1.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, January 26, 1977

To General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev

As I take up my duties as President of the United States, I want to

share with you my view on relations between our two countries.

I want to express my appreciation for the informal messages I have

received from you2 and in this connection I want to affirm that it is my

goal to improve relations with the Soviet Union on the basis of reci-

procity, mutual respect and benefit. That goal will have my close per-

sonal attention, as well as that of Secretary of State Vance.

I have read your public remarks with great interest, and they en-

courage me to believe that we share a common desire to enhance and

preserve the prospect of lasting peace.

As I understood your very important speech at Tula, the Soviet

Union will not seek superiority in arms, will oppose the concept, and

will require only a defense sufficient to deter any potential adversary.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The United States seeks nothing more or less for itself. With persever-

ance and wisdom therefore our two countries should be in a position to

avoid a new armaments race. I have said to the American people that

my firm goal is to eliminate all nuclear weapons.

There are three areas where progress can be made toward this

goal. A critical first step should be the achievement of a SALT II agree-

ment without delay, and an agreement to proceed toward additional

limitations and reductions in strategic weapons. Moreover, I hope we

can promptly conclude an adequately verified comprehensive ban on

all nuclear tests, and also strive to achieve greater openness about our

respective strategic policies. It is also important to renew efforts for

progress in the negotiations for a balanced reduction of forces in Cen-

tral Europe.

We also have a responsibility to pursue policies that will prevent

the troubled areas of the world from exploding into dangerous con-

flicts. The United States will work to promote a peaceful settlement in

the Middle East on the basis of appropriate UN resolutions. Similarly in

Southern Africa we are encouraging all parties to negotiate a peaceful

settlement which promotes security and justice for all.

It is my belief that the USSR can contribute to the realization of

progress toward peace in both of these critical areas.

My Administration attaches importance to the improvement of

our bilateral economic relations, on the basis of mutual and equivalent

benefits to the peoples of both our great countries. At the same time we

cannot be indifferent to the fate of freedom and individual human

rights.

We represent different social systems and our nations are different

in background and experience. Competition over ideals and ideas is in-

evitable between our societies. But it need not prevent a common effort

to shape a world that is more peaceful, just and humane. We live in a

world that increasingly requires collective responses to basic human

problems, and my hope is that our countries can cooperate more

closely in order to promote development, better nutrition, and a more

meaningful life for the less fortunate portions of mankind.

January–May 1977

I look forward to meeting you and to discussing with you both our

differences as well as our common interests. Meanwhile I propose that

we both do all that we can to further the progress of improving

US-Soviet relations. I have asked Secretary Vance to prepare to meet

with you, if you wish, in the spring to review the progress being made,

to discuss key issues which are outstanding. At that time we will want

to exchange views on a subsequent meeting between you and me.

Any specific suggestions you may wish to communicate to me on

these or any other issues will be welcomed and carefully studied.

With best personal regards.

Sincerely,

Jimmy Carter

2.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

3.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Anatoliy Dobrynin, Soviet Ambassador to the United States

Secretary of State Cyrus Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Affairs Assistant

Strategic Issues

President Carter began by stating he would like to move rapidly—

aggressively—on arms control issues with the Soviet Union. He men-

tioned that he had been encouraged by the messages he received this

summer from Secretary General Brezhnev. He would like to see

Brezhnev’s good wishes translated into positive results. The President

January–May 1977

added that his Inaugural Speech2 and his recent letter to Secretary

Brezhnev3 expressed his views on U.S.-Soviet relations.

SALT

Ambassador Dobrynin asked if the President had a timetable for

SALT. The President was non-commital.

Cruise Missile, Backfire, and Missile Reductions

The President asked how Dobrynin felt about the cruise missile

and the Backfire bomber in relation to SALT II. Dobrynin responded

that the cruise missile should be included within the SALT II frame-

work. With respect to the Backfire, Dobrynin said that the aircraft does

not have a strategic capability. The President asked if the Soviet Union

had tankers to refuel the Backfire. Dobrynin replied that he was not

prepared to answer the question. He did, however, add that the Soviets

would not go “intercontinental” with the Backfire. Secretary Vance

asked if that meant the Soviets would not deploy the Backfire so that it

would have a return capability. Dobrynin responded by asking “where

would we put them?”

The President said that he preferred to separate the cruise missile

and Backfire issues from SALT II. He indicated he wanted to confine

SALT II to numbers, but that other issues would be open to negotiation

later. Following a successful conclusion to SALT II, the President said,

he would like to move quickly to reduce the size of our respective nu-

clear arsenals. The President said he would like to see the total number

of nuclear missiles reduced, to several hundred. He added that we

could, at that time, decide which would be sea-launched, land-based,

etc.

The President stated his desire to reach a minimum number of mis-

siles, one that would allow each nation to feel secure from a preemptive

strike. He wanted the remaining missiles to be easily monitored and se-

cure from destruction.

Dobrynin raised the question of ceilings on MIRV and the

numbers of ICBMs. The President said he would like to see ICBMs re-

Dobrynin asked about range limitations for sea-based cruise mis-

siles. The President explained that our population is located on the sea-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

coast; the Soviet Union’s in the interior. A 600 kilometer range is, there-

fore, a threat. The President said that if we could agree on a lesser range

this might alleviate our concerns.

Throw-weight and Accuracy Advantages

The President commented that the Soviets have a throw-weight

advantage. Dobrynin responded that the United States has an accuracy

advantage and, therefore, their throw-weight advantage is necessary.

The President asked whether the Soviets would consider reducing

their throw-weight advantage if we would forego escalating our

quality advantage. Dobrynin responded that this might be considered

after SALT II. To include this equation in SALT II would make it more

complicated, he said.

Fixed and Mobile Missiles

The President asked whether the Soviets would forego the use of

mobile ICBMs. Dobrynin said the Soviets have mobile medium-range

missiles because of China. The President then asked about the SS–20

range to hit the United States. The President mentioned that it is diffi-

cult for us to tell the difference between the two missiles.

Dobrynin stated that he didn’t see any difficulty in medium-range

mobile missiles. He added that the Soviet Union has no need for

long-range mobiles because it has sufficient numbers of fixed ICBM

missiles. The President asked how we could confirm the difference be-

tween the two. Dobrynin said, “I will pass the question to my people.”

The President suggested the Soviets might consider keeping their

present SS–20s, but adding no additional ones or new types of mobile

missiles. He added that he would like mobile missiles eliminated. He

again asked if Dobrynin could tell us how to distinguish between the

two missiles.

Advance Notice of Missile Test Firings

The President indicated that he would like to reach a formal agree-

ment with the Soviet Union to have advance notice—at least 24 hours—

of missile test firings. This, according to the President, would allow us

to avoid any misunderstandings on intentions. This advance notice

would include sea-launched missiles. Dobrynin responded: “that is a

good idea.”

Comprehensive Test Ban

The President asked about the Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB).

Dobrynin raised the issue of French and PRC compliance. The Presi-

January–May 1977

dent responded that a CTB might be initialled for a limited time, such

as 2–4 years. It would be subject to renewal. Both the United States and

the Soviet Union would attempt to get France and the PRC to comply

with the CTB. The President said he envisioned the test ban applying to

peaceful nuclear explosions. Dobrynin mentioned that the Soviets have

two peaceful nuclear explosions scheduled, although the dates have

not been fixed. The President said his preference would be to stop all

testing.

Dobrynin asked about the two nuclear treaties pending before

Senate. He asked if the President supported them. The President said

he did, but as first steps. Dobrynin said that he was not prepared to

offer a Soviet view on peaceful nuclear devices. The President indicated

that the United States had tested peaceful devices and had not been en-

couraged. The President went on to say that he would be willing to in-

clude in the Comprehensive Test Ban an understanding that would

allow the Soviets to conduct their two tests, if observers were present.

Dobrynin responded that “this is fair enough.” The President added,

“We’ll try to get France and the PRC to comply.”

Compliance and “Matters of Concern”

The President asked for some assurance of compliance. He men-

tioned that Gromyko has said consideration should be given to on-site

inspection. The President went on to say that he would like to be able to

write Secretary General Brezhnev on “matters of concern,” such as

compliance and other sensitive activities which might be susceptible to

misinterpretation. Dobrynin responded that this would be “a good

idea.” The President added that each side would reserve the right not

to reply.

Civil Defense

The President said that he had another area of concern—Soviet

civil defense. He told Dobrynin that Congressional leaders argue

against arms control proposals citing the Soviet’s superior civil defense

capability. Dobrynin said their capability was poor. The President said

ours is worse. The President asked Dobrynin to consider the question

of foregoing civil defense efforts: no future construction. Dr. Brzezinski

mentioned this could be seen as an extension of the ABM agreement.

Summary

The President summarized his arms control views:

—a drastic reduction in nuclear weapons;

—reduction in the possibility of a preemptive strike;

—do the above in tangible terms so that “the world can see”;

—at the same time, reduce conventional weapons;

—also, both sides should cut down on international arms sales.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Personal Correspondence

Dobrynin asked whether the President would be willing to state

his arms control positions in a formal way before Secretary Vance went

to Moscow. The President responded by asking whether it would be

appropriate for him to put his thoughts in writing in a personal letter to

Brezhnev. Secretary Vance said this letter would be a suggestion of

things to be considered. Dobrynin said this would be “a good idea.”

The President said that he would wait for Brezhnev to answer his first

letter and then send a second letter with specific suggestions. He added

that no one but Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezinski, and Vice President

Mondale would be privy to the correspondence.

Past Experience

Dobrynin mentioned that Brezhnev had raised several arms con-

trol proposals with Kissinger and others—including one on the Indian

Ocean—and all had received “nos.” The President said this is a dif-

ferent Administration and he would like to pursue every proposal that

Brezhnev initiates.

Functional and Regional Issues

Arms Sales

Dobrynin asked if the President had a proposal to reduce arms

sales. The President said that any such proposal is complicated due to

third nation involvement—France, Germany and to some extent the

UK. He said that he would like to draft a specific proposal.

Europe

The President stated that our present concern is not so much a nu-

clear attack, but the Soviet buildup in the European theater. Dobrynin

asked if the President really believed the Soviet Union would start a

war in Europe. The President replied that the Soviet preponderance in

Eastern Europe is not necessary merely for defense. Dobrynin said that

the President should understand the psychological scars left by World

War II. He said the Soviets have “no such idea” to start a war in Europe.

The President said he would like to see substantial reductions in con-

ventional arms in Europe.

The President said he would like to see the MBFR talks get off dead

center and that we should make an effort to agree on force levels—min-

imum levels for mutual defense. Dobrynin said perhaps the Soviet

Union and the United States could look at this issue on a bilateral basis.

The President said we can’t conclude any MBFR agreement without

full consultations with our NATO allies, but that we can, as leaders,

move forcefully to reach an agreement.

January–May 1977

The President informed Dobrynin that the United States is going to

address more attention to NATO.

Middle East

The President indicated that he would like to reach a Middle East

agreement this year. He added that the Israeli elections complicate the

situation. He said he would like to have Soviet support in reaching a

Middle East agreement. Dobrynin commented that the Soviets are co-

chairmen at Geneva.

Berlin

The President expressed concern over possible problems in Berlin.

Vance referred to the quadripartite government in Berlin. Dobrynin

said that under the quadripartite agreement, West Berlin is not a part

of West Germany but Bonn apparently does not agree. Dobrynin said

that that is “completely wrong.”

Africa and the Indian Ocean

The President mentioned that he is concerned about arms going to

Africa and the Indian Ocean and the presence of Cuban soldiers in Af-

rica. He said that if the Soviets would include Berbera in demilitarizing

the Indian Ocean, then we could agree.

Secretary Vance said that the African situation is an explosive one

and is crucial to our bilateral relations. Dobrynin said the Soviets are

not interested in a confrontation in Africa. He added that the United

States has connections with Mr. Smith, not the Soviets. Secretary

Vance mentioned that putting conventional arms into Africa will hurt

us all. Dobrynin said he would pass this word to his government.

Soviet/U.S./PRC Relations

Dobrynin asked the President to summarize his views on the

present state of Soviet/U.S./PRC relations. The President responded

that he was not experienced enough at this time to comment on the

question but added that “we can’t ask the Chinese to do much until we

[the Soviet Union and the U.S.] do.”

meetings. For documentation on the Geneva Peace Conference see Foreign Relations,

by the United States, Soviet Union, France, and the United Kingdom. The Berlin negotia-

tions, which preceded the agreement, dealt with the status of West Berlin and access to

and from the city. For more on the Berlin negotiations, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Vietnam

Secretary Vance asked Dobrynin to convey to the North Vietnam-

ese our interest in exploring relations. Secretary Vance asked Dobrynin

to suggest to the North Vietnamese that they not push their admission

to the UN too early and asked that the Vietnamese help us on the MIA

question.

Human Rights

The President told Dobrynin that it is not his intention to interfere

in the internal affairs of the Soviet Union by making human rights

statements. He said he did not want to embarrass the Soviet Union, but

that he felt it was necessary for him to express human rights concerns

from time to time.

The President went on to say that he would like to restore normal

trade relations with the Soviet Union and it would be helpful if the So-

viet Union would respond on human rights issues. He told Dobrynin

this would help him in dealing with Congress. He said he was encour-

aged by recent Soviet emigration rates.

The President said our commitment to human rights and our ne-

cessity to make public statements—on occasion—should not be mis-

construed by the Soviets. Dobrynin responded that the Soviets have an

abundance of human rights in their country, such as in health and

housing. He mentioned that at some time the Soviets might feel it ap-

propriate to comment on the Equal Rights Amendment. More seri-

ously, Dobrynin said that he was concerned that the public debate on

this issue would be disadvantageous to both sides. He said he believed

that Brezhnev does not want to see the human rights issue become a

test of wills between the two countries because then Brezhnev would

be “forced to answer.” The President said we will try to be reticent and

Dobrynin asked for “quiet diplomacy.”

4.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

February 4, 1977

Dear Mr. President,

On behalf of my colleagues in the leadership and on my own I

would like to congratulate you once again upon entering the office of

the President of the United States of America.

I have carefully studied your letter of January 262 and found it on

the whole constructive and encouraging. We received with satisfaction

the affirmation that the goal of your policy is to improve relations with

the Soviet Union and that you intend to pay personal attention to that.

It is consistent with our basic approach which I have recently once

again expounded publicly. Now I want to emphasize that we are pre-

pared to make through joint efforts a new major progress in the rela-

tions between our countries.

As I see it, a business-like and confidential dialogue is being estab-

lished between ourselves.

It is naturally important that from the very beginning of our con-

tacts there were a clear and mutual understanding on issues of

principle.

The main thing here—and the past experience convincingly con-

firms it—is the necessity to strictly observe the fundamental principles

of equality, mutual consideration of legitimate interests, mutual benefit

and non-interference in the internal affairs of the other side. Such and

only such an approach by both sides, which fully corresponds to the

Basic Principles of relations between our countries, signed in 1972, can

provide for an even onward development of relations between the

USSR and the US as well as for the possibility of finding mutually ac-

ceptable solutions for the issues that arise.

Indeed, the cooperation of our two countries to end the arms race

and to achieve disarmament is, due to objective reasons, the central

area of relations between the USSR and the US at the present time. Only

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

in this way the main task facing our peoples and other nations—that of

removing danger of war and certainly the danger of nuclear-rocket war

in the first place—can be solved.

As you have also noted, it is necessary to complete without delay

the working out of a new agreement on strategic offensive arms limita-

tion. This task, as we see it, is quite attainable. Indeed, the main param-

eters of an agreement have been in fact already shaped up on the basis

of the understanding reached in Vladivostok. Successful completion of

this extremely important and necessary matter would allow [us?] to di-

rectly proceed to more far-reaching measures in this area and would

undoubtedly give a new impetus to constructive development of

Soviet-American relations on the whole.

It is our understanding that the questions of strategic arms limita-

tion will occupy the main place in the talks with Secretary of State

Vance when he comes to Moscow.

In our opinion, it is also necessary to put into force without further

delay the Soviet-US Treaties on the limitation of underground nuclear

weapon tests and on the explosions for peaceful purposes. At the same

time efforts should be intensified—and we are ready to cooperate with

the United States in this matter—for complete and general cessation of

nuclear weapon tests and the prevention of proliferation of such

weapons.

We are in favor of achieving a progress in the Vienna negotiations

on the reduction of armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. We

would like the new US Government to regard with attention the pro-

posals submitted there by the Warsaw Treaty countries last year.

There are also other questions of arms limitation and disarmament

which await their solution. Appropriate concrete proposals have been

put forward by the Soviet Union on many of these questions and we

hope that your Government would consider them in a constructive

manner.

Of course, now that the arms race in the world has not yet been

stopped we cannot but be concerned with the security of our country

and that of our allies. Our defense capability should be sufficient so that

no one would dare to launch an attack on us or to threaten us with an

attack. In this sense, to borrow your expression, we seek nothing more

or less for ourselves.

However, I would like to stress once again very definitely that the

Soviet Union does not seek superiority in arms. We are deeply con-

vinced that genuine security of all countries and, consequently, of each

pean Security, Document 371.

January–May 1977

of them individually lies not in competition in the field of armaments

but on the way of disarmament and elimination of material basis of

war. We shall continue to direct our efforts as well at achieving that

goal.

Now I shall briefly touch upon some other issues.

An important direction of joint or parallel efforts of our countries,

given their objective roles and responsibilities in world affairs, is to fa-

cilitate solution of problems causing international tensions. The task

here, in our opinion, is to eliminate the initial causes producing those

problems.

Of prime importance in this respect as you, Mr. President, also

rightly noted, is the establishment of just and lasting peace in the

Middle East. Almost ten years have elapsed since the war of 1967. This

“jubilee” acutely reminds us not simply of the time wasted for the reso-

lution of the Middle East conflict but also of the possibility of new dan-

gerous outbreaks—as it happened in October of 1973, and quite re-

cently in Lebanon.

Meanwhile, we are convinced that if in dealing with the Middle

East problem the legitimate rights and interests of all sides—both of

Arabs, including Palestinians, and of Israel—would be realistically and

objectively taken into consideration, then the reliable elimination of

this permanent source of international conflicts would be quite pos-

sible. Finding a necessary understanding between the USSR and the US

on this matter and in particular on the resumption of the Geneva Con-

ference will undoubtedly contribute to the success of a major under-

taking which is the achievement of a political settlement in the Middle

East.

Cooperation of our two countries would be of essential impor-

tance, as we believe, on other international questions as well—be it fur-

ther steps to strengthen European security on the basis of decisions

adopted in Helsinki, strict observance of the Quadripartite agreement

on West Berlin, or, say, a settlement in Cyprus.

In your letter, Mr. President, you mention the problem of Southern

Africa. Our position of principle on this question is well known: we are

in solidarity with the struggle of the peoples of Southern Africa for

their freedom and independence. We can recognize the right of nobody

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

but the peoples themselves to determine their own destiny. The Soviet

Union does not seek any advantages for itself in that region, neither is it

interested in confrontation with the United States there in spite of what

sometimes is alleged on that score.

Noting great importance which you, Mr. President, attach to the

improvement of trade and economic relations, I would like to stress on

my part that we were and continue to be in favor of our ties in this area

developing on a stable basis and becoming ever greater in scope to the

mutual, I emphasize, the mutual benefit of both sides. But it requires

that they be freed from all kinds of discriminatory restrictions and arti-

ficially created obstacles. Without this, without abandoning the at-

tempts to link in some way or another the trade with questions per-

taining to internal competence of states, not only our economic ties will

further suffer, but damage will be caused to the relations between our

countries in general.

I hope, Mr. President, that given good will and sincere readiness

for constructive cooperation with one another, you and I will be able to

make a good contribution to the solution of existing problems. Some of

them, along with the problem of strategic arms limitation, will obvi-

ously be a subject of exchange of views already at the time of Mr.

Vance’s visit to Moscow.

In conclusion I want to emphasize that I attach, as you do, special

importance to personal meeting between us. I will be prepared to

discuss the questions related to such a meeting with Mr. Vance whom,

as you wrote, you will ask to do that.

With my best wishes,

Sincerely,

L. Brezhnev

January–May 1977

5.

Letter From President Carter to Professor Andrei Sakharov

Washington, February 5, 1977

6.

Memorandum for the Record

Washington, February 9, 1977

SUBJECT

Luncheon with Minister Counselor Vorontsov, February 9, 1977

I had lunch at the Soviet Embassy with Yuli Vorontsov. Compared

to many previous encounters in which Vorontsov spent his time

probing me, this luncheon was almost entirely a monologue on the

problem of human rights. What he said at great length can be reduced

to two points he emphasized. First, he felt this would become a “Frank-

enstein”, that US policy would be dictated by the human rights mon-

ster rather than controlling it as the President had said. Second, that the

cumulative effect on Brezhnev would be disastrous. He was already

being told, according to Vorontsov, that after making a number of ges-

tures to President Carter, the response was a number of “insults”.

People around Brezhnev in the Politburo were saying, “Lenya, how can

you meet with such a man if he continues to interfere in our affairs and

make heroes out of people such as Ginzburg, Bukovsky, Solzhenitzen,

etc.” (Obviously, we must take much of this with more than a grain of

salt.) In elaborating on these themes he did acknowledge that the Soviet

leaders would ascribe a certain amount of human rights agitation to do-

mestic politics, but if a pattern emerged or a trend developed it would

have a deep impact on Soviet-American relations. There are those, he

alleged, who argued we can live without SALT. He constantly came

back to the point that what was being affected was not so much the

prospects for SALT or any other issue, but the “atmosphere”.

In reply I tried to make two points. First they should not interpret

our stand on human rights as being pointed solely toward the Soviet

Union. I assumed that they would see over time that this was a general

principle of the new Administration’s policy and that we would speak

out on matters concerning other countries. The fact that this was not

anti-Soviet in origin or focus was something the Soviet Embassy had to

impress on Moscow. Second, there was a change in approach and it

was reflected in the statements by the President and the State Depart-

ment. They ought to analyze very carefully what had happened in this

country over the past year or so. There was definitely a resurgence of

opinion that could be described as extremely conservative or hawkish.

This opinion had come quite close to nominating Ronald Reagan. It had

January–May 1977

definitely influenced the orientation of the Ford Administration in the

last year, and as a consequence it was no longer possible to conceive of

Soviet-American relations as simply business as usual. There were sub-

stantial numbers of influential Americans who were concerned at the

Soviet build-up in military affairs, at their intervention in Africa, and

who were concerned about their treatment of political dissent. The

present Administration obviously was going to speak up from time to

time and this would become simply a fact of life. The Soviet leadership

was certainly flexible enough and intelligent enough to deal with this

new fact. Expelling an American correspondent and arresting a promi-

nent dissident could not simply be ignored, and I speculated what the

motive behind this might be in Moscow.

Vorontsov made a particular point of noting that in the President’s

letter the economic relationship was linked to human rights. He said

this led them to conclude in Moscow that having begun with com-

plaints about emigration we were now linking trade with an even

broader subject. I said I thought he was misreading the letter, that it did

not represent an escalation but was restating what should be obvious in

Moscow, that any progress on the economic side could not be totally

uncoupled from emigration.

He spent a little time asking how we were organized in the NSC,

who would do what, and specifically the relationship between Vance

and Brzezinski. On this latter point I told him they should not assume

conflict between Vance and Brzezinski or that they could play one

against the other. He said specifically, however, that Dobrynin would

like to talk with Brzezinski and would I inquire about a meeting. I said I

would pass it on.

We also briefly discussed SALT. Vorontsov said he could not un-

derstand why the President was reverting to a position which

Brezhnev had rejected last year. He said Dobrynin had explained their

opposition to deferring or omitting Backfire and cruise missiles, where-

upon he went through the entire argumentation about cruise missiles

being tested, developed, deployed, and then becoming a strategic fact

which could not be reversed.

I said in response that the situation differed from last year. First of

all the new President was seriously looking beyond SALT II to SALT

III, and the prospects for substantial reductions on both sides. Second,

in this light, he wanted to move on as rapidly as possible, and therefore

setting aside contentious issues and protracted negotiations seemed the

best way to settle Vladivostok and move on to the more serious

problem of reductions. Therefore, what the President was saying about

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

omitting cruise missiles and Backfire was quite different from the pro-

posal put forward by President Ford in February because the overall

context was different.

Introducing a personal note, Vorontsov said why had I, as a hold-

over, not explained to the new Administration how close to an agree-

ment we had come in January. He reminded me that Brezhnev’s pro-

posal at that time was obviously a bargaining offer, and he stated

specifically that Brezhnev had a fallback already prepared.

I said that that had been my feeling at the time, but he understood

as well as I did why we had become diverted onto a different path. I

said if the Soviets had in fact a proposal along the lines of the January

negotiations, they should not simply sit back but should introduce it

into the dialogue while we were studying our own position. He was

careful not to agree to do so.

He asked who would accompany Vance to Moscow and specifi-

cally whether Warnke would come and whether they could expect to

get in advance of the meeting an outline of our SALT position. I said I

assumed Warnke would go, but that I was no longer in a position to say

who the Secretary of State would or would not bring, that I understood

the reasons why submitting a proposal in advance would be helpful to

Brezhnev in preparing for the meeting, but this would depend on the

President.

He said Vance had suggested to Dobrynin that he would give the

outline in advance, and I said in that case I assumed that would

happen.

Comment:

My conversations with Vorontsov and Dobrynin over the years

have been rather frank and straightforward. We have discussed some

extremely sensitive intelligence and political and strategic issues. I as-

sume that Vorontsov hoped I would convey the intensity of his appre-

hension about the effect of the human rights issue. Even though he is

skilled in agitprop I conclude that he has a genuine uneasiness that

Brezhnev will explode at some point. My guess is that both he and Do-

brynin will be counseling Moscow to be patient and not lose their cool.

On the strategic arms control issues, they are obviously discon-

certed by the fact that they have been outflanked for the first time in

history by an American President. They seem to be somewhat discon-

certed and unsure of how to respond. They do make a connection, how-

ever, between the new approach on human rights and a reversion to an

old, rejected approach on SALT. And I suspect their fear is that they

will be asked to make concessions on both accounts.

7.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, February 14, 1977

Dear Mr. General Secretary:

I am very pleased that our initial exchange of letters2 has led us im-

mediately into an examination of the central issues of world peace. Our

two great countries share a special responsibility to do what we can,

not just to reduce tensions but to create a series of understandings that

can lead to a more secure and less dangerous world political climate.

I know and admire your history. As a child, I developed a literary

taste by reading your classics. I know also how much, and how very re-

cently, your people have suffered in the course of the last war. I know

of your personal role in that war, and of the sacrifices that were im-

posed on every Soviet family. That is why I believe we are both sincere

when we state our dedication to peace, and this gives me hope for the

future.

The question is how to translate that dedication into reality. How

can we set in motion a process that widens our collaboration as it con-

tains and eventually narrows our competition? That competition—

which is real, very expensive, and which neither of us can deny—can at

some point become very dangerous, and therefore it should not go on

unchecked. To me, this dictates nothing less than an effort, first, to

widen where we can our collaborative efforts, especially in regard to

nuclear arms limitations; and, second, the exercise of very deliberate

self-restraint in regard to those trouble spots in the world which could

produce a direct confrontation between us.

I welcome particularly your desire for increased cooperation

looking toward an ending of the arms race and the achievement,

without delay, of specific disarmament agreements.

It is in the arms control field that I feel we should place greatest

emphasis. I will continue to give this my personal attention and can as-

sure you that those who are responsible for these affairs within my ad-

ministration will give any and all proposals made by you the closest

and most positive examination.

Obviously, we must be mutually secure from successful attack,

and we must take advantage of our roles as the most powerful nations

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

to initiate substantive reduction in the level of conventional and nu-

clear armaments. We need not meet deadlines as such, but we do need

to make maximum progress without delay.

I agree that in our exchanges and in the conversations which Secre-

tary Vance will have in Moscow at the end of March, we should give

priority attention to obtaining a SALT II agreement, perhaps including

some substantial force level reductions. It might help us to achieve a

successful conclusion to these negotiations if we agree that this is but a

first step in a process that may lead to much greater reductions in the

size of our respective nuclear arsenals. I wonder in this respect if it

might not be helpful to examine the possibility of separating the cruise

missile and Backfire issues from SALT II. We could return to those

issues immediately in follow-up negotiations. If our objectives are suf-

ficiently ambitious, and particularly if our desire is to achieve real dis-

armament within minimum forces left which are adequate to assure se-

curity to both parties, we may be able to deal more easily later with

what appear now to be significant and difficult technical issues.

I hope that our additional personal exchanges and Secretary

Vance’s talks in Moscow will cover the broadest range of possibilities. I

can assure you that the review I am currently conducting of our policies

in the arms control field will examine all relevant proposals. As I have

discussed with your Ambassador, I hope that we may look not only at

possible drastic limitations in the total number of nuclear weapons, i.e.

a minimum number of missiles that would allow each nation to feel se-

cure from a preemptive strike, but also at restrictions on throw-weight,

the possibility of prohibiting all mobile missiles, foregoing any further

civil defense preparations, and such additional confidence-building

measures as advance notification of all missile test firings and an agree-

ment not to arm satellites or to develop a capability to destroy observa-

tion satellites. We also need to explore practical ways to satisfy our mu-

tual need for assuring compliance with our agreements. Such matters

as on-site inspection and unrestricted surveillance from space should

not become subjects for misinterpretation. They are tools that can be

used to make progress and gain public support and understanding for

our efforts.

In all these areas, our ultimate aim should be to do more than our

technicians tell us may now be advisable. If we keep our sights set on

the most ambitious goal, we will be able to achieve a significant change

in the level of threat to ourselves and the rest of the world.

January–May 1977

It is counterproductive to attempt to negotiate an advantage over

one another. We will try to consult without artifice or unnecessary

delay, but without pressure or undue haste.

I welcome your willingness to intensify efforts to reach agreement

on a comprehensive test ban. I recognize that there are remaining issues

with respect to other countries who continue to have test programs and

the possible use of peaceful nuclear explosions for mining or construc-

tion, but I believe there are satisfactory ways of dealing with these

issues. I intend to ask the Congress to ratify the two existing agree-

ments which have been negotiated between our two governments but I

consider these only steps toward a common objective of a complete ces-

sation of nuclear tests. In the meantime these unratified agreements

will be honored by our government.

In the past, I know that there have been proposals for a demilitari-

zation of the Indian Ocean and that these proposals were not seriously

examined. I have asked my colleagues to look closely at the question of

the Indian Ocean so that we may be prepared to comment in some de-

tail on the possibilities for an agreement which would advance the

cause of world peace. Please let me know specifically what you have in

mind. I assume that in such a proposal adequate attention would have

to be paid to military activities of both sides in the area. This seems to

be a clear case where mutual benefit would require a balanced agree-

ment which leads to a general lessening of military effort in the entire

area.

As you know from my public statements, I intend to proceed vig-

orously in an attempt to reduce the sale or transfer of conventional

arms to the third world and hope that you will join in this effort. It

seems to me that this is a senseless competition and we, as major sup-

pliers, have a particular responsibility to put limits on such transfers.

Obviously other suppliers should be involved in such an effort and we

will broaden the discussion to include them.

I also welcome your desire to proceed more vigorously with the

Vienna negotiations on reducing armed forces and armaments in cen-

tral Europe ultimately to minimum acceptable levels. We have been

quite concerned about what seems to be an excessive increase in your

military strength in Eastern Europe. We are currently reviewing our

positions on this matter, while at the same time instructing our delega-

tion to pursue the examination of data that has been submitted by both

sides.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

These are subjects that I hope Mr. Vance can discuss in some detail

after we have completed our own review. We will, of course, conduct

this particular review in complete consultations with our NATO allies.

I would like to make one remark with reference to the Quadripar-

tite Agreement. As you know, we consider that this Agreement ap-

plies to all of Berlin and not just to West Berlin. It is very important for

us to carry out the letter and the spirit of that Agreement. We will make

every effort to avoid sensitive issues but we must insist that this Agree-

ment, which is so central to our ability to develop peaceful relations in

Europe, be implemented in full. Recently there seems to have been an

increasing inclination to create new tensions and constraints in Berlin,

which could cause deterioration in the delicate political balance there. I

trust that you will help to alleviate these tensions.

We look forward to cooperation in pursuing further steps in im-

plementation of the understandings reached in Helsinki regarding

human rights. As I have said to Ambassador Dobrynin, we hope that

all aspects of these understandings can be carried out. It is not our in-

tention to interfere in the internal affairs of other nations. We do not

wish to create problems with the Soviet Union but it will be necessary

for our government to express publicly on occasion the sincere and

deep feelings of myself and our people. Our commitment to the fur-

therance of human rights will not be pursued stridently or in a manner

inconsistent with the achievement of reasonable results. We would

also, of course, welcome private, confidential exchanges on these deli-

cate areas.

I have noted your response to my earlier comments on the impor-

tance of improving trade and economic relations. Your frank expres-

sions in this regard are in a spirit of candor that I admire, but we need

to do something practical to bring about the removal of obstacles. For

my part I intend to do what I can to achieve mutually beneficial in-

creased trade, but you are aware of some of the Congressional inhibi-

tions with which I must deal.

Let me say a word about our efforts to develop improvements in

other areas where disharmony and potential conflicts exist. In the

Middle East we are about to begin direct discussion with the parties in

the area and it is then my hope to pursue with vigor the process of

bringing about a just and lasting settlement. Mr. Vance will welcome

the opportunity in his discussions at the end of March to obtain your

views on this, including matters of direct interest to our roles as Co-

Chairmen of the Geneva Conference.

8.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

2181. For the Secretary from Toon. Subject: Letter to Sakharov. Ref:

Moscow 2124.

1. Sakharov telephoned EmbOff (Combs) at Embassy afternoon of

Feb 15 to ask if “we had any news”. He clearly was asking if we had re-

ceived the original of the President’s letter. When EmbOff said we had

no news as yet, Sakharov asked when we thought we would, adding

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

that he intended “to make a public statement as soon as it arrived”.

EmbOff said we might have something by Thursday, although it was

impossible to say for sure. Sakharov replied he would “tentatively plan

on Thursday”. EmbOff undertook to call him when “news” had

arrived.

2. If, as we assume, President’s letter was pouched from Depart-

ment on or about Feb 9, we should receive it in classified pouch ar-

riving Moscow this evening (Feb 15). We could then plan to telephone

Sakharov on Thursday. We presume he would immediately come to

the Embassy to receive the letter. He probably would arrange a press

conference Thursday evening or as soon as possible thereafter. Alterna-

tively, we could, if the Department wishes, delay delivering the letter

for three or four days in order to accomplish a scenario along the lines

set forth in Moscow’s 2124.

3. In any event, as I have indicated in Moscow 2124, I consider it

important that we give the Soviets advance warning of the President’s

letter. If a high-level demarche on the general matter of human rights,

which I have recommended, cannot be done by the time we deliver the

letter to Sakharov, then I recommend a specific demarche on the letter,

either in Washington to Dobrynin or in Moscow to First Deputy For-

eign Minister Kuznetsov (assuming that Gromyko is still out of action).

I would suggest demarche be on following lines:

—The Soviet side is undoubtedly well aware of the position of the

United States Government regarding human rights; we have carefully

studied the Pravda editorial of Feb 12, which we take as an authoritative

reflection of the Soviet position;

—Our interpretations of human rights and what constitutes inter-

ference in each other’s internal affairs obviously differ fundamentally;

—We approach this, as other issues that divide us, in a spirit of

mutual understanding rather than public confrontation;

—We anticipate that the highest levels of the U.S. Government will

soon be in touch privately with the Soviet side regarding this difficult

and fundamental question;

—In the meantime, we are instructed to inform the Soviet side that

on Feb 5 the President wrote a brief letter to Sakharov, setting forth the

President’s general philosophy on the question of human rights. While

we do not intend to publicize this letter, Sakharov may do so;

—We are making this demarche because we feel it is in our mutual

interests to minimize the impact of our disparate views on human

rights upon bilateral relations.

January–May 1977

4. Please let me know whether you would prefer us to deliver the

letter upon receipt this week or delay several days.

Toon

9.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

2280. For Secretary from Ambassador Toon. Subject: President’s

1. In accord with reftel, EmbOff (Combs) telephoned Sakharov

morning of February 17 and suggested he might wish to come to Em-

bassy later that day: Sakharov agreed to come at 3: p.m.

2. Upon his arrival we delivered President’s letter. Sakharov ex-

pressed thanks and said he planned to hold a press conference at 7:00

p.m. that evening, February 17, at which he would announce full text of

President’s letter. He said he would also release text of a new letter,

dated February 17, which formally responds to President’s letter. Text

of Sakharov’s new letter follows. Substance of other comments Sakha-

rov made during February 17 meeting reported septel.

3. Regarding line to be taken with press, if Sakharov reveals that he

received the letter via Embassy, we plan only to confirm that Embassy

transmitted letter. We will not comment further. If Sakharov reveals

that he gave Embassy his reply to President, we will merely confirm.

We plan to answer any other questions with no comment.

4. Begin text: Dear Mr. President: Your letter of February 6 (sic),

which I received today, represents a great honor for me and support for

the single movement for human rights in the USSR and the countries of

10.

Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State

Vance in the Middle East

Tosec 20106/37513. Subject: Soviet Oral Statement on Human

Rights.

1. Following is text of oral statement delivered by Dobrynin to

2. Begin text.

I am instructed to bring the following to the attention of President

Carter and the Secretary of State.

The placing before us by the US side of the question of releasing

Ginzburg, a Soviet citizen brought to justice for actions criminally

punishable in accordance with our legislation, has caused extreme

bewilderment in Moscow.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The fact that such interference in our internal affairs is undertaken

under the pretext of concern for “human rights” does not change the

substance of the matter.

Of course, everyone is free to have one’s own view of things in-

cluding the question of how things stand with freedom and human

rights in one or another country. We also have our interpretation of

how these matters stand in the United States.

But it is quite a different thing to extend such views to the sphere

of relations between states and thus to complicate them. Indeed, one

cannot regard otherwise the position of the representatives of the US

administration when they try to make questions which fall entirely

within the internal competence of the Soviet state a subject of discus-

sion. This touches upon an aspect of principle in our relations and here

full clarity is required from the very beginning. Such a position is cate-

gorically unacceptable to us.

Both you and we realize that we have different ideologies and

socio-political systems. And, of course, as a result we are far from

having a similar approach to this or that question.

We in the Soviet Union are proud of the fact that the Socialist Revo-

lution and our system not only proclaimed but also actually provided

to all Soviet people the right to work, education, social security, free

medical care, leisure—and really guarantee these rights.

At the same time Soviet laws protect our people against such anti-

social phenomena as war propaganda in every possible form, dissemi-

nation of the idea of racial inequality and national discord or attempts

at moral and ethical corruption of people. And with us no one has the

right to violate laws which are equally obligatory for all.

We do not seek to impose upon anyone our concept of human

rights and freedoms, though much of what is happening [omission is in

original], the other social system seems unacceptable to our people!

It is not difficult to imagine what would happen if we, proceeding

from our moral values, began to link the development of state to state

relations with the US and other capitalist countries with problems

really existing in those countries such as unemployment of millions, in-

fringement of the rights of ethnic minorities, racial discrimination, in-

equality of women, violation of rights of citizens by administrative

organs of the state, persecution of persons with progressive convictions

etc.

Incidentally, if one is to speak about concern over human rights,

then how, for example, does systematic US supporting for dictatorial,

antipopular regimes appear in a number of countries where the most

basic human rights and freedoms are constantly and brazenly trodden

on?

January–May 1977

If we began raising all these issues to the level of our state to state

relations then, obviously, there could be only one result: it could only

complicate all relations between our countries, lead us far from the so-

lution of issues which really can and must be the subject of interaction

and cooperation of our states. Besides, efforts to ensure the right of man

to live in a world free from war and the burden of the arms races under

conditions of security and friendly contacts among peoples would also

suffer.

Therefore we firmly adhere to the position that matters of internal

development, reflecting differences in ideology and socio-political

systems, should not be made a subject of dealings between states.

It is not accidental that it was that very principle, together with

other fundamental provisions, that was clearly started in the Basic Prin-

ciples of Relations between the USSR and the USA, signed in 1972. It is

relevant to recall also that as far back as the establishment of diplomatic

relations in 1933 our countries committed themselves to strictly respect

the undeniable right of each other to organize their lives as they wish

and refrain from interference in any way in the internal affairs of the

other side.

However, the statements and actions of the US side do not corre-

spond with that always or in all aspects. In effect the statements of

“concern” about human rights in the USSR amount to support and di-

rect incitement of individuals who oppose Soviet society. It is not that

the administration simply adopts a demonstratively approving atti-

tude toward some American correspondents in the Soviet Union who

do nothing but search out and publicize so-called “dissidents”. Some

members of the staff of the US Embassy in Moscow are also directly in-

volved in such activities. We could say specifically who they are.

And when the Soviet authorities resort to the measures which are a

prerogative of any state when Soviet citizens violate laws, this is used

actively by the US side to the detriment of the relations between our

countries.

Besides, it is known that the representatives of the US Embassy in

Moscow meet secretly with Sakharov who possesses state secrets af-

fecting the defense of our country. The most recent of these meetings

was held on February 8 at the initiative of the Embassy. This is an out-

rageous fact and no reference to “human rights” will conceal that here

we are dealing with direct activity of US special services against the

USSR and the Soviet social system.

As far as references to the American public opinion, the mood in

Congress etc. are concerned, there is public opinion in the USSR too

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

which resolutely rejects any attempts to impose upon US rules incon-

sistent with the Socialist democracy and law. End text.

3. Comment and recommendations (Prepared with Marshall

Shulman):

A. We read this demarche as an indication that the Soviets may be

approaching the threshold where Brezhnev himself would feel obliged

to take a stand. The involvement of the President pushes him in this di-

rection. Everything considered, however, it is relatively mildly

worded. It may have been intended as the prelude to some public state-

ment or action on the Soviet side, but publicity on the Sakharov letter

may alter their original intentions.

B. We do not believe any immediate response is required. We need

to wait and see what develops further regarding Sakharov, and

whether further actions are taken against Ginzburg and Orlov. We sug-

gest that since the document is addressed to the President, as well as

you, it would be useful on your return to get together with those con-

cerned in the White House to discuss the problem and seek to arrive at

an agreed strategy for dealing with these matters. Marshall and I are

having a preliminary talk with Zbig Friday.

Hartman

11.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 18, 1977

SUBJECT

Lunch with Ambassador Dobrynin February 18, 1977

12.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

February 25, 1977

Dear Mr. President,

want to talk bluntly about our impression and thoughts it evoked. As I

understand, you are for such straightforward talk.

The statements of a general nature in support of peace and cur-

tailing arms race contained in the letter are certainly consonant with

our own aspirations. We are definitely for working towards the ulti-

mate elimination of nuclear weapons, and even more, towards general

and complete disarmament under an effective international control.

However, the movement toward these lofty goals will by no means

be expedited but on the contrary it will be hindered if we, first of all, do

not treasure what has already been achieved in that direction over re-

January–May 1977

cent years and, secondly, if we supplant a balanced and realistic ap-

proach to the definition of further specific steps with putting forward

deliberately unacceptable proposals.

Looking at your considerations from this very angle, we unfortu-

nately did not see in many of them a striving for a constructive ap-

proach, a readiness for seeking mutually acceptable solutions to the

problems which are the subject of our exchange of views.

As I have already written to you, we firmly proceed from the

premise that it is necessary in the first place to complete the working

out of a new agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms on

the basis that was agreed upon in Vladivostok. It is a fact that the basic

parameters of the agreement which were put down there, as well as ad-

ditional provisions specifying those parameters which were agreed on

during later negotiations, were the product of enormous efforts. On a

number of occasions not easy decisions were required indeed for

finding a mutually acceptable way out of the situations which seemed

deadlocked. And to the extent that the agreement has already been

completed, all its elements are interconnected, i.e. it is impossible to re-

move any important element from it without destroying its whole

foundation.

It is sufficient to remind, for example—and it should be known to

you, Mr. President, from the documents on the negotiations—that the

method of counting the missiles equipped with MIRVs was clearly con-

ditioned by achievement of agreement on the whole complex of cruise

missiles. The US side not only agreed with that in principle, but in Jan-

uary last year a concrete formula for the accounting of air-to-surface

cruise missiles within the aggregate of strategic arms was practically

agreed upon. It remained to agree on concrete formulation regarding

sea-based and land-based cruise missiles. True, the US side did try later

to propose to leave the issue of sea-based and land-based cruise mis-

siles outside the main agreement, but we categorically rejected such an

attempt to depart from the agreement reached earlier.

Now we are invited to leave altogether outside the agreement the

whole question of cruise missiles. How should we understand that re-

turn to the stage left far behind, to a completely non-perspective raising

of the question? To agree with this proposal would mean that by

closing one channel of the strategic arms race we open right away still

another channel. And what is the difference indeed for people what

kind of missile will kill them—a cruise missile or a non-cruise missile?

There is no basis whatsoever also to think that it will be easier to resolve

the question of cruise missiles later when the sides start deploying

them, if we fail to do it now when they are still at the stage of develop-

ment. The experience testifies convincingly to the contrary.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The continued intention, as is seen from your letter, to artificially

retain the question of the Soviet medium-range bomber code-named

Backfire in the US does not correspond in any way to what was agreed.

Let be no doubts to this effect: we resolutely reject such an approach as

not in keeping with the aims and the subject of negotiations and as pur-

suing only one thing—to complicate deliberately and even generally to

cast a doubt upon the conclusion of an agreement.

And is the United States less interested than the Soviet Union in

this agreement? We do not believe it and if someone thinks otherwise

then it is a serious delusion.

In connection with the question you raised on a possibility of sub-

stantial reduction of levels of strategic forces agreed in Vladivostok it is

appropriate to remind that we, on our part, have been and are in favor

of ending the arms race and for the reduction of strategic forces as well.

Agreement reached in Vladivostok testifies to that which for the USSR

means a unilateral reduction of strategic delivery vehicles. This is a

strive in deeds and not in words for reduction of armaments.

We are for confirming the results achieved in Vladivostok in an

agreement without further delay and for moving on ahead. As it was

agreed, we are ready immediately after the conclusion of the said

agreement to proceed to talks about next steps and to discuss also pos-

sible reductions in the future.

However, there should be full clarity: any such steps should be

first of all and in full degree in conformity with the principle of equality

and equal security of the sides. I think, Mr. President, that no one can

challenge the legitimacy of such a position.

Then, how does the idea of drastic reduction of the nuclear and

missile forces of the USSR and US look like in that light? In your letter it

is advanced separately from all the other aspects of the existing situa-

tion. Meanwhile it is evident that in that case there would be an im-

measurable increase of importance—and to the unilateral benefit of the

US—of such factors as differences in geographic positions of the sides,

the presence of the US forward based nuclear systems and aircraft car-

rier aviation in the proximity of the USSR territory, the possession of

nuclear weapons by the US NATO allies and other circumstances

which cannot be discarded. The impossibility to ignore all these factors

in considering the question of reducing the nuclear missile forces of the

USSR and the US is so evident that we cannot fail to raise the question

what is the true goal of putting forward proposals of that kind—which

outwardly may be appealing to laymen but in fact are aimed at gain-

ing unilateral advantages. You yourself justly note that attempts to

seek at negotiations advantages for one side over the other can only be

counterproductive.

January–May 1977

The same one-sidedness can be discerned in proposals about pro-

hibiting all mobile missiles (meaning also intermediate missiles which

have nothing to do with the subject matter of the Soviet-American ne-

gotiations), limiting throw weight, on-site inspections.

You know better, of course, the reason for presenting all those

questions in such an unconstructive way. We, on our part, are in favour

of having from the very beginning a business-like talk, for seeking mu-

tually acceptable—I stress mutually acceptable—agreements. The So-

viet Union will henceforth defend firmly its own interests in all issues

while a realistic and constructive approach by the US side will always

be met with our understanding and readiness to reach agreement. It is

that balanced approach that we hope to see when Secretary Vance

comes to Moscow.

It applies both to the problem of the limitation of strategic arms

and other questions related to ending the arms race. We definitely ex-

pect that the US side will support our appropriate proposals including

those on banning the development of new types and systems of

weapons of mass annihilation, on banning chemical weapons, on con-

cluding world treaty on non-use of force. Our proposals on those and a

number of other questions, including the one of the Indian Ocean were

expounded not once and in detail particularly in the UN. We could

discuss as well such issues mentioned in your letter as notification of

missile test firings, reduction of sales and transfer of conventional

weapons to the third world countries etc., being guided by the interests

of international security and strengthening peace.

We attach great importance to an agreement on reduction of

armed forces and armaments in Central Europe without prejudice to

the security of any of the sides.

However, in your letter a onesided approach is clearly seen with

regard to the negotiations in Vienna as well. Only in this way one can

judge, for example, the words to the effect that the US side is viewing

its position in connection with the negotiations in Vienna in the light of

some “concern” about “an excessive increase” in the military strength

in Eastern Europe. Not only an objective estimate of the actual situation

is absent here, but the constructive proposals of the USSR and other so-

cialist countries—participants in the negotiations aimed at achieving

progress at the Vienna negotiations are totally ignored as well. We are

also prepared henceforth to seek solutions and decisions, and we are

ready for endeavours which do not imply acquiring by anyone unilat-

eral advantages. But if we are expected to reduce unilaterally our de-

fensive capabilities and thus to put ourselves and our allies in an un-

equal position, then nothing will come out of it.

It is impossible to agree with the evaluation given in the letter, of

the situation regarding the carrying out of the Quadripartite Agree-

13.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, March 4, 1977

To General Secretary Brezhnev

Your letter of February 25th2 caused me some concern because of

its somewhat harsh tone, because it failed to assume good faith on my

part, and because there was no positive response to specific sugges-

tions contained in my previous letter. The differences between our

countries are deep enough, and I hope that you and I never compound

them by doubts about our respective personal motives.

The fact is that no final agreement was ever reached at Vladivostok

nor in the subsequent negotiations regarding cruise missiles or the

Backfire bomber. I am confident that such agreements can be attained

in the future, and I am eager to seek them. I appreciate your concerns

regarding the deferral of these issues to later negotiations but I do be-

lieve that something is to be gained from generating momentum

through a more rapid agreement and I want to emphasize that a de-

ferral of these two contentious issues would be designed only to facili-

tate a more rapid agreement, with all its positive political conse-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

quences. I am also confident that with mutual good will, we should be

able to reach agreement regarding such matters as conventional arma-

ments, tactical nuclear weapons, and throw weight.

I do not underestimate for a moment the difficulties that stand in

our way. The resolution of these issues will require perseverance, pa-

tience, and determination. It is with that consideration in mind that I

would like to make two further suggestions, both designed to help in

resolving the differences between us.

First of all, I think it would be extremely useful if you were to indi-

cate to us your views regarding greatly reduced strategic force levels

which we might reach four or five years from now. In previous stra-

tegic arms limitation talks, we have tended to take small steps toward

an uncertain future. I am suggesting that instead we seek to define a

specific longer-term objective which we can then approach step-by-

step with more assurance of success.

Secondly, our search for a stable accommodation would be en-

hanced by the rapid conclusion of a formal agreement between us on

those issues on which both of us seem predisposed to agree. We

should exploit the fact that we are in agreement or might reach an early

agreement on such issues as:

a) a limit of 2400 (or a mutually agreeable lower limit) on strategic

delivery vehicles;

b) a limit of 1320 (or a mutually agreeable lower limit) on launchers

with multiple independent warheads;

c) provisions for mutually satisfactory verification;

d) prior notification of missile test launchings;

e) a comprehensive test ban, including a temporary provision for

the conclusion of ongoing peaceful programs;

f) agreement not to arm satellites nor to develop the ability to de-

stroy or damage satellites;

g) the demilitarization of the Indian Ocean;

h) a limit on civil defense efforts;

i) mutual restraints on arms sales to Third World countries;

j) elimination of mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles.

The above list is certainly not all-inclusive, and other relatively

noncontroversial matters could easily be added to it. The point is to

move forward without delay on those issues on which we are able to

agree, thereby generating the needed momentum for coping immedi-

ately thereafter with more intractable questions.

14.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

March 15, 1977

Dear Mr. President,

Having studied your letter of March 4, I would like to set forth

once more the substance of our understanding of the way the things are

with the working out of an agreement on strategic offensive arms limi-

tation (to be effective till 1985), as well as to state in more detail our po-

sition on specific questions which are still outstanding.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Here are some general observations to start with. We are naturally

in favor of concluding an agreement as soon as possible, without delay.

However, an attempt to do it on the basis of some artificially simplified

version does not by any means expedite the matter if we keep in view

the aim we place before us, namely, to really limit strategic arms, being

guided by the principle of undiminished security for either of the con-

tracting parties. Just the same, the preparation of an agreement would

in no way be expedited if, putting aside some questions which, for that

matter, have been worked up in many respects, we would start at-

taching to it some new issues which, besides, have no direct relation to

the subject matter of the agreement.

Conclusion of a new agreement between our countries on limiting

strategic arms would certainly have great political significance both for

Soviet-US relations and on a broader plane. However, it will be feasible

only if the agreement constitutes a real step in the direction of limiting

strategic arms. Otherwise, it would be counterproductive.

That would be precisely the case if the question of cruise missiles

were left outside the agreement. That question is not only most directly

related to the core of the new agreement but it also—which is essen-

tial—has been worked up in many respects. Even some specific for-

mulas have been agreed upon. To propose now to put cruise missiles

outside the framework of the agreement would mean not only a step

back to the initial positions but would also leave a way open for ex-

panding the arms race to a new dangerous direction.

That, we think, corresponds in no way to the goals of rapid conclu-

sion of an agreement on limiting strategic arms. Therefore we confirm

our concrete proposals on the whole complex of cruise missiles,

namely:

—To consider heavy bombers when equipped with cruise missiles

capable of a range of 600 to 2500 kilometers as delivery vehicles

equipped with MIRVs and to count them correspondingly in a certain

ratio (depending upon the type of a heavy bomber) against the agreed

level for such delivery vehicles—1320; air-to-surface cruise missiles ca-

pable of a range in excess of 2500 kilometers should be completely

banned; the equipping with cruise missiles capable of a range of 600 to

2500 kilometers of other aircraft except heavy bombers, should be also

banned;

—All sea-based and land-based cruise missiles capable of a range

in excess of 600 kilometers should be completely banned.

I would like to remind once again that our agreement to include

into the aggregate number of the missiles equipped with MIRVs (1320)

all the missiles of the types, of which even one has been tested with

MIRVs, was and remains conditioned upon reaching a final agreement

on the questions of cruise missiles.

January–May 1977

As for the Soviet medium bomber code-named by you Backfire,

we have given official data about the range of this aircraft (2200 km)

and expressed readiness to enter into the records of the negotiations

this data as well as our intention not to provide this aircraft with capa-

bilities to operate at intercontinental distances—all this on the condi-

tion that the issue of Backfire is completely and totally withdrawn from

further negotiations. We confirm that position of ours.

The issue of mobile launchers for ballistic missiles of interconti-

nental range naturally should find its solution in the agreement in

question. Earlier we proposed to agree that over the period that agree-

ment remains in force the sides should refrain from deploying land-

based mobile ICBM launchers.

Our approach to the question of a possibility for subsequent reduc-

tions of the USSR and US strategic forces is set forth in my letter of Feb-

ruary 25. I repeat that we shall be ready to proceed to the discussions

of this issue immediately after the signing of the agreement. However,

it is necessary that account should be taken here of those factors which I

already wrote you about on February 25, i.e. such factors as differences

in geographic positions of the sides, the presence of the US forward

based nuclear systems and aircraft carrier aviation in the proximity of

the USSR territory, the possession of nuclear weapons by the US NATO

allies and other circumstances which cannot be discarded.

Having in mind these factors and the above mentioned consider-

ations regarding cruise missiles, it could be possible not only to limit

the levels of strategic nuclear delivery vehicles for the sides (2400 and

1320) but also to consider the number of such delivery vehicles to be re-

duced even before the expiration of the agreement being worked out.

The above considerations represent our position of principle

which we intend to adhere to in the forthcoming talks with Secretary

Vance. The additional questions which are mentioned in your letter,

Mr. President, also undoubtedly deserve attention. We shall be pre-

pared to set forth our preliminary considerations on those matters. On

those of them, where a prospect appears for finding mutually accept-

able solutions special negotiations would be conducted. If progress is

achieved, appropriate agreements could be signed simultaneously

with the strategic arms limitation agreement.

In conclusion I would like to note, Mr. President, that I do not quite

understand the meaning of your reference to the tone of my letter of

February 25. Its tone is usual—business-like and considerate. If you

have in mind the direct and frank way in which it expounds our views,

then I proceeded and do now from the premise that a dialogue of that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

very nature is in the interests of the matter. If you yet have in mind our

attitude of principle toward the attempts to raise issues which go be-

yond the relations between states, and in general are far-fetched, then

no other reaction from our side can be expected.

I assume that our personal correspondence will serve the interests

of constructive development of the relations between our countries.

Sincerely,

L. Brezhnev

15.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, March 24, 1977

To General Secretary Brezhnev

The substantive answer to your recent letter2 will be presented in

person by Secretary Vance. However, I wish to express my hope that

his visit to Moscow will result in substantial general agreements re-

garding arms reduction and the enhancement of cooperation between

our two countries as we search together for a more peaceful and

friendly world.

I hope to continue our correspondence after Mr. Vance’s return,

and look forward to an early meeting with you. The Secretary of State

has my complete confidence, he and I have spent hours together pre-

paring for this important trip, and he is qualified to speak authorita-

tively on my behalf.

You have my personal good wishes.

Jimmy Carter

January–May 1977

16.

Telegram From the Department of State to the White House

68027. For the President and Dr. Brzezinski only. Following tele-

Quote. Secto 3009. Dept pass White House for the President from

the Secretary. Subject: Moscow Reception

My reception on arrival Moscow was most cordial. Gromyko was

warm and gracious, and agreed readily on a businesslike work

schedule to begin March 28 with a meeting with Brezhnev. On the way

into town, Brezhnev phoned on the car radio, extended a cordial wel-

come and sent you and me his best wishes. That is about the sum total

of initial impressions, as we get down to business tomorrow.

Vance

Unquote

Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

17.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

USSR

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

General Secretary L.I. Brezhnev

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Minister A.A. Gromyko

Mr. Paul Warnke

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Mr. Phillip Habib

Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov

Mr. William Hyland

Mr. G.M. Korniyenko

Mr. William D. Krimer,

Mr. O.M. Sokolov

Interpreter

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Following an exchange of pleasantries, General Secretary Brezhnev

expressed his condolences to the United States on the occasion of the

tragic crash of two aircraft in the Canary Islands, which resulted in a

large loss of life. Among those killed in the crash were some 300 Amer-

icans. Brezhnev expressed condolences on his own behalf and on be-

half of his colleagues, and took this occasion to note that the complexity

of technology was another argument against armaments.

Secretary Vance expressed his appreciation for Brezhnev’s words.

Brezhnev thought that now that the photographers had left, the two

sides could begin business-like discussions. He did not want to repeat

the questions he had dealt with in his recent foreign policy speeches in

saying this because he was convinced that the leaders of the United

States were well acquainted with these speeches. President Carter him-

self had commented that he agreed with the constructive proposals

“Comrade Brezhnev” had made at Tula and at the Trade Union

January–May 1977

Congress in Moscow. Thus he would not repeat what he had said on

those two occasions. It seemed to him that first of all, the two sides at

this meeting should exchange views on the general state of relations be-

tween our two countries, and discuss prospects of their future develop-

ment. It was his hope that he and his colleagues could have a chance to

hear at first hand how the new U.S. Government approached the ques-

tion of relations with the Soviet Union. He was saying this because he

considered these relations to be the most important thing to be dis-

cussed. When someone had an objective, he was determined to move

toward it, without turning aside. There had been many contacts be-

tween Soviet and American leaders before the Secretary’s arrival and

many inter-relationships between our two countries, which had

emerged in recent years, and had played an important role in working

out major understandings and agreements between the Soviet Union

and the United States in the course of the past several years.

Referring to the present stage of relations between our two coun-

tries, Brezhnev said that they had acquired certain specific distinctive

features. On the whole, these relations continued to develop under the

impact of those efforts which were quite justifiably made to introduce

positive changes. Truly great, and he would even say titantic, efforts

had been required at times in order to arrive at very complex decisions.

Brezhnev wanted to draw the Secretary’s attention to the fact that

one could approach the process of relaxation of tensions and improve-

ment of Soviet-American relations in different ways. The two sides

might agree on some things and disagree on others. However, if one

were to take a look at the work that had been accomplished in recent

years without bias (he repeated “without bias”), if one were to take a

look at the foundations of that process which undoubtedly was fur-

thered by the steps the two sides had taken to reduce the risk of out-

break of nuclear war, one could arrive at only one conclusion: the work

accomplished, and what had been achieved as a result of that work,

was equally important and beneficial, not only for our two countries,

but objectively for all the peoples of the world. In brief, this represented

a gain for all those who not only in words but in deeds desired peace

and wanted to see fruitful cooperation develop between our two coun-

tries and peoples. At this point Brezhnev deviated from his prepared

text to stress that whenever he talked to someone, he always did so in a

frank and sincere manner, and he wanted to be sure that his partner in a

conversation realized this well. In saying that the developments in re-

cent years represented a gain for all those who desired peace not only

in words, but in deeds, he would have to add quite directly that during

the past twelve to eighteen months the further development of our bi-

lateral relations had slowed down to a certain extent, and in some

sectors had come to a complete halt. There was no need to dwell on the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

reasons for this, but it was essential that we knew where we stood now

in terms of Soviet-American relations.

Brezhnev saw the principal purpose of the discussions here in

Moscow in a realistic (he repeated the word “realistic”) and carefully

weighed appraisal of the present situation, in order to identify prior-

ities that would give a new impulse to the relations between our two

countries, because without mapping out such priorities, without an

orderly manner of proceeding, we would not be able to move ahead.

Quite naturally, in this connection the Soviet leadership proceeded

from the premise that both sides should have an absolute interest in

furthering the development of our bilateral relations. Here he would

use a rather contentful and weighty expression, but one that was abso-

lutely true, because it was based on the realities of today’s world. The

question could be looked at in the following manner: either we con-

tinue to move ahead along the chartered path, or our relations would

find themselves thrown backward, whether we wanted to see this or

not. The alternative was all too clear. In the latter case both our coun-

tries and the cause of peace as a whole would stand to lose in the future.

Such was the true situation, even if only because of the objective role

and weight of the Soviet Union and the United States in the world in

general and in world affairs. Of course, Secretary Vance would be inter-

ested in the position of the Soviet Union with respect to these two alter-

natives. Brezhnev wanted to say quite clearly that as far as the Soviet

Union was concerned, it had no doubt at all as to the choice to be made.

Its course was clear. The Soviet Union was resolutely determined to

make use of recent achievements in Soviet-American relations in order

to move forward undeviatingly toward constructive cooperation and

interaction with the United States. He was in favor of resolving the

problems arising in our bilateral relations, and in favor of cooperating

in the settlement of international problems. The faster we would move

ahead, the better. He wanted to repeat that our two countries had

gained considerable positive experience. We had achieved funda-

mental agreements and understandings, we had formulated agreed

principles, consistent implementation of which, he was convinced, can

and must ensure forward development of Soviet-American relations.

Secretary Vance would realize that the Soviets, too, listened to U.S.

radio broadcasts, that many of Brezhnev’s colleagues read U.S. news-

papers and speeches by U.S. leaders. On the basis of recent pronounce-

ments it was not at all clear to him whether or not the United States in-

tended to abide by the various understandings achieved. He wanted to

state quite clearly that it was the intention of the Soviet Union firmly to

adhere to the agreements concluded, and to proceed in our relations on

the basis of the principles that had been mutually agreed; it stood to

reason that the Soviet leaders expected the United States to act in the

January–May 1977

same manner. They had no illusions at all about the complexities and

problems which existed and would continue to exist in our relations.

But, in his view all this led to one conclusion—that we should set our-

selves specific and realistic objectives, and that we should not permit

any abatement in the effort to resolve problems that arise. Of course,

just as the United States, the Soviet Union would never submit to

duress and would never permit its interests to be harmed. However, to

the extent that the other side was prepared to do so, the Soviet Union

was prepared to seek and find mutually acceptable agreements. The

main thing was that there be a common positive attitude and a practical

willingness on both sides to arrive at mutually acceptable solutions. In

this connection Brezhnev wanted especially to address the current

status of detente, both in the relations between our two countries and

on an international scale. He believed that the turnabout toward de-

tente, which had occurred in recent years, was the most important

trend in the development of international relations. Deviating once

again, he wanted to say something very frankly. The Soviet leadership

could not fail to be concerned over the fact that in Western countries

opponents of detente had once again become very active. Those who

wanted to return the world to the time of the cold war had stepped up

their activities. The range of means they used was rather extensive:

there were statements to the effect that detente had been beneficial to

the Soviet Union only; there were fabrications to the effect that under

cover of detente the Soviet Union was getting ready to carry out a first

strike against the United States. This was not a joking matter. Here

Brezhnev saw an attempt to distort and make acceptable an under-

standing of detente, which could allegedly allow interference in the in-

ternal affairs of the Soviet Union and other socialist countries under the

false pretense, and he stressed “false pretense”, of concern for human

rights. Brezhnev noted that Secretary Vance, visiting here in Moscow,

(he expressed regret that the Secretary would not have a chance to visit

Leningrad), could travel throughout the entire country, since no restric-

tions applied to him in this respect, and he could see for himself what

rights were enjoyed by people in the Soviet Union. The Secretary

would see what might distress a Soviet citizen and whether or not

anyone was oppressing him, and yet, a hullabaloo had started in the

United States and a great deal of anti-Soviet agitation. He was saying

this quite openly and frankly, and would ask the Secretary to convey

his views to President Carter. Never before had such a ruckus over

human rights been raised in the United States. Of course, he could and

intended to provide an answer on the human rights question, and with

respect not only to the Soviet Union but to the whole world. He would

provide a response—let America first take a look at human rights in its

own country. He added that this was a topic he would return to later.

Meanwhile he would like to touch on the theoretical aspect of these

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

questions. There were some in the West who tried to present things in

such a way as if what we were dealing with in this case was ideological

struggle; it was pointed out that in the view of the Russians themselves

the ideological struggle did not in any way stop under detente condi-

tions. Brezhnev would indeed say that he took this view when it was

really a matter of a clash between ideologies, a matter of differences in

philosophical views, a matter of different ways of looking at the devel-

opment of human society. However, such a struggle could not in any

way be dragged into relations between states. Otherwise we would be

dealing not with an ideological struggle but in fact, with psychological

warfare. These were two entirely different things in principle. To view

detente in this way would mean purposely or inevitably to distort it,

and ultimately to undermine it. The Soviet Union believed that detente

meant above all liquidation of the cold war and transition to normal

and smooth relations between states. This was clearly expressed in So-

viet readiness to resolve disagreements and disputes not by force, not

by means of threats, let alone the use of arms, but by peaceful means,

by negotiation. Finally, detente implied a certain degree of trust and a

willingness to take into account each other’s legitimate interests. He

was convinced that detente viewed in this way met the interests of not

simply one country, but had universal significance. It was obvious, for

example, that if the United States would not take into account the legiti-

mate (he repeated the word “legitimate”) interests of the Soviet Union,

if the United States tried to interfere in Soviet domestic affairs, it would

be unreasonable for anyone to expect the Soviet Union to take into ac-

count the interests of the United States. The realities of our times were

such that without due mutual consideration of the legitimate interests

of our two countries, without a certain degree of trust and concern for

strengthening that trust, it would be impossible to halt the arms race or

to achieve settlements of international conflicts or resolution of the

global problems facing mankind. For understandable reasons, prob-

lems could arise in the relations between our two countries, as well as

with other countries, but the Soviet Union has always believed and

continued to believe that Soviet-American relations must develop

without prejudice to the interests of third countries, and not at their ex-

pense. At the same time, he knew that it was not in our mutual interest

to tolerate attempts by third countries to undermine the relations be-

tween us, or to play on the differences that inevitably arose between us.

(Gromyko remarked in an aside that there were those who loved

to try it).

Addressing the Secretary and his colleagues directly, Brezhnev

concluded by saying that such were the thoughts he had wanted to ex-

press on the general state of Soviet-American relations as of now,

without at this time going into specific questions. He gathered that

January–May 1977

there was a vast number, hundreds of specific questions that would

have to be addressed subsequently. For now he would prefer to stop

here, and would ask for the views of the U.S. side. He also acknowl-

edged that he had received the last communication.

Secretary Vance first wanted to thank the General Secretary for the

frankness and openness with which he had addressed the various im-

portant questions before us. He, too, would try to speak frankly and

openly, because he believed this to be the best way of achieving results.

First, before beginning to set forth the views of the United States re-

garding the relations between our two countries, the Secretary wanted

to transmit to Mr. Brezhnev a letter from President Carter.

(Brezhnev took a few minutes to read the translation of the Presi-

dent’s letter and passed it on to Minister Gromyko).

The Secretary said that all of us were heartened by Brezhnev’s for-

eign policy remarks in his recent speeches. Last winter, as Governor

Carter6 prepared to assume the presidency, he had been impressed and

gratified by Brezhnev’s public statement on the importance of good re-

lations between our two countries. In particular, he was encouraged by

Brezhnev’s statement at Tula that detente meant a willingness to re-

solve differences and disputes by peaceful means, at conference tables.

The President’s deep conviction, which the Secretary shared and, in his

judgment, was shared by a majority of the American people, was that

our two countries must do everything they could to reduce the danger

of war. The President, like Brezhnev, was a practical man and realized

that the overall state of our relations would be determined largely by

the specifics of the issues on our agenda. These were the “objective real-

ities” of detente which determined where we were going.

The President, like Brezhnev, had been an officer in the armed

forces of his country, and had a deep determination to do all he could to

work toward a reasonable and fair regulation of military competition.

The Secretary well knew that Brezhnev had lived through the

devastation of war, and knew the sorrow and suffering it would bring

to all of our people, the young and the old. The Secretary, too, had ex-

perienced the horrors of war, had seen his friends and comrades die,

and had lived with the responsibility for nuclear weapons for many

years. It was his fervent hope that our children and Brezhnev’s children

would be spared the incalculable horror of a nuclear holocaust. At this

point Brezhnev interrupted to tell a story in connection with alleged So-

viet intentions to attack or threaten the United States. An Oriental tale

related that at a bazaar a man had purposely started the rumor that at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the far end of that bazaar someone was giving away pillows free of

charge. As people heard him, they began running toward that part of

the bazaar, until the man was left all alone. At that moment he began to

wonder whether there might not be something to the rumor that he

himself had started, and he thought that, just in case, he, too, should

start running; who knows, maybe they were indeed giving out free

pillows. Brezhnev said he knew that Americans liked anecdotes, and

that is why he told this story by way of an analogy to those who started

rumors about Soviet-war-like intentions.

The Secretary continued by saying that recently, Brezhnev had

noted that there were objective possibilities for developing equal and

mutually advantageous cooperation in various spheres for the good of

both countries and universal peace. He heartily agreed with such a

view of the situation.

Brezhnev had further said that the question was how soon such a

development would begin. He was firmly convinced that we could

begin that process now. We had an unparalleled opportunity to set our

relations on a fresh course.

At Tula Brezhnev had also said that detente meant an ability to

take into consideration each other’s legitimate interests. The two sides

were realistic enough to know that we would have differences. But we

shared a fundamental interest in improving our mutual under-

standing. Our differences must not distract us from working for peace.

They also must not divide us.

The Secretary wanted to give Brezhnev a sense of developments in

our country which had affected our national outlook. We have come

through a hotly contested national election which was a process of re-

newal and of developing a new policy consensus in the country. Now a

new government had taken office in Washington, but we were dealing

with the same currents of opinion that had shaped our election debates.

There was support for detente among the American people, but there

were also concerns and apprehensions which had to be overcome.

At this point Brezhnev interrupted again and recalled how at the

very beginning of the “Great Patriotic War”, at the time Hitler had at-

tacked Czechoslovakia and had allied himself with Mussolini, he had

come home from work one day to the place where he lived in rather

humble conditions together with his father. His father was a simple

man, a steel worker, and this story, which Brezhnev was sure his col-

leagues on the Politburo had heard more than once, was well-suited to

illustrate a simple working man’s approach to the psychological ques-

tions of war. His father had asked him “Lyonya, which is the highest

mountain in the world”? He had responded that it was Mt. Everest. His

father then asked how tall was the Eiffel Tower in Paris? He had replied

that it was some 300 meters tall. His father then said that if he and his

January–May 1977

friends had been authorized to do so, they would have built a tower

twice as tall as the Eiffel Tower, would have hauled it up to Mt. Everest

and topped it off with a gallows. There they would hang Hitler, and

would instruct everybody to view this scene through a telescope. His

father was obviously unaware of the fact that the curvature of the earth

would make such viewing impossible. His father went on to say they

would then declare that this would be the fate of not only the first insti-

gator of war, but of any other war-monger. After hanging five, six, or

seven such criminals the world would be rid of war. Much later, during

the Nuremberg Trial, when the prosecutor there pronounced the words

“instigator of War,” Brezhnev recalled this heart-to-heart conversation

between a father and a son. It was a true story and, while Brezhnev

apologized for having interrupted, he felt it was a useful story, because

it emphasized the need to defend peace.

The Secretary acknowledged that it was indeed a very useful story.

He continued by saying that President Carter enjoyed the support of

the vast majority of the American people—more so than any President

for many years—and therefore he could get support for arms control

agreements. The point he wanted to make was of critical importance,

because it meant that any agreements we could reach here the Presi-

dent could get ratified by Congress.

The Secretary said that what we wanted to set in motion during

our talks was a process of improvement in key arms control issues, in

our bilateral relations, and in international relations. The President had

spoken of his belief that we were all here in good faith to pursue a more

stable peace through new arms limitation negotiations. He felt that we

must be bold and vigorous in achieving control over nuclear weapons.

We were prepared to go far in this joint endeavor and explore new

ideas. The positions the President advocated were an advance over the

past—not only in the strategic arms area, but in stopping all nuclear

testing, and moving ahead on a broad range of other arms control

issues.

Our present talks were a crucial step in demonstrating that detente

was a dynamic, long-term process. It was not static. We, like the Soviet

Union, must give it new meaning, if it were truly to reflect greater mu-

tual understanding. The Secretary would suggest that we begin regen-

eration of detente.

Without going into details now, the Secretary wanted to sketch out

those areas which we would want to explore with the Soviet side. We

will explore ways to address the Backfire and Cruise missile issues, we

will make a comprehensive proposal which would enhance strategic

stability and mutual confidence, we will discuss advance notification of

missile test firings, averting military competition in space, and con-

cerns that certain forms of civil defense can be destabilizing. We also

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

hoped that our discussions will make a turning point in the long effort

to achieve a total cessation of nuclear testing, a subject in which, the

Secretary knew, the Soviet Union had deep concerns. Conditions may

be right for the United States and the Soviet Union to exercise unique

leadership in getting this process moving. We were moving promptly

to secure Congressional ratification of the Treaty on the Threshold Test

Ban and the Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions. What we accom-

plish during our meetings here would help us in the ratification of

those treaties. Another area where we could work together to move for-

ward was the Indian Ocean. We wanted to explore Soviet interest in

mutual restraint in that area.

The Secretary pointed out that conventional arms exports were

dangerous and wasted vast and increasingly scarce resources. Our two

countries have accounted for a large proportion of such trade. In fact,

the United States occupied first place in the export trade of conven-

tional arms, and the Soviet Union second place. Competition between

us in the export of arms placed stress on our bilateral relations. It

should in any event be a matter of principle for advanced countries to

make a serious effort to restrain and reduce this trade. We would wel-

come an expression of interest on the part of the Soviet side in an ex-

change of views on this subject. In this connection, we believed that the

best way to begin was with suppliers. The United States was ready to

exercise restraint in its own activities. We would be talking to our allies.

The President was interested in Soviet views on prospects for coopera-

tion. In the area of non-proliferation we were gratified by progress in

the London Suppliers’ Group, and in particular with very solid Soviet

participation. These were important problems, and we hoped to con-

tinue in close cooperation.

The Secretary wanted to inform Brezhnev today that in the very

near future we would announce certain policy decisions concerning

nuclear non-proliferation. They will include the indefinite deferral of

commercial reprocessing and recycling of plutonium in the United

States, and the restructuring of the U.S. breeder reactor program to em-

phasize designs other than the plutonium breeder. The Secretary had

instructed our Embassy to inform Minister Gromyko in detail of these

policy decisions. We shared Soviet concern about the dangers of prolif-

eration of nuclear weapons, and we believed that the actions which we

are about to take would constitute a major step forward toward this

end.

We had reviewed the Vienna MBFR negotiations and our MBFR

policy. The Carter Administration strongly supported these negotia-

tions. A satisfactory agreement could enhance the security of both sides

equally. The West had shown its will to move toward agreement. The

December 1975 Western proposal to reduce U.S. nuclear weapons was

January–May 1977

a substantial step. We hoped that the East would agree to the two basic

objectives involved in these negotiations, which were parity in the form

of equal military manpower in the area, and collectivity of limitations.

If the East showed serious willingness to reach an agreement based on

parity and collectivity, the way for movement on both sides would be

open.

Brezhnev interrupted to say that he wanted to present the following

statement. He said there could be different approaches to the relations

between us. When something had happened to President Nixon, the

Soviet side had not mentioned one word about it, neither in the press

nor in other communications. The Soviet leadership regarded this as a

purely domestic matter for the United States. When Nixon had come to

the Soviet Union the first time, he went directly by car to the Residence

and had come to see Brezhnev. They had a one-on-one conversation

only Sukhodrev present to interpret. Nixon had said that our two

countries had such quantities of arms that we could destroy each other

seven times over. Therefore he suggested that we approach this ques-

tion realistically. This was a very difficult time in our relations, because

the United States had just bombed some Soviet vessels in Haiphong

harbor in Viet Nam. Nevertheless, the Soviet leadership had decided

to receive Nixon to see what could be done. Nixon had pointed out that

he was trying to withdraw troops from Viet Nam, that it was not he

who had started the war. The Soviet Union, a great power with a vast

territory and a population of almost 260 million, and the United States,

the other great power, could not permit the Viet Nam situation to be an

obstacle to their mutual relations. Finally the Viet Nam war was extin-

guished, and that was good. Nixon had suggested that we take up spe-

cific issues between us, and one could see how productive that was, in

what a short period of time the SALT agreements were concluded,

among them the Interim Agreement which expires in October of this

year. A number of other agreements were concluded, basic principles

of relations between us were worked out, an agreement was con-

cluded on the prevention of nuclear war. All this had been accom-

plished during a very brief period of time. Since then much time has

elapsed. Nothing is being said about the Vladivostok understanding,

and 367.

Document 257.

Document 271.

Document 122.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

quite the contrary; Brezhnev had read that allegedly Vladivostok was

not binding on Mr. Carter, and yet that agreement had not been an

agreement between Mr. Brezhnev and Mr. Ford, but an agreement be-

tween the Soviet Union and the United States. If any audience were

convened in the Palace of Congresses here in Moscow—it holds 5,000

people—and Brezhnev were to ask “Comrades, do you want good rela-

tions with the United States?”, the answer would be a resounding yes.

Brezhnev did not know what authority the U.S. delegation had,

but he believed that things must be addressed in specifics.

President Carter had spoken of personal freedom in the Soviet

Union. In that case Brezhnev would want to list what has to be done in

the United States to ensure human rights. The U.S. Constitution did not

provide for the right of people to work, neither did it provide for equal

rights for women. Brezhnev hoped that Mr. Vance would not take of-

fense, this was just a matter of Brezhnev’s natural approach to things.

Secretary Vance said that he would be very happy at this time to

discuss a proposal that we wanted to table in order to lay the frame-

work for forward movement in the negotiations on strategic arms

limitation.

Brezhnev said that when he had spoken of specifics he did not have

in mind that we should now discuss SALT questions, because that

would involve technical considerations. He thought it would be advis-

able to do this later.

The Secretary said that in that case he would very briefly discuss

our relations in the international sphere. In that respect he would note

that there was need for us to consult earlier and more intensively about

potential trouble spots so that we could avoid the dangers of sudden

confrontation and avoid competing militarily all over the world. It was

in this spirit that we wished to discuss the international issues on our

agenda—the Middle East, Africa and Cyprus.

Brezhnev interrupted to ask if it was intended to take up the ques-

tion of the Middle East Geneva Conference.

Minister Gromyko interrupted to point out that there had been some

discussion of the possibility of his taking up Middle East questions at a

meeting with Secretary Vance in Geneva during the month of May.

The Secretary said that he wanted to make some brief comments on

our economic relations.

At this point Brezhnev asked if the Secretary was referring to the

MFN issue.

The Secretary replied that the Carter Administration was taking up

that issue with Congress and working in that direction, but that this

would require some time. In this connection resolution of the MFN

January–May 1977

issue would be facilitated by the arms control agreement we might

achieve here.

Brezhnev remarked that he had now heard about that issue from

three U.S. Presidents, and yet nothing has been accomplished.

The Secretary repeated that we were working with Congress in that

direction, but some time would be required to achieve its resolution.

Turning to our economic relations, the Secretary expressed the

hope that the Joint Commercial Commission could become more ac-

tive. Secretary Blumenthal was ready to discuss dates with Soviet rep-

resentatives for reconvening the Commission soon in Washington. The

Secretary said we were pleased that scientific/technical and cultural/

educational cooperation was going forward in many fields. These pro-

vided both immediate benefits to both sides and a favorable climate for

improved relations. We were ready, if the Soviet side was, to agree

in principle on the extension of two cooperative agreements which

were signed in 1972 and which expire in May of this year—Space and

Science/Technology. The Secretary said that he had to say one word

on the human rights issue which had been raised by Brezhnev. He had

listened carefully to what Brezhnev had said and would point out that

we had not in any way embarked on an anti-Soviet campaign. Our

stand involved matters of principle, and we had no intention of taking

advantage of the situation to single out the Soviet Union. The Secretary

would simply suggest that we agree to disagree on our respective

values, and then go on to discuss the urgent problems before us.

Brezhnev pointed out that President Carter had written a kind letter

to Sakharov, praising him in every way, etc., encouraging and em-

bracing him, without knowing what Sakharov was doing in the Soviet

Union, with whom he was connected. Or, another example—he had re-

ceived Bukovskiy, a man who was a crook, a thorough crook. Was this

really suitable?

Gromyko interrupted to remark that if the Secretary were to run

into Bukovskiy, he better put his watch in a safe place.

Secretary Vance said he did not think it would be useful to debate

this issue, but recalled that there had been times in the past when

people who had attacked the U.S. government had been received and

honored in the Soviet Union.

Gromyko said he would point out the simple circumstance that

President Carter had sent a letter to Sakharov at the same time that he

had also sent a letter to General Secretary Brezhnev. This was a dis-

turbing event.

Document 227.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Brezhnev went on to say that people like Sakharov were traitors to

their country, were linked with espionage organizations, and at

meetings in his home Sakharov had received outright criminals. There

were some stories about some illegal currency operations they had

been involved in. As for the United States, he would note that the U.S.

Constitution did not provide for the right to work, the right to educa-

tion and the right to social welfare. Up to now, there was no equality for

women in the United States. He had read in the New York Times of Jan-

uary 9 of this year that U.S. economists proceeded from the premise

that the United States would have full employment if it were able to re-

duce unemployment to the level of four percent of the labor force; in

other words, according to the New York Times, millions of people

would still be unemployed, and yet U.S. economists considered that

full employment. In February of this year the United States had 7 mil-

lion unemployed, among whom there were twice as many blacks

as whites. 48 percent of young people in the U.S. under 24 years of

age were unemployed. These were data of the U.S. Department of

Labor. Gromyko added that this represented “discrimination within

discrimination.”

Brezhnev said that between the years 1960 and 1974 the FBI had car-

ried on surveillance on 500,000 citizens accused of subversive activities,

although their actions did not go beyond lawful activities. According to

a Congressional report on intelligence activities, the CIA had unlaw-

fully opened 250,000 letters from abroad between the years of 1953 and

1973. Brezhnev further cited an open letter by James Baldwin, ad-

dressed to President Carter, in which he wrote “too many of us are in

prison, too many of us go hungry, for too many of us the doors are

closed.” That letter had been published in the New York Times and

Baldwin spoke of the stepsons of America who were being persecuted

because they refused to acquiesce in racial discrimination. Baldwin had

also mentioned the Wilmington Ten—nine blacks and one woman—

who had received sentences totalling 282 years in prison, only because

they had protested against discrimination in the schools. Baldwin

wrote about a trial in Charleston, North Carolina, where three blacks

faced the same prospect as the Wilmington Ten. They were accused of

arson as a pretext for imprisoning them for protesting. In conclusion,

Baldwin had called on the President to correct this situation. So far he

had received no response to his open letter to President Carter.

myko. He said he was very pleased that he and Secretary Vance had

had such a frank and open exchange of views. Each of them felt free to

criticize the other, had done so, and, taking into account today’s talk,

we now had to take up SALT and other matters. Brezhnev ended the

conversation on a friendly and cheerful note.

and Christopher, who was serving as acting Secretary in Vance’s absence. (Carter Li-

brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter/

18.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

SALT

PARTICIPANTS

US PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. Paul Warnke

Mr. William Hyland

Mr. Leslie H. Gelb

Mr. William D. Krimer, (Interpreter)

USSR PARTICIPANTS

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers L.V. Smirnov

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Mr. V.G. Komplektov

Mr. O.M. Sokolov

Mr. V. Sukhodrev, (Interpreter)

SALT

Foreign Minister Gromyko opened the meeting by saying that there

were many questions to discuss, but he would suggest now to take up

SALT. Secretary Vance agreed.

Gromyko wanted to say a few words by way of introduction. If we

wanted to waste no time in taking the bull by the horns, we should con-

tinue to discuss the subject in further development of the discussions

with General Secretary Brezhnev. For objective reasons, the question of

curbing and putting an end to the arms race and thereby reducing the

risk of outbreak of nuclear war is the pivotal direction of Soviet-

American relations. While this might be repetition, Gromyko thought it

should be repeated each day in each city, each village, and at every

crossroads. Within the framework of this direction, a central place was

held, and understandably so, by the problem of limiting strategic arms.

This had been quite correctly stressed at the meeting this morning, and

again during his and the Secretary’s conversation at lunch. There was

January–May 1977

evidently no need to speak at length of the great importance of this

problem, and of the fact that both sides, that is the Soviet Union and the

United States, must be interested in a solution to this problem in an

equal degree. There cannot be a situation where one side would be in-

terested more than the other. In the Soviet view this was the crucial

factor that made it possible and necessary to resolve the problem of

limiting strategic arms.

It was not fortuitous that the two sides had recognized and

adopted the principal of equality and equal security (Gromyko re-

peated and stressed “equality and equal security”). Furthermore, it

would be inadmissable for either side to seek unilateral advantages in

this area. It was no accident that this formulation had become part and

parcel of the very fabric of the Soviet-American SALT negotiations at

all levels, the highest as well as the lowest. All involved in SALT liter-

ally lived with this formula. Indeed, any other approach would be

nothing but an illusion and fantasy, and a waste of time. Gromyko

could use even stronger words, but he was sure that neither side was

interested in a different approach. He wanted to emphasize these facts

at the very outset of the discussions aimed at accomplishing the task at

hand, i.e., limiting strategic arms.

Of course, the very fact that our two countries had engaged in ne-

gotiations on a new agreement limiting strategic offensive arms was in

itself a significant and important achievement. It might have been con-

ceivable that the two sides, while desiring agreement, had not engaged

in appropriate discussions. However, one could hardly conceive of

anything like that, because the alternative would have been simply to

use our respective mass media to scold each other. That would indeed

have been a very gloomy prospect. The fact that we were now engaged

in trying to work out a new agreement proved that the first SALT

agreements were viable and had proved their practical value. If this

were otherwise, both sides would have drawn quite different

conclusions.

Gromyko thought the Secretary would recall that in 1974 the So-

viet Union and the United States had reached an understanding re-

garding conclusion of a new long-term agreement limiting strategic of-

fensive arms, and had practically agreed upon the parameters of such a

new agreement. The Soviet side believed that what had been agreed

upon reflected a mutually acceptable balance of the interests of the two

sides, and was fully in accord with the objective of curbing the strategic

arms race. It would be hard to find a more precise formulation than the

words “mutually acceptable balance of the interests of the two sides.”

Gromyko thought Secretary Vance would agree that an enormous

volume of energy, resources and labor had been expanded to achieve

what had been achieved. The Vladivostok understanding, as well as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the subsequent working out of its specific provisions had required

enormous efforts in Moscow, Washington, and then Geneva. He won-

dered how many people had been involved in these efforts, and how

many times the highest leadership of our respective countries had been

involved in hammering out agreement.

Gromyko said it would not be out of order to recall that both in

Vladivostok and during subsequent negotiations the Soviet Union, in a

search for mutually acceptable solutions, had taken serious and impor-

tant steps to meet the US side halfway. If necessary, he could mention

some of these steps now. In response the Soviet side had heard state-

ments to the effect that these steps were indeed helpful, and Secretary

General Brezhnev had been told that these were major steps toward re-

solving the problem. After hearing that, the Soviet side believed that

things were moving toward conclusion of the new agreement. He

could tell the Secretary a great deal about the conversations held be-

tween our respective representatives on this subject. He could tell a

great deal about the concessions the Soviet side had made in order to

meet the US position, concessions within the framework of the gov-

erning agreed principles. Much could also be said about all the things

the Soviet side had heard about the obstacles in the way of reaching

agreement. He would prefer to emphasize, however, that the road trav-

eled was indeed a long one. Of course, Secretary Vance was new to

these negotiations; they had been conducted by the previous Adminis-

tration, by the former Secretary of State and by the former President.

But he would ask the Secretary to look at the situation from the view-

point of the Soviet side. How should it be assessed? Should everything

that had been achieved be thrown away? Now the Soviet leadership

was talking with Secretary Vance; should it assume that when another

new Administration came into office the results of these talks would be

discarded? What was needed here was a maximum degree of stability

and reciprocity. At the theater last evening Gromyko had said to the

Secretary that there were many keys to resolving numerous other

world problems, but they were all locked in a box to which there were

only two keys, and we could lay our hands on those many keys only by

opening the box with these two keys, keys of keys as it were. He would

point out that the Soviet leadership had remained the same, it had not

changed; neither had the Leninist foreign policy of the USSR changed

in the meanwhile. In fact, however, he thought that people on the US

side had not really changed either. He did not believe those who would

assert that the best thing the United States could hope for was a nuclear

war. That was completely out of the question. But, he would also have

to note that the recent period had been marked by no headway at all, by

something one might call a freeze. General Secretary Brezhnev had

spoken about that quite unambiguously. The Soviet leadership was

January–May 1977

convinced that in the absence of such a freeze the new agreement could

have been achieved at least a year ago; he repeated “at least a year ago.”

Gromyko pointed out that, surely, no one could comment on So-

viet foreign policy better than the Soviet leadership itself. There was

surely no need to rely on newspapers, magazines or the radio for infor-

mation about that policy. The Soviet leadership had stated repeatedly,

and Gromyko wanted to state this once again right now, and most em-

phatically emphasize, that the Soviet Union wanted to conclude a new

agreement. Given a mutual desire to do so, this could be done, espe-

cially since the questions remaining unresolved so far had already been

very carefully discussed, and in some cases formulated most specifi-

cally. Secretary Vance would know the formulations Gromyko was re-

ferring to. There were serious people here who had taken part in the

work and were well acquainted with the specific formulations and

various legal clauses, as well as the additional fundamental under-

standings, which had been reached as a result of discussions at the

highest level, and between the delegations in Geneva. Successful con-

clusion of this work and conclusion of the new agreement would not

only constitute an important step forward in itself, but would also open

up possibilities for working out more far-reaching measures to limit

strategic arms. After all, the understanding reached in Vladivostok

would clearly show anyone who took a look at it that it contained some

bridges leading to negotiations on follow-on agreements: these bridges

were not bad at all.

At this time Gromyko felt he had to tell Secretary Vance that what

was needed now was for the sides to try and implement the under-

standings already reached, and not at all to narrow the framework of

the new agreement being worked out, or to add new issues which

would only cause additional complications. He thought the Secretary

might already have drawn that conclusion from what had been said

this morning.

How should the task of limiting strategic offensive arms be accom-

plished? Gromyko thought it was clear that US authorities were well

aware of what work still had to be accomplished, and of the fact that

time was short.

In recent letters to President Carter2 the Soviet leadership had once

again set forth in detail its position on the questions remaining unre-

solved so far. The Soviet side therefore proceeded from the premise

that the present discussions would proceed in a specific manner, and

that efforts should be focused above all on finding mutually acceptable

solutions to these unresolved issues.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

This was the preliminary statement Gromyko had wanted to

present with regard to these issues; he would now propose to give

the floor to Secretary Vance and would be pleased to hear US

considerations.

Secretary Vance thanked Gromyko for his remarks and said that at

the outset he would like to indicate his agreement with what Gromyko

had described as central to the relations between our two countries. He

would also agree that he shared Gromyko’s view about both countries

being equally interested in achieving a new strategic arms limitation

agreement. Further, he would also state that we believed the principle

of equality and equal security to be fundamental to our task, and that it

had to form the basis for our strategic arms limitation talks.

The Secretary wanted to take a minute or two to review the history

of our efforts on strategic arms limitation, and then he would go on to

the specific question of the Vladivostok understanding. When we

began the process of negotiating strategic arms limitation a number of

years ago, we had several purposes in mind: to reduce the risk of out-

break of nuclear war, to enhance strategic stability, and to reduce the

level of arms on each side so as to build up confidence between our

states. We had made progress toward achievement of this goal. We had

concluded the ABM Treaty, the Interim Agreement, and had also

reached an understanding at Vladivostok in 1974. It was quite true that

the principle of parity had been established in that understanding.

Since that time a great deal of useful work had been accomplished in

Geneva. At the same time, we had to recognize that over the past two

and a half years two important problems had emerged, which had not

yet been resolved. These were the Backfire and the Cruise Missile

issues. Neither of these had been resolved in the Vladivostok under-

standing, nor had they been resolved since that time. It was precisely

for this reason that US President Carter had proposed, as a method of

most rapidly resolving the problem before us for the immediate future,

that these two issues be set aside, and that agreement be reached on the

basis of the aggregate numbers agreed upon in Vladivostok, at the

same time resolving other issues, such as MIRV verification, data base

and concealment. Such an agreement would be wholly consistent with

the Vladivostok understanding. The Secretary had read the history of

the negotiations and had also consulted with the former Secretary of

State. On the other hand, President Carter felt that there was another al-

ternative, a bold one to be sure, that would achieve significant further

progress along the lines of the real substance of arms control. This alter-

native the Secretary would call a comprehensive approach. It had

several significant advantages which he would like to sketch out for

Gromyko, after which he would hand him the proposal briefly summa-

rized on one piece of paper. First, it would provide for significant arms

January–May 1977

reduction for both sides. Second, it would be a genuine step in setting

limits on the quantitative and qualitative aspects of armaments. Third,

it would represent a major political achievement and would provide

for new formulations improving Soviet/American relations. In the

eyes of the whole world it would be regarded as an exercise in political

wisdom by both sides. Now the Secretary proposed to run through the

details of this Comprehensive proposal (see Attachment I). Having

done so, Secretary Vance handed Gromyko the comprehensive pro-

posal in both languages and said he would be prepared to answer any

questions and to discuss its provisions in any way.

Gromyko said that as far as this new proposal was concerned,

having just now received it from the US side, he would have to defer

his response to one of our subsequent meetings during these talks.

Since it had been presented as an official proposal of the US, he would

provide an official response during the Secretary’s stay in Moscow.

On a separate piece of paper the Secretary also presented the details

of President’s Carter alternative idea of setting aside the unresolved

issues and concluding the new agreement on the basis of the Vladi-

vostok understanding (see Attachment II).

Gromyko said that he would like to address the Cruise Missile issue

in specifics. We had a document which had been signed by both sides

and registered agreement in the form of an Aide-Memoire dated De-

for cruise missiles. When discussing the issues at Vladivostok, no dis-

tinction had been made between cruise missiles and ballistic missiles.

Indeed, it would make no difference to people whether they died as a

result of a cruise missile attack or a ballistic missile attack. After the

Vladivostok meeting some people had tried to draw a distinction be-

tween these types of missiles. The Soviet side had pointed out that it

would be inconsistent to pose the question in that fashion. On his side

there was no need to study the history of the negotiations leading to the

Vladivostok understanding, because he and others were living partici-

pants in those negotiations. Thus, both he and Brezhnev were quite cer-

tain about how things were discussed and accomplished there. Neither

Brezhnev nor Gromyko, nor other Soviet participants, needed to be re-

minded by reading briefs, about how things were resolved in Vladi-

vostok. Anyone who tried to adjust this matter retroactively would find

that such attempts would hardly strengthen his position. Furthermore,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

he would point out that in a message to President Carter the Soviet

leadership had set out its positions quite concretely and very carefully

on the whole complex of questions related to cruise missiles. Gromyko

said he would have to repeat that the Soviet Union could not agree to

exclusion of these missiles from the Agreement which was now in

process of being worked out; in other words, that cruise missiles should

remain outside of limitations. In effect, what would be the practical

value of any agreement if cruise missiles remain outside restraints?

There could only be one answer to this question: the new agreement

would continue to exist by itself, while the race in strategic arms would

continue in a new channel. Such an agreement would in effect sanctify

the further development of the arms race and would in no way be con-

ducive to finding a solution to the task at hand, i.e., the task of limiting

strategic arms. Finally, in purely practical terms there were no grounds

whatsoever to believe that, if we deferred the cruise missile issue for

the time being, it would lend itself to easier solution at some time in the

future.

Quite the contrary would be the case. Experience showed, and as a

practical politician, Secretary Vance would realize this, that when a

new type of weapon was developed, and particularly deployed, it was

by no means easier to limit that type. It was more difficult, and some-

times quite impossible. If we looked back a few years, we could see that

at that time it would certainly have been easier to ban both conven-

tional and nuclear arms, it would have been easier to resolve the matter

then, rather than now, when the whole problem had become much

bulkier. He would even say that it was now ten times or even a hun-

dred times more difficult to ban nuclear weapons than would have

been the case thirty years ago. The same thing would happen with

cruise missiles. Taking into account what has been said, and earlier de-

tailed discussions between the two sides, in the course of which out-

lines for a possible solution to this problem could be discerned, the So-

viet position on cruise missiles was as follows:

Air-to-surface-cruise missiles—heavy bombers when equipped

with air-to-surface cruise missiles with a range between 600 and 2500

kilometers should be regarded as strategic delivery vehicles equipped

with MIRVs and should accordingly be counted within the 1320 ceiling

established for such vehicles. That ceiling had been agreed upon by

both sides in Vladivostok. In this connection, a B–52 carrying such

cruise missiles would be counted as one missile equipped with MIRVs,

while a B–1 would equal three missiles equipped with MIRVs. In an

aside Gromyko commented that he was talking about the US side’s be-

loved B–1.

The Secretary asked why the B–1 would count as three missiles

equipped with MIRV’s.

January–May 1977

Gromyko explained that this was due to the qualitative difference

between the B–1 and the B–52. This fact had been widely written about

in the US press, and was no big secret. At the same time, the new agree-

ment should provide a full ban on air-to-surface cruise missiles with a

range of more than 2500 km, and there should be a ban on air-to-surface

cruise missiles with a range of more than 600 km carried by aircraft

other than heavy bombers.

Gromyko went on to say that the agreement should also ban

submarine-launched cruise missiles and cruise missiles on surface

ships, as well as land-based cruise missiles with a range of more than

600 km. In the Soviet view the solution of the cruise missile problem on

this basis would promote more effective limitations of strategic offen-

sive arms and would create good prerequisites for their subsequent

reduction.

Gromyko wanted especially to emphasize once again the readiness

of the Soviet side, expressed in the course of previous negotiations, to

count among the numbers of missiles equipped with MIRV’s, i.e.,

within the 1320 aggregate, all intercontinental ballistic missiles of those

types which had been tested with MIRVs even just once. (Gromyko em-

phasized “even just once”). He added, however, that this was condi-

tional upon satisfactory resolution of the cruise missile and Backfire

issues, as well as the other major items in this context. This was pre-

cisely what Gromyko had told Kissinger in Geneva, and Kissinger had

appeared to have been interested. In fact, he had said that this pre-

sented a major concession on the part of the Soviet Union, one that

would be duly appreciated. Unfortunately, the Soviets had yet to see

the day when this concession was taken into account. Gromyko would

say something to the Secretary that he had also said to Kissinger: it was

not an easy matter for the Soviet side to go along with such a definition

of MIRVed ICBMs, because there was a great difference between

testing a missile once or 100 times. Still the Soviet leadership had de-

cided to go along with this and to regard each missile which had been

tested just once with MIRVs as falling within the 1320 aggregate.

Gromyko turned to the Backfire bomber issue. If one were to for-

mulate politically what the US had proposed, he would say that the US

wanted to give the Soviets something that did not belong to the US in

the first place. In elaborating the deferral proposal the Secretary had

said that the US was prepared not to discuss the Backfire at all pro-

vided, etc.

Secretary Vance remarked that the Backfire constituted a serious

problem.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Gromyko said that Soviet side viewed this quite differently. He had

been present in Helsinki when General Secretary Brezhnev and Presi-

dent Ford had a conversation. He thought Kissinger had been there

too. Brezhnev had asked President Ford who it was in the United States

that kept giving the President deliberately falsified characteristics re-

garding the Backfire. Moreover, when Kissinger had been in Moscow

in January 1976, Brezhnev had given him some data regarding this

bomber, that is official data characterizing various parameters, particu-

larly range. Brezhnev had at that time said that he was presenting the

data on an official basis, and that Kissinger could so refer to them in this

record. Gromyko could clearly state that the Soviet Union had no inten-

tion of using the Backfire as a strategic bomber. It certainly must have

taken a great deal of inventiveness to come up with the reaction that the

US had come up with. The Soviet side was now told that the Backfire

had in-air refueling capabilities and, therefore, could reach the territory

of the United States, although it might have to refuel more than once.

Well, in that case all American Phantoms and other planes could also

be regarded as strategic weapons. This single counter-argument alone

makes present US arguments completely untenable. And yet, the US

position has remained unchanged. Was the new Administration trying

to uphold the honor of those who had misinformed it in the first place?

If someone had given the US Government information to the effect that

the Backfire bomber was a strategic bomber, he was completely mis-

taken. The Soviet Union certainly denied that the Backfire bomber was

a strategic weapon. It had no strategic capabilities, nor did the Soviet

Union intend to give it strategic capabilities. On more than one occa-

sion the US side had been informed that the Backfire was a medium

range bomber. This fact was also well-known to the US side. The fact

that this question had been raised again was, in the Soviet view, simply

the result of the unwillingness of the United States to move forward in

the strategic arms negotiations toward a successful outcome. Repeti-

tion of incorrect facts even 100 or 1000 times would not change the situ-

ation one iota. Therefore, it was now necessary to do away with this

issue once and for all, and to remove it from the agenda. (Gromyko em-

phasized “once and for all”).

Gromyko now turned to the question of mobile missiles, in part

because Secretary Vance had raised it, and in part quite independently.

In July 1975 the Soviet side had proposed that the sides refrain from the

deployment of mobile missiles for the term of the new agreement. This

was intended to apply to mobile land-based ICBM launchers as well as

to ballistic and cruise missiles with a range of more than 600 km on all

aerial systems except heavy bombers, and on all sea-based systems ex-

January–May 1977

cept ballistic missiles on submarines. The Soviet Union was prepared to

consider the US proposal on mobile ICBM’s, but Gromyko would say

in advance that he would categorically object to discussing this ban in

the context of the missile complex which the US side called SS–20. The

SS–20 complex was not a strategic one. It had been developed and was

being deployed to carry out missions of medium range and to replace

other systems. A problem could arise in the view of the US side as to the

difference between the SS–16 ICBM launchers and the SS–20 MRBM

launchers. Gromyko would tell the Secretary at once that SS–16’s were

not being deployed, and that the Soviet Union did not intend to deploy

them provided, of course, that a new strategic arms limitation agree-

ment was achieved. Gromyko wanted to put the Secretary’s mind at

ease; the question of the difference between SS–16’s and SS–20’s should

not arise at all.

Gromyko said that he now wanted to turn to another issue which

was of exceptional importance. This was the requirement that the new

agreement include provisions on non-transfer of strategic arms to third

countries and non-circumvention of the agreement through third coun-

tries or in any other manner. Secretary Vance would certainly be well

aware that the Soviet side attached a great importance to inclusion in

the agreement of an obligation not to take any actions which would re-

sult in the provisions of the agreement being weakened or circum-

vented or reduced to zero through third states or in any other manner,

and also an obligation not to transfer strategic offensive arms to third

states.

Furthermore, the Soviet Union proceeded from the premise that

for the duration of the new agreement the US side would not only not

build up forward-based systems which, due to their geographic loca-

tion were capable of reaching the territory of the Soviet Union, but

would also take steps to reduce them. As far as Gromyko knew, and he

would wish that he was mistaken, every time that this issue had been

raised, US representatives would make no comment and would pro-

vide no indication of the possibility of solving the question in this way.

He had to tell the Secretary quite frankly that the question did arise in

the minds of the Soviet leadership, and that perhaps it should be re-

viewed in terms of including in the new SALT II agreement an obliga-

tion to that effect, that would be imposed on the US side. The Soviet

leadership was now asking itself whether in proposing that the United

States merely make a statement to the effect of not building up

forward-based systems the Soviet Union had not asked too low a price.

Gromyko now wanted to say a few words on the subject of reduc-

tion of strategic offensive arms. Secretary Vance had mentioned it in his

presentation. However, even if he had not mentioned it, the Soviet side

had intended to present its position. The Soviet position on the reduc-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tion of strategic offensive arms was crystal clear. He could not say that

during the talks in Vladivostok or immediately afterwards either side

had suddenly seen in a crystal ball how this question could be resolved

in a way that would be acceptable to both sides. The Soviet Union was

in favor of beginning discussions on the reduction of strategic offensive

arms quite promptly after conclusion of the SALT II agreement; (he re-

peated “after conclusion of SALT II”). This position had been commu-

nicated to President Carter, to the Delegation in Geneva, and at

meetings here in Moscow. The Soviet side had said that it would be

possible to reduce the aggregate number of strategic weapon delivery

vehicles on each side after entry into force of the SALT II Agreement

and on condition that the SALT II Agreement resolved the cruise mis-

sile issue. The Soviet side had not completely precluded the possibility

of discussing and realistically considering such reductions even before

expiration of the Interim Agreement. Of course, this referred to reason-

able and acceptable reductions, and not to such as might be announced

for the sake of public opinion or a section of public opinion. It was quite

obvious, however, that to reduce, and especially to establish sublimits

for, numbers of landbased strategic ballistic missiles and sea-based

strategic ballistic missiles and heavy bombers, without taking into ac-

count strategic stability, would result in infringement of the principle

of equality and equal security. Factors influencing stability included

the difference in the geographical situation of the two sides. Gromyko

doubted that anyone could deny this fact. The existence of US forward-

based nuclear systems and of US aircraft carriers based near Soviet ter-

ritory, the existence of nuclear arms in the hands of US allies, were

other such factors. Gromyko would ask the Secretary not to assume

that the Soviet side could ignore or overlook them. They were there and

they caused concern. Gromyko said that both he and the Secretary were

alive today, but they must know that in time other people would take

their places. We had to provide for the future today. Therefore, the time

would inevitably come when these questions would have to be taken

up, especially in the light of the new proposals the US side had tabled

today.

Secretary Vance said he had a few comments to offer. First on cruise

missiles: He would note that cruise missiles were not included in the

Vladivostok accord. He had read the record of the negotiations there

and had also spoken to some people who had been present, including

the former Secretary of State. As a result, he concluded that the ques-

tion of cruise missiles was not included in the Vladivostok under-

standing; it had dealt with air-launched ballistic missiles only, which

had also been referred to in the Communique. He also concluded that it

was only after Vladivostok that the cruise missile issue had been raised.

Nonetheless, we had taken care of Soviet concerns by including a ban

on cruise missiles with a range of more than 2500 km in our compre-

January–May 1977

hensive proposal. In addition, a part of the overall package we had pro-

posed, and it was a package, took into account Soviet views on the

Backfire bomber. The Backfire bomber represented a serious problem

for the United States. Its range and bomb load were substantially

greater than those of medium bombers. The Secretary wanted to assure

Gromyko that the Backfire represented a most serious problem in the

US. Therefore, what we had suggested in the package proposal repre-

sented a substantial move on our part. As for mobile missiles, there re-

mained the question of how we could confirm the fact that SS–20 mis-

siles could not be converted to intercontinental range by adding a third

stage. On the question of non-circumvention and non-transfer to third

countries, the Secretary understood that this was one of the remaining

items to be resolved at SALT II negotiations. Other such items were the

problems of MIRV verification and data base. Concerning our proposal

to reduce the numbers of aggregates for both sides, the Secretary did

not think that this was an infringement of the principle of equality and

equal security. He intended to speak further on this subject at to-

morrow’s meeting. He noted that Gromyko had raised the question of

forward-based nuclear systems. He would point out that such systems

were not an appropriate subject for negotiation within the SALT frame-

work, any more than were Soviet IRMB’s or MRBM’s. These were all

European weapons which had not been considered at SALT to date.

Gromyko said that if he were to comment on all of the comments the

Secretary had made, he would probably be repeating himself in large

measure. He did not want to lose time needlessly. There was no need

for him to read the record in order to answer the question whether or

not cruise missiles were singled out as an exception to the limitations

provided for at Vladivostok8 for the simple reason that he had been

present there and knew what had gone on. The discussions there were

held in a very narrow composition with only President Ford and Secre-

tary Kissinger on the US side, and Brezhnev and Gromyko plus Mr.

Sukhodrev, the interpreter, on the Soviet side. Therefore, he would

reaffirm the statement he had made a little while ago, i.e., that there

was no basis for singling out cruise missiles in a separate category. In

fact, we had two documents which had come out of that meeting, the

two Aide-Memoires dated December 10, 1974, which had been ex-

changed between the US and the USSR and indicated that cruise mis-

siles had not been singled out for an exception. Gromyko suggested

that the meeting now be recessed until the following morning.

Secretary Vance agreed, but had one comment: The December 10,

19.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

MBFR; Middle East

PARTICIPANTS

US PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. Paul Warnke

Mr. William Hyland

LTG Edward Rowny

Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR PARTICIPANTS

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers L.V. Smirnov

Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Mr. V.G. Komplektov

Mr. O.M. Sokolov

Mr. V. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Foreign Minister Gromyko opened the meeting by recalling that yes-

terday the two sides had set forth their positions on the preparation of a

January–May 1977

new SALT Agreement. Today, if this suited Secretary Vance, and if the

Secretary had no additional considerations to add to what he had said

yesterday, Gromyko would suggest that they take up other political

questions which in their common opinion required discussion. These

were the Vienna negotiations and the Middle East. He would suggest

to take up the Vienna negotiations first, because the exchange of views

would undoubtedly be shorter than on the Middle East problem. In

suggesting that the Middle East problem be discussed here in Moscow,

he did not intend to preclude the special meeting that he and the Secre-

tary had agreed upon, to be held in Geneva for the specific purpose of

discussing the Middle East. In this connection, they could perhaps take

up other disarmament issues and questions of mutual interest.

The Secretary said that would be fine with us; he would be happy to

discuss these two items and thought it was appropriate to take up the

Vienna talks first. He suggested that Gromyko start off.

MBFR Vienna Negotiations

Gromyko said that the Soviet Union continued to believe that it

would be useful to reach agreement on an equal reduction by both

sides of their armed forces and armaments in Central Europe. A suc-

cessful solution to this problem would constitute a major contribution

to achievement of military detente on the European continent, and

would be an important component of the efforts aimed at strength-

ening peace and security.

Gromyko wished to point out directly and clearly that throughout

the more than three-year history of the Vienna negotiations3 the East

had done a great deal and had gone a long way to bring them to a posi-

tive result. The principal factor in the Soviet approach, and this per-

vaded all the specific proposals tabled in Vienna by the socialist coun-

tries, was that reductions should not harm the security of either party.

Any agreement reached must not give either side any unilateral advan-

tage. In other words, what was to be accomplished was a reduction of

the levels of military confrontation in Central Europe, but without dis-

turbing the correlation of forces in that area. The level would be re-

duced, but the existing correlation of forces would remain the same;

that was the only solution to this question. Naturally, it would please

either side in the negotiations if the other were to give up some of its

forces, but this would not be a realistic approach. Gromyko did not

really believe that those responsible for preparation of these negotia-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tions had harbored any illusions about one-sided concessions. At least,

there were no such illusions on the Soviet side. Their Western partners

at the negotiations, however, were obstinately trying to get the Soviet

Union and its allies to accept so-called “asymetric” reductions, in other

words expected the Eastern powers to reduce their forces to a far

greater extent than the other side, and in effect weaken their defensive

posture vis-a-vis NATO. This will not succeed; it cannot serve as a basis

for agreement.

Gromyko thought the Secretary and his colleagues would be well

acquainted with the latest proposal, in fact all the proposals the Eastern

powers had tabled at the conference; thus there was no need to repeat

them. Gromyko said that he would characterize the situation of the ne-

gotiations in Vienna as follows: the Western powers said to the Eastern

powers, “We don’t like the fact that you have so many tanks; why don’t

you reduce their numbers unilaterally, and then we will talk.” Well,

that was some position! Did the other side really believe that the

Eastern powers did not have the necessary intellectual resources to

make similar proposals about U.S. forces in Central Europe? They

could say: “We don’t like the fact that the United States has forces in

Europe, reduce them unilaterally, and then we will talk.” No such pro-

posal had ever been tabled by the Eastern powers, however. The Soviet

Union and its allies were ready to continue the negotiations in a search

for a solution to this problem, but only on a basis of equality in a search

for solutions which would take into account the security interests of all

the parties concerned. Gromyko felt that, given exactly such an ap-

proach by the Soviet Union and the United States, because of their

weight and the role they played in the world, the Vienna negotiations

could be moved out of their present stagnation, and real progress could

be achieved. Gromyko pointed out that he had already said to the pre-

vious Administration and perhaps even to representatives of the new

Administration (he did not recall) that he did not believe that this

problem could be resolved at one fell swoop, that it was not an easy

one, that it would require time and patience. The Soviet side had suffi-

cient patience and was prepared to continue the discussions. Roughly

the same thing was said by US representatives, and that was good.

Without both sides manifesting the necessary degree of patience it

would be difficult to resolve issues, particularly complex issues, such

as the ones discussed in Vienna. But one should not forget the time

factor. Other things being equal, the sooner this problem was resolved

the better. He would ask the Secretary to take a fresh look at this

problem. In particular, he would like to draw his attention to the last

proposal the East submitted in Vienna. He and his colleagues had

heard some preliminary reactions to that proposal, but had not yet re-

ceived an official response. He would ask the Secretary to take a look at

it and see what it was in the latest Soviet proposal that did not suit the

January–May 1977

United States. He was at a loss to understand that. Could this proposal

for a symbolic initial reduction of Soviet and US forces really under-

mine the security of the United States, or that of the Soviet Union? Was

this really such a terrible thing? He would also ask whether the Secre-

tary would not agree that actual achievement of progress on the basis

of that last Soviet proposal for a token, symbolic, reduction of US and

Soviet forces would create favorable conditions for the solution of other

questions that needed to be resolved? It would be hard to say to just

what extent such progress would facilitate resolution of other ques-

tions, but it would undoubtedly work in the direction of creating a cli-

mate of detente. This concluded what he wanted to say about the

Vienna negotiations.

The Secretary thanked Gromyko for his remarks and said that in re-

sponse he would first say that in our view the present situation did call

for serious steps in order to move forward the Vienna negotiations

which were unfortunately in a state of stagnation. In order to make

progress, in our judgment two key principles would have to be recog-

nized by both sides. The first accurately reflected the real objective of

both sides in these negotiations, and that was to achieve parity, equal

military manpower in this area. Gromyko had talked of equal reduc-

tions. We insist that there be equal results—overall parity—just as in

the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. What we sought as an ultimate

goal in both negotiations was rough parity. The proposal Gromyko had

referred to, providing for equal reductions, would contractualize in-

equality. Our purpose was to seek an even balance on the basis of

agreed data. That in our judgment was a proper basis for seeking agree-

ment in this field. The other key principle was collectivity of manpower

limitations. This was an essential condition for any agreement in the

Vienna negotiations. We would agree that subceilings were justified for

US and Soviet forces, only because the territories of our countries were

outside the area covered by the negotiations, and because we were the

two most important powers involved in them. On the other hand, to es-

tablish subceilings for the forces of the other countries involved would

seriously disrupt collective defense arrangements. If the other side was

ready to negotiate on the basis of such collectivity, we would regard it

as an important step forward. As for the matter of symbolic cuts, we be-

lieved this would be a mistake, because it would mislead not only

peoples in our two countries, but all peoples. The Secretary would add,

however, that we would agree to US and Soviet cuts, but we would

need better data for analysis and for arriving at conclusions.

Gromyko asked if the Secretary believed that the data already sub-

mitted were not sufficient?

The Secretary replied that they were not sufficient. We would

discuss with our allies whether additional amplification of the data we

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

had provided was required. We now believed that there was a large

disparity between Eastern and Western forces, but we would need

better data to arrive at correct conclusions. In sum, if we could agree on

the two principles the Secretary had described, and could have reliable

data, we could promptly achieve the positive results that both our

countries wanted. He would point out that the data presented so far

showed 150,000 fewer troops on the side of the Eastern powers than our

estimates indicated. We needed a breakdown of the data in order to

find out where differences existed and how they could be reconciled.

Gromyko thought that if some additional data were indeed re-

quired this could be done, but it would have to be done on a bilateral

basis. On their side, too, they might require additional data. He would

have to further reflect on this matter.

The Secretary said that if the Soviet side needed additional data,

they should let us know, and we would take it up with our allies.

Gromyko said the situation was such that since the West had raised

this matter of data, obviously the Soviet Union and its allies would be

equally entitled to additional data.

Smirnov added that one would have to give some further thought

to this direction. Gromyko acknowledged this, but said that it would be

wrong if the question of data were to turn into an obstacle to resolving

this major issue in substance.

The Secretary once again stressed that if agreement could be

reached on the two principles he had mentioned, there was reason to

believe that progress could be made in Vienna. He added that we were

prepared to consider requests for additional data, and believed the So-

viet side should approach the question in this manner. He hoped that

Gromyko could reflect on the matter of agreeing on the two principles.

Gromyko said that we should not permit really insignificant dis-

crepancies in the data each side had stand in the way of progress in re-

solving what was indeed a most important political issue. He would re-

peat that he was in favor of negotiating further. The Soviet Union and

its allies would never be the first to break off these negotiations.

The Secretary said that was good.

Gromyko said that there were some problems that required not just

a few years, but in some cases even decades to be resolved. This did not

mean he was in favor of dragging the Vienna talks out for decades. It

sometimes happened that a sudden breakthrough occurs which moves

the negotiations forward. A good example of that could be seen in So-

viet relations with the Federal Republic of Germany. For many years

the Soviet Union and the FRG did not even have diplomatic relations.

Then suddenly diplomatic relations were established and even a treaty

January–May 1977

signed. Both sides had gained from this, as had the cause of peace. He

hoped that the Secretary, too, would stock up on patience.

The Secretary said he would, and would continue to hope for a

breakthrough.

Middle East

Gromyko said that there were a number of disarmament matters he

thought it would be useful to discuss, but now he would take up the

Middle East because this problem was most acute. The situation in the

Middle East had been the subject of discussions between the two coun-

tries for many years now, including some at the highest level. It was

discussed when President Johnson was in office, later on with Presi-

dent Nixon and then with President Ford. It was also discussed with

the Carter Administration, although not too deeply. (Gromyko re-

garded this as the first small step taken.) However, we still had no solu-

tion to the Middle East problem. If the Secretary believes that peace in

the East could be bought for 1 million or 1 billion dollars, he would be

sure that the Secretary was deeply mistaken.

The Secretary said we did not believe that peace could be bought.

Gromyko said that was good. What the Secretary had just said was

encouraging. If this was indeed so, we must jointly look for a political

solution. He did not know whether the Secretary was aware of the fact

that at one point the Soviet Union had agreed with the United States

that both countries would coordinate their activities in the Middle East.

But, what had happened then? Nothing serious had happened. There

was no coordination, not even a more or less regular exchange of infor-

mation. This understanding had been suspended in mid-air and de-

monstratively not carried out. Unfortunately, this situation prevailed

to the present day and, as he had told the Secretary before and during

today’s lunch, the Soviet Union regarded the present situation in the

Middle East as fraught with much explosive potential. It was true that

for the moment the cannons were silent, but this did not prove any-

thing. Both our countries had witnessed a variety of surprises in that re-

gion. In 1973, toward the end of that year, there was a moment when

through the joint efforts of our two countries it had seemed that a be-

ginning could be made in the process of settling the conflict between

the Arab countries and Israel. There was an unofficial understanding to

continue acting jointly in the interests of establishing a just and lasting

peace in the Middle East. Unfortunately, however, very soon after that

the United States chose a separatist way of proceeding. It was quite evi-

dent that in so doing, the US was not guided by long-term consider-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ations, but by the prospects of gaining purely temporary advantages.

The short-sightedness and erroneousness of that mode of action by the

United States appeared to him to be quite obvious. Gromyko wanted to

say outright that the Soviet Union had not sought and was not now

seeking any special rights or advantages for itself, but, neither should

anyone else. The only desire the USSR had for that area, which is situ-

ated in direct proximity to the borders of the Soviet Union, was peace.

But peace could only be based on taking account of the legitimate in-

terests and legitimate rights of all the parties concerned, above all those

states which were directly involved in the conflict.

Gromyko said that three key elements were of importance for real

cooperation between our countries to promote settlement of this

problem. What he was saying now would perhaps also be useful to

bear in mind in future discussions between him and the Secretary later

this year, but he would set forth these key elements now. First, he was

deeply convinced that the starting point of any settlement was agree-

ment on the principle that was codified in a well-known resolution of

the UN Security Council—the inadmissibility of territorial acquisition

by war. In other words, this meant that the result of a settlement should

be that Israel remove its forces from all the Arab territories it had occu-

pied in 1967. In this connection, Gromyko reminded the Secretary that

he had headed the Soviet delegation at the Special Session of the Gen-

eral Assembly, which had discussed a Soviet and an American pro-

posal to establish a state of Israel. Our two delegations had tabled cor-

responding proposals almost simultaneously. The Soviet Union had

firmly favored the establishment of a Jewish state in the Middle East.

By the way, Israel should really be grateful to the Soviet Union for such

a way of looking at the situation. After all, the 1967 borders represented

a considerable increase in the size of the Israeli state when compared to

the borders established by the United Nations in 1947.

But it seemed to be forgotten now that at that time not only an in-

dependent Jewish state was established in that area, but also an inde-

pendent Arab state, which had simply disappeared because part of it

was later seized by Israel and another part by Jordan. Thus, when he

talked about a return to the 1967 borders, that would already represent

a considerable expansion of Israeli territory by comparison with the

1947 borders. The fact that Tel Aviv resisted a return to the 1967

borders could not be explained as anything other than the result of

having completely lost a feeling for reality. He thought the Israelis

probably reasoned that since a rifle was more effective today than the

rule of law, they should rely on the rifle. All this, however, produced a

very unstable situation in the area.

Now Gromyko wanted to tell the Secretary something very un-

pleasant, but he felt he would be remiss if he failed to do so: those who

January–May 1977

encourage Israel in territorial annexations instead of acting to bring it to

its senses were only rendering a disservice to the cause of peace in the

Middle East and, he would say, to Israel itself. “Defensible borders”—

how many wise men did it take working day and night to come up with

that euphemism? If Israel, Israeli leaders, those who determined its

policy believed that they could indefinitely live under conditions of

war with the Arabs, they were deeply mistaken. It would require a

major miracle indeed for this to be possible. Although the Middle East

was known as an area that had produced some major miracles, this one

would have to be even larger than any previous miracle. Attempts to

acquire ownership of Arab lands could only multiply the hatred of

Arabs toward Israel. In this connection, Gromyko referred to Sadat and

said that anyone who wanted to base his long-term policy on all sorts of

memoirs that were published would find himself in a very complex sit-

uation. Quite recently Prime Minister Rabin had made a statement

couched in aggressive terms. It had amounted to saying that even if

agreement was reached, Israel would in any case retain a portion of the

Arab lands it had occupied in 1967 in the form of Israeli military bases.

This was the road toward unceasing enmity between Israel and the

Arabs. Was that the road Israel wanted to take, or did it want peace? If

it wanted peace it could get peace. If that was so, he would suggest that

the Soviet Union and the United States help them achieve it, and rein-

force Israel’s right to exist as a sovereign, independent state. The Soviet

Union was firmly for that, and had indeed never deviated from that

stand. In fact, the Israelis should have said “thank you” to the Soviet

Union for such a policy but, in Israel they don’t know how to pro-

nounce these words. The Soviet Union was deeply convinced that it

would be much more promising for the United States and the Soviet

Union to take a joint action to promote peace. It would be much more

promising and might even be cheaper. What was missing now was our

common and weighty word. Let President Carter resolutely say that

there must be peace, and the Soviet Union would add its words to the

same effect immediately.

Gromyko said that another element concerned the legitimate

rights of the Arab people in Palestine. There would be no peace in the

Middle East if the legitimate rights of Palestinians were not satisfied.

What this really required was a very small piece of territory for the Pal-

estinians. They were not asking for much. Looking at a map recently,

Gromyko found that the eraser part of his pencil was larger than the

territory involved. Providing that territory would bring about a great

and most significant change in the situation. Among other things it

would also stop promoting certain activities that were undesirable for

the Soviet Union, for the United States, and for Israel, i.e., the various

terrorist and extremist tendencies among Palestinians. Such undesir-

able phenomena would then be undercut. Actually, in terms of spe-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

cifics, when Gromyko spoke of a small piece of land, he was referring to

the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. What the relationship of such a state

would be with neighboring Arab states, particularly Jordan, was some-

thing the Palestinians and the Arab states themselves could decide. It

could perhaps take the form of close-knit economic ties, perhaps even

economic ties with Israel.

Now on the matter of Palestinian participation in the Geneva con-

ference to settle this problem. What form that participation should take

should be decided by the Arabs themselves. Whom else could we ask

about that? President Amin, perhaps? He knew, of course, that the US

had cordial relations with Amin, but the Palestinians themselves

would have to decide this issue. Perhaps the Arabs would decide to go

to Geneva in one single delegation including Palestinians. Why should

we, the Soviet Union or the United States, object to this? The Soviet po-

sition on this matter was anything but rigid.

Finally, Gromyko wanted to repeat again that if necessary, polit-

ical guarantees should be provided for the independent, sovereign ex-

istence and development of all states in the Middle East. The Soviet

Union was prepared to affix its signature to a solemn document to that

effect, along with the signature of the United States. Perhaps other

major powers, such as France or Britain, might want to join in pro-

viding guarantees if they shared the same goal of peace and fairness. Of

course, it goes without saying that the result of such a radical settle-

ment must be a cessation (Gromyko repeated “cessation”) of the state

of war, as Israel itself had insisted all along. After that, let anyone try to

open fire in that region. It would be sufficient for either of us to just wag

a finger to put a stop to it.

There were other issues in the Middle East that required discus-

sion. Gromyko would prefer to leave these for the future. Notable

among them was the question of timing and organizing the Geneva

Conference. Now Gromyko would like to hear from the Secretary

whether or not the new Carter Administration was prepared to act in

concert and coordination with the Soviet Union, to implement in prac-

tice the statements already made by President Carter and by the Secre-

tary. Major international issues cannot be resolved without the active

participation of the Soviet Union and the United States. Gromyko re-

garded that as an axiom.

The Secretary said that he welcomed the opportunity to talk about

the Middle East, because he believed that this was one of the three or

four most important issues facing us today. He believed that the danger

to peace in this region, but also to world peace, was very great indeed

because of the lack of a just and lasting settlement to the conflict there.

He also believed that we, the United States and Soviet Union, as

co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference, had the solemn obligation to

January–May 1977

see to it that the necessary steps were taken to bring this conflict to a

final and just conclusion. That could only be accomplished by coopera-

tion between our two countries. The Secretary would point out that he

had said on many occasions that we could cooperate with the Soviet

Union in discharging this responsibility. President Carter shared that

view. The Carter Administration had acted accordingly since coming

into office. Immediately after returning from his Middle East trip5 the

Secretary had informed the Soviet leadership through Ambassador Do-

brynin of his discussions there. We had also informed the Soviets about

the discussions with Prime Minister Rabin after the latter’s visit to

Washington, and intended to keep the Soviet Union informed of the re-

sults of discussions with Arab leaders after their visits to the United

States. The Secretary had also already indicated to Gromyko that he

looked forward to meeting him in Geneva later this year in order to

agree on steps to reconvene the Geneva conference. Thus, Gromyko

could see that we were serious in our desire to cooperate in these areas.

The Secretary now wanted to turn to the key issues before us. First,

the question of boundaries, the question Gromyko had raised in his

principle number 1—the inadmissibility of territorial acquisition by

war. Our position on this was well-known. We strongly supported Res-

olution 2426 of the UN General Assembly and reaffirmed it today.

Nothing said by President Carter goes counter to that resolution. On

defensible borders, when the President had been asked to amplify his

views he had said that we had not changed our views about Resolution

242. Indeed, he had specifically talked of Israel’s 1967 borders with

minor changes. When President Carter had spoken about defensible

borders, what he had in mind were defense arrangements primarily. It

seemed to the Secretary that it would be necessary for a period of time

to make certain defense arrangements in order to insure that the

borders were inviolable. The exact framework of such arrangements

might include such things as demilitarized zones, patrols, reconnais-

sance, a “black box” perhaps, possibly UN troops in demilitarized

zones. This would have to be discussed at the Geneva Conference.

As for the legitimate interests of the Palestinian people, the Secre-

tary said it was our view that the question of how these interests were

to be taken care of was primarily a question for the Arabs to resolve.

During his recent trip to the Middle East, he had put this question to

various Arab leaders. Each held a different view. He had urged them to

try and coordinate their views so that we could better understand how

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

best to proceed. He hoped that he would get further clarification on

that next Monday, when President Sadat came to Washington.

Gromyko asked if the Secretary could be sure that he would obtain

further clarification.

The Secretary said that we would keep the Soviet Union informed.

He would mention, however, that there was a fundamental question

that both of us had to consider and see if a solution could be found to it,

and that was the current refusal of the Palestinians to recognize the

right of Israel to exist as a nation. Such refusal was completely contrary

to our views and indeed Soviet views. The Secretary expressed the

hope that Gromyko could use his influence with the PLO to eliminate

the corresponding provision from its Charter.

Gromyko asked whether in that case the United States and Israel

would be ready to recognize the right of the Palestinians to an inde-

pendent and separate state entity. Obviously these two matters were

closely related.

The Secretary replied that, of course, he could not speak for Israel

but, removal of that provision from the PLO Charter would create a dif-

ferent situation; at this time it was a stumbling block.

Gromyko said that he could say the same for the Palestinians, al-

though he could not speak on their behalf. It was surely important that

Israel state that it was ready to recognize the rights of the Palestinians.

As to who would be the first to say “A,” that should not be a difficult

matter to resolve, that was precisely what diplomacy was all about.

The Secretary agreed. As for PLO participation at the Geneva con-

ference, he agreed that in the final analysis this was in large part a ques-

tion the Arabs themselves should decide. However, he had found that

Arab leaders were split right down the middle on this issue. President

Assad had said that unless the Arabs came to Geneva as one delega-

tion, he would not participate. On the other hand, President Sadat had

said that he would not come to Geneva if the Arabs came as a single

delegation. The Secretary had urged them to make an effort to see if

they could not agree on what form their participation would take in

Geneva.

Gromyko said that things would be considerably easier if the Secre-

tary could say whether the United States today held to its old position,

or whether it had a new position regarding the possibility of the Pales-

tinians participating in Geneva, regardless of whether it was in the

form of a single delegation or a separate delegation.

The Secretary said that we wished to discuss this matter with the

Arab leaders he was expecting in Washington. Our discussions with

the Arabs would be concluded by the middle of May, by the time he

and Gromyko would meet in Geneva.

20.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Middle East, Arms Control

PARTICIPANTS

UNITED STATES

USSR

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Deputy Chairman of the Council

Mr. Paul Warnke

of Ministers L.V. Smirnov

Assistant Secretary

Deputy Foreign Minister

Arthur Hartman

G.M. Korniyenko

Mr. William Hyland

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Mr. Leslie Gelb

Notetaker—Name Unknown

Mr. William D. Krimer,

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Interpreter

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

MIDDLE EAST

The Secretary agreed that an end to the state of war was most im-

portant; establishment of normal relations was no less important,

however.

Gromyko said this did not contradict what he had said. He would

say that they understood each other on this question.

The Secretary said he understood what Gromyko had said on this

score, except that the Secretary would put more emphasis on the im-

portance of normal relations.

Gromyko said that the Soviet side emphasized the importance and

significance of peace, which includes normal relations. He did not want

to belittle the importance of normal relations; the Soviet Union might

even trade with Israel; it was his understanding that the Israelis pro-

duced good oranges and, given normal relations, the Soviet Union

would buy some.

The Secretary asked why they didn’t buy them.

Gromyko said that right now the Soviet Union had neither diplo-

matic nor commercial relations with Israel, and answered the Secre-

tary’s question if it would not be good for the Soviet Union to reestab-

lish such relations by saying that some preliminary movement in Israeli

policy would have to be made before relations could be resumed. Oth-

erwise Soviet people would not understand. He thought the Secretary

knew that he had conveyed this to Allon when he had met him in New

York. If the Soviet Union were to start trading with Israel, literally thou-

sands of questions would be asked. How could one explain normal

trade while a state of war existed in the Middle East, while Israel occu-

pied Arab territory? All these questions would have to be resolved be-

fore the Soviet Union could establish normal relations, but there had to

be some substantial forward movement in Israeli policy. He hoped this

would occur, but he was careful in terms of predicting the timing. He

thought that in this respect Israel appeared to live according to its own

calendar.

The Secretary wanted to bring up one or two items. Although they

were of a procedural nature, they would have to be faced before too

long. One such question was how the delegations at the Geneva Con-

ference could be divided and organized to deal with the various issues

on the agenda. This was not a simple matter, because the Arabs were

divided on how to proceed. The sooner Gromyko and the Secretary

knew how to resolve this issue, the better.

Gromyko agreed to discuss this. He said that not only the Secretary

was going to see the Arab leaders; he also intended to see them, and

January–May 1977

then the two of them could discuss this issue during their special

meeting on the Middle East in May. There were evidently differences

on this procedural question between the various Arab leaders. But it

would be up to the Soviet Union and the United States to steer a true

course, and not allow questions of substance to flounder in procedural

matters.

The Secretary agreed that our two countries would have to exercise

leadership in order not to get bogged down.

Gromyko said that the Soviets were not afraid of these matters. He

was sure we would survive these procedural difficulties. He would

point out that it sometimes happened in the United States that people

preferred to look at very major issues through very small ones, with the

result that minor issues were assigned a significance one million times

more than they were worth. He believed that procedural difficulties

would not be hard to overcome.

The Secretary hoped Gromyko was correct. He had seen too many

conferences spend months and months on procedure, when they

should have been discussing substance.

Gromyko said he was afraid that in that respect he had set a record

at one conference, but the real reason for that only appeared to be pro-

cedural, while in fact it had been a matter of policy.

Secretary Vance recalled that it was only with Gromyko’s good help

that we had managed to settle the question of the shape of the table in

Paris.

Gromyko demonstrated how he had done this, using pencils. The

Secretary was right; such situations did arise. Translating this into se-

rious language, if our two countries pursued a policy aimed at peace, a

really bold policy, then this kind of thorn, the Middle East problem,

impeding the development of our bilateral relations, simply could not

exist. The situation there was not of Soviet creation, and it seemed to be

disturbing not only the Soviet policy, but also US policy as well. How-

ever, the Secretary would be the better judge of US policy.

The Secretary thought that this concluded the Middle East discus-

sion. He and Gromyko would pick it up again in the not too distant

future.

Gromyko agreed, and hoped this could be done with a view to set-

tling the issues on the basis of a general settlement. Perhaps he was an-

ticipating events, but he thought he could say that the United States

would also be interested in a general settlement. After such settlement,

it should also be possible to resolve the question of arms deliveries,

arms sales to the Middle East. Without a general settlement, it was not

possible to do so. If another war broke out, how could our countries

possibly resolve this question? That would be fantasy. But if there was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

an overall settlement, the question of arms deliveries could be solved,

given a desire on both sides to do so. He had explained Soviet policy in

this regard. It was an important question in itself, and he would not

deny its significance, providing, of course, it was viewed in a correct

perspective.

The Secretary said he would like to say a lot on the broader question

of arms sales.

Gromyko agreed to discuss it on the basis of President Carter’s

statements that the US was the number one exporter of arms to foreign

countries.

The Secretary reminded him that the Soviet Union held second

place.

Gromyko said this certainly was true. It meant that theirs was a

backward country.

CTB

Gromyko said that, as the Secretary would know, the Soviet Union

was in favor of resolving the problem of completely stopping nuclear

weapon testing. The USSR had proposed that all nuclear powers,

without exception, enter into discussions as soon as possible, with the

participation of non-nuclear states, with a view to conclusion of a treaty

on this subject, providing for a complete and universal ban on testing

nuclear weapons. In connection with that proposal, the question of ver-

ification would arise, and the Soviet Union had taken it into account, al-

though he was convinced that given today’s level of technology, verifi-

cation by national technical means should be sufficient. Still, the Soviet

Union was prepared to go further and find mutually acceptable under-

standings that would preserve the framework of voluntary decisions in

the context of on-site investigation of certain phenomena. This should

be aimed at providing assurances for all parties to the treaty that obli-

gations under the treaty were being complied with. Something of this

kind had been suggested by the Swedes. The Soviets would suggest

that our two countries act promptly, considering the fact that this issue

was currently under discussion in the Disarmament Committee. To

translate these considerations into the text of a mutually acceptable

treaty would be a major step forward.

Gromyko wanted to suggest an idea that the Secretary might not be

able to answer now. Perhaps he could reflect on it, and reply after he

returned to Washington. Such a treaty could initially be signed by our

two countries, and be accompanied by a simultaneous appeal to other

nuclear states, and even to non-industrial countries, to accede to it.

When signing the treaty, the United States and Soviet Union could de-

clare that for a specified period of time, say one and a half to two years,

they would refrain from testing nuclear weapons; in other words, they

January–May 1977

would declare a moratorium on their own testing. If other nuclear

powers did not accede to the treaty within that period of time, the So-

viet Union and the United States would be released from their obliga-

tions under such a moratorium. Gromyko believed that such a step

would impel certain powers to take positive action and would, in gen-

eral, favorably influence the whole international situation. That would

be a good thing. It was hard to imagine who could criticize the new Ad-

ministration for taking such a step. In the Soviet Union, and he was

quite sure in saying this, such a step would meet with understanding;

people would regard it as positive. However, one could not consider

peaceful nuclear explosions in one and the same category with the

testing of nuclear weapons. Peaceful nuclear explosions were used in

the Soviet Union to accomplish major economic tasks. Certain plans

had been made involving PNEs. He would point out that, taking into

account US views, the Soviet Union had agreed to limit the yield of

such explosions under an agreement signed last year. At the same time,

that agreement provided that nuclear explosions for solely peaceful

purposes would be subject to a system of verification that would be

worked out in detail, envisioning in certain cases access by the repre-

sentatives of one side to the explosion site of the other. It would repre-

sent a substantial step forward, a radical solution to the problem of

ending nuclear testing, curbing the arms race, and protecting people

against the harmful consequences of such tests, if ratification of the

Threshold and PNE agreements already signed by our two countries

were completed. The Soviets did not lack readiness to do so. They were

waiting to see when the new Administration in Washington would be-

come more active in this area. Who could deny the positive significance

of the agreements already on the table in signed form? He thought that

each member of the US Senate and House of Representatives would ap-

prove. The US could take this important step toward strengthening

peace and security, strengthening Soviet-American relations, and thus

reinforce some of the positive statements made in the US. It seemed to

the Soviets that the Carter Administration could do this if it wished.

The Soviet Union had tabled a draft treaty banning all nuclear

weapon testing. Surely the Secretary was aware of it, and Gromyko

would not repeat its provisions. It was now before the appropriate in-

ternational organizations.

The Secretary said with respect to the two treaties we had already

signed, that, as he had indicated yesterday, he had urged the Chairman

of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to take positive action to

ratify these treaties. The Chairman had indicated that he would take

the necessary steps to move Congress to act. In addition, the Adminis-

tration will indicate its support for this ratification, so as to assist in

urging that Congress take prompt action in the near future. The Secre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tary said he would be less than frank if he did not tell Gromyko that

there will be some in Congress who will ask why these treaties should

be signed, in view of the fact that a comprehensive test ban treaty was

being urged by the Administration. The comprehensive test ban could

be strongly supported by the administration and he believed that this

would be an indication of our wish to cooperate with the Soviet Union

and strengthen our bilateral relations.

Gromyko suggested that the Secretary explain to those who do not

understand that these agreements do not run counter or contradict the

other one.

The Secretary said that we will argue that these agreements are

steps on the way to a comprehensive test ban.

Gromyko said it would be good if progress were achieved. He

would also point out that their own instruments (national means) here

in Moscow had so far registered even weak explosions.

The Secretary was sure that our efforts to get ratification would be

aided if both our countries were clearly cooperating toward achieve-

ment of a comprehensive test ban.

Gromyko suggested that we not only cooperate on the technical as-

pects of verifying peaceful nuclear explosions, but also make the coop-

erative work much more intensive than it was now.

The Secretary said he found this idea very interesting. He would

point out, however, that we had grave concerns for allowing exceptions

for peaceful nuclear explosions. The reason for that was that it was al-

most impossible to conduct peaceful explosions without weapons-

related benefits. Therefore, we favored elimination of all nuclear

explosions.

Gromyko asked what exceptions the Secretary had in mind. After

all, there were provisions for verification. He would suggest that those

who shouted the loudest in the US be sent along as observers on PNE

verification assignments.

The Secretary agreed that verification was one of the matters that

needed to be pursued further. However, experts in the area said that

even with verification it would be possible to develop information that

was contrary to a comprehensive test ban. Therefore, he would suggest

that we have our respective experts get together for bilateral discussion

of this subject in the near future.

Gromyko did not believe there would be any insuperable obstacles

in the way of resolving this problem. One should not forget that all

along in the course of discussing these matters on a bilateral basis the

Soviets had proceeded from the premise that there was a significant

difference between weapons testing and PNE. It was for this reason

that they had signed the two treaties. He would suggest to the Secretary

January–May 1977

that we should avoid taking any step that would turn us backward.

One could find skeptics on any question. He supposed one could even

find someone who would maintain that Earth was not turning around

the sun, but that it was the other way around.

Smirnov said that this was probably asserted by those experts who

did not want to see that kind of treaty signed. He pointed out that this

was a specific technical problem. “Let your experts come and see, they

could even take the top off the cylinder of the explosive device to make

sure that it was not a weapon.” (The Secretary asked Gromyko if he

agreed; Gromyko did not reply.)

Gromyko said that, put in other words, the sooner the US Govern-

ment obtained ratification of these treaties, the better. If that were done,

there would be nothing but applause for both sides.

The Secretary said he would be happy to respond. If we could agree

upon a satisfactory CTB treaty, we would be very much in favor of

signing it with the Soviet Union, even though others did not sign it

initially.

Gromyko said that if the US was ready to accept the idea in prin-

ciple, he would suggest that the two sides agree to hold bilateral discus-

sions at the level of experts. He asked when the US would be prepared

to begin.

The Secretary consulted with Mr. Warnke, who informed him that

we could do so very rapidly. He would accordingly inform Gromyko

and would assure him that it could be soon.

Gromyko said that Mr. Warnke had given the Secretary good ad-

vice. The Soviet side would await advice as to when the experts would

be ready.

NON-PROLIFERATION

Gromyko suggested that the subject of non-proliferation required

some discussion.

The Secretary said he would be happy to start. As he had indicated

the other day, the question of non-proliferation was a matter of major

concern for our government, for the Carter Administration. As a conse-

quence of the priority we attached to this issue, we had begun a study

immediately upon taking office. That study was about to be completed.

We would be prepared to discuss such things as international fuel as-

surance arrangements, international spent fuel storage and strength-

ening IAEA safeguard arrangements. As a result of the study, we had

come to the following conclusions, which would be announced very

shortly: First, we would indefinitely defer commercial fuel repro-

cessing; Secondly, we intended to restructure our breeder reactor pro-

gram in such a way as to stress designs other than plutonium-related;

Third, we would redirect the funding of nuclear research and develop-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ment programs in such a way as to concentrate on alternative nuclear

fuel cycles that would not involve materials that could be used for

weapons purposes; Fourth, we planned to increase US production of

nuclear fuels. We believed that these steps will be constructive and that

they should be discussed in international fora, to see whether interna-

tional action could be taken to strengthen control on sensitive tech-

nology with the objective of stopping further proliferation. That in brief

was where we stood today. We would, of course, continue to urge

those who had not signed the NPT to sign and ratify the treaty in view

of its great importance. We would continue to encourage widest pos-

sible use and adherence to the treaty and urge strengthening and im-

proving safeguards for enforcing sanctions against violators of such a

treaty.

Gromyko said that he had listened to the Secretary’s communica-

tion on this issue with interest, and so had his colleagues. Soviet views

on this issue were as follows: the task of preventing nuclear war de-

manded most insistently that insuperable obstacles be placed in the

path of the spread of nuclear weapons. Above all, this was the task of

making the NPT, already in effect, truly all-embracing and universal. It

was well-known fact that countries such as the People’s Republic of

China and France were outside the treaty; so were a significant number

of other countries. The Secretary knew this well and also surely knew

that there were some countries that were very close to starting the

building of their own nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union was pre-

pared, together with the United States, to continue efforts aimed at in-

suring that these and all other states so far outside the treaty become

parties to the treaty. Why could not our two countries think of some

new forms of influencing them, perhaps even on a trilateral basis

(i.e., the US, the USSR, and UK) or on a bilateral basis only, with the

Soviet and US governments approaching the governments of non-

participating countries to speed up adherence to the treaty. Speaking

quite frankly, Gromyko would say that the Soviet side had not yet ob-

served any energetic measures on the part of the United States to exert

its influence in the right direction. It was quite true that occasionally

some statements were made urging adherence, but this was only a

small part of what could be done. He would not say that the United

States had acted wholeheartedly in this matter so far. The danger re-

mained that non-nuclear countries which received nuclear materials

from other countries would utilize such materials for purposes of

weapons development. The Soviet Union was resolved to make sure

that international cooperation in this field and in the field of peaceful

nuclear explosions not become another channel for nuclear weapons

proliferation. He was convinced that this was not a commercial ques-

tion, but a major question of policy.

January–May 1977

By way of example, Gromyko thought it would be appropriate to

mention the current nuclear deliveries by the FRG to Brazil and by

France to Pakistan, deliveries that could not but give rise to concern. In

the Soviet view, what was needed was effective nuclear control over

any receiving country. The Soviet Union had advocated and now advo-

cates all-embracing improvement of the system of control in this field,

and was prepared to cooperate with the United States and others.

The Secretary interrupted to say he appreciated hearing this from

Gromyko. As Gromyko would know, we had worked with Brazil, Ger-

many, France and Pakistan to see to it that sensitive materials and in-

formation transfers through creating processing plants not be brought

to fruition, and that other measures be taken to guarantee fuel supply

so as to eliminate the danger in this area.

Gromyko said it would be hard for the Soviets to believe that the

United States was not able to bring greater pressure to bear on Brazil in

these matters. Had the Brazilian leaders really come to the conclusion

that they could not live without nuclear weapons? He thought the Bra-

zilians must be fully aware of the fact that their action might set off a

chain of events, thereby worsening the situation. Of course, he knew

that some positive statements were being made in the US from time to

time, say every six months or so, but it seemed to him that the United

States was not fully using its options to bring pressure to bear. Perhaps

the new Administration would need some time before it could do more

in this respect.

The Secretary said he disagreed with the Minister. His deputy had

gone to Brazil to discuss this issue. We had asked Brazilian leaders to

stop their arrangement with Germany and find an alternate solution.

We had told them we would guarantee fuel supply. As a result of this

maximum pressure, Brazilian-US relations had become quite strained.

It was difficult to see how we could have done more.

Gromyko said that, of course, the Secretary was a better judge of

what could be done. He would suggest that in addition to the contacts

we had on this subject within the framework of international organiza-

tions, it would be useful to hold Soviet-American consultations on the

whole complex of the problem of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.

It was true that we had not had too much contact in this respect. Some

meetings were held a long time ago and at infrequent intervals. In the

course of such consultations, the Soviet Union and the United States

could agree on joint action in the direction of improving the already op-

erating London understanding between the exporting countries, in

which the Soviet Union, the United States and others were active. In the

course of such consultations we could also review the effectiveness of

IAEA functions, and discuss the question of sanctions. We had a great

deal to do.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Secretary said that he would welcome that.

Gromyko said that was very good. He would ask that both sides

specifically reflect on when they could consult on setting a specific

schedule.

The Secretary agreed to do that.

Gromyko said he wanted the US Government and President

Carter to know that the Soviet Union attached signal importance to the

entire issue of non-proliferation. The Soviet leadership liked it when

the President, or the Secretary, or others, stressed the importance of this

issue in the view of the United States.

The Secretary said that was very good. The President will be very

pleased to hear of this Soviet position.

BAN ON NEW WEAPONS SYSTEMS

Gromyko said he would briefly touch upon a question the Secretary

would be familiar with—possible conclusion of a treaty or agreement

on banning new types of weapons or weapons systems of mass de-

struction. The Soviet Union had raised this question in all seriousness

some time ago. It had hoped that the US would also emphasize the im-

portance of this question and would join in working on the problem.

From time to time, representatives of past administrations had sporad-

ically touched on this subject, perhaps sometimes at Soviet initiative, at

other times on their own accord, and had told the Soviet Union of their

views in this regard. An exchange of views had taken place in the CCD

in Geneva and in the United Nations in New York, but these discus-

sions had been of a very general nature. At the same time, some serious

discussions were held in Geneva. At first, the US reaction had consisted

in asking the Soviets question after question and in evading discussion

of specifics. Gromyko noticed that and had been amazed at such an ap-

proach. Then, probably after those who had asked the questions real-

ized that this could not go on endlessly, another question was asked—

what was meant by new types of weapons systems? Soviet repre-

sentatives found themselves forced to name several such types, stating

that theirs was by no means an exhaustive list, and that representatives

of all other countries were equally free to name what they felt could be

weapons of mass destruction. What serious man could deny the exist-

ence of this serious problem? Should we simply permit rocks to roll

down the mountain without our doing anything to stop them? Surely

we should attempt to take steps to restrain all countries from devel-

oping new types of weapons of mass destruction; otherwise, every-

thing that had been accomplished, most notably in the field of strategic

arms limitation, would become worthless. If we were on the one hand

to attempt to limit strategic arms, while others produced new types of

weapons of mass destruction, this would be tantamount to the right

January–May 1977

hand not knowing what the left hand was doing. He did not know

whether he had expressed his thoughts clearly, but it should be clear

that the United States and the Soviet Union should combine their ef-

forts. If that were done, other nations would join in, and that would

benefit the general cause of world peace and the peoples of our coun-

tries. Gromyko hoped the Secretary would not think that the Soviet

Union was pursuing some sort of advantage or political capital in this.

He thought that a solution that would benefit all would be facilitated

by developing cooperation between our two countries, provided, of

course, that the United States was interested and willing. The Soviets

would even be prepared to consider the question of concluding sepa-

rate agreements banning the development and manufacture of radio-

logical weapons, taking into account the interest in this question which

was displayed by the US side. Repeated contacts on this matter had al-

ready taken place. It had also been discussed in the UN General As-

sembly. This was a major question, one that had significance not only

for today, but also for the future.

The Secretary said he would respond briefly by saying that we had

found on the basis of experience that for arms control agreements to be

effective, they had to be precisely defined and capable of verification.

Quite frankly, we had problems with the Soviet proposal because of its

broad and general nature. It would be difficult to deal with. However,

we continued to be interested in banning specific weapons categories,

such as the radiological weapons Gromyko had mentioned.

Gromyko said that when the US was ready to engage in specific dis-

cussion of this concrete issue, it should inform the Soviets accordingly.

As for the Soviet draft treaty which appeared to the Secretary to be gen-

eral in nature, in the context of exchanges of views already held at the

level of experts, some specific information was developed. He would

suggest that the Secretary take a look at these materials. Soviet experts

had named some very specific weapons categories. He would ask the

Secretary to signal him when the specialists were ready to exchange

views.

PEACEFUL NUCLEAR EXPLOSIONS

The Secretary agreed. He wanted to say before we got too far away

from the issues of non-proliferation and CTB, that agreement on a com-

prehensive test ban without an exception for peaceful nuclear explo-

sions would do much to stop proliferation and discourage others from

following India’s example. He feared that if an exception were per-

mitted for PNE, we would soon find other threshold countries.

Gromyko said the new treaty would require careful discussion and

drafting but, completely to preclude PNE—could that really be done?

Smirnov said the time would someday come when Americans, too,

would realize the benefits of PNE for national economic purposes.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Soviet scientists had suggested using PNE to provide storage

space for wastes and for other purposes. He repeated his suggestion

that an expert be assigned to monitor a peaceful explosion for verifica-

tion purposes. An expert could always determine by examining the ex-

plosive device whether it was a weapon or not. He pointed out that the

Soviet Union had also made use of conventional explosives for peaceful

purposes. There were no technical difficulties here, only a desire was

needed for verification to be effective.

Gromyko recalled some films that had shown PNEs. Any expert

who could not assure himself that an explosion was not carried out for

weapons purposes either did not understand the subject or did not

wish to see an agreement of this sort. He recalled that a few years ago a

representative of the United States had talked with him about the pos-

sibility of using PNEs to dig a new Panama Canal. He asked if the US

did not expect that PNEs might be very advantageous in the future.

The Secretary responded that he was familiar with the suggestion

for construction of a new Panama Canal. The project had been exam-

ined in great detail and we had come to the conclusion that the results

of digging a canal in this manner would be unacceptable—PNEs would

produce fallout dangerous to people in the area. Consequently, the

plans had been abandoned. We also had acquired a great deal of expe-

rience in testing PNEs, but had concluded that such explosions pre-

sented environmental dangers. We had also concluded that the

problem of weapons-related information were quite real. One of the

problems that arises with the weapons aspect was the fact that it would

be necessary closely to examine the explosive device itself. This created

many problems.

Gromyko suggested that the Secretary inform him when the US side

would be prepared to enter into discussions of all the questions arising

in this connection.

The Secretary agreed.

Gromyko suggested that several groups of experts could examine

the non-political questions involved.

INDIAN OCEAN

The Secretary took up the problem of demilitarizing the Indian

Ocean. In this question, we would be interested in exploring the subject

with the Soviets. We believed that if we could have some ideas on how

one could proceed to demilitarize the Indian Ocean, it would help us

understand the Soviet position and to decide how one could develop

further discussions on this subject. There were a number of items that

logically came to mind. First—elimination of naval bases in the area.

Another item was the possibility of agreeing on limiting the number of

ship-days for warships in the area. Of course, one would have to define

January–May 1977

the geographic boundaries and a number of similar items. We would

be very interested in pursuing the matter further. Therefore, he would

like to hear Gromyko’s views.

Gromyko thought the Secretary would know the Soviet Union at-

tached importance to this question. The problem had become more

acute when the United States started construction of the Diego Garcia

base in the Indian Ocean. The Soviet Union, of course, understood the

purpose of that base and at whom it was aimed, and had vigorously

condemned the US action. In the Soviet view, it had not been dictated

by the security interests of the United States. The Soviet Union was

against military confrontation involving the coastal states, and against

military bases in that area. The Soviet leadership believed that this had

been a badly mistaken and harmful decision on the part of the United

States—to establish the base at Diego Garcia. It knew and understood

very well that it was aimed at the Soviet Union. If that were not so, it

could only be the product of the sick imagination of the American mili-

tary. The Soviet Union had resolutely condemned it and, in fact, that

decision had injected a negative element into the relations between our

countries. The only military activity permitted in that area should be in-

nocent passage by warships, as provided by international law.

The Secretary inquired about the Soviet base at Berbera. He said the

Soviet Union had facilities there that could be used for military

purposes.

Gromyko said that Berbera was a rest base for Soviet personnel and

a place for taking on food and water. There were no military facilities at

Berbera, and the Soviet Union did not plan to construct any such facil-

ities there. If the United States had received information that was not in

accord with what Gromyko was now saying, it had been simply

misled. In fact, he did not believe that the United States had any such

information. The Soviet Union did not have a military base there or

anywhere else in the Indian Ocean. That was his reply—an official

reply—and a categorical one. In fact, the Soviet Union would not accept

an invitation to build a military base there if it were offered.

The Secretary said that we had information to the contrary. He

would be happy to present it to Gromyko. Perhaps it was erroneous,

but in any case we were ready to present it to the Soviet side.

Gromyko remarked that what had happened here was somewhat

similar to what had happened with the Backfire bomber, which had

suddenly become a “strategic” aircraft.

The Secretary continued by pointing out that we had information

that there were missile handling facilities at Berbera that quite obvi-

ously were not required by the Somalis.

Gromyko said that the equipment there was for handling the

loading of food and water. He repeated that even if the Soviets were of-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

fered a naval base there, they would not accept, simply because they

knew that if they accepted, they would be facing many more negative

consequences than positive ones. That was contrary to their policy. In

any case, whether the Secretary believed it or not, he had provided an

official, categorical answer to the question asked. He trusted that the

Secretary would treat it with respect.

The Secretary asked whether he would be correct to say that he un-

derstood the Soviet position to be that the Soviet Union would be

willing to forego all military bases in the Indian Ocean.

Gromyko said: “We have none there, and we have no intention to

set up bases there.” He only wished that the United States not have any

bases in that area either.

The Secretary asked for Gromyko’s views on warship stationing in

the Indian Ocean area.

Gromyko said he had already told the Secretary that the Soviets

proceeded from the premise that innocent passage according to inter-

national law had always applied in the Indian Ocean, and should con-

tinue to apply.

The Secretary said he certainly agreed to maintenance of the right of

free passage. His question had referred to limiting numbers of ship-

days in this area.

Gromyko said this question had not been raised before. It was sepa-

rate and distinct from the question of naval bases, and was one that

should be looked into. Perhaps the two sides could exchange views and

look into the possibility of reaching agreement.

The Secretary said it was certainly a question that needed to be con-

sidered if we talked about a demilitarized area.

Gromyko, replying to the Secretary’s question as to definition of the

Indian Ocean area and whether it extended as far as the Philippines,

said that he was not a geographer and would not want to be one.

The Secretary said that certainly if we wanted to talk seriously

about it, we would have to define the area.

Gromyko thought that if a geographer were present now, he would

have an answer. He would ask a counter question: where did the At-

lantic begin and end? Did it reach as far as the Arctic, and where was

the boundary? Gromyko asked how the Secretary proposed to explore

the second aspect—limits on ship-days.

The Secretary thought it should be done at less than the ministerial

level, and he would have to see if it might best be done on a bilateral

basis.

Gromyko said he was prepared to listen to considerations on this

score, and would himself reflect on the appropriate level.

January–May 1977

The Secretary thought it would be good if Gromyko could give it

further thought.

Gromyko asked if he would be correct in assuming that President

Carter and his Administration attached importance to this question

and were prepared to pursue it further.

The Secretary said Gromyko could assume that President Carter

was interested in pursuing this matter further and discussing it with

the Soviets.

Gromyko said that was good, but we should not lose time on this

issue. It would be good to have one problem less.

ARMS TRANSFERS

The Secretary suggested they now take up the question of arms

transfers to third world countries. He said that we were concerned that

arms transfers by the US and USSR to other countries, into the third

world, could in the long run only lead to misunderstandings and diffi-

culties. In our judgement, we had to find a way to exercise restraint in

transferring arms to third world countries. Our restraint would depend

on restraint by the Soviet Union, and it seemed to us that we should

also enlist the cooperation of other sellers of weapons. As President

Carter had said, we would be prepared to take unilateral steps in this

direction. But in the long run, unilateral action could not succeed

without the cooperation of other countries supplying arms. He pro-

posed to use a specific example. In our judgement, providing arms to

countries in southern Africa would fuel the flames and possibly lead to

a broad conflict. We believed that this was not in the interest of either

our two countries nor in the interest of people in the area. We believed

that such actions could only strain relations between our two countries,

which was not in our mutual interest. Therefore, we wanted to get the

situation under control, either on a multilateral or bilateral basis. The

United States would like to begin a serious dialogue on the question of

arms transfers. He would appreciate learning Gromyko’s thoughts on

how we could exchange views on this subject. We would emphasize

our interest in how one might reach a multilateral agreement among

arms suppliers, and how one might best proceed to organize such an

accord. We had already raised our concerns with the Federal Republic

of Germany, Great Britain and France.

Gromyko acknowledged that the problem did exist. No one could

deny that. Much weaponry was supplied to many countries. The big-

gest arms supplier, as President Carter has said on various occasions,

was the United States, and had been for some time. In this connection,

he would ask a specific question by way of example. Who was it that

forced the United States to supply billions of dollars worth of arma-

ments to Iran—was it any action on the part of the Soviet Union or

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

some other country? Was this really indicative of any desire to exercise

restraint? The Soviet leadership had been surprised and concerned

when it learned of these massive arms sales. In effect, these sales had

aggravated the problem. That was his first remark. Secondly, it was ob-

vious that this question should be posed within the context of the mili-

tary clashes that were taking place in the world. There were some coun-

tries that, whether we wanted it or not, were involved in military

conflicts, and this fact was greatly related to the question of arms

transfers. Only on paper could these two questions be separated. In any

case, very frequently this linkage was obvious. Thirdly, the Soviet

Union would be prepared to consider any concrete proposal the US

Government wanted to table with a view to resolving this problem.

Whenever the United States was ready, the USSR would be happy to

take a look at it. The more specific, the better. Before involving others, it

would perhaps be better to talk between our two countries; otherwise,

third parties might ask for our own joint views, which might not exist.

The Secretary said that one of the problems one faces in the area of

arms transfers was that it was often said that should we not sell arms to

some country or another, the Soviet Union, or France, or Germany,

would certainly jump in and do so. As a result, arms sales continued.

One simply had to find a way to cut the Gordian Knot.

Gromyko said he realized the problem did exist and it was neces-

sary to take a look at it.

The Secretary asked if it might be looked at in the context of the

Middle East, perhaps.

Gromyko said that if it were done in the context of a peaceful settle-

ment in that area, the Soviet Union would be in favor of it.

The Secretary asked: “Why not before?”

Gromyko said that it could not be done before, simply because it

would be wrong from a political, factual, or any other aspect now. For

example, on February 18, 1977, Reuters reported a statement by Prime

Minister Rabin of Israel that Israel had received 1½ billion dollars

worth of weapons since the 1973 war, as against 300 million before that.

Gromyko thought the Secretary would agree that arms transfers and

conflicts were interrelated.

The Secretary pointed out that this was certainly not a one-sided

issue. The Minister would know that the Soviet Union had supplied

massive arms to Middle East countries.

Gromyko said he would not deny that, and suggested our two

countries find ways to do something about it.

The Secretary asked: “What about Africa?”

Gromyko said the same thing applied there, except that in that

whole area there were 100 times more American weapons than Soviet.

21.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Berlin, Cyprus, Arms Control, CSCE, Bilateral Matters

PARTICIPANTS

United States

USSR

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Deputy Chairman of the Council

Mr. Paul Warnke

of Ministers L.V. Smirnov

Assistant Secretary

Deputy Foreign Minister

Arthur Hartman

Georgiy Korniyenko

Mr. William Hyland

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Deputy Assistant Secretary

Mr. O. Sokolov

Slocombe

Mr. V.F. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Mr. William D. Krimer,

Interpreter

BERLIN

Foreign Minister Gromyko said that if the Secretary had no objec-

tions, he would like to say a few words on the subject of West Berlin. He

said the Quadripartite Agreement on West Berlin had been well re-

ceived in his country. The subsequent agreement concluded between

the two German states had been in accord with the spirit of the Quadri-

partite Agreement. All this had created additional detente elements in

European affairs, particularly Central European affairs. But the Soviet

side had noted one thing that was probably obvious to the US side as

well. Seen from Moscow, for a long time now it had been clear that

there were circles in West Germany who would like effectively to nul-

lify the accord on West Berlin. After all, the Quadripartite Agreement

stated directly that West Berlin did not belong to the Federal Republic

of Germany, and that it was not governed by the FRG. And yet, West

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

German authorities, the West German Government, and West Berlin as

well, appeared to act as if West Berlin was some sort of a Land of the

FRG. In fact, there was some legislation adopted in which West Berlin

was directly referred to as a Land. The Soviet Union had protested

against this. The Soviet leadership did not believe that the United States

had anything to gain from such a state of affairs, either, although, of

course, the Secretary was a better judge of US actions and policy. Gro-

myko would merely state the Soviet view. He had brought with him a

document, translated from German, which was a certificate issued pur-

suant to an order by members of EEC countries regulating employment

rights on the sovereign territory of the Federal Republic of Germany,

including the Land Berlin. This particular document was dated October

15, 1968. What was this if not a travesty on the Quadripartite Agree-

ment? How many West German institutions and organizations have es-

tablished unlawful branches in West Berlin? The Soviet Union had

more than once drawn the attention of the US Government, and the

governments of other parties to the Quadripartite Agreement, to this

situation, but, to its great regret, without any result whatsoever. In

some individual cases the Soviet Government had been told that the

situation would be studied, examined, etc., but no real steps had been

taken. Of course, the Secretary might say that this occurred before the

new Administration took office, and that the point of view of the new

Administration was different. If the Secretary could say that, Gromyko

would take note of it with satisfaction. Up to now, however, nothing

new had been said on this subject. What seems to be taking place here,

in his view, was some sort of preference in favor of NATO solidarity,

over improvement of relations with the Soviet Union. He would ask—

was it justified to provide certain West German circles with the oppor-

tunity to drive a wedge between our states, and to poison the relations

between us? Was this sufficiently justified. The Soviet answer was a

clear no. There were higher interests which quite definitely spoke in

favor of our doing all we could not to permit anyone to poison relations

between us from this West German direction. He would repeat—the

Soviet Union stood for strictest compliance with the Quadripartite Ac-

cord. No one should be permitted to violate that agreement. This is

what he wanted to say to the Secretary on West Berlin.

The Secretary said that he would also like to talk on the Berlin ques-

tion in general. We believed in general that East-West relations had

been improved by the West Berlin accord and by the agreement be-

tween the two German states. We would like to see that balance main-

tained. We believed that both sides should avoid doing anything to dis-

turb that balance. We further believed that Four Power status applied

to all of Berlin, not only West Berlin.

The Secretary then raised recent GDR actions aimed at attempting

to alter the status of the city.

January–May 1977

The Secretary pointed out that the document Gromyko had brought

with him was dated 1968, whereas the Quadripartite Agreement had

been concluded in 1971. In sum, he believed that both our countries had

to see to it that the Quadripartite Agreement was complied with in full

measure by all interested parties.

Gromyko said that the same kind of document was being issued

today as well. He would ask the Secretary to take note of this fact.

The Secretary said he would take note of it, and hoped that Gro-

myko would also note the instances the Secretary had raised con-

cerning East Berlin.

Gromyko said that, of course, there were some questions the West

Berlin authorities were competent enough to resolve on the basis of the

authority they possessed, which would not conflict with the Quadri-

partite Agreement; similarly there were some questions that could be

resolved by East Berlin (as the Secretary had called it), the capital of the

GDR, without coming into conflict with the Quadripartite Agreement,

and the Soviet Union would certainly not object to such acts. Neither

should there be any objections on the part of the Western powers and

the US to such acts by the capital of the GDR. The instances Gromyko

had cited, however, represented gross violations of the Quadripartite

Agreement. He would repeat that there were numerous West German

legislative acts which referred to Berlin as a Land of the Federal Re-

public. He had provided only one example; this situation was not im-

proving. He would hope that the new Administration and the Secre-

tary, personally, would reflect on whether it was really worthwhile to

play into the hands of those circles that wanted to inject as much poison

as possible into the relations between the Soviet Union and the United

States in connection with the question of West Berlin. The Soviet Union

favored complete implementation of the Quadripartite Agreement.

Gromyko welcomed the Secretary’s words to the effect that he took a

similar attitude, but this also should be implemented in practice. This

concluded his statement on the subject of West Berlin.

The Secretary said that the US took its responsibilities in West Berlin

very seriously, and had given great attention to the Quadripartite

Agreement and would continue to do so in the future.

Gromyko said that practice would show whether this was indeed

the case.

The Secretary hoped the same would apply to East Berlin.

CYPRUS

Gromyko suggested to take up the question of Cyprus. He asked if

the Secretary would like to be first to speak. How did he assess the

present situation? The Soviet Union did not want to see any hostilities

in that area, and therefore hoped the US position was similar.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Secretary said he would be happy to take up the Cyprus ques-

tion. He personally had been involved in Cyprus problems over the

years, particularly during the period of time in 1967 when he, together

with others from the United Nations, was involved in resolving the dis-

pute that existed at the time, in order to avoid a conflict between Greeks

and Turks. It was with concern and sadness that he had seen the con-

flict break out in the early 70’s. Since then a number of efforts by

various countries and by the United Nations were made to try and find

a way to resolve such conflicts. Recently, in an effort to offer our good

offices and help the United Nations in their efforts to resolve the dis-

pute, we had sent a mission to Cyprus headed by Mr. Clifford. Mr.

Clifford had discussed the issues that divide the Greeks and Turks, in

particular with the Archbishop and Mr. Denktash, to see whether or

not common ground that would settle the dispute could be found. In so

doing, he had indicated that he had no wish to do anything that would

not be helpful to UN Secretary General Waldheim’s efforts to settle the

intra-communal dispute. Clifford had reported the results of his dis-

cussions with Cyprus leaders to Waldheim and had offered our assist-

ance. As Gromyko undoubtedly knew, the intra-communal talks were

about to begin in Vienna today, and it was the Secretary’s under-

standing that the parties had new proposals on the table that would be

helpful. As he understood it, one side would put forward a new pro-

posal to resolve the territorial question, and the other a proposal to re-

solve the question of governmental structure. If these proposals were

actually discussed, then perhaps we would see progress. This was in

the hands of the Secretary General, as an overseeing party to the discus-

sion. We believed we should leave matters in his hands, while sup-

porting his efforts.

Gromyko remarked that while Waldheim was overseeing matters

he was, of course, in no position to decide anything.

The Secretary agreed that that was correct. The ultimate solutions

should be worked out by the parties. Therefore, he thought we should

see what comes out of the Vienna talks and then decide.

Gromyko asked if he could take it that it would be correct to state

that the new Administration in the US favored preservation of Cyprus

as an independent, sovereign, and integrated state.

The Secretary answered: “You can.”

Gromyko took that to be a very good response; it indicated that our

positions had much in common. He would ask another question—

troops in Cyprus.

The Secretary said he clearly agreed that there should be no Greek

or Turkish forces in Cyprus. That had been our position from the

beginning.

Gromyko said that this response drew our positions closer together.

By way of information, he told the Secretary that recently Foreign Min-

ister Caglayangil of Turkey had visited Moscow. He had touched on

the Cyprus question. Gromyko did not know where he had obtained

that information, but on the territorial question he had said that in gen-

eral Greek Cypriots—Archbishop Makarios—were closer to accepting

the idea of 30%–31% of territory for the Turks. If that was really so, the

Turkish Foreign Minister had said, then the Greek and Turkish posi-

tions on the territorial question were not all that far apart. Gromyko

was saying this to the Secretary for the sake of information, but could

not go into further detail, since this was not a subject for discussion be-

tween Turkey and the Soviet Union. He felt it would not be out of place

if our two countries could assist and advise the two communities, al-

though it would be they who would have to arrive at a final settlement.

The Secretary said it was his understanding that the Turkish Cyp-

riots’ position was that they wanted to get 30%–31% of the territory,

while the Greeks were prepared to give something closer to 20%. He

would predict that they would finally compromise on 26%–27%.

Gromyko said that had also been his impression after his talk with

the Turkish Foreign Minister. He had suspected that 30%–31% was

more wishful thinking than reality.

To finish up with the Cyprus question, Gromyko said the Soviet

Union would hope that the question would be settled and would no

longer be a problem. He felt that, in general, the Turks were inclined to

take the road toward solution. He believed that if both sides were flex-

ible, we could be optimistic about the future. However, no one should

interfere with them, although the US and the Soviet Union should as-

sist and prevent any outside interference. As for military bases, and for-

eign troops, ultimately these should leave.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

NUCLEAR NON-FIRST-USE

Gromyko wanted to say a few words regarding the Non-First-Use

proposal. Why had the US Government (the Ford Administration) so

quickly declined the Warsaw Pact proposal that an attempt be made to

reach agreement between the participants in CSCE, which included

Warsaw Pact countries, NATO, the US, and Canada, not to be the first

to use nuclear weapons? What was the explanation for such haste and a

lackadaisical response? It was no secret, of course, that it was the US

that insisted that NATO take this attitude. Not even the proposal to

discuss this question thoroughly in a group of experts had been ac-

cepted. After all, both of us had followed similar procedures in the past.

This had been the case when the NPT was discussed between our two

states for approximately four years before it finally came to drafting.

Gromyko had taken part in these discussions. He would ask the Secre-

tary to take a further look at this problem.

The Secretary replied that it was his understanding that what had

happened when this proposal was rejected last year had not been a US

decision, but one taken at a Ministerial meeting of NATO member

countries after thorough discussion in that group. As he understood it,

the decision to reject was based on the grounds that NATO was not

prepared to renounce use of any means to repel an attack upon one

member of NATO. This was his understanding of what had happened.

Gromyko said that the Warsaw Pact proposal was aimed precisely

at preventing a nuclear attack on any country. Would it really have

been harmful if a preliminary meeting of experts, including repre-

sentatives of NATO and the US and representatives of the Warsaw Pact

powers, had met for the purpose of a preliminary study? Perhaps some

sort of variant might have emerged that could have been useful. After

all, should the Warsaw Pact powers also follow such a practice when

NATO had a proposal to make—reject it out of hand and allow NATO

to learn about that from a radio broadcast? Was this really the best way

to proceed? He did not think so. There had to be some degree of

responsibility.

The Secretary said that rather than single out one single weapon as

a subject of focus, it would make much more sense to reduce forces

across the board, in order to increase overall security. This was pre-

cisely the purpose of the Vienna MBFR negotiations. It would seem to

him that there were items of greater priority, for example, real progress

in the strategic arms talks and at the ongoing discussions in Vienna. He

would put that ahead of attempts to resolve the more abstruse question

January–May 1977

of Non-First-Use. The other negotiations dealt with tangible matters,

proposals at the table, and they should be brought to fruition.

Gromyko wondered why the Secretary would call that proposal ab-

struse. After all, we were negotiating on specific types of arms, such as

chemical weapons, bacteriological weapons, environmental modifica-

tion for military purposes. Just yesterday, he and the Secretary had

talked about banning weapons of mass destruction. If we did not at

least try to look at these things, what would diplomats be doing?

Would some just drink coffee, some others tea, and all of them eat

caviar, if any remained; was that all? These were not very strong argu-

ments. He said he would conclude from the Secretary’s words that he

stood on the same position as his predecessor. He was saying this with

sadness and regret. The problem remained, and we might perhaps be

forced to return to it some day. He would like to hope that this was not

the Secretary’s final word on this subject.

The Secretary said he would only note that there were already obli-

gations under the UN Charter not to use force. Why, then, should these

obligations be brought into question by a new document limited to

CSCE participants? However, he would reflect on it.

Gromyko wanted to refer to conclusion of an international treaty on

non-first use. A majority in the United Nations favored conclusion of

such a treaty, and this was not fortuitous. It was an expression of a gen-

eral yearning of people for a true and lasting peace. He would ask the

Secretary if that proposal would not be in accord with the interests of

peace, with the interests of those governments that wanted peace? This

was a proposal not to use force under any circumstances. In other

words, it would provide for an obligation of states in treaty form to re-

solve disputes by peaceful means only. The Secretary might say that

the UN Charter already contained such obligations. There was a great

deal in the UN Charter, but all of it in general terms only. The only

thing missing from the Charter was a mention of God, and Gromyko

recalled a fervent plea in favor of such mention by one of the repre-

sentatives. After all, treaties existed in order to make more specific the

obligations arising out of the Charter, and to translate Charter provi-

sions into specific undertakings by states. Would it not have been

useful to have experts examine the question? Would the United States

be poorer if it had sent some people to Moscow, Geneva or Washington

to discuss the proposal? As things stood now, the whole world agrees,

but the government of the United States says no. There are other coun-

tries that follow US lead. The Secretary was a member of a new gov-

ernment. Would he not agree that there was something here to think

about, to take a look at? He called upon the Secretary to do so.

The Secretary said he would be happy to give new thought to this

matter, because he preferred to negotiate rather than reject. He would

see if further discussions could be productive.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Gromyko asked that the Secretary’s representatives at whatever

level was appropriate inform the Soviet Union when the time came.

ANTI-SATELLITE CAPABILITIES

The Secretary said that in this connection he wanted to raise the

issue of placing limits on the anti-satellite capabilities of both sides. We

had noted that such capabilities were in the process of being devel-

oped. We firmly believed that an attempt should be made to stabilize

the strategic situation by discussing such capabilities, and were pre-

pared to enter into discussions with the Soviet Union concerning their

limitation. In the interim, he would suggest that it would be useful to

exercise restraint in testing anti-satellite systems.

Gromyko said he could not say that no problem existed in this area.

He would be prepared to examine any proposal the United States could

submit.

The Secretary thought that was good, because he believed it impor-

tant that we do this.

CIVIL DEFENSE

The Secretary raised the question of civil defense preparations. As

Gromyko knew, there was concern in the United States over what ap-

peared to be a civil defense program in the Soviet Union. It would be

constructive to exchange information and see if we could not reach

agreement on mutual restraint in this area in the future. At SALT both

sides had acknowledged that limitation on active ABM defense of the

territory of a country was a substantial factor in curbing the race in stra-

tegic offensive arms and reducing the risk of nuclear war. The Secretary

thought that the same logic may apply to a broad expansion in the field

of civil defense. Therefore, we should discuss this question.

Gromyko asked whether Mr. Schlesinger, upon returning from

China, had not tried to scare public opinion in the United States on the

basis of a civil defense program in China?

The Secretary said that Schlesinger had not tried to do that, but that

he had seen the preparations there.

Gromyko asked if that meant the United States was afraid only of

the Soviet Union.

The Secretary said the United States had not expressed fear in the

sense in which Gromyko used that word, but we did believe this to be

an important aspect of strategic equality. We should not ignore such a

factor and discuss limitations that would be in our mutual interests.

January–May 1977

Gromyko said that in his view activities in the field of civil defense

were not a problem of first-rate importance. In terms of strategic sta-

bility they were not significant. He did not think that anyone would

deny the truth of such a view. Pursuing the question in these terms

might complicate the process of reaching agreement on really impor-

tant problems—the number one problem—limitation of strategic arms.

This did not mean that the Soviet side would be afraid to discuss this

question. If the United States attached importance to it, Soviet and

American specialists might be instructed to consider specific proposals.

The Secretary said that was good and very productive. He recalled

that when we had suggested discussing ABM limitations, it was said

that they were defensive weapons and did not affect the strategic bal-

ance. It developed, however, that both sides later agreed that ABMs

had an impact on that balance. Therefore, it would be useful to discuss

civil defense and its effect on the strategic balance.

WORLD DISARMAMENT CONFERENCE

Gromyko said that for a long time now discussions in the United

Nations and elsewhere had dealt with the possibility of convening a

World Disarmament Conference. The Secretary should not believe

that the Soviet Union alone was interested in convening such a confer-

ence; it did not expect any profit out of such discussions. The Soviet

Union had favored this idea for a long time because it believed that im-

plementation could be an important landmark on the road toward dis-

armament. First of all, he would have to explain that it often happened

that people mixed up two things—a World Disarmament Conference

and a Special Session of the UN General Assembly to discuss disarma-

ment. It might be asked what was the difference? The Soviet Union was

not opposed to holding such a session, and in fact had voted for the cor-

responding resolution, but it believed that this would not remove the

question of convening a World Disarmament Conference. What could a

General Assembly session accomplish, even with the best intentions? It

could adopt recommendations and pass resolutions but, according to

the UN Charter, the nature of such recommendations and resolutions

was that a government might accept them, or might not, or might

simply pigeonhole them. Gromyko was afraid that such would be the

result of a special General Assembly Session on Disarmament; already

the Soviet Union had voted for it. A World Disarmament Conference

was quite another thing. It would be held on an entirely different basis

from the standpoint of organization and procedure for taking deci-

sions. The juridical effect of decisions adopted would also be different.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

At a special conference, decisions could be worked out by minorities as

well, including the major powers, and then converted into an interna-

tional agreement. Success at such a conference would be determined

simply by the wishes of the parties, and not by the number of votes in

favor. The procedure for taking decisions at a conference would be to-

tally different. Often people did not understand this difference, but the

difference was great indeed. It should not be precluded that at a confer-

ence a limited number of states could take a position to conclude an

agreement, and such an agreement would become an effective interna-

tional document, whether or not a majority of states signed. Gromyko

did not want to prejudge the special General Assembly session, but

would ask the Secretary to reflect on the possibility of convening a

World Disarmament Conference following the special General As-

sembly session. It could not possibly be detrimental to the United

States or the Soviet Union, since no one could impose anything on

anyone else by a majority of votes.

The Secretary quite agreed that a World Disarmament Conference

was a noble objective for the future. On the other hand, there were so

many pressing things now, that it was above all necessary to show the

world that we could make progress on such practical things as strategic

arms limitations and in the Vienna MBFR talks. We should deal with

things on the table before talking about a disarmament conference.

Both the Soviet Union and the United States had stated that they would

actively participate in the special General Assembly session, but it was

our view that we should give priority to the things already on the table

and before us.

Gromyko believed that efforts to convene a World Disarmament

Conference would not in the least degree interfere with efforts to re-

solve other disarmament problems. He also thought the world was en-

tering a phase where we had to take up many things in several arenas,

because now the world had become so complex that we had a good one

hundred years of work ahead of us. In any case, parallel efforts would

have to be applied. That was all he had to say on the World Disarma-

ment Conference.

CHEMICAL WEAPONS

Gromyko said that he would like to instruct his representatives in

Geneva to suggest that the CCD start drafting the text of an agreement

on chemical weapons, provided the United States agreed of course. In

the process of drafting, some problems might simply disappear. So far

the CCD had indulged in philosophical discussions. This is all he had

to say on the subject. (He remarked that this was the briefest statement

he had ever made on any issue.)

The Secretary agreed that some progress had been made through

discussions between technical people in this area. We were ready and

January–May 1977

willing to join with the Soviet Union in this initiative. We would see if

working on the text of an agreement might not change our respective

stand on issues on which we had different views, although our goals

were the same.

Gromyko said we should instruct our representatives to get to

work.

BELGRADE

Gromyko wanted to present a brief formulation of the Soviet posi-

tion with regard to the forthcoming Belgrade Conference. The Soviet

Union believed that it was necessary to gather in Belgrade not in order

to quarrel, not to launch all sorts of allegations against each other, not

to present lists of alleged unlawful activities or crimes of one state

against another, or lists of violations of some sort of provisions. It was

necessary to gather in Belgrade in order to demonstrate a positive spirit

of cooperation and detente, to promote implementation of all the obli-

gations of the Final Act of the CSCE, and to table appropriate proposals

toward that goal. This was the Soviet view of the purpose of the Bel-

grade meeting. He would like to hear US views on this score.

The Secretary replied that our view was also that we should not go

there to quarrel, or for purposes of confrontation. We should review

how well the Final Act was being implemented, what was being done

on Baskets I, II and III9 viewed in that light. A limited number of new

proposals might also be considered, but our emphasis should be on

how well the Final Act commitments were being implemented.

Gromyko asked if it would not be good to take all the Baskets out

and burn them before Belgrade so that they not stand in the way. Oth-

erwise, we might run the danger that these Baskets would be the most

popular items. He had taken note of the Secretary’s statement re-

garding the review. Of course, it would be difficult to object to the Sec-

retary’s views, because each participant was free to act as he wished,

but the important thing was how this should be done. A review might

take the form of sharp criticisms of the other side, which then would

not remain in debt, and then this might be followed by the third, fourth,

or fifth and finally thirty-fifth party to the Final Act. Was this really

needed? The Soviet side saw the major purpose of the conference in

carrying out the review in such a way as to consider the future. If con-

structive proposals were made that are in accord with the spirit of the

Final Act, this would impart a constructive character to the conference.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Soviet Union, for its part, intended to raise certain matters, some

new and some already mentioned. It would act fully in accord with the

spirit of detente and in the direction of improving Soviet-American

relations.

The Secretary said that we also wished very much for a constructive

intent and purpose. He said we would conduct ourselves consistent

with that purpose.

MARITIME AGREEMENT

Gromyko took note of the fact that the protocol on maritime ship-

ping had finally been agreed upon. That was a positive fact.

The Secretary said he, too, was pleased that the maritime agreement

had finally been concluded.

CIVIL AVIATION

Gromyko noted with regret that the aviation question so far had not

been resolved. However, it was necessary to apply further efforts to

finding a solution to this matter, too.

The Secretary thought that some progress had been made on civil

aviation and looked forward to resuming negotiations in the near fu-

ture to bring this matter to a satisfactory conclusion that would be ac-

ceptable to both sides. He would suggest that in the meantime the

status quo of scheduled service be maintained, and that discussions be

picked up as soon as possible, to reach a final agreement.

Korniyenko asked the Secretary to explain the meaning of the status

quo. Some discussion followed as to whether this meant to maintain

two scheduled flights a week for each airline, or whether the normal

April 1 schedule of four weekly flights each would go into effect. The

problem was not resolved and remained to be taken up at another

level.

CONSTRUCTION OF EMBASSIES

Gromyko noted with satisfaction that agreement had been reached

on the construction of the respective embassies.

The Secretary said he, too, was pleased.

SOVIET MIG–25 DEFECTION

Gromyko said the Soviet leadership had been very much affected

and even hurt by the US Government’s direct attitude in connection

January–May 1977

with the well-known incident involving the Soviet aircraft in Japan.

This was not even a matter of the pilot, although they did not believe

one word of the version spread in the West about the pilot. It was a

question of the aircraft itself. Did the strategic services of the United

States think they would improve their strategic situation by disassem-

bling the aircraft? Did they really see an advantage to be gained here?

Their actions were a blow at the spirit of confidence and trust in the re-

lations between our respective governments, and had poisoned the

general climate. Gromyko would tell the Secretary directly that the So-

viet leadership had been amazed and surprised how these two factors

could be likened. Could familiarization with this aircraft by the Japa-

nese and Americans change the strategic situation between our coun-

tries? “Nonsense. Utter nonsense.” Supposing the Soviet Union had an

opportunity to dismantle a US plane, say a Phantom, could disman-

tling it and crawling all over it improve the strategic situation of the So-

viet Union? “Nonsense.” In that case, why was it necessary to poison

the relationship between us? It had seemed like a small matter, but in

fact it was a major one. This was what the Soviets wanted the new US

Administration to know, as something to be borne in mind in the fu-

ture. He did not think that this had increased confidence.

The Secretary said he had taken note of the Minister’s statement. He

understood that this matter had been raised with President Ford, and

followed by a subsequent exchange of correspondence between the

President and General Secretary Brezhnev.

ADVANCE NOTIFICATION

The Secretary said that, as Gromyko knew, President Carter had

communicated to General Secretary Brezhnev his desire to see if we

could enter into an agreement about advance notification of missile

firings. The object of this was to be a confidence-building arrangement.

It would further the objectives of the Measures Agreement12 and would

be a simple and constructive move. What we had in mind was notifica-

tion, some 24 hours in advance, of dates and times and places of ICBM

launchings. We believe this would prevent misinterpretation of test

launches during periods of tension.

Gromyko said he had asked his colleagues whether this question

had been raised earlier. He ascertained that it had not been discussed

with US representatives previously. The USSR announces all launches

which land in areas outside of its territory. The Secretary knew this,

surely. As for launches of strategic missiles within limits of national ter-

“Hot Line” would be used for urgent communication pertaining to nuclear weapons. See

22.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Emigration Lists; Radiation; Trade

PARTICIPANTS

US PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR PARTICIPANTS

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

At the Secretary’s initiative a private meeting was held with For-

eign Minister Gromyko immediately after the Secretary’s luncheon at

Spasso House.

The Secretary told Gromyko that he had two or three issues he

wanted to raise privately with Gromyko. First, he wanted to deal with

the question of divided families. He had two lists: one he would hand

Gromyko, listing people who wanted to emigrate to the United States;

the other consists of people who wanted to emigrate to Israel. He

would appreciate it if Gromyko would have someone take a look at

what could be done.

January–May 1977

Gromyko said (facetiously) that he was really overenthusiastic, but

since this was a “hot question” and “a hot list”, he would not even

touch it but would ask Mr. Sukhodrev to take it along. What could he

tell the Secretary in this regard? The Soviet authorities would consider

the information contained in the lists in accordance with Soviet legisla-

tion. He would have to refrain from giving any promises in this regard.

He thought he knew how these things were eventually resolved. He

also knew that it happened sometimes that police organs, when they

started to look into the persons concerned, found that in some instances

these persons were not at all interested in leaving the Soviet Union. In

one instance he knew of, one of these told the police that he had just

been married, and asked them to leave him alone.

The Secretary repeated that he would appreciate it if Gromyko had

someone look at the list.

The second issue the Secretary wanted to raise with Gromyko con-

cerned radiation. He knew that the levels of radiation affecting our Em-

bassy had been reduced, but they were still a matter of concern to the

people working in our Embassy here. We would indeed be pleased if

such radiation could be stopped completely.

Gromyko said that he was really getting tired of this question. He

had thought that this issue was some sort of joke, but then he had no-

ticed that from time to time someone would raise it again. Apart from

the reply he had repeatedly given the Secretary earlier, he could not say

anything else. Who was he to accuse the city of Moscow or the city au-

thorities in this regard? He knew that there were certain conditions

here that did not exist in Washington due to the fact that the city here

contained so many industrial enterprises. Some had already been taken

out of Moscow, but some still remained. He would bear in mind what

the Secretary had said, but, quite honestly, he knew that there were

some in the United States who loved to raise this issue again and again.

The Secretary said that the problem was that a number of people

had become ill in ways somehow associated with radiation. It was for

this reason that he had raised the issue with Gromyko.

Gromyko replied that since he and the Secretary were discussing

this, he would point out that he could provide some statistics showing

how many Soviets returning from the United States had been taken ill.

Among them were even some important officials; for example, one of

his deputies had died of leukemia after returning from the United

States. All he could tell the Secretary was that he would keep this in

mind. Whether or not he would be able to say something new on the

subject, he could not determine now. However, he knew that some

people in the US liked to blow up these matters; of that he was firmly

convinced. He also thought there was no question that Soviets living in

the United States were actually exposed to higher levels of radiation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

than Americans here. More than that the Secretary would not be able to

get out of him on the subject. After all, he, too, lived near the center of

the city together with his family, although he spent the summers at his

dacha. Still, no one in his family had experienced any such difficulty.

The Secretary thanked Gromyko for taking these matters into ac-

count. Another issue had been entrusted to him by President Carter, to

be conveyed to Gromyko. The Secretary had touched on it briefly the

other day, but wanted to be sure that Gromyko knew that this Admin-

istration would like to see trade between our countries increased, and

would like to see the Soviet Union accorded most favored nations

status in the US. We wanted to work toward this end, but it would take

awhile to get Congress to move. We continued to move in that direc-

tion, and the problem had already been raised with Congressional

leaders. We would hope to continue pressing Congress on this, and ob-

tain satisfactory results. In this connection, we realized that it was not

only a matter of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment, but also the Ste-

venson Amendment3 which affected credit arrangements. He had con-

veyed this to Gromyko, because the President was interested in making

progress.

Gromyko said he took note of the Secretary’s statement. The Secre-

tary would know that if a satisfactory solution could be found, it would

be given a very positive assessment by the Soviet Union. General Secre-

tary Brezhnev had talked about this, because the Soviet leadership con-

sidered it to be of mutual benefit to both countries to remove the

present obstacles to increased trade. He would point out that a positive

solution would also play a certain role in our bilateral relations.

93–618), necessitated the relaxation of Soviet emigration restrictions before MFN status

for the Soviet Union would be considered. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XVI, So-

23.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

SALT

PARTICIPANTS

US PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. Paul Warnke

Mr. Philip C. Habib

Mr. William G. Hyland

Mr. William D. Krimer, (Interpreter)

USSR PARTICIPANTS

General Secretary L.I. Brezhnev

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov

Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko

Mr. O.M. Sokolov

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, (Interpreter)

General Secretary Brezhnev opened the meeting and said to Secre-

tary Vance that it was now time again to talk about business. Foreign

Minister Gromyko had kept him fully informed of the current talks on

SALT, as well as a number of other issues. Secretary Vance had given

the Soviet side quite a long list of things to be discussed.

Turning to SALT, Brezhnev rhetorically asked what he could tell

the Secretary on this subject. To his regret it was necessary to recognize

that the discussion of this most important issue had so far not been very

satisfactory.

The main reason for that was the unconstructive, one sided and, he

would even say, non-objective nature of the position taken by the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

United States. Brezhnev had to tell the Secretary that the considerations

the US side had set forth had been very carefully considered by him

and his colleagues, and what he had to say here represented their

common opinion.

That which Secretary Vance had set forth in his talks with Foreign

Minister Gromyko was a repetition of a previous US proposal, re-

garding which the Soviet side had already informed President Carter

and the Secretary that it was completely unacceptable; as for the new

variant presented by the US side, it was equally unacceptable for the

Soviet Union because of its one-sided nature. The United States was

proposing things which, if one got to the bottom of them, objectively,

and without indulging in propaganda were advantageous to one side

only, i.e., the United States, and would harm the security of the USSR.

Brezhnev said that he had carefully followed the entire course of

the current talks, and he had to point out that, just as earlier, we were

here witnessing manifestation of a desire to pretend that there was no

Vladivostok understanding; and yet, that understanding had been

achieved as a result of the immense efforts of both sides, involving a

great deal of hard work. How could one discard that to which the

United States had given its consent at the very highest level? The Soviet

leaders had wanted to believe the word of the United States as a state.

By way of another example of a one-sided, non-objective position

at the talks, Brezhnev wanted to refer to the course taken by the United

States and its NATO Allies at the Vienna negotiations on the Mutual

Reduction of Armed Forces and Armaments in Central Europe. He

knew that the Secretary and Gromyko had discussed this question as

well. Indeed, the NATO countries did not even try to conceal the fact

that they wanted to use these negotiations to improve their military po-

sitions in Europe, to the detriment of the Soviet Union and its allies. Did

the US side really consider the Soviet leaders to be naive simpletons?

Had the Secretary believed that the Soviet Union would agree to this?

The answer was no; no indeed. It would be much better in a business-

like way to consider the possibilities of reducing the armed forces of the

two sides, while still retaining the existing correlation of forces. This

was the only reasonable and realistic way out of the present situation,

and was in fact why these negotiations had been started in the first

place. Brezhnev would most sincerely and insistently call upon Secre-

tary Vance and President Carter to approach the major and important

issues being discussed here, above all the problem of limiting strategic

arms, in a less one-sided manner, and with an account for the legiti-

mate interest of both sides, so as not to discard what had already been

achieved.

Naturally, the Soviet leadership did not believe that, because the

two sides had not been able to agree on the question of strategic arms

January–May 1977

limitation this time, the negotiations were doomed to failure altogether.

There was still time to reconsider, and once again to talk. Brezhnev

would like to hope that in time, in particular by the time of the Secre-

tary’s forthcoming meeting with Gromyko in May, reflection might

produce a wiser course.

At the same time, Brezhnev noted with satisfaction that on some of

the specific issues discussed during the talks, as he saw it, some favor-

able prospects for further constructive discussions had emerged, and

he wanted to express the hope that such discussions would lead to

good results. He felt that objective possibilities were present, notably to

reach an understanding on joint action on the Middle East problem

where, as he understood it, both our countries were interested in seeing

a lasting settlement achieved. As he understood it, Secretary Vance,

too, had expressed the view that without inter-action (vzaimodeyst-

viye) between the US and the USSR there could not be an effective set-

tlement in the Middle East.

On the whole, Brezhnev thought that the talks had been useful in

terms of enabling the two sides to understand each other’s views, but

that was not enough. If we wanted to move further in developing our

relations and strengthening peace it was necessary to bring these views

closer together, and that required new efforts by politicians and dip-

lomats, as well as an appropriate psychological climate in the relations

between our two states. Brezhnev wanted to call upon the leadership of

the United States to promote such efforts and create an appropriate

climate.

Brezhnev wanted briefly to address two more questions to which

the Soviet side attached great importance, and which had already been

touched upon in the course of the current talks. The first question con-

cerned the transfer of strategic arms to third countries and non-

circumvention of agreements through third states or in any other

manner. This was not a new question. From the very outset the Soviet

side had assumed, and had said so to the US, that without including ap-

propriate provisions on non-transfer and non-circumvention in an

arms limitation agreement, that agreement would lose its meaning to a

significant degree. In the Soviet draft of the new agreement specific

wording had been proposed to deal with these matters. He wanted to

emphasize once again that the Soviet Union could not contemplate any

agreement not containing such provisions. The other question con-

cerned nuclear forward-based systems. Before Vladivostok and after

Vladivostok the Soviet side had stated clearly that it did not regard the

forward-based nuclear weapons issue as having been removed from

the agenda. Moreover, as he had already stated, the Soviet side had

proceeded from the premise that the US side would, at the time of sig-

nature of the new agreement, state that during the term of the new

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

agreement it would not only not build up forward-based nuclear

systems which, due to their geographical location were capable of

reaching the Soviet Union, but would take steps to reduce them. The

current position of the United States completely ignored this issue,

once again confirming that Soviet concerns on this score were well

grounded. In addition, this led the Soviet side to conclude that the

question of US forward-based nuclear systems (the Soviet Union had

no such systems) would have to be resolved within the framework of

the agreement currently under preparation. Such were the thoughts

that inevitably arose during an analysis of the current US proposals.

In conclusion, Brezhnev would ask Secretary Vance to transmit his

greetings to President Carter, and to tell him of Brezhnev’s sincere con-

viction that an improvement in relations between the Soviet Union and

the United States, establishment of good-neighborly cooperation be-

tween the two countries, was entirely possible, given the necessary

effort.

Secretary Vance said that he concurred with Brezhnev that the re-

sults reached in the current talks with respect to strategic arms were not

satisfactory. Indeed, we were deeply disappointed that no progress

had been made in our discussions of this subject, which was important

not only for our two nations but also for world peace. The proposals we

had presented had been prepared with seriousness and good will, and

no intention at all to try and enforce a one-sided approach. We believed

that the two proposals we had presented were fair and equitable to

both sides. The proposal about deferral, we believed, was fully consist-

ent with the accord reached in Vladivostok. The Secretary recognized

that Brezhnev held a contrary view, but he would tell Brezhnev that we

held our views with all seriousness. He said that he could not accept the

suggestion that we had gone back on the word of the United States, and

that we had cast it aside or had suggested matters that were incon-

sistent with the Vladivostok accord in our proposal to defer. In so far as

our comprehensive proposal was concerned, we had indeed suggested

steps that did go beyond the agreement reached previously, but this

had been done with the objective of moving boldly toward true arms

reduction in a fashion that would result in a balance fair to both sides,

and in greater stability in the area of nuclear weapons. Brezhnev would

note, of course, that our comprehensive proposal contained restrictions

on cruise missiles, and that it also accepted as part of the package the

earlier Soviet proposal regarding the Backfire bomber. The Secretary

looked forward to meeting Foreign Minister Gromyko in May. At such

time, they would be discussing questions relating to the Middle East, as

well as any other subject that either party would choose to raise.

Referring to the Vienna talks on Mutual Balanced Force Reduc-

tions, the Secretary said that we had not asked the Soviet side to be

January–May 1977

naive. We were suggesting that the guiding principle at these talks be

parity of manpower in the area, in other words, equality; equality had

been the guiding principle in the strategic arms limitation talks from

the very beginning, and should also be the guiding principle at the

Vienna talks on conventional arms in Central Europe. According to our

estimates, there was currently a difference of more than 150,000 in the

land forces of the two sides in Central Europe. We believed that there

should be an exchange of data to ascertain if our estimates were correct.

If they were correct, of if they needed correction, then necessary steps

could be taken to reduce manpower to equal numbers for both sides.

The Secretary also wanted to note with satisfaction that progress

had been made on some matters, and a basis laid for further work

which would advance our common interests in some areas. As he had

already said, he looked forward to meeting Mr. Gromyko in Geneva to

discuss how to proceed and work in order to achieve a just and lasting

peace in the Middle East. We had common interests and a common re-

sponsibility as co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference to bring about

reconvening of that conference and to see to it that the Geneva Confer-

ence produced a solution that would give a just and lasting peace to

this troubled area.

The Secretary noted that Brezhnev had asked two questions, the

first concerning non-transfer and non-circumvention, and the second

concerning forward-based systems. As for non-transfer and non-

circumvention, the Secretary had already said, as Brezhnev knew, that

this was one of the remaining issues to be resolved at the strategic arms

talks in Geneva. That was one of the issues that could be addressed

once the basic provisions of the new agreement had been determined.

As for forward based systems, it was our view that they were not an ap-

propriate subject for SALT, because these negotiations dealt with inter-

continental ballistic missile launchers, submarine-launched ballistic

missile launchers, and heavy bombers. These negotiations did not in-

volve our forward-based systems any more than they involved Soviet

medium-range ballistic missiles or intermediate range ballistic missiles,

such as the SS–20. If forward-based systems were to be included in the

strategic arms talks, then obviously the Backfire bomber would also be

covered, even though not deployed for intercontinental ranges. We be-

lieved that we should stick to our task, i.e., control strategic interconti-

nental nuclear weapons, and not theater weapons. Finally, the Secre-

tary would point out that the Vladivostok Aide-Memoire contained no

mention of forward-based systems.

Brezhnev said that in his remarks he had referred to many ques-

tions that had been the subject of discussion. He did not think there was

any need to repeat what had already been said. He only wanted to say

that he had listened very attentively to what the Secretary had said, and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

wanted to say again that the Soviet position was set forth very firmly in

his concluding statement. He would ask the Secretary to convey these

remarks to President Carter. He also suggested that the two sides issue

a brief joint press communique regarding these talks.

Secretary Vance said he agreed. He had also listened very carefully

to Mr. Brezhnev’s remarks, and would convey his message to President

Carter.

Brzezinski, and Christopher. The telegram is in the Carter Library, National Security Af-

24.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

April 4, 1977

Dear Mr. President,

Secretary of State Cyrus Vance has handed over to me your letter

of March 24.

I think there is no need at the present moment to say something on

the substance of the talks just concluded in Moscow.

We shall be expecting from you concrete considerations on the

questions of strategic arms limitation, which you may have, taking into

account the exchange of views on these issues we had with Mr. Vance

in Moscow. We have stated to him our concrete positions on the issues

of completing the work on a new SALT agreement.

I would like to stress that the USSR policy in relations with the US

has been and remains aimed at a steady advance—proceeding on ex-

isting experience—in developing constructive cooperation and interac-

tion to solve the questions of bilateral relations and to settle interna-

tional problems on the basis of mutual regard for legitimate interests

January–May 1977

of each other, strengthening confidence between our countries, the

principles of equality, equal security and non-interference in internal

affairs.

25.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Soviet Jewry and Secretary’s Trip to Moscow

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Eugene Gold, Chairman, National Conference on Soviet Jewry (NCSJ)

Rabbi Alexander Schindler, Chairman, Conference of Presidents of Major

American Jewish Organizations

Yehuda Hellman, Executive Director, Conference of Presidents

Jerry Goodman, Executive Director, NCSJ

Dr. Marshall Shulman, Special Consultant

Arthur A. Hartman, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Leonard F. Willems, EUR:SOV (notetaker)

SUMMARY: The Secretary met with leaders of two major Amer-

ican Jewish organizations concerned with Soviet Jewry to report to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

them on his recent trip to Moscow2 with regard to matters concerning

Soviet Jewry. He had met with the same group prior to the trip on

a list of Soviet Jews refused exit visas for Israel as well as the US Exit

Visa Representation List. He had not presented any list of prisoners, or

raised any individual cases. During the visit the Soviets were told that

what happens with regard to Soviet-American trade will be affected by

what happens in arms control and emigration. The “drop-out” phe-

nomenon of Soviet emigrants to Israel not going to Israel did not come

up in any way during the visit. The Secretary described the Soviets’

sensitivity about the coming Belgrade CSCE Conference. He said there

had been a general review of the Middle East, and Gromyko had con-

firmed to him that the Soviets had not changed their positions. The

Jewish organizations leaders seemed genuinely very appreciative of

the Secretary’s efforts on behalf of Soviet Jewry. END SUMMARY.

Moscow Trip

Secretary Vance reported that he had personally delivered to For-

eign Minister Gromyko both the US Government Exit Visa Representa-

tion List of Soviet citizens refused exit visas to join relatives in the

United States, and a list of Soviet Jews refused exit visas for Israel. Gro-

myko received the lists and indicated he would look into the matter,

but made no promises. Gromyko had accepted them, though, and not

rejected them. The Secretary had not felt it advisable to present any lists

of prisoners. He had discussed in general terms with Gromyko the ef-

fect of the emigration issue on our bilateral relations, but could not pre-

dict what would happen in the emigration area in the future. The Secre-

tary said his guess was that the Soviets will act with a degree of caution.

It had been made clear to the Soviets that what happens with regard to

trade will be affected by what happens or does not happen in arms con-

trol and emigration.

Schindler asked whether the Soviets linked the human rights and

emigration issues. The Secretary replied that at the first meeting

Brezhnev read a long paper admonishing the US on the human rights

issue. The Secretary said he had responded that we were from different

societies and different systems with different values which produced

some inevitable conflicts, but we were not focusing any attack on the

USSR in our human rights efforts, which reflect universal principles.

After that exchange at the first meeting, human rights had not been dis-

recent developments were caused by anti-Semitism and how much

they reflected suppression of dissidents. He was inclined to doubt they

were caused by anti-Semitism. Goodman replied that Soviet Jews see it

as anti-Semitism. For example, the anti-Semitic television film “Traders

of Souls” has been shown on national television twice. Shulman said

anti-Semitism is a latent phenomenon which surfaces from time to time

in Russia. He cited as an example of official anti-Semitism the fact that

two years ago Academy of Sciences institutes had been directed by the

Academy Presidium to refer all decisions to employ Jews to the

Academy Presidium. Quotas for Jews had existed sporadically in the

past in some Academy of Sciences institutes, but had never been ap-

plied across-the-board until the decree two years ago. Gold and

Goodman noted that Jewish quotas had also been instituted in certain

university faculties. Shulman agreed that was true, at Moscow State

University for example. Gold noted that imposition of such Jewish

quotas encourages Jewish emigration. Shulman agreed, but pointed

out that the quotas are also an effect of Jewish emigration. Shulman and

the Jewish leaders agreed it was a cause-and-effect, self-reenforcing

phenomenon.

Trade

Goodman asked the Secretary to elaborate on his earlier comment

that in Moscow he had told the Soviets that progress in trade would be

related to progress in SALT and emigration. The Secretary said the So-

viets had been told that all were related in the eyes of the American

people. He said the Soviets did not respond directly to that idea. They

had countered that the US Government promised them MFN and then

reneged. The Secretary said he had pointed out to the Soviets that as

practical people they must take into account the trade-and-emigration

connection, recognizing that Jackson-Vanik is an enacted statute. To

remove the statute there must be progress in the emigration area.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Drop Outs

Alluding to their March 24 meeting, Gold mentioned the

“drop-out” phenomenon (i.e., the high rate of Soviet Jews who leave

the USSR with exit visas for Israel but settle in the US and other third

countries instead of proceeding to Israel). Shulman interjected that he

hoped the American Jewish organizations would not put emigrants in

a straight-jacket which would compel them to go to Israel. It is impor-

tant the emigrants be given a choice. So far the American people were

responding very well to Soviet emigration and assisting and wel-

coming Soviet emigrants. For example, Mrs. Shulman works for the

Council on Emigre´s in the Professions, trying to raise funds to assist

and place Soviet emigrant professionals. Gold and Schindler asked

what the Secretary thought was the potential impact of the drop-out

phenomenon—what he sensed in Moscow was the Soviet reaction.

The Secretary and Shulman indicated the drop-out phenomenon

had not come up in any way during the Moscow trip. Schindler said all

American Jews want to get as many Jews as possible out of the USSR,

but there are signs the Soviets are manipulating the emigration flow to

increase the drop-out rate, by increasing the proportion of urban Jews

and professionals who tend to drop out. Schindler asked whether the

Soviets discuss the drop-out rate in the CSCE context. Hartman an-

swered that they sometimes cite it as a debating point.

Belgrade Conference

The Secretary noted that the Soviets are very sensitive about the

approaching Belgrade CSCE Conference. They are very concerned, and

fear a confrontation. During the Moscow visit the Secretary had dis-

cussed Belgrade in general terms with Gromyko. The Secretary had

told Gromyko that we were not seeking a confrontation. Our position is

that the Conference will be to review the progress or lack of progress in

implementation of the Final Act, rather than to consider new proposals

as the Soviets would prefer. Hartman commented that the Soviets

would try to have only brief discussion of implementation, preferably

outside the human rights area. The Secretary commented that the So-

viets always ask why we emphasize Basket III.

Gold asked whether the Secretary shared the concern of some ob-

servers, including some on the Hill, that if we take a strong position at

Belgrade the Soviets might walk out. “Or downgrade the Conference”,

Goodman suggested. The Secretary observed that the Soviets would

like to downgrade the Conference if they could, but that would be hard

to do. Hartman noted that the level of representation for the Belgrade

January–May 1977

Conference—below the Foreign Minister—was specified in the Final

Act. All the European countries have agreed that representation should

be just below the Foreign Minister.

Secretary Vance said that he had established a group to deal with

the Belgrade Conference, and named Warren Christopher as Chair-

man. Schindler asked whether Jewish organizations should direct in-

formation about non-compliance to Christopher. The Secretary replied

that such material could be directed to Christopher or Hartman. Gold

commented that the NCSJ had been sending such information to Con-

gressman Fascell7 as Chairman of the CSCE Commission. The Secretary

and Hartman commented that the Department receives information

from the Commission, so sending it to Congressman Fascell was an ac-

ceptable way to forward it. The Secretary commented that the Depart-

ment is trying to work closer with Congressman Fascell’s Commission.

Gold commented that Fascell and Spencer Oliver8 feel they have a good

relationship with the Department under the new Administration.

Middle East

Schindler asked what had been said about the Middle East during

the Moscow trip. The Secretary said the Soviets had stressed the impor-

tance of their position as Co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference.

There has been no change in the Soviet position. The newspapers

misrepresented Gromyko’s brief comments about the PLO during a

toast. The Secretary specifically asked Gromyko whether there was any

change in their position, and Gromyko replied that there was not. Gold

commented that the April 8 newspaper photos of Brezhnev and Arafat

embracing showed there had been no change. The Secretary said there

had been a general review of the Middle East issues during the Moscow

visit. He said he believed the Soviets could not affect the substance of

any settlement but could be spoilers. For that reason it is essential not to

humiliate them or cause them to lose face. If they are allowed to con-

tinue to carry out their role as Co-Chairman they are less likely “to

throw a spanner in the works”.

Trade

Turning back to the subject of Soviet-American trade, Goodman

and Gold cited a recent Washington Post article about the need of the

East to convert to Western technology through trade. They asked the

Secretary if he thought there was anything they should do as a commu-

nity or Conference in the trade area. They observed that the Soviets’

26.

Memorandum of Conversation

New York, April 10, 1977

SUBJECT

SALT Negotiations

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

Marshall Shulman, S/MS

Georgiy A. Arbatov, Director of

the Institute on USA

and Canada

SUMMARY: At a dinner meeting in New York, Giorgi A. Arbatov,

Director of the Institute on USA and Canada, filled in some back-

ground on Soviet reactions during and following our Moscow

meetings and discussed some possible terms for future SALT

negotiations.

I had dinner with Giorgi A. Arbatov, Director of the Institute on

USA and Canada, on April 10. His account of the reaction in Moscow to

our meetings largely confirmed information received from other

sources, but in some respects went further.

The main elements of a common reaction of anger and puzzle-

ment, Arbatov said, were:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

1. Disbelief that the US would cast aside the Vladivostok + January

terms2 that had been reached with so much difficulty on their side. He

said they kept waiting until the third day of the meetings to see

whether “Vance had not brought something more.”

2. What loomed largest in the comprehensive proposal was the

proposed cut in their ICBM force, which seemed transparently one-

sided in its effect. If the intention was to encourage a shift to a more

stable sea-based force on both sides, this could have been understood if

we had not tried to accomplish it so fast.

3. From the Soviet point of view, the absence of proposals for

ground and sea based cruise missiles seemed cavalier, and not even in

the US interests, taking into account the situation that would exist in a

few years in the absence of such limitations.

4. Brezhnev felt he had gone to great length to explain candidly the

Backfire limitations and was angered that his efforts seemed to be

ignored.

5. The Soviet intention had been to reject the two US proposals, not

to close off negotiations or to create a crisis in Soviet-American rela-

tions, but they felt the President’s press statements immediately after

the meetings’ close3 seemed to suggest that the US proposals had been

deliberately intended to evoke a Soviet rejection for propaganda pur-

poses. These statements contributed to Soviet uncertainties about the

intentions of the US Administration. Background factors, he said, were

the human rights campaign and the request for funds for VOA and

Radio Liberty timed to coincide with the beginning of the Moscow

talks.

Arbatov said he and his colleagues had debated two main theories

about US intentions:

1. That the President may have genuinely wanted a substantial

agreement, but because of inexperience tried to move too fast and ig-

nored the logical starting point of the discussion as of January 1976, and

may have been encouraged in this by people who did not want an

agreement; or

2. That the President wished to produce a Soviet rejection that

would justify further US military buildup and a general return to a con-

frontation relationship.

In discussing possible ground for future negotiations, Arbatov

thought some elements of the US comprehensive proposal could be ac-

January–May 1977

cepted, if the negotiations started from Vladivostok + January. As long

as cruise limitations, ground and sea based, along with air launched,

were included, he thought the Soviet Union could accept some reduc-

tions in the aggregates. He thought it possible that some parts of the

comprehensive plan could be accepted in principle (on the Vladivostok

model) at the time of the signing of SALT II, and other parts could be

accepted for negotiation in SALT III. Speaking personally, he thought

the Soviet side might consider limitations on flight testing, although

with different numbers, and might be willing to consider limitation on

mobile launchers, although he said some Soviet advisors thought mo-

biles could be stabilizing and could be made verifiable. (He added that

they had not been inclined to consider separate elements of the compre-

hensive proposal at Moscow because they understood it was being pre-

sented as an integral package.)

With regard to procedure for the next steps, he was concerned that

the May meeting with Gromyko was not the best forum, since people

who knew more about SALT details needed to be involved, but he

thought the process could at least be started through Dobrynin. He

hoped the US would take the initiative and he thought it unlikely that

the Soviet Union could or would.

He expressed personal regret that the circumstances were such

that a warmer reception could not have been given to the Secretary,

who was held in general high regard.

Arbatov will make what he describes as a “dull speech” at MIT this

week, and will come to Washington April 16 for two weeks, during

which period he mainly wishes to form a judgment about the inten-

tions of the Administration.

27.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin

The Vice President

Secretary Vance

Dr. Brzezinski

Robert Hunter (NSC Notetaker)

The meeting began with an exchange of pleasantries concerning

the Ambassador’s trip to Moscow.

The President said he was looking forward to the next few months,

and hoped that the two sides could work out difficulties on SALT. He

had been disappointed at the Soviet reaction to the US proposal. We

had gotten together our position, and put it forward for Soviet reaction.

He hoped he would not be permanently disappointed. He felt that with

over a month’s work, with the exchange of letters with Brezhnev, and

the Secretary’s talks with the Ambassador3—in which the US had put

forward its position—it was hard to understand Soviet concerns, ex-

pressed both publicly by Gromyko and also in their abrupt and sur-

prising rejection of the U.S. proposal.

The Ambassador asked if the President was surprised by the Gro-

myko press conference.

The President joked that it was Gromyko’s first in a long time. Do-

brynin joked that he was just following the trend in the US Administra-

tion, and the President countered that that would be great.

The Ambassador said that it was important (at SALT) to begin with

something.

The President asked what we should do now. Discussions would

continue in May in Geneva between Secretary Vance and Gromyko. We

January–May 1977

had gone back and assessed the relative strength of the two nations,

from our viewpoint, in 1985. We felt that our proposal was equitable,

but we couldn’t know Soviet plans. Where should we go from here? If

we relegate the matter to technicians, there will be no progress. We are

not in a great hurry, but we do want progress.

The Ambassador said that when there was a framework for nego-

tiating, then experience shows that it is necessary to agree at the

President’s level—or the Secretary’s—otherwise there would be no

agreement.

The President asked if it would be all right at the level of Secretary

Vance.

The Ambassador said that the decision ultimately rests with the

President. In the Soviet Union, it is Brezhnev. As long as the decision is

at the top level, working through the Secretary’s level would be all

right. Though he (Dobrynin) could pass comments back and forth to

Brezhnev, as before.

The President asked whether Brezhnev is considering making other

proposals, other than seeking agreement on the basis of ratifying Vladi-

vostok agreement.

The Ambassador replied that Brezhnev is waiting for new ideas

from the President. He had pointed this out in his letter, he waits to see

if we have changes (?) to the Vladivostok agreement. He wants an

agreement. Dobrynin is 100% sure of that. But what basis should it be

on? The Soviet Union did not feel capable of accepting the comprehen-

sive proposal as the basis for agreement. It was so different from what

had been agreed and negotiated for more than two years. This was a

matter of deep conviction, that after that something new should not just

be brought up.

The President said we had proposed two options, one of which (the

second one) was very close to Vladivostok.

The Ambassador said that it put cruise missiles aside altogether. He

understood that the US is for reductions, but SALT is about “Limita-

tions”. The second US proposal would permit cruise missiles to go un-

checked. The US proposed to permit this fourth dimension to be devel-

oped without checks. How could this be explained to the Soviet

people?—that here was a wonderful SALT II agreement, but it per-

mitted a new strategic system? What kind of agreement would that be?

The President asked if Brezhnev did not consider our second pro-

posal worthy of discussion.

The Ambassador said that if cruise missiles were ignored in it, then it

was not. They had never decided to let cruise missiles go unchecked.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The President said there seemed to be a difference of opinion be-

tween Soviet negotiators and Secretary Kissinger. Kissinger said that

cruise missiles were never discussed at Vladivostok. Subsequently

there had been talks on it, but there had never been an agreement

shared by both sides.

The Ambassador replied that a green light had never been given to

cruise missiles at Vladivostok. The President agreed. The Ambassador

continued that there was already agreement on ALCMs, which if on

bombers would mean that the bombers would be counted under the

The President said, assuming that negotiations went forward on the

second US proposal, we would have no objection to negotiating with

cruise missiles involved, and with (the?) assurances from Brezhnev on

Backfire. Then we could both go on to ratify the agreement. Would the

Ambassador be frank, and tell what position the Soviet Union would

take on lower levels as goals for later. He would be happy to have a

letter from Brezhnev saying that here are some divisions of numbers

with regard to submarines, ICBMs, bombers, and MIRVed missiles, for

1985 or for 1982. This would be welcome as a basis for negotiations.

What bothered the President was the position and attitude taken by the

Soviet government. It has made no proposals. He would welcome

some as a basis for negotiating.

The Ambassador answered that there was a Soviet proverb about

taking the bird one has, instead of looking for another in the sky. There

had been three years of negotiating on SALT II. The small differences

that still existed were less than those in the new US proposal (i.e. com-

prehensive proposal). It would take years to negotiate. Inside the Soviet

Union there would be real problems. He could state definitively that

there would be no agreement on that basis this year; the issues were

simply too complex. It was important to finish first things first. When

January–May 1977

October comes, it should be possible to reach agreement: ALCMs had

been done, land and sea-based cruise missiles could be deferred to

SALT III provided there were agreement not to test them. And mobile

missiles could be put in or left out. The Soviet Union is prepared to go

forward on this basis.

He continued that this agreement would be worthwhile now. On

the idea of levels of weapons and MIRVs, there could be a declaration.

Brezhnev would be willing to sign one, or this could be done in any

other way that the President would decide with Brezhnev: to the effect

that negotiations would begin immediately (after SALT II) on lower

levels. It could say now that reductions agreed in SALT III could go into

effect in SALT II. They were already (set?) to go down, though not im-

mediately to 1800. To some people in the Soviet Union, that proposal

seemed suspicious. The cuts would be too deep into the Soviet forces,

but little for the United States. There were too many questions. The po-

litical atmosphere between the two countries was not as good as he

wanted to have in the future. If that went unresolved, it could lead to

other difficulties.

There had been nearly three years of negotiating on SALT II, and it

was 90% or so completed. So let’s discuss the two or three issues that

are left. The Soviet Union is prepared to include a statement, regarding

negotiations of actual reductions, which could take place in the time pe-

riod of SALT II.

Secretary Vance asked if it could be said under the SALT II agree-

ment that numbers would be less than 2400 (missiles and bombers) and

this (reductions) couldn’t be done if the US got an advantage.

The President indicated that it was not our intention to do that. The

Ambassador said it looked that way to the Soviet Union. The President

said he understood that that was their reaction. But he hoped that if

they saw something that they thought was not equitable, they would

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

proposal they might want to go up to 550—maybe they would want to

go to 1000, though we hoped not.

He hoped they would be willing to accept the 1800 level (?). We

were not trying to get an unfair position, after the stability point were

reached. He had no objection to negotiating reductions in two stages.

The Ambassador asked what the President meant. Finishing SALT

II, followed by the reductions in SALT III (as discussed)? The President

agreed. He said we would set down, after talking with them, what we

think we could accept. Any why not, before either of us tests missiles,

let one another know about it? This doesn’t need to be a complicated

matter; the Soviet Union could define the limits. If there were some

missiles that would be launched in the Soviet Union and come down

there, they might not want to have us know about them. Our society is

more open.

Secretary Vance said he would provide a memo on this.

The President continued that we would list things we are interested

on negotiating in SALT II. If Brezhnev doesn’t want them, he can cross

them out. We should then go on with as many issues as possible that

are not controversial. This is our idea for SALT II. He would welcome,

if they agree, including what is possible immediately, or to go to SALT

III for reductions.

The Ambassador said that this was in the Brezhnev letter. The Presi-

dent said he did not question that. He had put in a lot of time on this

issue.

The Ambassador said that the first US proposal had seemed

one-sided, a matter of politics and propaganda. Why, they asked in

Moscow, had the United States put in its (first) proposal? He had been

asked to explain. The leaders in Moscow had been unanimous on re-

jecting this proposal, since it was so one-sided. The Soviet point on this

had been so clear, why had the United States laid this proposal before

them?

The President said that if the proposal appeared one-sided, it was

inadvertant. We had tried to estimate their programs for SS–17s, 18s,

and 19s. We thought they were shifting to the modern large ballistic

missiles. We have 550 Minuteman IIIs, and thought they might want

that figure for (MIRVs?). We used our best judgment of what the Soviet

Union would want. There was no desire to put it at a disadvantage. The

President was not about to waste two months of his life on that kind of

approach.

January–May 1977

Fishing

The President then raised the issue of Soviet fishing boats. He said

that he had tried to wait before acting, and at first only citations were

issued. Now it was necessary to enforce the law. He asked the Soviet

government’s help in stopping these violations.

The Ambassador said that the first incident happened when he was

out of the country. But the instructions given by the Soviet government

to the fishing boat captains had been to obey the law and the agreement

the Soviet Union had with the United States. Two ships had been

seized. Maybe they were in violation, maybe not—he did not know,

though his consul in Boston would report. One of the boats is a refriger-

ator ship—and is not large—he hoped that it could be let go.

The President said he had no authority to release any boats. The

issue was with the courts, and it would not be proper for him to inter-

fere. He had some latitude when they were at sea, but not after they had

been seized.

The Ambassador said he understood. The State Department had

raised this yesterday. They were ready to pay (?). He could assure the

President there would be no excuses, and that they would fulfill their

obligations. He was concerned, however, about all the unfriendly talk

in the United States.

The President suggested that the Soviet government put out a state-

ment, indicating what the instructions to the captains had been. This

might help.

The Ambassador said why not? He would ask. Secretary Vance

added that a third boat had been seized. Dr. Brzezinski added that these

were being treated on an individual basis; it was not part of any con-

flict, and this had been told to the press.

SOVIET COMMENTS

The President introduced the subject of commentary in the Soviet

press. He indicated that in the first month of his Administration, the So-

viet press had been reticent about personal attacks against him. That

had changed, and he wanted to raise it—though these attacks did not

hurt him. He was careful not to say anything about Brezhnev that was

not complimentary. If their earlier attitude had changed, he wanted to

help restore it, and create an atmosphere here of a desire for friendship

with the Soviet Union.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Ambassador said he understood, and asked if he could be

undiplomatic. The President joked that he hoped Dobrynin would not

be too undiplomatic. The Ambassador continued that the psychological

atmosphere had become bad—because of initiatives on the part of the

United States. Two or three years ago—and this had nothing to do with

personalities—there had been a sense in the Soviet Union that relations

were improving, and this feeling had become quite strong. Now this

was not the case.

The President said he would try to change that.

The Ambassador continued that if the improvement of atmosphere

were mutual, it would be good. They had been impressed that this Ad-

ministration—though not deliberately, but for some reasons—had

been trying to push the Soviet Union, and had been engaging in

anti-Soviet propaganda. This was the impression they had reluctantly

come to. In November and December, the Soviet press had been posi-

tive. Then some issues—and some actions in the White House—had

created a bad impression, as though we were starting psychological

warfare (not ideological struggle, which was good). This had led to a

spoiling of the atmosphere. The atmosphere in the Soviet Union was

strained with regard to the United States. He could say this was some-

thing to be worked on together; they are prepared to move their half of

the way.

The President said that we should do what we can, on both sides.

SALT

The Ambassador returned the conversation to SALT. He summa-

rized that the US should be prepared to look at the Vladivostok Agree-

ment as it is, with the levels as they were agreed, with cruise missiles

subject to negotiation in SALT II. Therefore, this would be the number

two US proposal, with cruise missiles.

The President said that we would prepare a draft on it, including

what we wanted to say on this. Secretary Vance said it should be in-

formal, sort of thinking out loud.

The Ambassador said it was clear that they did not want to talk

about the comprehensive US proposal. Both would be talking about

Vladivostok, though each side could call it what it wanted. The only

difference is on cruise missiles. On mobile missiles, that could be nego-

tiated—and could be prohibited or counted. The real issues that are left

are cruise missiles: with ALCMs, there was a preliminary under-

standing. Sea and land-based cruise missiles were left.

Secretary Vance said that we would think out other issues. The Presi-

dent said that this was a good start, and that the Secretary would pro-

vide our views (?).

January–May 1977

The Ambassador said it would be good to have them before the

meeting with Gromyko, instead of trying to do it in two days in

Geneva.

The President said it would be helpful if the Soviet Union would let

us have a picture—in general terms, not a negotiating position yet—of

what their thinking might be on the lowest levels of nuclear forces they

could accept for 1982 or 1985.

The Ambassador suggested that this would be difficult, and that ne-

gotiations should go forward for a while first; the President agreed. The

Ambassador said it would be better to get a feeling that something was

going to come out of the current round, then it would be all right to pro-

vide the thinking the President had suggested.

The President said that just going on to ratify Vladivostok, on the

basis of ideas worked out by Kissinger, wouldn’t be very much. The

Ambassador said it was something. The President agreed, but said that

we really wanted to go farther. We need an understanding that

Brezhnev will help us to get lower levels. The Ambassador said that was

no obstacle, and the President said that would be helpful.

The Ambassador repeated that we would be moving on something.

Working in parallel would be acceptable. They couldn’t deceive the

United States: if a treaty was no good, the United States would not ne-

gotiate it. Therefore, the Soviet Union was also interested in moving

towards greater security which would be better than nothing. And a

treaty would have to be measured against each other’s views.

The two sides need a minimum (?) psychological understanding of

each other. If we have something, we can then build little by little.

The President asked how much reductions in SALT II from the 2400

and 1320 levels would they consider. The Ambassador said he couldn’t

say. The President asked whether it could be 10 or 15%. The Ambassador

urged the President not to press on this point. The President asked the

Ambassador to speak personally, not as an official of the Soviet Union.

The Ambassador replied that he didn’t know.

The President asked how far down, in their view, would be in the

mutual advantage of both sides. Was 1800 too low?

The Ambassador replied that it was, in 1985 (?) It seemed that the

United States was trying to freeze Soviet forces, or get them to cut their

heavy missiles. But they were prepared to look into a total package (?).

The President asked if there could be some reductions in SALT II?

The Ambassador replied that Brezhnev was ready to put in a statement

in SALT II, within a treaty.

Dr. Brzezinski mentioned having targets for reductions. The Ambas-

sador replied that a treaty could provide for SALT II implementation of

SALT III agreements. Dr. Brzezinski asked if in the summer there could

28.

Editorial Note

Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Secretary of State

the Middle East. Four of the five meetings addressed SALT and espe-

cially how the United States and Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

could reach an agreement despite differing goals and objectives fol-

lowing the Vladivostok negotiations. For a summary of those meetings,

Document 167.

June–December 1977

29.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, June 9, 1977

30.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

8749. For the Secretary from Ambassador. Subject: Appointment

With Brezhnev.

1. Upon arrival in Moscow I requested appointment with

Brezhnev to deliver message from President. We reminded Foreign

31.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Anatoliy Dobrynin, Ambassador of the Soviet Union

initiative. The luncheon was a compromise-picnic: I provided the

White House meal and he provided vodka and caviar, a bargain that I

felt was equitable to both sides.

After usual preliminaries, we agreed that we would not talk about

specific issues in any negotiating fashion but would simply discuss in

broad terms the state of U.S.-Soviet relations. He asked me for my

opinion and in my opening comments, I essentially suggested the

following:

1. Our relationship is approaching a key phase in regards to some

central issues, notably SALT, and, in some measure also, the Middle

East. On SALT, I expressed concern that the pace of negotiations may

not be rapid enough and that we may be faced by early fall with a situa-

tion which at least our publics will interpret as involving a crisis. This

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

could have an inhibiting effect on further progress. I stressed to him

that this concern was not derived from any feeling that our public

opinion or that our Congress would not support the U.S. negotiating

position; rather it was derived from my concern that we do not put our-

selves into a position in which neither side has sufficient flexibility to

conclude an effective agreement.

Secondly, in regards to the foregoing, I also suggested that the

Middle East is coming to a phase in which we will need to be very sen-

sitive to each other’s concerns. The Soviets have to realize that while

they will need to be engaged in any formal negotiating process, at this

stage it is in everyone’s interest—including the Soviets’—for the United

States to play a special role in encouraging the parties towards genuine

negotiations.

In addition to these two key issues, I commented that other issues

are surfacing as potential sources of difficulty: I noted that develop-

ments in Africa are such that they may well be interpreted in signifi-

cantly different ways by Washington and Moscow, and that Soviet ac-

tions are likely to generate increasing anxiety here. I noted that the

situation in Eastern Europe could conceivably become unstable if eco-

nomic difficulties in one or another East European country were to be-

come linked with political difficulties. This could precipitate some

eruptions, the consequences of which could also adversely affect the

U.S.-Soviet relationship. I also noted that at this stage it was too early

for us to judge how genuinely interested the Soviets were in reaching

an agreement on the CTB and the Indian Ocean, and that progress on

these issues would be desirable. Finally, I noted that there are also spe-

cific irritants to be taken into account: The Toth incident had a negative

impact on U.S. public opinion, and so do the continued Soviet press at-

tacks on the President personally, the Soviet crackdown on the dissi-

dents, and—last but not least—the failure of Brezhnev to receive Am-

bassador Toon, who was carrying a friendly message to Brezhnev,

especially in view of the fact that Dobrynin has already twice seen (and

for lengthy sessions) the U.S. President.

In the light of the foregoing, I noted that we still hope very much

that a Carter-Brezhnev meeting can be held, and that it can be held in

an atmosphere which would be conducive to further progress in

U.S.-Soviet relations. Accordingly, it might be important to reflect on

ways which can be helfpul to move SALT forward, to help contain

very perplexed about what it is that the Carter Administration is trying

to do. He stated that Brezhnev recently asked him to provide one con-

crete example of the new Administration’s willingness to improve

U.S.-Soviet relations and that Dobrynin was at a loss as to how to an-

swer. Dobrynin specifically mentioned a number of examples which in

his view were counterproductive: the negative decision on the Cyber

computer; the publicity given to new weapons systems which seem to

be designed to put the Soviet Union under pressure; the President’s use

of the word “aggressively” when the President recently spoke of the

U.S. desire to pursue policies designed to diminish Soviet influence in

certain friendly countries.

Dobrynin stated that all of the foregoing is creating the impression

in Moscow that we are more interested in competition than in coopera-

tion and that this necessarily affects the Soviet attitude on specific

issues. In addition to the foregoing, he noted the following minor spe-

cific points, which strike me as worthy of note:

a. He said he was surprised that lower level State Department offi-

cials seem to be familiar with the fact as well as with the content of the

President’s correspondence with Brezhnev;

b. That U.S. delegations to recent bilateral U.S.-Soviet talks on nu-

clear and other issues did not seem to be well prepared and not ready

to negotiate in detail.

Turning to SALT, Dobrynin emphasized that the Soviet position is

that the United States is deliberately attempting to significantly affect

the central component of the Soviet nuclear force, namely ground-

based missiles. This he feels is unequal and one-sided. He also stressed

that the Soviet Union made a deliberate bow to the President by pro-

posing recently that both sides reduce their arsenals to 2250; he empha-

sized this point, stressing that this had not been the Soviet intention but

that it was a goodwill gesture aimed at the President personally.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

I stressed to Dobrynin that he should make it clear to his Soviet col-

leagues that there are certain things which the U.S. President can and

cannot control. I cited the example of the Concorde as something which

foreigners find very difficult to comprehend, and I emphasized that it

is important for him to stress to Brezhnev that the Congressional de-

fense budget process, and statements by legislators, are not under exec-

utive control in this country. Moreover, I indicated to him that the Pres-

ident’s desire to decrease nuclear weaponry is a very genuine one, and

that it had been counterproductive for the Soviet side to misconstrue it

as an attempt to gain a unilateral advantage. He acknowledged this

point and stated that he was trying to convince his colleagues back

home of this fact.

He became somewhat indignant when I cited to him the fact that

some Soviet spokesmen had spoken of deeper cuts than those proposed

by Gromyko, involving at least 10%. He spoke with some vehemence to

the effect that we make a mistake in taking seriously Soviet academi-

cians who pretend to speak for the top Soviet leadership. He pointed

out that the most prominent one of them has seen Brezhnev only once a

year and that it is really a figment of our own imaginations to consider

them as serious spokesmen for the Soviet government. He noted, for

example, that the Soviet academic who publicly proposed in Moscow a

mutual 10% cut was reprimanded and will not make such proposals

again.

While generally concerned with the nature of the U.S.-Soviet rela-

tionship, he was unwilling to be specific as to what ought to be done

about it. He was rather inclined to press me for my views, which I did

not elaborate beyond those summarized earlier. He agreed that it might

be useful to try to see whether a more concerted effort could not be

made in SALT in order to make certain that there is more definite

progress by September; that it might be useful to take a closer look at

some of the issues that provoked the greatest degree of sensitivity on

both sides, differentiating between those which cannot be subject to

governmental control and those which perhaps can be ameliorated by

initiatives taken by the leaders; and that more thought ought to be

given to the possibility of a Carter-Brezhnev meeting. We further

agreed that it might be useful to have again a talk focusing not so much

on specific issues but on the larger dimensions of the Soviet-American

relationship, and that he would pursue this subject also in his conversa-

tions with the Secretary of State.

32.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, June 24, 1977

SUBJECT

NSC Weekly Report #18

1. Opinions

The opinion piece this week is written by William Hyland of the

NSC Staff. Hyland, as you know, went with Vance to both Moscow and

Geneva and is probably this government’s top Soviet expert. He argues

that we should be sensitive to the permanent problems confronting the

Soviet Union and that we should not overestimate the significance of

the temporary coolness in US-Soviet relations. It thus presents a some-

what different perspective than the one developed by Shulman2 and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

implies that a steady policy course by the United States would be most

productive.

U.S.-Soviet Relations

It is risky to try to characterize Soviet-American relations at any

given point. In August 1968 at the time of the Czech invasion, it would

have seemed that there would be a sharp deterioration. In fact, there

was little change. In 1972–73 optimistic projections were made, but by

1976 relations were stagnating.

Thus, it is misleading now to characterize relations as caught up in

a “downward spiral.” The relationship is much more of a mix of transi-

tory facts and more basic and permanent elements. Too much of the

current analysis focuses on the transitory, while disregarding the per-

manent problems confronting the USSR.

First, the transitory factors:

—there seems little doubt that the Soviets made a positive judg-

ment about the President [1 line not declassified] He was portrayed as

changing the style but not the substance of his predecessors’ policy and

generally inclined to do business with the Soviet Union. This analysis,

[less than 1 line not declassified] was reflected in the conciliatory tone of

Brezhnev’s speech at Tula on January 18. [6 lines not declassified]

Thus, we are dealing to some extent with a crisis of Soviet expecta-

tions. This may have been aggravated by the fact that Brezhnev person-

ally put himself too far out in front—in conversations with Bill Simon

and Averill Harriman, and in his public speeches. Since Brezhnev was

already vulnerable, over President Ford’s abandonment of “detente,”

he now may be exceptionally defensive about the failure of his relations

with the Carter Administration to proceed along a smoother path.

But this is not a permanent state of affairs. Whatever criticism

Brezhnev has had to endure, it has obviously not affected his power po-

sition. Nor has it necessarily affected his ability to adjust (and his visit

to France represents a rehabilitation of “detente”).

Another temporary factor is the fate of the Soviet leadership. In re-

trospect, we know that the past few months have led to the downfall of

Podgorny, and the consequent strengthening of Brezhnev’s position.

riman, Ambassador to the Soviet Union from 1943 until 1946. Simon had multiple con-

versations with Brezhnev including ones in April 1975 and November 1976; Harriman

spoke with Brezhnev in September and December 1976.

June–December 1977

What we cannot be sure of is how much this internal conflict may have

shaped Soviet policy during the interim. Certainly, if Brezhnev was en-

gaged in a struggle, he might have overreacted to current events. His

behavior since the Central Committee meetings does not suggest a

hardening of his foreign policy line.

The outcome seems to be a temporary confusion. Brezhnev is

reaching out to various visitors—Genscher and Giscard—to establish a

better understanding of Jimmy Carter. This is typical because Brezhnev

tends to personalize relations. So, we can expect that this period, which

could last for some time, will be followed by one in which the main fea-

tures of Soviet policy will be more certain and fixed. And as this confu-

sion is cleared up, it is worth remembering that the Soviets do not have

a free hand. They are constrained by long term trends that affect any So-

viet leader, be it Brezhnev or his successor.

First of all, there is the nightmare of Soviet policy: two front hos-

tility. If the Soviets misjudged the Administration of Jimmy Carter,

they also misjudged the Administration of Hua Kuo-feng. Their frus-

trations have been surfaced in a series of authoritative and harsh at-

tacks on China. The Soviet note of mid-May was the most ominous

threat since the crisis of 1969. This rather significant turn of events has

received less attention in the West because of our preoccupation with

SALT and other matters.

One is forced to conclude, however, that the Soviets now foresee a

period of rising tensions with China. Thus, unless Brezhnev wants to

justify hostility on two fronts, he is compelled to look for ways to soften

the conflict with the West, including with the United States.

Second, there is the SALT problem and its alternative. Despite

harsh words, the Soviets have in fact moved in their substantive posi-

tion, if only slightly. The lapse of the present agreement is more of a

symbol of failure for Brezhnev than for the United States. And, the con-

sequences of a new round of competition cannot be all that attractive to

Brezhnev. A cruise missile race without an agreement is not in the So-

viet interest. Moreover, the United States is on the upswing of the curve

with B–1, Trident I and II, MK–12A and cruise missiles. The Soviets are

on a plateau filling out the deployment of five years ago.

And there is the economic problem. While it is always dangerous

to project Soviet restraint because of their economic dilemma, it may be

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

true for the first time that long-term problems will impinge on foreign

policy decisions. A CIA study still in the works suggests this.

The problem of dissent is a difficult one. The Soviets have applied

varying tactics to neutralize it, but it continues. The most significant

change has been that what used to be an interesting phenomena for So-

viet specialists has gradually emerged as an international issue. This is

reflected in Solzhenitsyn’s stature throughout the world and awarding

of a Nobel prize to Sakharov. The Soviets, always inordinately suspi-

cious, may see the U.S. as engaged in a political offensive, but they are

nevertheless caught up in the dilemma: to repress their dissidents actu-

ally aggravates the problem abroad. It is therefore an interesting fact,

that despite some noisy propaganda, the Soviets have behaved very

cautiously since the round of quick arrests in early February. Tactically,

the Soviets may be seeking a period of quiet.

But the basic fact is that the West in general, and the U.S. in partic-

ular, has the power to greatly aggravate the Soviet dilemma. And it is

this consciousness that, in the end, will bring Brezhnev back to a for-

eign policy of moderation.

Brezhnev also knows better than we do that the situation in

Eastern Europe is not good, and that he may face an explosion in Po-

land. That possibility is the more likely if repression is intensified, but

perhaps less likely if tensions seem to be receding.

One last factor that is the most difficult to take into account is

Brezhnev’s personal situation. It is a reasonable guess that he wishes to

end his career on a high point. The new constitution is a testament of

sorts. Assuming the Presidency goes along with the same syndrome.

But since he is associated with detente, and particularly with SALT,

then it must be agonizing for him to contemplate that this status as a

“peace champion” will elude him in his relations with the United

States. He is a hardened old veteran, and could absorb this setback, but

it is a good bet that he is obsessed with restoring “detente” by the 60th

Bolshevik Anniversary this November.

In sum, many of the permanent factors seem to point to an even-

tual turn in Soviet policy back toward something resembling “detente”.

Obviously, as pointed out by Marshal Shulman, the U.S. could inadver-

tently or deliberately forestall such a turn. But we have the capabilities,

June–December 1977

provided that we carefully monitor each major issue (SALT, CTB, In-

dian Ocean, CSCE, the Middle East, and human rights), to shape So-

viet policy at a time of uncertainty. We still have most of the high cards.

[Omitted here is information on the Quadripartite Meeting on

Conventional Arms Restraint.]

US–USSR Working Group on Proliferation

The first session of the US–USSR working group on proliferation

was recently held in Washington. Morokhov, who led the Soviet dele-

gation, had an hour long opening statement full of substance, in-

cluding: (1) they agree, without reservation, to participate in our

INFCE program (fuel cycle evaluation); (2) expansion of NPT member-

ship should be our most important goal, and we should concentrate on

Brazil, Argentina, Spain, South Africa, Israel and South Korea (we came

back at them with Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam); (3) a proposal for a

joint US–USSR statement signed “at the highest level” outlining nine

points for a “universal non-proliferation regime.” In response to a point

we raised, they said that they were reconsidering their position on

signing the Treaty of Tlatelolco13 but that it was difficult for them. With

regard to India, they agreed that the first step should be to get them to

agree to full scope safeguards and they would exercise their influence

in that direction. All in all, a very encouraging beginning to these

exchanges.

Initial Soviet Views on Indian Ocean Arms Limitations.

In the first two meetings of the US–USSR working group on arms

limitations, the Soviets focused their approach on three subjects:

—Elimination of “foreign” military bases, both the US bases and

those of US allies; the Soviets stated that neither they nor their allies

have bases. They do not, therefore, define Berbera as a base. The Soviets

said that bases are “the key issue.”

—Reciprocal reduction of military activities—not only freezing the

present level but decreasing it, as well as a total prohibition on nuclear-

powered ballistic missile submarines and on aircraft carriers.

—The definition of the area: the Soviets argued that a strict geo-

graphic definition is not proper because the US has permanent bases in

adjacent areas while Soviet home ports are thousands of miles away.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Soviets also proposed an exchange of data on military pres-

ence, including specifically ship-days and ton-days; said the talks are

bilateral but that the forces and bases of allied countries must be taken

into account; and pointed out the importance of the Indian Ocean to So-

viet interests as the only year-round sea route connecting the European

to the Far Eastern USSR.

Brezhnev in Paris

You will soon be receiving from Cy a report on the conversations

between Brezhnev and Giscard. Here is a report on his behavior in

Paris. According to our embassy:

“Brezhnev’s brusque personal behavior was reflected, in first in-

stance, in frequent abrupt changes of visit’s protocol at his request.

Tete-a-tete meetings which were foreseen were peremptorily trans-

formed into large plenaries where Brezhnev was not at pains to give

Giscard equal time. Similarly, Soviet agreement to sudden Brezhnev

visit at City Hall to see Chirac was hardly gesture likely to please Gis-

card. Brusqueness also marked certain substantive exchanges. Finally,

the curious manners of France’s latest guest were brought home to

public by Brezhnev’s now widely publicized refusal to accept the

second car—the Matra Rancho—which Giscard had given him because

it was painted green! Brezhnev wanted it blue! Car was rushed back to

factory and was repainted. This capriciousness made an impression.”

[Omitted here is information on West Bank attitudes.]

33.

Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, June 27, 1977

SUBJECT

Brezhnev’s Health

At the Political Directors’ meeting last Wednesday, both de La-

boulaye and Andreani3 commented at length on Brezhnev’s health

(they both sat in on two meetings and the official functions), and the

Elysee provided Embassy Paris with further details.

Their views take the Brezhnev health situation farther than our

people reported from the Vance Moscow trip.

Brezhnev was “painted”—i.e., heavily made up—and seemed to

be wearing a corset. He had trouble enunciating, and particular diffi-

culty at the ends of sentences. He had trouble following the discussion,

and needed constant prompting from Gromyko, who seemed to be “in

control.” There was one exchange on Berlin where Brezhnev seemed

bewildered about the facts (though an alternative interpretation held

that the Russians were confusing the facts—about East German en-

croachment in West Berlin—to tease the French). He acted as though he

had never heard of Djibouti.

At the official dinner, Brezhnev had the toasts at the beginning, ate

and drank nothing, and departed at 10:05. He walked out “unseeing”,

and stopped only to say hello to his grandson.

The French were told that the hour’s delay in the start of the final

meeting for an hour was due to Brezhnev’s lengthy daily treatments on

his jaw, and his desire not to get up too early.

Throughout, Brezhnev spoke almost entirely in generalities, and

stayed away from details.

(Another observation, which Bill Hyland says is not out of the or-

dinary: during the reading of his long speech in the first meeting,

Brezhnev kept making asides to Gromyko in Russian that “I really be-

lieve in this” or “yes, disarmament, disarmament;” and the French seri-

ously wondered whether he had read the statement before giving it.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

De Laboulaye’s summary: we might conclude that the succession

process has already begun.

Other Items:

You have probably seen reporting that Brezhnev expanded the

first meeting at the last moment, to include the two retinues; cancelled

the second tete-a-tete; and had one of the cars given him sent back to be

repainted blue.

The French were puzzled by this slip-shod performance in contrast

to the business-like preparatory visit of de Guiringaud4 to Moscow. At

that meeting the French rejected a Soviet draft on detente, and read out

an alternative. Gromyko noted some places in the document as it was

being read, then instantly accepted it as the basic text. It changed little

in negotiation.

The consensus in Paris is that Marchais5 was neither helped nor

hurt very much by not seeing Brezhnev—and if anything he was

helped slightly, in terms of his “independence” from Moscow. The

Brezhnev-Chirac meeting was put on at the last minute, following a

further round of pettiness on the part of both Giscard and Chirac, who

no longer bother to disguise their mutual distaste (a point to be borne in

mind if the President decides to go to France in the autumn).

The Elysee wanted us to know that Giscard had used the Presi-

dent’s suggestions in his presentation to Brezhnev at the second

meeting (which he made tougher than he would have otherwise, in re-

sponse to Brezhnev’s monopolizing the first meeting).

June–December 1977

34.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

9564. For the Secretary from Toon. Subject: Appointment With

Brezhnev.

1. Following are principal points made by Brezhnev in his pre-

pared statement to me at 100-minute meeting in Kremlin this morning:

A. While Geneva meeting2 had been useful Soviet side was disap-

pointed at lack of progress in resolution substantive differences on

SALT—which in Soviet view largely the fault of US which continued

insist on one-sided approach;

B. US human rights campaign and particularly President’s report

to the Congress on CSCE compliance3 condemned as blatant interfer-

ence in Soviet internal affairs;

C. Progress on removal of trade barriers stymied;

D. Despite Soviet understanding that Washington discussions re

possible summit meeting would at US insistence remain confiden-

tial, matter had been unilaterally publicized, much to Brezhnev’s

annoyance;

E. Although Vance-Gromyko agreements on desirability of recon-

vening Geneva Conference this year was step forward, movement now

seems bogged down.

2. While I will be sending full report later in day4 I thought that

you and the President would wish to have this briefest of summaries

soonest, particularly in view of fact that news of my meeting with

Brezhnev is already on tickers. Brezhnev incidentally seemed in good

form and while his speech was somewhat slurred it was intelligible. He

did not visibly tire during our extended meeting and his attention span

seemed normal.

Toon

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

35.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

9580. For the Secretary from Toon. Subject: Appointment With

Brezhnev.

1. Following is my translation of letter for President handed me by

Brezhnev at meeting in Kremlin this morning lasting one hour and

forty minutes on which full report will be cabled soonest:2

Begin text.

Esteemed Mr. President:

I have received your letter conveyed by the American Ambassador

to Moscow3 and for my part I would like to express the following

thoughts.

I think that the conversations between the Minister of Foreign Af-

fairs of the USSR and the Secretary of State of the USA in May of this

year in Geneva4 were in fact useful and in a practical way a necessary

step toward working out a new agreement on the limitation of strategic

offensive arms.

However, as you yourself note, the differences between the posi-

tions of the sides still remain substantial. In this sense the discussions in

Geneva did not lead to a solution of a number of principal questions.

From our side and in the course of these discussions steps have been

taken which offer a possibility of a way to fair mutually acceptable so-

lutions, but from the American side such equivalent steps up until the

present time have not followed.

Noting the desire to overcome existing obstacles which you ex-

pressed in your letter, I would like to hope that in the development of

this the American side will react in a constructive way to our proposals.

Indeed in the final analysis the conclusion of a new agreement is neces-

sary not only for the Soviet Union. To an equal extent—we are deeply

convinced of this—it is necessary for both of our countries, for both of

our peoples, as well as for all other countries and peoples.

It is possible and necessary to find solutions to the remaining ques-

tions which stand in the path to agreement. For this, as we have several

June–December 1977

times stressed, it is important at the outset to be guided in this matter

by the principle of equality and equal security, to realize an identified

mutually acceptable balance of interests, not trying to extract from the

matter any sort of unilateral advantage. Only in this way is it possible

to prevent a new spiral in the arms race with all the dangerous conse-

quences flowing from this and with the inevitable political and other

costs. It is also clear that any other development of events would re-

move us far from the goal of radical limitation and reduction of arms. I

therefore call upon you once again to weigh the state of affairs with the

conclusion of a new agreement and to apply the necessary efforts for

the resolution of the remaining questions. For our part we as before

wish and we are ready to bring the matter to the speediest working out

of an agreement and its signature.

According to the mutual understanding which we have achieved

we are ready to turn over for further discussion by the delegations in

negotiations at Geneva a number of questions which have become ripe

for this and will give appropriate instructions to our delegation on this

account. The exchange of opinions on questions which will remain un-

resolved, as we have already agreed, will be continued in the course of

meetings between A.A. Gromyko and C. Vance slated for September.

Now with regard to our meeting with you. We have already

brought our considerations on this matter to your attention. Evidently

therefore there is no need to repeat them here. I wish only to confirm

my agreement that this question should be more concretely discussed

by our two ministers in September.

Respectfully,

Moscow, The Kremlin

36.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 8, 1977

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

Marshall D. Shulman,

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Special Consultant

SUMMARY: Dobrynin stressed the need for a quiet period in

US-Soviet relations. SALT was the touchstone for progress in the rela-

tionship, and downgraded other issues as secondary in importance.

Ambassador Dobrynin came to see me at his request, following the

signing ceremony of the US–USSR Science and Technology Agree-

ment. He appeared to have two missions in mind: to review current

US-Soviet relations, and to discuss possible measures for their

improvement.

Administration Intentions

On the first score, Dobrynin quite obviously was occupied with

gathering material to answer queries from Moscow about the President

and his intentions. “Does he really want a SALT treaty, or is he using

the issue for political and propaganda purposes? Does he really want to

improve relations? If so, why does he repeatedly violate our sensitiv-

ities, and particularly, Brezhnev’s?” He added, “I don’t want to make

invidious comparisons, but although Henry [Kissinger] was as strong

an anti-communist as anyone, he understood and observed the civil-

ities of the relationship, whereas it is hard to know whether this Ad-

ministration deliberately violates them, or does so out of inexperience.”

I replied first by affirming that it was my impression that the Presi-

dent was strongly committed to serious arms control negotiations, and

to an improvement in relations. I said that we are also puzzled about

Soviet actions. I cited the negative Soviet reaction to the President’s B–1

decision, and the overreaction to the CSCE monitoring report. On the

June–December 1977

B–1 issue, he said that what caused the negative Soviet reaction was the

way Secretary Brown treated the cruise missile issue. “Why did he have

to say that the US will proceed to develop the 1500-mile air-launched

cruise missile, SALT or no SALT, when this is not an issue in SALT? I

had difficulty in restraining my military attaches from reporting that

SALT was dead.” On the CSCE monitoring report, he said he had re-

ported that the President and the Secretary had made efforts with the

leadership on the Hill to handle the report quietly, but what created the

difficulty in Moscow were the two personal references to Brezhnev in

the report. (COMMENT: This is puzzling, because the references to

Brezhnev are minor and neutral) and because any document signed by

the President is assumed in Moscow to carry his personal views.

Moscow Atmospherics

“You must understand,” he said, “that the atmosphere in Moscow

at the top is as emotionally wrought up as I have ever known it to be. It

is, however, better than it was a month ago, when Brezhnev was close

to saying, ‘the hell with them, we’ll go our own way without them!’”

He said that there had been a strong debate in Moscow about

whether to send Patolichev on his recent visit to Washington, and that

his own cabled recommendation had swung the decision. “I told them

that there could be no movement on the trade issue right now, but that

the visit could be useful anyway in improving the atmosphere.”

A Quiet Period

In turning to the future, he urged that we try for a month or two of

quiet relations, damping down the public statements and counterstate-

ments (he emphasized that all the Soviet statements had been reactions

to things said in this country) to let the feelings in Moscow subside. He

urged us not to take TASS statements as necessarily representing the

views of the Soviet leadership.

The Summit

He thought the prospects for a summit meeting were good, that

both sides wanted it, and expressed personal conviction that it would

be useful. He reiterated the familiar Soviet position that Brezhnev

would want documents (presumably SALT-related) to sign at a

summit. He hoped that he could have a tete-a-tete with the President

before a summit, to give him a feeling for Brezhnev’s personality and

ensure that the two men bring a reasonably light touch to the discus-

sion of their differences.

Future Moves

I asked what measures he thought the two countries could take

now that would have a useful effect. He tended to dismiss the CTB and

37.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

159579. For the Ambassador: White House for Brzezinski. Subject:

Comments on Brezhnev’s Health, and Questions for Ambassador

Toon. Ref: (A) Moscow 9621.

1. We very much appreciate the detail of ref report. Brezhnev was

apparently in better form during your visit than on any previously re-

ported visit over the past 4 months. The overall pattern remains one of

ups and downs, although recent reporting strongly suggests a signifi-

cant net decline during 1977. There have been more profound and fre-

June–December 1977

quent “downs”, during which Brezhnev on occasion has been de-

scribed as “in a daze” and out of touch with his surroundings. On other

occasions he has been very mechanical in his presentations, and ap-

peared to be heavily dependent on those around him in getting

through his audiences.

2. The reported health pattern is strongly suggestive of an aging in-

dividual whose reserve strength is essentially depleted, and who there-

fore tolerates very poorly the recurrent onslaughts of a host of medical

ailments. Occurring alone, or in a younger stronger individual, such

ailments would usually not lead to the erratic performance pattern ap-

parent in Brezhnev’s case. Ultimately, however, and as is apparently

the case with Brezhnev, even non-life threatening conditions can lead

to rather profound short-term functional incapacitation. Brezhnev

probably continues to be plagued with intermittent facial neuralgia

which may now be associated with more prolonged episodes of severe

pain requiring strong medications for control. Recent reporting also

raises the possibility that he has early pulmonary problems. These are

all in addition to his more well known and long standing problems—

most notably heart disease.

3. The prognosis associated with this view of Brezhnev’s health is

that it remains statistically unlikely that he will suffer a fatal episode

within the next year or so. His performance, however, will continue to

be as uneven—occasionally alarmingly so—as it has been this past

spring. His multiple health problems will continue to require con-

tinuous treatment. He will require considerable rest, but following ex-

tended breaks will probably appear vigorous and to be in relatively

good health. Sustained periods without a break will probably lead to a

rapid—but reversible—decline in his performance to the marginal

levels reported several times this spring. This general pattern is ex-

pected to continue, with a slow overall decline, for the next few years or

until some acute episode such as a heart attack or stroke proves fatal or

totally incapacitating.

4. Medical analysts would appreciate your observations on several

points related to recent collateral reporting: (A). Did Brezhnev show

any signs of a pulmonary problem, such as labored or deep breathing,

cough, expectoration, etc.? (B). Did he eat or drink anything during the

one hour forty minute session? (C). What time of the day was the

meeting? (D). Was there any suggestion of a tremor in Brezhnev’s

hands? Particularly, we are interested in a tremor that gives the appear-

ance of rapidly rolling a small pill between the thumb and index finger

(associated with Parkinson’s disease). (E). Brezhnev was recently re-

ported to be wearing make-up. Was any of this in evidence? Where?

Vance

38.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale

Washington, July 19, 1977

SUBJECT

Origins of Soviet Campaign Against Dissidents

Attached is a memorandum prepared by CIA/INR at our request

on the origins of the current soviet campaign against dissidents. It is a

good job, although the statement on page 7 that the current campaign is

“the toughest of the decade” is overstated.

Attachment

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Directorate of

Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, July 15, 1977

The Evolution of Soviet Reaction to Dissent

Summary

After the signing of the Helsinki accords, several developments

converged to heighten the concern of Soviet authorities about dissent in

their society.

—The human rights provisions of Basket III4 became a rallying

point for Soviet and East European dissidents.

—The Eurocommunists became much more critical of Soviet in-

ternal repression.

—Persistent food shortages in the Soviet Union resulted in isolated

instances of active protest on a mass level.

The current crackdown against dissidents is the end-product of a

gradual growth in the Soviet regime’s anxiety over these related pres-

sures. The initiation of the crackdown, although not its present scope,

June–December 1977

predates the change in US administrations. The initial impulse for it

was probably the desire to silence the dissidents before the Belgrade re-

view conference. The new US administration’s public defense of So-

viet dissidents apparently did reinforce and intensify Soviet anxieties.

The net effect was to impel the leadership increasingly to conclude that

harsher measures against dissidents were required.

The current campaign against dissidents is in part related to irrita-

tion over the lack of progress in other areas of US-Soviet relations, as

well as to the Soviets’ desire to keep dissent closely controlled during

the Belgrade conference. At the same time, the more defensive and

pugnacious tone of Soviet policy, both externally and internally, may

also reflect aggravated tensions within the Soviet leadership. Recent

policy difficulties may have strengthened the arguments of those

leaders somewhat less inclined to conciliate the regime’s opponents,

both at home and abroad.

The Evolution of Soviet Reaction to Dissent

When the Soviets signed the CSCE accords in August 1975, they

took a calculated risk that their acceptance of the human rights provi-

sions of Basket III would not create serious internal difficulties for

them. After Helsinki and especially during the last year, however, sev-

eral developments heightened the concern of Soviet authorities about

dissent in their society. This increased anxiety has been gradually

translated into increasingly tough stands on issues of ideology and

social control, and has produced the current crackdown on internal

dissent.

[Omitted here is a chronology of interactions between the Soviet

Government and dissidents, August 1975–July 1977.]

I. The Dissident Problem

A. CSCE: A Rallying Point for Soviet Dissidents

The human rights provisions of Basket III provided a common

ground for Soviet dissidents with a wide range of views and concerns,

thus raising the specter for the first time in many years of a unified “op-

position.” The CSCE monitoring group, the most important dissident

group to emerge in the Soviet Union since Helsinki, was organized by

physicist Yury Orlov in Moscow in May 1976, and soon sprouted re-

gional branches in the Ukraine, Lithuania, Armenia, Georgia, and Len-

ingrad. These branches were tiny and the degree of actual coordination

that existed between them is not known, but the emergence of a dissi-

dent organization with links throughout the country was unique in re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

cent Soviet history. More important, the CSCE monitoring group, by

espousing the causes of a wide variety of aggrieved religious and na-

tional minorities, established some claim to being the center of a

broader protest movement.

Although this incipient support of religious and national minor-

ities in itself potentially provided a mass base for human rights ac-

tivism, the intellectual dissidents remain estranged from the bulk of the

working class population. Working class discontent, which has ba-

sically economic rather than political objectives, thus did not converge

with intellectual dissent.

B. Food Shortages and Unrest

Nonetheless, official apprehension that such a convergence could

take place has evidently grown since the bad harvest of 1975. Although

consumerism is not a potent political force in the Soviet Union, as it is

in some East European countries, the Soviet population has come to ex-

pect a gradual improvement in the standard of living. The food

shortages caused widespread grumbling, and over the last year and a

half there have been reports and rumors of a number of instances of ac-

tive unrest and protest.

We know that last winter the Soviet leadership was quite worried

about the mood in the country. In early 1977, for example, Foreign Min-

ister Gromyko—who was definitely not speaking for US consump-

tion—privately indicated that the Soviet leadership was “acutely

aware” of countrywide criticism of food shortages.

Although the recent instances of violence, some of them related to

food shortages, were not perpetrated by human rights activists, the So-

viet leadership may not always distinguish clearly between different

sources of protest. Some reporting suggests that Soviet officials may

vaguely sense some connection between intellectual dissent and pop-

ular discontent. According to the report on Gromyko, in early 1977 the

Soviet leadership feared that easing restrictions on dissidents could

abet a trend of criticism in the country that could create an “explosive”

climate.

C. Under Attack From the Eurocommunists

Since early 1976, the Eurocommunists, including the once docile

French Communist Party, became more openly critical of the Soviet

Union than at any time since the aftermath of the invasion of Czecho-

slovakia. The Spanish Party has gone furthest, but the larger French

and Italian parties pose the more serious problem for the Soviets. From

the Soviet perspective, the chief danger implicit in Eurocommunism is

not that it has diminished Soviet influence in West European Commu-

June–December 1977

nist parties, but that it offers a Marxist alternative to the Soviet model in

Eastern Europe, and perhaps ultimately within the Soviet Union itself.

Moscow has thus been upset by Eurocommunist support to dissi-

dents in Eastern Europe and the USSR. Particularly annoying to the So-

viets in this regard was an unprecedented visit in late December of an

Italian Communist delegation to dissident Soviet Marxist Roy Med-

vedev in Moscow. The Italians presented Medvedev with an Italian

edition of one of his books and reportedly asked him to write articles

for an Italian party historical journal.

D. Unrest in Eastern Europe

At the same time, CSCE had a catalytic effect on East European dis-

sent, which became a movement cutting across national borders. Dissi-

dents from different East European countries have reportedly coordi-

nated their activities to a limited degree. Last winter some Soviet

leaders were evidently genuinely alarmed that post-Helsinki condi-

tions were creating an unstable situation in Eastern Europe, especially

in Poland, and to a lesser degree in East Germany and Czechoslovakia.

The growth of unrest in Eastern Europe increased chronic Soviet

fears of a spillover into the Soviet Union itself. Soviet authorities have

always been alert to the danger of a political “virus” from Eastern Eu-

rope spreading into the polyglot borderlands of the Soviet Union,

which have historically been susceptible to influences from that

quarter. The fear of such a domino-effect was evidently a factor in the

Soviet decision to invade Czechoslovakia in 1968.

E. The US Human Rights Initiative

The new US administration’s human rights “campaign,” and espe-

cially the personal involvement of President Carter in public appeals

on behalf of Soviet dissidents, further disturbed Soviet authorities.

Many Soviet officials, already fearful of being put in the dock at Bel-

grade, reportedly regarded the campaign as a deliberate attempt at

subversion by the US. At the same time, US protests about Soviet

repressions temporarily emboldened Soviet dissidents to make more

vigorous protests and to channel their appeals directly to the US

administration.

II. The Soviet Response

It is largely as a response to all these related pressures that the cur-

rent crackdown against dissidents must be seen. It is clear that at least

the initiation of the crackdown, although not its present scope, predates

the change in US administrations. The original factor of greatest impor-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tance in the minds of the Soviet leaders at the outset of the crackdown

was probably the desire to clean house and silence the dissidents before

the Belgrade review conference was convened. Indeed, some dissidents

have charged that the climate in the Soviet Union deteriorated immedi-

ately after, and as a direct result of, the signing of the Helsinki accords.

Recent emigre Bukovsky, among others, claimed that conditions in

his prison “tangibly worsened” after Helsinki. In 1976 there were a

few trials of dissidents, balanced by occasional regime conciliatory

gestures.

The first clear evidence that a crackdown might be underway did

not come, however, until late December 1976, seven months after the

formation of the Orlov group in Moscow. In December Soviet author-

ities moved in a limited way against the CSCE monitoring group, by

conducting searches of apartments of the members of its subgroup in

the Ukraine. But there is no evidence to indicate that at this early date

the Soviets intended the crackdown to assume the major proportions it

did in the spring. Rather, it seems likely that they intended to continue

“carrot and stick” tactics aimed at controlling dissent by a careful com-

bination of coercive and conciliatory measures, while holding in re-

serve the option of intensifying repression if circumstances warranted.

The new US administration’s public defense of Soviet dissidents

apparently was a major factor which reinforced and exacerbated the re-

lated Soviet anxieties about the coming Belgrade CSCE meeting, the sit-

uation in Eastern Europe, the behavior of the Eurocommunists, and the

food situation at home. The net effect was to impel the leadership in-

creasingly to conclude that harsher measures against the dissidents

were required. Since February the Soviets have moved to suppress the

Orlov group and its regional subgroups, by arresting leading members

and encouraging others to emigrate. Moreover, in the spring the So-

viets began to make greater and greater efforts to limit the access of

Westerners in Moscow to the dissident community, and to link the dis-

sidents with espionage activities.

Two incidents in June were particularly indicative of the changed

atmosphere in Moscow: the interrogation of newsman Robert Toth

(the first such case in the detente era), and the surfacing of further sug-

gestions that dissident Shcharansky is under investigation for treason.

If Soviet authorities do charge him with treason, Shcharansky may be-

come the first intellectual dissident since Stalin’s day to be tried for this

June–December 1977

serious crime. Meanwhile, since Toth’s departure, the Soviet media

have expanded insinuations that he was engaged in espionage.

Conclusions

The Soviets originally believed that they could afford to permit

their citizens greater contact with the West, or they would never have

signed the Helsinki accords, allowed greater movement between East

and West Germany, or stopped jamming some Western broadcasts to

the Soviet Union in 1973. The events of the last year, however, have

given them pause and reason to reassess their policies. Many Soviet of-

ficials have probably decided that acquiescence on Basket III was a

mistake.

Objectively, Soviet dissent does not appear to pose a serious threat

to the Soviet system, but Soviet officials evidently perceive a greater

danger than exists in fact. Both Russian history and Leninist ideology

impel them to exaggerate the potential importance of opposing groups,

however small. They have always been preoccupied with problems of

control. The importance that the leadership attaches to dissent can be

seen by the fact that decisions about individual dissidents are some-

times made at the Politburo level.

It is not merely intellectual dissent that disturbs the Soviets. They

fear that the “freer movement of people and ideas” which they con-

ceded on paper at Helsinki, and which to a certain extent the circum-

stances of a modern technological world force upon them, will open

their society to a whole host of ideas and influences from the West that

are, in their view, not only politically subversive but socially disruptive

and morally unhealthy. Identifying Western concepts of liberty with li-

cense, they are apprehensive that extensive contact with the “deca-

dent” West will expose the Soviet people not only to alien political

ideas but also to crime, terrorism, pornography, and drugs, which

could combine to produce a general breakdown of order and disci-

pline. To the extent that they are concerned about the stagnation of

their economy, the Soviets may also fear that consumer dissatisfaction

will become a more serious political problem in future years.

In view of the problems the Soviets confronted in the winter and

early spring, some sort of domestic crackdown was to be expected. The

intensity and duration of the Soviet response, however, is not entirely

explained by objective circumstances. Some of the pressures on the So-

viets in fact seem to have diminished since the February–March period.

The tense situation in Eastern Europe has eased, and the food supply in

the Soviet Union itself, while still a subject of considerable concern,

seems to have improved somewhat. Meanwhile, Soviet attempts to

muffle internal and external criticism have paid off to a considerable

39.

Memorandum Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and

Research, Department of State

Washington, undated

SOVIET-US RELATIONS: A SIX-MONTH TRACK RECORD

Despite six month’s trying, the Soviets have as yet failed to come to

grips with the Carter administration. Their perplexity centers on what

June–December 1977

they see as a dichotomy between administration policies and actions.

For Moscow, the main issue is whether the US adheres to the detente

formulas which shaped relations over the preceding five-year period—

acceptance of parity, moderation of differences, etc.—or whether the

US’s numerous foreign policy initiatives, especially in the realm of

arms control and human rights, signify a new set of priorities, with the

US attempting to impose its view of these issues on the Soviets.

Whether or not the Soviets have now concluded that the latter ac-

tually is the case, their suspicions and doubts about Carter policies ex-

plain to a large extent the defensive—and relatively stand-pat—posi-

tions they have adopted during this period. With progress in SALT

their measure of the political temperature, they consistently blame

Washington for the present deterioration in relations and, conversely,

look to Washington to reverse the trend. Yet they may still anticipate a

turning point ahead; the virtual cessation of personal criticism of the

President following his Charleston speech seemed such a signal; it has

not, however, been matched as yet by any restraint in criticism of ad-

ministration policies.

Officials Claim Perplexity

How far and how fast the Soviets originally expected to move with

the Carter administration is open to question, but there is no doubt as

to their dismay and disappointment over the record of the administra-

tion’s first six months in US–USSR relations. Private observations on

the President by Soviet officialdom, though few and generally modu-

lated, have reflected perplexity or puzzlement, mainly about his stand

on human rights, which according to the Soviets, does not betoken a

forthcoming attitude toward the Soviet Union.

—In an unusually frank statement, Politburo candidate member

Solomentsev told a visiting Canadian official in June that the Soviet

leaders gave President Carter the benefit of the doubt the first few

months but could not understand how it was possible for a President of

the United States after only a few weeks in office to try to humiliate the

Soviet government by receiving Bukovskiy in the White House. How,

Solomentsev asked rhetorically, could Carter reconcile his statements

about wanting good relations with the USSR with his “constant inter-

ference” in Soviet internal affairs? The Soviets, he said, wanted to trust

the President but could not because he was using human rights as a

“weapon” to attack the USSR.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

—Without directly mentioning the President, Politburo member

Romanov reportedly also mentioned to a visiting West European that

the US SALT proposals were “the greatest display of cynicism imagin-

able” because they traded on European nuclear vulnerability while

guaranteeing the US immunity.

—At a Bastille Day reception in Moscow, senior Soviet military of-

ficers complained about the administration and one contrasted Presi-

dent Carter unfavorably with his last four predecessors, saying the

President did not seem to want to strengthen ties with the Soviet

Union.

—A Soviet Foreign Ministry official complained to a visiting

American that President Carter is not prepared to deal with the Soviets

as equals and termed his stance on human rights as “a well-thought-

out, well-planned campaign of psychological warfare, as a special in-

strument to be employed in the struggle against the socialist

countries.”

Early Hopes and Doubts in Perspective

The Soviets apparently calculated initially that the President

would move quickly to revive detente momentum which they viewed

as having slowed to a virtual standstill during the US election cam-

paign. To this end, Brezhnev on the eve of the inauguration volun-

teered assurance to the new President that the Soviets would not put

him to a “test of nerves.” In his January 18 speech at Tula, Brezhnev ex-

pressed the mood of the moment when he said: “We are prepared

jointly with the new administration in the United States to accomplish a

new major advance in relations between our two countries.”

Nonetheless, Soviet apprehensions about the new administration

were evident. President Podgorny told Ambassador Toon two days be-

fore the inauguration that while he was hopeful the President would

move quickly to strengthen ties with the Soviet Union, he and his col-

leagues were somewhat disturbed at the “negative noises” of the elec-

tion campaign. He made clear “negative noises” meant how much in-

fluence proponents of a harder policy toward the Soviet Union would

have on the new President. Pravda January 15, for example, had ac-

cused President Ford in his last days in office of yielding to pressures

from the military-industrial complex in approving higher military

spending and in trying to saddle the new administration with this

policy. Similar wariness was reflected in Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn

(signed to press January 19) which warned that toughness, “haggling

stubbornly” or exerting pressure on the Soviet Union “to obtain the

maximum from it” was an approach without prospects, and that “any

attempts to exert pressure and to test our country’s will and the sta-

bility of its positions on particular questions will be resolutely

rebuffed.”

June–December 1977

Moreover, Brezhnev’s Tula speech, besides offering an olive

branch, identified some sore points in the new relationship:

—“adding new questions to those that are currently being dis-

cussed in SALT”;

—“attempting to teach us how to live according to rules that are

incompatible with socialist democracy, with socialist law and order.”

Assurances of cordiality notwithstanding, it was clear the Kremlin

anticipated difficulties even before the SALT negotiations resumed and

before human rights took on an entirely unexpected (for the Soviets) as-

pect outside the CSCE context.

SALT: A Consistent Public Stance

Actual Soviet expectations about the prospects for achieving a

SALT II agreement expeditiously with the new administration may

have been less optimistic than the media or Soviet spokesmen generally

implied. Brezhnev had placed SALT at the head of his list of priorities

in relations with the US in the Tula call for an agreement “on the basis

that we had reached in Vladivostok . . . in the nearest future.” These

two caveats—on the basis of Vladivostok, and in the nearest future—

were also stressed in the media. The Mezhdunarodnaya Zhizn piece

noted that “the Soviet Union is ready to go even further in the fields of

strategic arms limitation but it is first necessary to implement what was

agreed in Vladivostok.” And Izvestiya January 21 made the identical

point.

Thus, the arguments following the Vance visit in March had al-

ready been aired, at least in their essential outlines, weeks beforehand;

from Moscow’s viewpoint, the US had clearly been put on notice long

before March about the basic Soviet position.

In any event, the guarded optimism expressed about SALT in Jan-

uary cooled considerably during February and March. USA Institute

head Arbatov, a chief advocate of Soviet-US rapprochement, warned in

Pravda February 5 of a US “psychosis” about a Soviet military threat,

denied the Soviets were seeking more than strategic parity, and

stressed the negative consequences of failure to achieve an agreement

before expiration of the interim accord in October 1977.

A few days later, February 9, on Moscow TV, Arbatov worried

more specifically about the cruise missile as:

“a weapons system on its way which is very dangerous from the

point of destabilizing the situation, not to mention that it will be a new

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

factor in the arms race, and will lead to political consequences such as a

deterioration of the international situation.”

By mid-March, against the background of the swelling human

rights dispute, the Soviets were airing in greater detail the problems

they foresaw for the upcoming negotiations on SALT with Secretary

Vance, whose late March visit they had announced without fanfare

early in the month. Pravda March 13 observed that the President’s state-

ment of March 9 allowing for deferral of cruise missile limits from the

new agreement was “a certain departure from the previous US stand,”

saw a contradiction in US words about “mutual trust” and the “hulla-

baloo” it had raised on human rights, and interpreted the latter as an

attempt to exert pressure on the Soviet Union and “bargain for conces-

sions,” implicitly on SALT.

Brezhnev’s March 21 trade unions speech threw an early pall of

pessimism over prospects for the Vance meeting. Avoiding substantive

comments on SALT (he referred only to the 1974 agreements, not to

Vladivostok), Brezhnev observed that the new administration’s first

two months in power did not “seem to show a striving to overcome”

the stagnation in relations with the Soviet Union. And in his stark

warning that the USSR would “not tolerate interference in our internal

affairs by anyone and under any pretext—a normal development of re-

lations on such a basis is of course unthinkable,” he expressed the pre-

vailing mood of irritation in Moscow toward the administration.

Watershed in March

Secretary Vance’s trip to Moscow marked something of a water-

shed in US-Soviet relations. Up to that point, the Soviets, despite evi-

dent misgivings and doubts, at least appeared to be acting on the as-

sumption that an agreement before October was in prospect. Their

attitude toward the Carter administration, while soured compared to

January, was still relatively punctilious. And they gave the impression

that while it was up to the US to take the initiative to improve rela-

tions, they themselves would be responsive, or at least not totally

unresponsive.

Gromyko’s unprecedented press conference of March 31 at the

conclusion of the talks with the Secretary revealed a far greater chasm

in the relationship than the Soviets had disclosed publicly up to that

point. Obviously peeved at the White House statement on the talks

“even before the Secretary returned to Washington,” Gromyko sought

to set aright what he called “distortions” of the Soviet position. Gro-

June–December 1977

myko ranged over the whole gamut of disarmament questions, but fo-

cused his animus on US motives and intentions in offering the USSR al-

ternative SALT packages which it supposedly knew could only be

rejected. He charged, in essence, that the US was trying unilaterally to

revise agreed Vladivostok formulas; equating the cruise missile with

the “non-strategic” Backfire bomber and then claiming that the cruise

missile had not been covered at Vladivostok; and attempting to gain

strategic advantage for itself by proposing limits on ICBM’s, an area of

Soviet strength.

Gromyko, to be sure, did not close the door to future bargaining

but warned pointedly that any change in the basic Vladivostok frame-

work—an obvious reference to the US proposal for significant reduc-

tions—would reopen the whole question of the US Forward Base

System in Europe. His statements suggested, however, that the Soviets

had concluded the new administration was out for tactical leverage in

its approach and indicated their response would be to hunker down.

“The more attempts there are to play a game in this matter, to tread on

the foot of the partner,” he declared, “the more difficulties there will

be.”

Gromyko’s arguments set the stage for a spate of public statements

on SALT and relations with the US. Pravda’s lengthy April 14 editorial

argued Gromyko’s main contentions even more pointedly, denying

they were merely an excuse to gain time to study the American pro-

posals because of their “drastic character.” Pravda also charged that if

the US, as some contended, knew its proposals were not going to be ac-

cepted, then they were made “only to create a pretext for talking about

Soviet intransigence.”

Subsequent commentators, in “clarifying” and justifying the So-

viet position, took a multifaceted approach, which, however, seemed to

grow increasingly defensive as time went on. They:

—intensified attacks on the specifics of the US proposals, stressing

the need to observe the “main parameters” of Vladivostok (but subse-

quently hinting at flexibility on certain points);

—publicized various long-standing Soviet initiatives on other dis-

armament issues;

—stressed “equality and equal security” and US “realism” as re-

quirements for any agreement; and

—attacked US military spending and new arms programs.

But they also began to give increasing weight to the President’s

domestic problems, picturing him as under heavy pressure from the

military-industrial complex and its supporters in Congress. In effect,

they gradually began blaming the March SALT results on these forces,

and on Senator Jackson in particular, who purportedly had “a great, if

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

not a decisive” voice in formulating the US package and in advising the

administration to “take a hard line.”

As the date for the next Vance-Gromyko meeting in Geneva ap-

proached, the coverage took on a more optimistic cast. A Pravda May 7

editorial, apparently aimed at countering impressions abroad that re-

jection of the US March proposals implied a Soviet unwillingness to

consider substantial arms reductions, argued the USSR had always

been the prime mover in international disarmament endeavors. And as

the Soviet-US SALT delegations resumed talks, media and spokesmen

once again began to stress Soviet willingness to seek agreement,

pledging that the USSR would respond to a “realistic attitude” on the

part of the US.

When Gromyko and Vance met in Geneva May 18–20 the atmos-

phere was definitely less charged. The signing ceremony for the agree-

ment on the use of outer space for peaceful purposes was cordial, and

the “Joint Report” issued May 206 spoke of a “businesslike” forum. Fol-

lowing the meeting, TASS reported Secretary Vance’s statement that

“full agreement” had been reached on the general framework for a

SALT II accord even though substantial differences remained to be ne-

gotiated. The Soviet press also underscored the Joint Report’s conclu-

sion that the talks had achieved “progress” on a general framework for

further talks.

But Gromyko, while acknowledging “some progress” on “certain

problems,” made the point in leaving Geneva that “this does not mean

a solution of the main questions is close in sight. . . . The conclusion of

the work of drafting the agreement is still a long way off.”

In keeping with Gromyko’s thrust, Moscow then continued to play

up alleged US obstinacy on SALT affairs, and minimized prospects for

quick progress. Soviet media accused the President of “skating

around” SALT in his May 24 speech at Notre Dame, contrasting his

tone with Brezhnev’s somber evaluation to French TV May 29: “The po-

sitions have drawn closer to a certain degree . . . yet it must be said

frankly that there has been no serious progress so far because of the un-

constructive line pursued by the US.” This line, Brezhnev said, did not

promote the conclusion of an agreement.

Brezhnev also privately told the French in late June of his concern

over the way the SALT negotiations were going, and after his trip to

France stated flatly that “no progress” had been achieved. He capped

June–December 1977

of the President’s in June, throwing cold water on a summit unless

there were some agreements to sign, a line Arbatov reiterated to US of-

ficials in early August.

Meanwhile, attacks against US military programs proliferated,

ranging from accusations that US foreign policy was being militarized

to charges that the US was using the stalemate in SALT to advance new

weapons development and using the latter in turn to pressure the

USSR. The President’s July 1 announcement of his decision on the B–1

bomber/cruise missile evidently caught the Soviets by surprise; in re-

sponse they downgraded the B–1, one of their prime targets in the past,

to a propaganda ploy, and concentrated instead on the cruise missile.

US statements on the neutron bomb then replaced the cruise missile as

a prime propaganda target, and the TASS statement of July 30 on that

subject signaled another mass media/communist-front campaign

against the US.

Moscow’s record of public adamancy on SALT remained unaf-

fected by the President’s July 21 speech in Charleston; Arbatov in his

August 3 Pravda unofficial response to that speech merely reiterated

basic Soviet arguments. The regime at that point had, however, still not

given an official response to the President’s overture.

Criticism of President Carter

While the Soviets traditionally give a new US President a honey-

moon period before resuming the inevitable attacks on US policies,

President Carter’s emphasis on human rights quickly diverted Moscow

from its customary approach. The sharpest and most direct criticism of

the President has invariably been pegged to some element of his stance

on human rights. Although the media ignored the issue in reporting

the President’s inaugural address, it was barely a month before the ad-

ministration was accused of playing an ill-intentioned role in its human

rights “campaign.” The President’s letter to Andrei Sakharov9 struck a

particularly sensitive nerve, and although the Soviets did not publicize

it domestically they in effect answered the President officially with the

February 17 letter by Deputy Prosecutor General Gusev to the New York

Times10 warning against outside interference in Soviet domestic affairs.

The March Vance visit and its aftermath briefly distracted attention

from the theme, but in mid-April Soviet media linked the administra-

tion’s decision to expand Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty activities

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

directly to its actions on human rights. And on April 9, TASS director

general Zamyatin and CPSU Central Committee International Depart-

ment head Zagladin11 described the Carter human rights position to TV

audiences as an “acute anti-Soviet campaign,” Zagladin charging that

support for dissidents was in effect the same as encouraging “appeals

for the overthrow of the existing system in the Soviet Union.”

The “First Hundred Days” served as the occasion for other unflat-

tering comments as well. One commentator May 18 claimed the Presi-

dent was still conducting an election campaign instead of solving

problems—this time with his eye on 1980—and sarcastically chided

him by name for delivering “moralistic homilies” to the American

people. Another equally negative assessment observed that in 15 weeks

the “administration” had not managed to accomplish anything

substantial.

The President’s report to the Congressional CSCE Commission in

June generated a torrent of criticism. TASS veteran Kornilov, in

perhaps the sharpest language to date, charged the President with

using the “most absurd and wild concoctions” from “reactionary bour-

geois propaganda” in the report and “openly” encouraging a “mali-

cious” publicity campaign over alleged Soviet violations of the Hel-

sinki agreements.

Brezhnev’s Le Monde interview of mid-June was evidently meant

in part to answer the President’s CSCE report, as well as to warn that

the then convening Belgrade preparatory meeting on CSCE would be

difficult if the US persisted in its human rights stand. Brezhnev did not

mention the President by name but left no doubt as to his target when

he said “the ideological struggle should not grow into psychological

war” and warned that if it did, the dispute might “develop into a catas-

trophe in which . . . along with millions of people their concepts will

perish as well.”

Perhaps in deference to private US complaints, and in any event

under cover of a shift of media emphasis to US military policy, the per-

sonal association of the President with critiques of US policy subse-

quently began to diminish gradually. Six-month assessments by such

veteran propagandists as Valentin Zorin and Yuriy Kornilov, while

critical of the administration, were more moderate in tone than earlier

pieces by these same critics, and not noticeably focused on the Presi-

dent personally. As on the occasion of the 100-day benchmark, how-

ever, their conclusions both in the domestic and foreign policy spheres

were largely negative.

June–December 1977

Reporting on President Carter’s July 21 Charleston speech was vir-

tually free of personal criticism. Almost simultaneously, a New Times

editorial asserted that in the current difficult phase of US-Soviet rela-

tions the correct policy is “not to dramatize this but to display reserve

and patience”; New Times was optimistic that Washington would

eventually return to a “constructive” line. Arbatov’s August 3 Pravda

piece, while critical of policies (but not the President), reflected the

same upbeat theme.

Other Bilateral Activities

The decline in the general atmosphere did not have an immedi-

ately measurable impact on day-to-day US-Soviet bilateral contacts,

which in general continued to move along established patterns. On the

whole the Soviets seemed eager to build up further the network of ac-

tivities under the various bilateral agreements, some of which are now

in their fifth year or going into a renewal phase. In response to US de-

mands for greater reciprocity, the Soviets were cooperative in some

areas; in others they pleaded bureaucratic difficulties or continued

their less-than-forthcoming positions.

Since January, agreements have been reached on further coopera-

tion in manned space flight and in the exploration and use of outer

space for peaceful purposes; the bilateral science and technology agree-

ment14 has been renewed for another five-year period; and an accord

reached on correcting certain imbalances favoring the USSR in the mar-

itime shipping field. The Soviets also showed some flexibility on cer-

tain civil air matters long under negotiation, and assigned a top civil air

ministry official as their permanent representative in the US, signifying

interest in solution of other issues. The two sides also reached agree-

ment on beginning construction of the Washington-Moscow embassy

complexes, and several of the working groups established by the

Vance-Gromyko meeting got underway, that on the Indian Ocean com-

pleting its first round successfully in June.

On the long-standing trade/MFN/credits stalemate, the Soviets

have scaled down, if not written off, expectations for any improvement

in the foreseeable future. They had evidently originally anticipated the

Carter administration would bring Congress around to rescinding the

1974 restrictions, but that hope has now been all but abandoned. The

trade issue is no longer a bellwether of the relationship with the US, al-

though the Soviets continue at every opportunity to stress the need for

normalization in this area.

40.

Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, August 1977

The Value to the USSR of Economic Relations with the US

CONCLUSIONS

The importance of Western technology, credit, and grain to Soviet

economy has increased in recent years, and will increase further during

the next decade. Moscow is determined to avoid exploitable depend-

ence, however, and expects to be able to do so.

—In the great majority of instances, alternatives to US sources are

available.

—Other Western countries have shown little willingness to sacri-

fice economic gains for a concerted, sustained policy of using East-West

June–December 1977

economic relations for purposes of exerting influence upon Soviet

behavior.

—The Soviets believe that, in the US itself, conflicting domestic in-

terests place severe limits on the US ability to use its policy instruments

for these same purposes.

The growing dependence of Soviet economic growth on a rising

productivity of labor and capital will put an increasing premium on

Western capital goods and technology during the next decade. In addi-

tion, Moscow will need vast amounts of Western equipment to sustain

production of oil in some fields, minimize declines in others, and de-

velop new sources of oil and gas. Some of this equipment will have to

come from the United States.

Technology

In importing Western technology and equipment, the USSR is

playing “catch-up.” Specific sectors of Soviet industry—such as the fer-

tilizer and automotive industries—are being helped greatly by Western

technology and equipment, increasing the quality and quantity of

output and reducing costs. The Soviets will be especially dependent on

Western energy technology in the future, such as high capacity oil

lifting equipment discussed separately below. The magnitude of Soviet

imports of Western equipment, however, is too small to have much im-

pact on overall economic growth.

In only a few areas is the United States the sole supplier of the most

advanced technology of interest to the Soviets. In many of these fields,

US pre-eminence is being increasingly challenged by technological ad-

vances in Western Europe and Japan. Moreover, less advanced tech-

nology is often sufficiently good to satisfy immediate Soviet needs. In

the many instances where US technology is available from US licensees

or subsidiaries abroad, the Soviets can turn to these.

The United States must rely primarily on persuasion in marshaling

effective support from its allies for control of technology exports. The

record on this score is disappointing at best. Our allies see little or no

need to limit Soviet acquisition of technology unrelated to items on the

COCOM List. Even in COCOM, they have shown a tendency to push

for relaxation of definitions to permit the sale of their own goods while

supporting the embargo on those higher technology goods produced

only in the United States. Their reluctance in the past to go along with

the United States in controlling anything but the most sensitive tech-

nology and equipment affords little hope for consent to broader vigi-

lance now.

Energy

The supply of oil in the USSR will become a critical problem in the

next few years, with production peaking perhaps as early as next year

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

but not later than the early 1980s before declining. To stave off or slow

the expected production decline, the Soviets will need substantial

amounts of Western oil field technology and equipment. Because of its

superior technology, the United States is the most logical source of

much of this equipment and know-how. Without assistance in the form

of Western technology and equipment—especially high capacity lifting

equipment involving US technology—gas lift and electric submersible

pumps—Soviet oil production will fall sooner and more sharply than

would otherwise be the case.

Although the USSR and some West European countries produce

low capacity oil well pumps, the only pumps adequate to deal with the

Soviet lifting problem are produced in the United States. The USSR has

been buying several hundred annually in the US and recently sought a

turnkey plant for their manufacture. Thus far neither of the two US pro-

ducers has been interested in supplying the production technology.

The US is the preferred source of other equipment and technology

such as drill pipe, rock bits and rotary drilling rigs, none of which is

under export control restrictions, as well as certain COCOM-controlled

items, e.g., seismic and gravimetric measuring and recording instru-

ments. There are close substitutes for these in other Western countries,

however.

Credit

The Soviet hard currency debt increased from only $5 billion at the

about $17 billion by the end of this year. What pushed up the debt was

mainly the Western economic recession, which nearly halted the

growth of Soviet hard currency exports and the massive Soviet grain

The USSR’s hard currency trade deficit reached a record $6. bil-

deficits—Western government-backed credits and gold—were no

longer adequate, and the Soviets had to borrow heavily on the Euro-

dollar market at higher interest rates including a substantial amount on

short term.

As a result of heavy Soviet borrowing, many major banks reached

or at least approached their legal or self-imposed ceilings on credit to

the USSR. Moreover, the international banking community has grown

concerned about the growth of the Soviet debt and the persistence of

large trade deficits. Although bankers remain confident about the

USSR ability to repay its debt, they feel that additional credits require

higher interest rates.

Moscow’s stubborn stance on terms is hampering progress in ne-

gotiations for government-backed export credit lines. The “gentlemen’s

June–December 1977

agreement” on export credit terms is now in effect, and the Soviets are

unwilling to pay the higher interest rates required. Soviet negotiations

with Italy have dragged on since May 1976, with France, Japan, and the

United Kingdom watching closely to see whether the Italians can with-

stand Soviet pressure to break the agreement by offering better terms.

The betting is that Italy will cave in.

A reduction in the trade deficit is expected in 1977 with con-

tinued—if sluggish—Western growth leading to expansion of Soviet

exports; a sharply lower grain bill will reduce imports. A deficit of $4

billion or less and a $3 billion increase in debt is anticipated. A further

decline in the deficit is likely in 1978, given continued economic growth

in the West and the bumper grain crop Moscow expects this year. Oil

exports could fall, but probably not enough to prevent an increase in

total exports while imports should be stable or lower.

Prospects in the longer run, however, are much dimmer because

the expected decline in Soviet oil production and exports will seriously

aggravate the Soviet hard currency position. Western bankers will

probably have increasing doubts about Moscow’s ability to maintain its

foreign exchange earnings and manage its debts in the 1980s. Substan-

tial new credits are likely to depend upon Soviet willingness to under-

take large compensation deals, particularly for development of energy

resources, that provide assurances of export capacity.

Grain

Even with normal harvests, Moscow will need to import 10–20

million tons of grain annually to support announced livestock expan-

sion programs during the next several years. If past practice holds,

about half of Soviet import requirements would be filled by the United

States. The need for US supplies obviously depends both on the size of

Soviet requirements and on production and stocks in other supplier

countries. Attempts to apply US leverage on the grain issue might lead

to minor concessions in the short run but would carry longer run costs.

The threat of withholding grain, even if not exercised, would compro-

mise US reliability as a supplier and lead the Soviets to pursue

alternatives.

Our leverage is lessened by the wide range of options available to

the Soviets in the event of a moratorium on US grain shipments.

—In the short run, other countries would be able to provide addi-

tional grain, especially at premium prices.

—Over the longer run, the USSR could probably arrange for alter-

native supplies, perhaps with the aid of long-term contracts.

—Domestic demand for grain could be substantially reduced by

(1) rationing and other conservation measures, (2) export cuts, and

(3) further slaughtering of livestock if need be.

41.

Memorandum From William Hyland of the National Security

Council Staff to President Carter

Washington, August 6, 1977

SUBJECT

Oral Message from Brezhnev to You

The Soviet Minister delivered an “oral” message from Brezhnev to

you concerning South African nuclear weapons. The burden of the

message is that the Soviets believe the South Africans are building nu-

clear weapons and preparing to conduct underground tests and are

practically ready to begin. Brezhnev emphasizes that should this occur

it would do great damage to the Non-proliferation Treaty2 and weaken

international efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and re-

duce the danger of nuclear war. The Soviet statement also emphasizes

that all countries should undertake extraordinary, urgent efforts to pre-

vent South Africa from conducting nuclear tests and building nuclear

June–December 1977

weapons. The message concludes by noting your personal interest in

non-proliferation and asking for your views on what effective meas-

ures might be taken.

The Minister added that a public statement, roughly along the

same lines, will be issued in Moscow on Monday3 and that similar mes-

sages from Brezhnev had been sent to London, Paris and Bonn. The So-

viets do not plan to announce the fact of these messages, however. I

told the Minister that I would relay the message immediately to you

and that you would consider how and when to reply. I did note to the

Minister that the Soviet information did not seem to be in accord with

our own information on the imminence of the South African test but

this was not my area of expertise.

I have informed Warren Christopher of this message and I will

send you the full text as soon as it is translated. We will also send you a

draft reply, though it is obvious that the Russians intend this primarily

for propaganda since they intend a public statement on Monday.

Attachment

Oral Message From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

undated

We would like to draw your attention to a matter which in our

opinion is of quite considerable importance from the point of view of its

consequences to the development of the international situation and

furtherance of detente. This matter concerns our countries as Perma-

nent Security Council Members which carry a special responsibility for

the maintenance of peace and international security.

According to incoming data on the South African Republic, they

are completing work on building nuclear weapons and on carrying out

the first nuclear test. In the desert of Calabari they have built a testing

site which is practically ready for such tests underground.

These facts testifying to the possibility of building nuclear

weapons in South Africa could not but cause us a grave apprehension.

Naturally if this state, which carries out a policy of apartheid with re-

gard to the African population of their land and does not take into ac-

count United Nations decisions, acquired nuclear weapons then this

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

would sharply aggravate the situation on the African Continent and

would as a whole increase the danger of the use of nuclear weapons.

The emergence of such weapons in the hand of the SAR would cer-

tainly be used by some other countries to justify the building of their

own nuclear devices. It is easy to see what a damage this would cause

to the treaty on non-proliferation and how considerably it would

weaken the framework of non-proliferation, to strengthen which joint

efforts of the USSR and the USA are directed. No one has the slightest

doubt that the SAR is in a position to build nuclear weapons only

through the help of other states. One also knows that the SAR has

access to the latest research in the nuclear field, that it received and con-

tinues to receive nuclear equipment and materials. “The London Un-

derstandings” demand, as we know, fulfillment of a number of condi-

tions aimed at preventing the use of materials, equipment and tech-

nology to build nuclear devices. The world public will be justified in

asking this question: since these understandings failed to prevent the

emergence of nuclear weapons in the SAR, then what are they worth?

We in the Soviet Union consider it a matter of extraordinary and

urgent importance to make all efforts to prevent the SAR from con-

ducting nuclear tests and building nuclear weapons. On our part we

have in mind publishing in the nearest future an appropriate state-

ment, having in view drawing the attention of the governments and the

public to the dangerous plans of the SAR. As to the USA we understand

that you have at your disposal the necessary channels and probabilities

to render directly a holding influence on this state.

Addressing ourselves directly to you, Mr. President, we take into

account the great attention which you personally pay to the problem of

non-proliferation. Cooperation between our two countries along the

lines of strengthening the Treaty on Non-proliferation is developing.

Our states have taken on themselves certain obligations on the preven-

tion of a nuclear war. Now a situation has developed where it is quite

necessary and urgently at that to undertake energetic efforts to prevent

the emergence of new nuclear powers and holding at bay the growth of

nuclear danger.

I hope that this appeal of mine would meet with your, Mr. Presi-

dent, understanding and from the US part appropriate and effective

measures would be taken.

On our part we would like to learn what are your views on the

above-mentioned matter.

June–December 1977

42.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

192990. Subject: Reply to Soviet Demarche on South African Nu-

clear Program.

1. The Deputy Secretary called in the Soviet Charge, Vasev, August

15 and gave him as a non-paper the text of the President’s reply to

Brezhnev’s message on South African nuclear programs delivered by

Vasev on August 6. In receiving the reply Vasev commented that it ap-

peared to be very constructive and in the same spirit the Soviet side ap-

proached this problem. Text follows for your information.

2. Begin text. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for bringing to my

attention information you have that the Republic of South Africa is

completing work on a nuclear explosive device and is preparing to test

such a device. I am replying in like spirit, out of the deep concern I

share with you to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.

We are addressing this matter on a serious and urgent basis since

we view such a development in the Republic of South Africa or else-

where with the utmost gravity. The United States has long been con-

cerned over South Africa’s operation of a pilot enrichment facility

which is not under the safeguards system of the IAEA, and over the re-

peated refusal of the South Africans, despite our urgings, to join the

NPT.

Upon receipt of your information about the existence of a test site

in the Kalahari Desert, I directed my experts to investigate the situa-

tion, utilizing our national technical and other means. I am also in-

structing my representative in Pretoria to emphasize to the Govern-

ment of South Africa in the clearest terms that the testing of a nuclear

device would have the gravest consequences. I am pursuing this with

the Government of South Africa.

It is my hope and my intention to work closely with you and other

concerned countries in the immediate period ahead, so that by our re-

spective efforts we can successfully resolve this serious situation. End

text.

Vance

cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Mark Garrison (EUR/SOV); cleared by

Tarnoff; approved by Christopher.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

43.

Telegram From the Department of State to the White House

197920. For Dr. Brzezinski only. Quote. Eyes only for Ambassador

from Secretary. Subject: My Meeting With Dobrynin August 18.

1. Dobrynin, newly arrived from Moscow, told me that Brezhnev

intended his comment in his recent speech on the Charleston speech3 to

be “constructive.” But he added that Brezhnev’s charge that the human

rights campaign was simply a “smokescreen” to cover a continued

arms buildup—for example, the neutron bomb—correctly reflected the

Soviet leaderhip’s opinion. Dobrynin cautioned that if the aim of this

“buildup” is to pressure the Soviet leadership in current negotiations,

the US will find it counter-productive.

2. However, Dobrynin was clearly under instruction to put a good

face on US-Soviet relations, and to signal continued Soviet interest in

44.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 23, 1977

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations

PARTICIPANTS

US—Dr. Marshall Shulman, S/MS

USSR—Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

At his request, I had lunch with Dobrynin August 23. His main

purpose appeared to be to get an additional reading on the Administra-

tion’s approach to the forthcoming negotiations on SALT, and to the

general relationship.

Dobrynin first asked whether the dates he proposed to Secretary

Vance for Gromyko’s visit to Washington (September 22–23) would be

convenient for the President. I said that I would try to find out.

Later in the conversation, Dobrynin came back several times to the

question of what the President really wants of the Soviet-American re-

lationship, and of a SALT agreement. Although I repeated the strong

impression I had several times expressed to him before that the Presi-

dent seriously desired a stabilization of the strategic military competi-

tion, and an improvement in Soviet-American relations, it was clear

that this question remains a continuing uncertainty in his mind.

In the discussion of SALT, Dobrynin opened by asking my impres-

sion of the prospects. I said that from the American point of view, it

was discouraging that the Soviet Union had been negative and uncre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ative; that we had no sense of feedback to our ideas. I had the impres-

sion that the Soviet Union was hoping that public pressure would bring

about a shift in the American positions, but if this is so, it represented a

serious misreading of US public opinion, the main force of which was

in the other direction. I expressed the hope that at Vienna Gromyko

would address Soviet concerns and American concerns in a forth-

coming spirit, with ideas of how we might find common ground on the

main issues. If this were done, I expressed confidence that he would be

met by the same spirit on the American side.

In reply, Dobrynin emphasized that we must understand the psy-

chology of Brezhnev’s situation. He had invested a great deal of effort,

and against substantial opposition, to reach the Vladivostok agree-

ments and, said Dobrynin, he simply could not go to the Politburo and

say: “Well, the Americans have rejected the agreement we reached.

What other ideas shall we put forward?” The only chance of forward

movement, Dobrynin thought, would be for the US to say to Brezhnev:

“We understand your commitment to Vladivostok, and we start from

there. But there have been changes in technology and other factors in

the three years since Vladivostok, and this is how we propose to take

account of those changes.” I said this was essentially what the frame-

work agreed upon at Geneva sought to do, but he replied that our pro-

posals, to have a reasonable chance of acceptance, had to reflect a will-

ingness to accept parity, whereas it appeared to the Soviet leadership

that what we sought, in our effort to reduce the Soviet heavy missiles,

was to prevent the Soviet Union from attaining a strategic capability

equal to ours.

We then reviewed the American concerns centering on Soviet

heavy missiles and the Soviet unwillingness to consider a reduction in

the MIRV aggregate. Dobrynin’s response covered familiar ground: the

US had at first agreed to count the air-launched cruise missiles individ-

ually against the MIRV aggregate, and now were unwilling even to

count a plane-load of them as one MIRV against the total, etc., etc. Do-

brynin also covered Soviet concerns about GLCMs as a problem exacer-

bated by the way the B–1 decision was handled.

Dobrynin expressed the hope that the US could transmit its pro-

posals through him in ample time so that Gromyko could have them

studied in advance, if we wanted the Vienna meetings to be productive.

He also inquired whether the Panama, Taiwan and Cuba issues

would make the President’s problem with domestic public opinion on

SALT more complicated. At this point, we broke off to watch the Presi-

dent’s press conference on television.

45.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, August 29, 1977

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

Paul C. Warnke, ACDA

1. Middle East. Dobrynin opened by conveying Gromyko’s thanks

for the comprehensive briefing on the Secretary’s Middle East trip re-

to convey his consideration of related questions. Among other things,

he will discuss the possibility of preparing, perhaps by the time of the

Washington meeting, a joint US-Soviet co-chairmen’s statement about

some basic principles of a settlement, including the rights of Palestinian

self-determination and statehood, as well as the order and time for the

resumption of a Middle East conference. The Secretary gave his reply

later in the conversation, saying that he would be glad to have Gro-

myko bring with him or to send ahead his thoughts about a statement

of principles. The Secretary expressed the feeling that it should be pos-

sible, before Gromyko left Washington, to settle on a date or at least a

month for the Geneva meeting, and said he thought December would

be a realistic possibility.

Dobrynin asked about the situation in southern Lebanon, and ex-

pressed concern lest the Israelis take military action. The Secretary re-

plied that we had gone over this issue with the Israelis, and had re-

ceived commitments that they would not take military action. The

Secretary then reviewed the main elements of the most recent plan pro-

posed by Boutros, the Foreign Minister of Lebanon. In addition to the

Shtaura agreement, it would include the following steps: (1) remove

the Palestinian fighters to camps at Tyre; (2) allow some armed Pales-

tinians in the Arqub area and in the vicinity of Bint Jubayl (3) deploy

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

1,000 armed Lebanese soldiers in the southern area (Dobrynin: Do they

have that many? The Secretary: Yes, they do now, and they hope to

build this up to 1,400); (4) Those Palestinians who entered Lebanon

since 1969 would be transferred to Syria. Boutros believed the Syrians,

Palestinians and the Lebanese government were close to agreement in

principle along these lines, but did not yet have a definite agreement.

Dobrynin said he would keep us informed on the results of the

current Arafat visit to Moscow.

2. China Trip. In reporting on his trip to China, the Secretary said

that it had been particularly interesting to arrive following the Party

Congress. He observed that a new sense of self-confidence could be felt,

following the several trying years that had preceded it. This was now

behind them, and the leaders appeared to be of one mind on how to at-

tack the problems of the future, to which they looked forward with op-

timism, in the light of their support from the country. One could feel

even in the street impressions a sense of a more open situation. In a

pragmatic and less ideological spirit, the leaders will concentrate on in-

ternal goals in the next decade or so, rather than on foreign policy.

The Secretary reported that he had discussed with the Chinese

some international issues, including the recovery of confidence in the

United States; a region-by-region review, beginning with Asia (largely

on Japan and Korea), the Middle East (where the Chinese knowledge

had been sketchy, and some misunderstandings were dispelled), polit-

ical, economic and security aspects of Europe (where Chinese informa-

tion also appeared to be fragmented), Africa (particularly Namibia and

Rhodesia, describing our joint efforts with the British, and our shift to

greater cooperation with the Africans—the Chinese asked many ques-

tions and showed special interest in the subject).

Among non-regional issues, the Secretary reported he had de-

scribed US efforts to widen normal relations with as many countries as

possible, including North Vietnam, Cuba, etc. On the issue of nuclear

proliferation, he said, the Chinese took the same position they had

taken during his previous visit two years ago. He had spoken also of

the human rights issue and other global aspects of US policy.

Among bilateral issues, the Secretary said he had discussed nor-

malization of relations, trade, and cultural relations, claim assets, etc.

No decisions were made on the matter of normalization, he reported,

but the discussion was good and contributed to a better understanding

of each other’s position. It was agreed to continue our consultations in

the future on this subject.

June–December 1977

Dobrynin asked for the Secretary’s impressions of Teng Hsiao-

Ping and Hua Kuo Feng. The Secretary replied that Teng seemed bub-

bling and vigorous, expressing satisfaction with his having been resur-

rected three times; Hua seemed thoughtful, quiet, well-suited for his

role as Chairman. Dobrynin said this corresponded with Soviet

impressions.

3. Embassy Fire. At the Secretary’s request, Shulman expressed ap-

preciation for the Soviet cooperation in dealing with the problems

raised by the fire in our Moscow embassy. He said that we would be

preparing a list of matters on which further cooperation would be ap-

preciated, and expressed hope that we would not again have the air-

port clearance delay which had marred an otherwise splendid record of

cooperation. Dobrynin gave assurances that he would be ready to help

in any way we required.

4. SALT. The Secretary then turned to a discussion of the plans for

the next round of strategic arms limitation negotiations. He said that he

had read with care the reports of the conversations between Dobrynin,

Warnke and Brzezinski last week, and also of the interview between

Gromyko and Senator McGovern, and these had all reenforced his con-

cern that the two sides were still so far apart that the progress we both

hoped to make at Vienna did not yet seem within reach. He therefore

suggested for Soviet consideration the possibility that we both give

ourselves more time, and that we postpone the meeting of the Foreign

Ministers until Gromyko comes to Washington September 22–23.

Speaking personally, said the Secretary, he felt that an unproductive

meeting in Vienna would not be good for either side, and that with

more time, it might be possible for the Soviet side to reflect on matters

that had been discussed, and for us to be able to put into Dobrynin’s

hands well in advance of the next meeting for staff study the results of

our own reflections.

Dobrynin said he would have to consult his government, but ex-

pressed the personal view that he felt a sense of relief. Although the in-

terim conversations had helped explicate our position, he had intended

to say to the Secretary that he had not noted any significant develop-

ments since Geneva that would lead to a productive meeting. Although

he was not authorized to say so, he said he felt impelled to express his

personal feeling that we were headed for a deadlock in the negotia-

tions, and that the postponement was a good idea.

The Secretary gave Dobrynin a draft of a press statement on the

possible postponement and on the intent of the two governments to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

continue to observe the terms of the Interim Agreement, which might

be issued simultaneously in Moscow and Washington. Dobrynin raised

some question initially about the Interim Agreement announcement,

fearing that it would convey a sense of fatalism about the September

meeting, but after discussion and reflection, expressed willingness to

convey the draft to Moscow for consideration. The Secretary asked Do-

brynin to convey to Gromyko his strong feeling that it would be useful

to say something now about the Interim Agreement, to ward off nega-

tive interpretations of the postponement. It was agreed that, subject to

Soviet concurrence, the press statement would be released Thursday,

It was further agreed that the two Foreign Ministers would meet

on September 22, and that Gromyko’s meeting with the President

would follow on the 23rd.

Dobrynin said he would seek a response from Moscow as soon as

possible on the proposal for postponement and the press statement.

There followed a brief review of selected SALT issues. In the

course of a summation of his impression of the US position, Dobrynin

made it clear that he had not clearly understood some figures men-

tioned by Brzezinski at their last meeting. The point at issue appeared

to be that if the ALCMed bombers were to be counted under the MIRV

aggregate, as the Soviet Union now wished, the US would in practice

be limited to a SNDV aggregate of 2080, while the Soviet Union would

have an aggregate of 2250. Dobrynin asked if it were the US intention to

propose that the Soviet Union reduce its aggregate to 2080. Warnke

said that he would supply Dobrynin with a paper clarifying the point.

Dobrynin restated the Soviet preference for including limitations

on air-to-surface missiles in the treaty rather than in the protocol, and

also the Soviet position that a reduction in the MIRV aggregate without

the inclusion of ALCMed bombers would have the practical effect of

giving the US a MIRV advantage.

46.

Summary of Conclusions and Minutes of a Policy Review

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Economic Relations

PARTICIPANTS

White House

CIA

Vice President

Adm. Turner

Denis Clift

Robert Bowie

Domestic Policy Staff

Energy

Stu Eizenstat

Harry Bergold

Robert Ginsburg

Commerce

State

Sec. Kreps

Richard Cooper

Frank Weil

Richard Vine

NSC

Marshall Shulman

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Treasury

Samuel Huntington

Sec. Blumenthal (Chairman)

William Hyland

Anthony Solomon

Robert Hormats

Marjorie Searing

Timothy Deal

Defense

Charles Duncan

JCS

Gen. Smith

The group agreed that trade was an important aspect of overall

US-Soviet political relations even though the volume of trade was small

relative to the size of the two economies. MFN and credits clearly mean

more to the Soviets than to us, primarily because of their political sym-

bolism. MFN would not result in substantially greater Soviet exports to

the US.

The Jackson-Vanik and Stevenson amendments2 have largely

failed in their principal objective, that is, to put pressure on the Soviets

to permit increased emigration of Jews and other minorities. The

Jewish community in the US has begun to understand this and now

may be amenable to some change in the legislation if that would facili-

tate emigration. Some participants doubted, however, that the Con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

gressional sponsors and supporters of the legislation are willing to con-

sider amending the legislation, at least at this time.

The group agreed that timing was crucial. Presently, we have a

number of major policy initiatives that are or will shortly come before

the Congress (e.g. Canal treaty, SALT, energy program). We will need

the full support of Jackson and other key senators. Thus it would be a

major tactical mistake to launch an Administration initiative to repeal

or modify the Jackson-Vanik and Stevenson amendments now. But this

would not rule out low-key, exploratory discussions with Jackson and

others about the desirability of revised legislation, the best means to ef-

fect such a change, and what we want from the Soviets in return for

modification in our policy.

Present restrictions in the Trade Act deny the President adequate

flexibility in dealing with the Soviets. The ability to offer MFN and,

perhaps, credits could be a valuable tool. We should be able to use that

tool to our advantage, but that will not be possible without a change in

the law.

However, before deciding on Congressional tactics, we should

first attempt to develop a coherent East-West trade policy. We need an-

swers to some basic questions. What are we trying to accomplish

through expanded trade? Is increased trade a goal in itself? Should we

attempt to link movement in the trade area to progress on other issues?

Should the linkages be to internal issues in the Soviet Union (e.g. emi-

gration, human rights) or to Soviet external behavior (e.g. their policies

and actions in the Middle East, Africa, etc.). Some participants ex-

pressed concern about “overloading the circuits”, that is, asking too

much from the Soviets in return for MFN and credits.

The papers prepared for the meeting3 outlined four strategies for

dealing with the Soviets: (1) reduced engagement—a more restricted ap-

proach to trade relations designed to increase Soviet isolation from the

West, slow Soviet economic growth, and put pressure on their re-

sources; (2) status quo; (3) limited new engagement—an approach empha-

sizing use of “carrots” and “sticks” to control the pace of Soviet interac-

tion with the US and world economy; and (4) enthusiastic engagement—a

forthcoming approach intended to lead to full normalization of eco-

nomic ties. The Chairman (Sec. Blumenthal) pointed out that the status

quo (2) and limited new engagement (3) options were the only realistic

alternatives. He suggested, as a working hypotheses, that we seek to

define more closely what we mean by limited new engagement leaving

aside, for the moment, questions on timing and tactics.

June–December 1977

There is an important difference between giving the President

tools which enable him to be more flexible in his dealings with the So-

viets and actually using those tools. Under Jackson-Vanik, he has no

flexibility. Any proposal for limited new engagement must address this

issue. As a first step, we should let the Soviets know what we want

from them in the way of a down payment. We would make it under-

stood that we would work for a change in US legislation, but they, in

turn, would have to take steps to improve the atmosphere. If, as a re-

sult, the Soviets liberalize their policies, we will then be in a better posi-

tion to go before the Congress and seek a change in the Jackson-Vanik

and Stevenson amendments.

It was agreed that we need to study this question further to estab-

lish what we can reasonably expect to obtain from the Soviets in return

for MFN and/or credits. On the other hand, we should avoid making

the linkages between specific economic and political issues too explicit.

That would surely backfire, as did Jackson-Vanik.

It was pointed out that generally our analysis of US-Soviet eco-

nomic relations and, in particular, the question whether the US has eco-

nomic leverage or influence over the Soviets was narrowly focused on

the current situation. At the present time, we cannot exert significant

influence upon Soviet behavior by economic means, and to be effective

what leverage we do have would have to be used in a coordinated

Western effort. However, our allies are more reluctant than we to use

trade policy to achieve political ends. Yet, we may be missing an impor-

tant point. If economic growth in the Soviet Union slows as projected,

the Soviets will face difficult choices in the 1980’s regarding the alloca-

tion of resources. Does this have implications for US policy? Conceiv-

ably, our economic leverage may be much stronger than now, and we

may have a unique opportunity to use it. Some concern was expressed,

however, that it was difficult to see where an economic crisis, or more

likely, a slowdown in the Soviet economy, would necessarily be to our

advantage.

Similarly, with respect to energy, we should begin to think now

whether it is in our long-term interest to help the Soviets develop and

expand their energy production, in order to avoid the crisis suggested

in the CIA’s recent paper on Soviet oil. In that regard, we must decide

whether we are justified in basing our policies in this area on the CIA

study. We need a critical assessment of the paper.

Regarding technology transfer, it was agreed that our primary

concern was peaceful, non-strategic trade. Granting MFN and credits

to the Soviets would not necessarily mean any loosening of controls on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the export of strategic goods and technologies, particularly those with

potential military application.

On other East-West matters, the group agreed that the Administra-

tion should not support the Humphrey bill which, like the Dole amend-

ment proposed earlier this year, would permit the extension of CCC

credits to non-market economies not otherwise eligible under the Trade

Act. It was also reported that Romania was anxious to obtain an ex-

tended (e.g. three year) Jackson-Vanik waiver and had approached US

officials in that regard. The group decided that it would be a tactical

mistake for the Administration to undertake Congressional consulta-

tions on this issue at the present time. To obtain an extended waiver for

a single country, we would have to use up valuable bargaining chips

with the Congress which could undermine the prospects for a broader

change in Title IV of the Trade Act.

Next Steps

It was agreed that we are not in a position now to undertake any

major new initiatives in US-Soviet economic relations. Further work

must be done in the following areas:

1. Studies should be initiated on the implications for US policy of

(a) a slowdown in economic growth during the 1980s and (b) a pro-

jected decline in Soviet energy output and its shift from net exporter to

net importer.

2. There should also be a study of what we would realistically ex-

pect to obtain from the Soviets in return for MFN and/or USG credits.

This would include an examination of alternate packages, i.e. tradeoffs

on both Soviet internal (e.g. emigration, human rights) and foreign

policy issues (e.g. Soviet restraint in the Middle East, Africa).

3. We should undertake low-key, exploratory discussions with key

Senators and Congressmen to evaluate the prospects for a change in the

Jackson-Vanik and Stevenson amendments and to review the best leg-

islative means to effect such a change.

Sec. Blumenthal will meet with Soviet Foreign Trade Minister Pa-

tolichev in November, and it was agreed that we should have answers

to these questions before that meeting. The studies and our Congres-

sional soundings will be reviewed by the PRC at a later date.

June–December 1977

47.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Paul Warnke

Mr. Marshall Shulman

In the course of a luncheon meeting, September 10, held at our re-

quest, the following subjects were covered:

1. Aeroflot Office Bombing. In response to Dobrynin’s protest of Sep-

tember 7 regarding explosion damage to Aeroflot Washington office

earlier that day, the Secretary reported measures taken to seek to ap-

prehend the persons responsible and to prevent further such occur-

rences. Dobrynin indicated satisfaction with the report.

2. Brezhnev remarks to Justice Burger. The Secretary expressed sur-

prise at the tenor of the reported remarks of Brezhnev concerning the

48.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Dobrynin

Richard Moose—part time

Paul Warnke—part time

Marshall Shulman

At a two-hour meeting held at our request September 13, the fol-

lowing subjects were covered:

1. Rhodesia. Moose and the Secretary reviewed in detail our plans

on Rhodesia, including our intention to seek a Security Council resolu-

tion next week. Dobrynin expressed the opinion that if the Africans in-

volved accepted the proposal, he did not think the Soviet Union would

oppose it. In response to Dobrynin’s request, Moose agreed to supply

the details in writing.

2. Middle East. The Secretary gave Dobrynin a preliminary review

of some problems we have with language in the Soviet draft of the pro-

posed joint statement, but indicated he would communicate a fuller re-

sponse later in the week after consultation with the President. A gen-

eral problem in the discussions appeared to arise from the Soviet

disinclination to refer specifically to Security Council Resolutions 242

and 338, but to mention Security Council and General Assembly Reso-

lutions or United Nations Resolutions, or to incorporate language from

the resolutions without naming them. The Secretary suggested that the

joint statement might better be issued at the conclusion of the New

York meetings toward the end of the month, rather than during Gro-

myko’s visit to Washington. Dobrynin seemed to have no difficulty

with this suggestion. Incidentally, Dobrynin commented favorably on

the statement on the Middle East issued by the State Department on

June–December 1977

September 12; he thought it usefully clarified our position on the Pal-

estinian problem, and called attention to Arafat’s favorable reaction.

3. SALT. In commenting on the possibility of a sublimit on MIRVd

ICBMs, Dobrynin observed that this would be likely to evoke an imme-

diate and unfavorable reaction in Moscow, as a step backward from

our May position. The equity of this sublimit was discussed, against the

background of the number of Soviet missiles at Pervomaisk and Der-

ezhnaya. Dobrynin repeated his understanding of the importance of

getting a response from Moscow to the illustrative principles discussed

at the meeting on September 10.

4. ABM Treaty Reaffirmation. In response to Dobrynin’s request to

Shulman on September 125 for clarification of the time intended for the

SCC review and the nature of the clarifications and modifications men-

tioned in our previous draft, Dobrynin was given a statement indi-

cating that the review was intended to follow immediately after the

November meeting, and that the clarifications and modifications were

minor. Dobrynin made it clear that references to clarifications and

modifications might raise questions in the public minds over the extent

of the changes proposed. The statement was thereupon redrafted. The

present text is attached as Tab A.

5. Moscow Embassy Roof Materials. The Secretary made strong rep-

resentations to Dobrynin requesting that the lumber required for the

repair of the roof of the US Embassy in Moscow be granted prompt

clearance by Soviet Customs. Dobrynin said he had no knowledge of

the problem, but promised to seek expeditious handling of the matter.

He added, however, that our Embassy was using the occasion of the

fire to seek action on many unrelated requests.

6. Gromyko Visit.

a. The Secretary indicated that Gromyko’s meeting with the Presi-

myko and the Secretary might meet together earlier that morning. Do-

brynin suggested that Gromyko might wish to mention the Middle

East in his talk with the President, and it was therefore agreed that a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

half-hour would be set aside on the afternoon of the 22nd for a brief

preliminary discussion of the Middle East between Gromyko and the

Secretary.

b. The Secretary indicated that Mrs. Vance would be pleased to

give a tea for Mrs. Gromyko if she should accompany the Foreign Min-

ister to Washington.

c. Dobrynin suggested that Gromyko might wish to have an op-

portunity to talk with the Secretary alone, following the luncheon on

the 22nd. The possibility was kept open that Gromyko might wish to

return to the Soviet Embassy for a brief period thereafter, and before

the start of the afternoon session.

d. Dobrynin inquired who would be present at the meeting with

the President. The Secretary replied that, in addition to himself, there

would be the Vice President, Dr. Brzezinski and a notetaker. Dobrynin

said that Gromyko would be accompanied at the meeting by himself,

Kornienko and Sukhadrov, the interpreter.

e. The Secretary suggested the possibility that in the course of the

meetings, it would be useful to review the status of the various working

groups set up following the Moscow meeting, and that the commu-

nique might include a reference to this review. Dobrynin concurred in

the suggestion.

7. Miscellany.

a. Dobrynin asked the Secretary whether there was any possibility

of a favorable US response to the Soviet suggestions of a declaration on

the non-use of force, and on no first-use of nuclear weapons in Europe.

The Secretary indicated that the former did not appear to have practical

value, but that we still had the latter suggestion under study.

b. The Secretary asked Dobrynin about the Soviet view of develop-

ments in the Horn of Africa. Dobrynin indicated that the matter was a

delicate one, but he went on to say that the Soviet Union had done its

best to stop the fighting in the area, and was trying to hold arms ship-

ments to a minimum. However, he added, irrationality on both sides

made the situation difficult.

c. Dobrynin inquired conversationally about the composition of

the US Delegation to the United Nations, and to the Belgrade CSCE

Conference. When these had been answered, Dobrynin indicated an in-

terest in whether the appointment of Justice Goldberg7 to the CSCE

meeting implied a change of policy. He also inquired whether the Sec-

retary as well as the President would be speaking at the General As-

sembly. The Secretary said this had not been decided.

49.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Dobrynin

Marshall Shulman

Ambassador Dobrynin came in September 15 at his request to re-

port on replies received from Moscow to several points discussed with

him at previous meetings, related to the forthcoming discussions with

p.m.

He transmitted the text of the Soviet unilateral statement re-

garding the Soviet intention to take no actions inconsistent with the In-

terim Agreement after its expiration and while SALT negotiations are

proceeding, provided that the United States exercises similar restraints.

Statement would be issued during Gromyko visit. (Text of statement at

Tab 1, in Russian and English translation as provided by Dobrynin.)

Dobrynin also transmitted language for a joint US-Soviet state-

ment expressing determination to conclude a new SALT agreement,

which could either be issued separately or as part of a communique at

the conclusion of the Gromyko visit to Washington. (Texts of Russian

and English translation as provided at Tab 2.)

Dobrynin then transmitted a non-paper indicating a negative

Moscow reaction to the proposal to limit Soviet MLBMs to 220, and to

limit the number of bombers carrying ALCMs to 250. The statement

also repeated the charge that the United States is striving for unilateral

advantages, and expressed the hope that the US would approach the

talks with Gromyko with “more realistic positions.” (Text of non-

paper, as supplied in English handwriting, at Tab C [3].) In transmit-

ting the message, Dobrynin observed: “This is something we will both

regret.”

In the discussion that followed, Dobrynin expressed the view that

further efforts to elicit counter-proposals to the points raised would not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

be likely to be productive, since the Soviet commitment to “the Vladi-

vostok agreements” (and by extension to the negotiations of January

and February, 1976) was a matter of principle, and was accompanied

by strong emotion. It was clear from the lengthy discussion following

that fundamental differences of recollection and interpretation re-

mained on what was agreed to by the United States at Vladivostok and

the subsequent negotiations. Dobrynin insisted that Secretary Kissin-

ger had agreed, and President Ford had affirmed in writing, on aggre-

gate ceilings, on counting ALCMs as MIRVs and on a 2500 km range

limit on ALCMs. He also thought, but less certainly, that agreement

had been reached on a 600 km range limit on SLCMs and GLCMs. He

insisted that the language used at Vladivostok had referred to “air to

surface missiles,” and had not, in a number of specific instances, in-

cluded the adjective “ballistic.”

Moreover, Dobrynin added, the Soviet leadership was uncertain

until April or May where the present Administration stood on these

points, since they had been repeated by Brezhnev in his letters to Presi-

dent Carter, and had not been specifically rejected in the President’s re-

sponses. He also cited the Brzezinski press conference of April 14 as evi-

dence that the US administration still held to the position that bombers

carrying ALCMs would be counted under the MIRV aggregate. The

Secretary refuted this interpretation of the Vladivostok agreement, and

said that the press conference referred to did not constitute a formal

statement of the Administration’s diplomatic position. He added that

further arguments about Vladivostok would be sterile, and could not

lead to productive discussions when Gromyko came.

Dobrynin responded by saying that the essence of the matter, as he

saw it, was that the negotiations were premised upon the acceptance by

both sides of a rough strategic equivalence, and that the US efforts to

limit Soviet ICBMs, their principal reliance in that equivalence, ap-

peared to them as an effort to gain a strategic superiority through nego-

tiations, since US advantages in submarines, bombers and now cruise

missiles, would not be equally limited. “As they see it in Moscow, you

here think we are weak economically and have other problems, and ex-

pect us to yield to your demands for superiority, but we won’t. We are

prepared to make any sacrifices necessary, and our people will, when

they understand that the US is unwilling to accept parity.”

There followed some inconclusive discussion whether it would be

useful, in the absence of other agreement, to conclude an agreement on

the Vladivostok ceilings on delivery vehicles and MIRVs, perhaps with

50.

Editorial Note

Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko visited Washington on

and President Jimmy Carter. Gromyko’s visit to Washington was in

conjunction with his trip to New York for the United Nations General

Assembly. The six meetings with Vance and/or Carter dealt primarily

with SALT, but also addressed issues in the Middle East.

The first meeting, held between Gromyko and Vance on Sep-

reiterated the use of the three-part framework, which he had intro-

duced at the Geneva meetings. (See Document 28.) The discussion re-

volved around negotiations dealing with specific missiles and the limi-

tations that would be imposed. Both Gromyko and Vance stressed that

there should be equality for both countries in the limitations. (Memo-

randum of conversation; Department of State, Office of the Secretariat

10, Vance NODIS MemCons, 1977)

Vance and Gromyko took place and dealt with territorial issues in the

Middle East. Vance discussed his recent talks with Israeli and Egyptian

representatives. Gromyko proposed a joint statement that addressed

reconvening the Geneva Conference. Vance indicated that the Leba-

nese should be included, but this proved to be a point of contention be-

tween the United States and the Soviets. (Memorandum of conversa-

tion, September 22, Department of State, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of

Later that evening, Gromyko and Vance met a third time to discuss

SALT. Gromyko addressed the proposed limitations on land-based

MIRVed missiles. He also assured Vance that the radius of the Backfire

would not be increased. Vance assured Gromyko that he would share

this information with the President. The memorandum of conversation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980.

On the morning of September 23, Gromyko met with Carter and

Vance. During this meeting Carter provided an overview of U.S.-Soviet

relations, to which Gromyko responded. While a variety of topics were

discussed, including the Middle East and Africa, the discussion dealt

primarily with SALT and missile limitations. Regarding the Middle

East, it was determined that the Geneva Conference should be recon-

vened. The discussions on Africa addressed white versus black rule.

Gromyko reiterated that in order to convene a summit between Carter

and Brezhnev, a major step must be on the horizon. Carter complained

about Soviet press criticism of him. Additionally, he criticized the So-

viet leadership for its inflexibility and unresponsiveness to several pro-

posals made by the United States. He reiterated that the United States

would remain flexible, but the Soviet Union must be so as well. For the

record of the meeting on SALT, see ibid., Document 183.

On the afternoon of September 23, Gromyko and Vance held their

fifth meeting. They discussed the communique´ and continued their

previous discussions regarding the limitations on MIRVed and

non-MIRVed missiles. (Memorandum of Conversation, September 23,

cial Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall

9/77) For the text of the communique´, see Department of State Bulletin,

discuss a variety of subjects. MBFR was discussed and its lack of

progress was attributed to differences in data. Vance and Gromyko

next turned to the political situation in Rhodesia. Both expressed the

desire to see majority rule in Rhodesia and other nations in southern

Africa, in addition to United Nations support in this regard. Gromyko

then complained about U.S. press coverage, stating that the press ac-

tively insisted that the Soviets were increasing their conventional and

nuclear arms, and as a result forcing the United States to increase its

arms supply. Finally, their discussion turned to the Comprehensive

Test Ban, specifically the date the treaty would enter into force, and

peaceful explosions, as opposed to those that were weapons-related.

ment of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Sec-

June–December 1977

51.

Editorial Note

On September 27, 1977, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko

returned to Washington from New York, where he was attending the

52.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

The Middle East

No. I of IV

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Dobrynin came in Monday afternoon, October 17, 1977, at the Sec-

I. Middle East—The Secretary asked Ambassador Dobrynin

whether there was any Soviet reaction to the US/Israeli working paper.

Dobrynin said that he had gone over the text. He asked if it was really

necessary to have this paper and said it made matters more difficult

with the PLO. He said the PLO had inquired whether the working draft

superseded the joint Soviet/American declaration2 and had been told

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

that it did not. The Secretary reported that the preliminary response

from Egypt and Jordan had been positive and from Syria “reserved”—

a word suggested by Dobrynin. The Secretary said there were two main

questions: How the Palestinians were to be represented and how the

working groups were to be organized. Dobrynin asked what role the

Soviet Union would have in the six working groups listed in the

working paper. The Secretary said that he had recommended that the

two co-chairmen participate in each of the working groups and Do-

brynin seemed reassured on this point. The Secretary recalled that in

1974 both the US and the Soviet Union had participated in the military

working group and that we could build on this precedent. (The Secre-

tary noted that in 1975 the Soviets had not participated in the military

working group at their own choosing.)

The chairmanship of the conference was discussed; it was agreed

that it would be better to have the co-chairmen rotate in the chair than

to have the Secretary General preside.

Returning to the Israeli statement, Dobrynin asked whether it im-

plied that only West Bank Palestinians would be represented. The Sec-

retary replied that the question of Palestinian representation should be

solved in a practical way and should be developed with specific names.

We should work together with the parties to find names that would be

acceptable both to the Arabs and the Israelis.

The Secretary then raised the question of how to go about initi-

ating a public call for the convening of the conference. Provisionally, it

was agreed that it should be done the same way as last time, with iden-

tical letters from the co-chairmen to the Secretary General requesting

that he convene the conference, and that one possibility would be one

invitation to the Arab League for the Arab participants. The Secretary

noted that Lebanon had asked to participate and that the other parties

had expressed no objection to this.

The Secretary said that there could be no guarantees at this point

on the outcome of the conference on specific substantive matters such

as a Palestinian state. Dobrynin probed about the extent of the US de-

53.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Arms Control Issues: SALT, ASAT, Conventional Arms

No. II of IV

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Dobrynin came in Monday afternoon, October 17, at the Secre-

1. SALT—Dobrynin wanted to know whether the ratification of the

Panama treaty would interfere with SALT negotiations or ratification

and expressed the hope that early progress could be made at Geneva.

He hoped that Warnke would stay in Geneva until agreement was

reached. The Secretary replied that it was the President’s desire to have

SALT proceed on its own two feet and that, although Warnke would be

coming home for consultation, he would stay on duty as long as neces-

sary. Dobrynin said that he had received a copy of the instructions is-

sued to Semenov and that they called for the speediest possible conclu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

sion. He thought only one or two difficult questions remained and that

these could be dealt with promptly and flexibly.

On Backfire, the Secretary mentioned the questions being raised in

the Congress and stressed the importance of having the clarification

from the Soviet side. He cited the questions raised by Senator Stevens

of Alaska about whether Alaska would be within Backfire range. Do-

brynin replied that Alaska was almost within rifle range. The Secretary

said he understood Gromyko to say that Backfire’s current radius of

2200 km would not last indefinitely, but that it would never be given a

range that would enable it to attack the US. The Secretary said there is

still a general question as to what “intercontinental range” means. Do-

brynin replied that in the Geneva discussions it had been generally

agreed that intercontinental range meant 5500 kms.

The Secretary also pointed out that there had been discussions in

the Congress of the Backfire’s retractable refuelling capability and that

this would present a verification problem. Dobrynin said he did not

know how this would be handled, but he left the impression that he

was expecting to receive some additional explanations on this and

other Backfire questions. He added that there could not be 100 percent

verification on either side, but that it would be stupid for the Soviet

Union to cheat on Backfires. He was sure that specialists could find a

way to deal with the verification problem. He cited the Soviet Union’s

willingness to accept a radical solution to the Derazhnya and Pervo-

maisk problem, even though it would cost the Soviet Union quite a bit

of money to get another site, but they had decided it was worth it.

With regard to the discussion of the differences between the Amer-

ican proposal for banning the testing of all new missiles, and the Soviet

proposal that only MIRVs be banned, the Secretary asked if this issue

was understood and what the Soviet problem was on this point. Do-

brynin first said, “Some of our missiles are old fashioned,” but then

went on to make the argument that it would be technically difficult to

substitute a whole new MIRV system for a “mono-block” that had been

tested only with a single warhead. On the differences between the 1200

and 1250 figure for the MIRVed subceiling, Dobrynin said that this was

not only a question of the US getting 120 as against 70 ALCM bombers,

but that the US would be getting a double bonus, since the Soviet Union

would not be deploying any ALCM bombers.

2. Anti-Satellite Systems—The Secretary said he wanted to let Do-

brynin know that a proposal would soon be transmitted to the Soviet

Union regarding limitations on ASAT systems. He underlined the im-

portance of the subject, saying that in his recent testimony before the

Congress on SALT, he had been interrogated at length about the con-

tinuing capability of the US to monitor compliance with the SALT

agreement by satellite observation. He had replied that this was very

June–December 1977

important and this had led to the question of the effect on satellite mon-

itoring of the development of an ASAT system. Dobrynin asked

whether the American communication would add further concrete

thoughts and suggestions. The Secretary replied in the affirmative and

said that this would have a significant bearing on the ratification of the

SALT agreement.

3. Conventional Arms Transfers and Sales—The Secretary noted that

Gelb had raised this point with Bessmertnykh and that Bessmertnykh

had said that it might be a long time before a reply was received from

Moscow. The Secretary said the President attaches considerable impor-

tance to this subject and urged Dobrynin to do everything possible to

speed up a reply. Dobrynin replied that he would do so, but he went on

to say, in what he described as an unofficial reaction, that the US was

selling more and more arms around the world, including to some of the

neighbors of the Soviet Union. In this connection, he cited sales to Iran.

He noted the Administration’s declared intent to reduce arms sales and

asked why the US had been speeding up the process. The Secretary said

that many items had been in the pipeline, but an effort was being made

to hold sales and transfers down. This was reflected in the fact that the

lion originally projected. This includes some very expensive items,

such as AWACS. There would be further reductions next year, he said.

Dobrynin asked why not show some restraint as a good will gesture.

The Secretary replied that restraint was being shown and that AWACS,

for example, had a purely defensive function.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

54.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

INFCE; South Africa, Horn of Africa, Rhodesia

No. III of IV

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Dobrynin came in Monday afternoon, October 17, 1977, at the Sec-

retary’s request. The meeting lasted approximately two hours.

1. International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation Conference—The Secre-

tary asked Dobrynin if he knew who the Soviet delegate would be to

the INFCE Conference beginning October 19. Dobrynin did not know

(but later Bessmertnykh called with the name). The Secretary informed

Dobrynin he was planning to add three more countries to the list: Al-

geria, Saudi Arabia, and South Africa. Dobrynin inquired whether

there would be any African objection to these additions, to which the

Secretary replied that the participants were coming in as experts and it

was necessary to include the threshold countries.

2. South Africa—The Secretary said that we were continuing satel-

lite monitoring of the nuclear sites and nothing new had been reported.

He said the South Africans had given their commitment not to explode

any nuclear devices, whether peaceful or military; not to acquire nu-

clear capabilities, except for the purpose of nuclear power; and that

they were not planning an explosion at the Kalahari test site. It was

agreed that the two countries would keep each other informed on this

subject.

3. Horn of Africa—The Secretary inquired how the Soviet Union

saw the problems in the Horn of Africa developing. Dobrynin said,

“We are more eager to end the fighting there than you are,” but he indi-

cated a reluctance to shut off supplies to the Ethiopians, which had not

yet reached the level previously supplied to the Somalis. The Secretary

June–December 1977

raised the question of the OAU’s seeking to mediate and whether there

was anything that anyone could do with Ethiopia that would be

helpful. He also raised the question of how the Nigerians could be

helpful in working out a ceasefire acceptable to both sides. Dobrynin

did not think that any outside intervention would be useful. He said

that although an autonomous solution for the Ogaden was a reasonable

basis for a settlement, the Somalis want to remain in place and the Ethi-

opians’ position was that Somalia should first withdraw. The Secretary

asked about the possibility of greater restraint on what is furnished to

the Ethiopians. Dobrynin replied that the level of supplies had not

reached the level formerly supplied to the Somalis. He said that the

problem was that the Ethiopians did not have enough trained people to

use the material they had received. Dobrynin made it clear that, in his

opinion at least, it would be shortsighted for the Soviet Union to send

technicians or military advisers. He cited the experience of the Soviet

Union and Egypt as a case in point.

4. Rhodesia—The Secretary filled in Dobrynin on the Anglo-

55.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 22, 1977

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations

PARTICIPANTS

US

[USSR]

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Ambassador Dobrynin came in at his request, saying he had some-

thing to present which would be useful. It turned out to be a non-paper

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

informing us of a series of planned ICBM test launches the last few

days of this month and in November (see text attached).

The following subjects were also discussed:

1. Middle East. The Secretary recalled that the letter from the co-

chairmen of the Geneva Conference went to the Security Council, and

recommended that this precedent be followed again, as well as in the

matter of having the working groups report to the plenary conference,

without having this specified in the working paper.

On the subject of Palestinian representation, the Secretary said he

had the impression that Arafat was showing signs of beginning to

move toward presenting names which could then be checked out with

the other participants; Dobrynin said, however, that this was not his

impression.

2. SALT. The Secretary reviewed his recent testimony and consul-

tations with the Congress, including the information that had been pro-

vided to the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committees

on a confidential basis. He said that every effort was being made to

avoid leaks, but that leaks might nevertheless occur. He indicated that

the Congress was raising very serious questions about the issues under

negotiation, and stressed the importance of having more specific assur-

ances on Backfire range and production rates. Dobrynin said that

Moscow was aware of our concern, since the matter had been raised

with Gromyko. The Secretary also stressed the interest expressed by

Senator McIntyre, among others, in an agreement limiting new missile

systems, reflecting the view, which he shared, that significant arms lim-

itations would be achieved when this kind of agreement was combined

with an agreement limiting numbers.

Dobrynin remarked that Semenov, the chief of the Soviet delega-

tion in Geneva, thinks things are moving fairly well.

3. Radiation. The Secretary informed Dobrynin that a book would

be published during the coming week on the subject of the Soviet radia-

tion of the US Embassy in Moscow. Dobrynin said he could not under-

stand why the US was raising the issue, since Deputy Undersecretary

Read4 had been able to cite only one instance in the preceding week in

which this radiation had been observed. Shulman pointed out that at

least a dozen bursts of radiation had been recorded in recent weeks,

and said that information underlining the seriousness of the matter

would be put before Dobrynin.

56.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 31, 1977

SUBJECT

Lithuanian Governor; Middle East; Non-First Use

Part I of II

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Ambassador Dobrynin came in on the afternoon of October 31 for

a meeting which lasted an hour and 10 minutes, at which the following

items were discussed:

1. Governors’ Conference Delegation: Dobrynin informed us that the

Chairman of the Lithuanian Council of Ministers had been taken ill and

would not be able to be a member of the delegation. The Secretary said

that this fortunately resolved a problem that he would otherwise have

had to raise.

Later, Dobrynin asked who in the Administration would be re-

ceiving the Soviet delegation or the chairman, Solomentsev. The Secre-

tary said it was not definite, but perhaps it would be the Vice President.

Dobrynin replied that this would be a good idea.

2. Middle East: The Secretary reported to Dobrynin that the US had

now heard from all the Arab states. It was now clear that Egypt, Israel

and Jordan are prepared to go to Geneva and are willing to be flexible.

The Syrians, he said, are somewhat more rigid, although they are now

willing, after the debate on substantive matters in the plenary, to enter

into bilateral discussions afterwards.

On the Palestinian representation issue, the Secretary continued,

everyone is agreed that there should be a united Arab delegation with

some kind of Palestinian representation. The question has been: which

Palestinians? The US suggestion has been that the Arabs should indi-

cate privately whom they would like to see in the delegation, and we

would make sure that this would not create any difficulties. Indications

so far are, he said, that this would be agreeable to a number of the

parties, but it is not yet clear that Syria is among them. Also, it is not

June–December 1977

known what the PLO will do. There are some indications that Arafat

would look upon this procedure favorably, if he can be sure that the

Palestinian question will be discussed. He appears to feel that the ques-

tion of who represents the Palestinians is not of crucial importance. The

Israelis are still strongly maintaining that Palestinians drawn from the

West Bank and from Gaza should be the representatives, but this is still

being discussed with them.

Our suggestion, said the Secretary, is that we follow the 1973

model. At that time, there were identical letters from the US and Soviet

Union to the Secretary General saying that the parties had agreed to

meet. The letters could indicate that the Arabs are willing for the

United Arab delegation to include Palestinians. They would further

state that the 1973 procedures would govern the conference, unless the

parties should agree otherwise. The letters might also make it clear that

after the opening plenary session, there would be both bilateral and

multilateral working groups. The Secretary pointed out that it should

help with the Syrians that under the 1973 procedures, the working

group was required to report back to the plenary.

The Secretary went on to report that the US had just sent letters to

Sadat, Hussein and Assad suggesting these procedures, and informa-

tion along these lines had also been sent to Saud, since there was to be a

meeting of some or all of the Arab principal states in Saudi Arabia on

November 2.

Dobrynin said that Gromyko had the intention of sending in the

near future information on Soviet contacts with the PLO, and of con-

sulting about conference procedure.

The Secretary advised against too precise language on conference

procedure at this time.

Dobrynin said he had been doing research on the 1973 arrange-

ments, and said he had been unable to determine whether the Secretary

General had sent a letter to the participants. The Secretary replied that

he had sent a letter to the Security Council but not to the participants.

Dobrynin asked what the Israelis might object to. The Secretary re-

plied that one of the issues of concern to Israel was the reporting by

working groups to the plenary.

The Secretary informed Dobrynin that the US would take an early

opportunity to restate its position on the importance of dealing with the

Palestinian issue. Dobrynin asked if this should be done by the two

co-chairmen together, and the Secretary suggested at this stage it had

better be done unilaterally.

3. Soviet Non-First Use Proposal. Dobrynin asked whether it might

not be possible to work together on this subject, since he felt the Presi-

dent’s statement had been basically the same as the one proposed by

57.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 31, 1977

SUBJECT

Bilateral US-Soviet Issues; UN Issues

Part II of II

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

Ambassador Dobrynin came in on the afternoon of October 31 for

a meeting which lasted an hour and 10 minutes, at which the following

items were discussed:

1. Warvariv Case. Although the United States had already formally

protested the matter, the Secretary said, he wanted to express his

strong disapproval of the fact that representatives of the Soviet Union

had first tried to recruit Warvariv and, having failed, then publicly

sought to discredit him, forcing us to respond. He added that this ac-

tivity would not help to advance the improvement of relations between

our countries.

Dobrynin said he had no information beyond a TASS despatch; he

offered, however, to supply documents that would demonstrate com-

pletely that Warvariv had been a Nazi collaborator. The Secretary re-

peated his point that these charges in no way excused the Soviet effort

to recruit Warvariv by blackmailing him.

June–December 1977

2. Patolichev Visit. Dobrynin asked about arrangements for the Pa-

tolichev visit. The Secretary said he would meet with the President, but

the time of the meeting was not yet definite. Dobrynin asked if the day

of the meeting was known, since it would help to plan Patolichev’s

flight to this country. He was told that it was understood that No-

vember 10 was under consideration.

Dobrynin then asked who would be present at the opening of the

Soviet exhibition in Los Angeles. The Secretary said it was not definite,

but he was considering Warren Christopher or Philip Habib, together

with John Reinhardt. Dobrynin said this would be very good. It was

agreed to firm matters up in a few days.

Dobrynin inquired who would be meeting Patolichev at the air-

port. The Secretary said that it would be someone of cabinet rank—ei-

ther Secretary Blumenthal or Secretary Kreps. Dobrynin indicated his

satisfaction, and added that the Soviet Union had invited Secretary

Kreps to visit Moscow—originally after her Warsaw trip—but now for

some later time, preferably in the spring, or whenever convenient to

her.

5. Soviet UNGA Detente Resolution. Dobrynin asked again, as he

had done during his previous visit, about the possibility of US support

for this resolution. The Secretary pointed out that Ambassadors

Leonard and Troyanovsky4 had discussed this in New York. Dobrynin

replied that Troyanovsky was told it was up to the State Department to

authorize the exploration of a possible mutual text. The Secretary an-

swered that our Delegation has all the authority it needs to continue the

discussions.

6. Sixtieth Anniversary Greetings. Dobrynin inquired whether the

US would be sending greetings to Brezhnev on the occasion of the Six-

tieth Anniversary celebration. He said the celebration would start on

November 2 with a speech by Brezhnev (at which he would have

“something positive” to say), but that greetings could be received any-

time up to the 7th.

7. Glagolev Letter. Dobrynin then handed a Shulman an oral

“non-note,” transmitting a letter received by the Consular Division of

the Soviet Embassy from Igor S. Glagolev, a Soviet citizen now resident

in the United States, threatening to publish a book in which will appear

previously secret information detrimental to the Soviet Union, but in-

viting the Soviet Embassy to be in touch with him through the State De-

partment. The Soviet note expresses the belief that Glagolev is acting in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

behalf of “American special services,” and asks the United States to

prevent the publication of the book. Shulman agreed to look into the

matter.

8. Shcharansky. The Secretary observed that accusations of Shchar-

ansky’s alleged contacts with the United States government had again

appeared in the Soviet press that morning, and recalled the President’s

categorical denial to Foreign Minister Gromyko that there had been

any connections between the CIA and Shcharansky. He reminded Do-

brynin of the serious effect a trial of Shcharansky would have on rela-

tions between the two countries. Dobrynin inquired whether the Presi-

dent had examined the evidence lately. The Secretary said that the

President had checked with the Director of the CIA. Dobrynin said that

the Soviet officials in charge of the judicial process say there were such

connections, and that he had the impression the trial would go for-

ward, although he did not know when it would be. He added that the

campaign against the trial by Jewish groups and others made the

matter more difficult; that resentment at high levels—including the

Central Committee—had been building up over what they saw as a

challenging demand not to touch a dissident because he was Jewish,

and that this resentment “by people who are not directly involved in

Soviet-American relations” had led to a determination not to yield to

this dictation from abroad. Dobrynin ventured the personal opinion

that the President’s statement may have delayed the trial, but now

pressure had been building up as a result of the clearly organized cam-

paign of letters from Jewish communities all over the United States,

and the matter had become a domestic issue within the government

and the party, and the investigation and preparations for the court

were still continuing.

9. UN Hijacking Resolution. The Secretary expressed the hope that

the Soviet Union and its colleagues would support this measure ac-

tively. Dobrynin inquired whether there had been any trouble about

this with the Soviet delegation. The Secretary said that some of the East

European countries had been dragging their feet. Dobrynin suggested

that the matter be discussed with the Soviet delegation in New York,

which the Secretary said would be done.

10. South African Issue in Security Council. The Secretary reviewed

the action anticipated later that day on the several resolutions on the

subject and indicated how the United States would vote on them. Re-

ferring to the anticipated United States vetoes, Dobrynin observed that

Ambassador Young had said he was obliged to follow instructions, to

strengthen security measures in an effort to prevent hijacking. For the text of the resolu-

58.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, November 4, 1977

Dear Mr. President:

On the eve of the 60th anniversary of the Soviet Union, I want to

extend to you privately, as I will be doing more formally in a separate

public message, my warm congratulations. I wish you and the Soviet

people every success in the efforts to enhance the peaceful well-being

of your country.

Let me also take advantage of this opportunity to share with you

my thoughts about our joint pursuit of better relations between our two

countries.

We still have some distance to go to achieve an agreement on stra-

tegic arms that would be mutually satisfactory. I hope that our negoti-

ators will soon be able to resolve the outstanding issues. Otherwise, un-

necessary delay—as was the case after February 1976—may make it

increasingly difficult for us to reach accommodation. Our own major

goal in seeking an agreement is to achieve the sharpest mutual reduc-

tions and to insure balanced forces, with adequate verification of com-

pliance with agreements.

I hope that as we move forward on questions of limiting and re-

ducing strategic arms we can at the same time take useful steps in other

aspects of our relations. A comprehensive ban on all nuclear testing

will slow the nuclear arms race, and will also have a highly beneficial

impact on opinion in my country and in the world at large. I am grati-

fied by your statement of November 2nd. It is an important and con-

structive step which brings us closer to agreement. I would also wel-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

come your suggestions about how we might implement and verify

your proposal that no more nuclear weapons be produced.

One issue is of increasing concern to us. The continuing tests in

space of anti-satellite devices by the Soviet Union have been carefully

noted in our country. This concern has emerged in our efforts to build

support in the U.S. Senate for a SALT agreement. This is a seriously de-

stabilizing development which we have voluntarily foregone, although

we would have the technical capability to build similar systems. A very

early joint agreement not to conduct further tests and to forego this ca-

pability would be helpful.

As you know, we are making some progress in the Middle East

under difficult circumstances and, with your help, there is a good pros-

pect that the parties will agree to go to Geneva this year under mutually

proposed procedures, and in the proper spirit of compromise. The

United States has been exerting much effort to that end with all the na-

tions involved, and I hope that the Soviet Union will also use its influ-

ence on Syria and the other nations in a positive and forceful manner.

Let me also draw your personal attention to certain conditions

which adversely affect the well-being of the U.S. Embassy’s personnel

in Moscow from their repeated exposure to unwarranted doses of di-

rected radiation. I do not wish to raise this issue publicly into a source

of difficulty between our governments but you can well understand the

reason for our deep concern.

Finally, I would like to take advantage of this private communica-

tion to express the hope that the events in your country commemo-

rating sixty years of Soviet power will, in addition to reflecting the suc-

cesses and aspirations of the Soviet people, also contribute positively to

our mutual relations. Should the spirit of magnanimity expressed in

such acts as you may take in connection with the anniversary extend to

individuals whose situation is closely followed here, I assure you such

a step would contribute greatly to the improving atmosphere in our

relations.

Mr. President, my overall assessment is that progress is being

made toward a more cooperative and harmonious relationship be-

tween our countries. This is one of my major goals, and I know that you

share this desire. Despite difficult obstacles, I believe that together we

can resolve other remaining problems which derive, perhaps inevi-

tably, from our different societal systems and varying points of view.

You have my best personal wishes.

Sincerely,

Jimmy Carter

59.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

16276. For the Secretary from Ambassador. Subject: Message to

Brezhnev. Ref: State 264784.

1. With one hour’s advance notice I was received by Brezhnev in

Also present were Brezhnev’s aide A.M. Aleksandrov and his inter-

preter Sukhadrev. (It is noteworthy that no representative of the Min-

istry of Foreign Affairs attended.) I was accompanied by my political

counselor.

2. After the usual opening courtesies I presented Brezhnev with

the text of President Carter’s letter (reftel). Brezhnev informed me that

he was already familiar with the contents since Secy Vance had given

the text to Dobrynin. This enabled him to make some preliminary con-

siderations which he would ask me to transmit to President Carter.

—First he wished to express his gratitude for the President’s con-

gratulatory message on the sixtieth anniversary of the Soviet state and

for the best wishes which the President had expressed both in his offi-

cial message and in this letter

—He would of course carefully consider the contents of the Presi-

dent’s letter and will soon give an official reply.

noted with satisfaction that one of President Carter’s main goals was

for greater cooperation. “We welcome this positive shift in Soviet-US

relations during the recent period.” He also took satisfaction from the

fact that agreement on a series of mutually acceptable principled un-

derstandings was found in the recent meetings which Gromyko had

with the U.S. side in Washington and New York. As for the Soviet

Union, its line vis-a-vis the U.S. remains consistent and unchanging:

“We want these relations to be good, more friendly and hallmarked by

the spirit of cooperation” regarding bilateral questions and important

international problems. This Brezhnev had restated in his (November

2) speech marking the sixtieth anniversary celebration. The Soviets are

ready to maintain and improve relations so as to meet the aspirations of

cret; Cherokee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Sent by the Department of State to the White

House.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

both peoples, for reduction of international tensions and strengthening

of world peace.

4. SALT—Today, said Brezhnev, there are difficult tasks for both

sides to work out. Re SALT, he considered that Gromyko’s recent

meetings on major unresolved questions with Pres. Carter and Secy

Vance had opened the path to complete success, to the signing of a

SALT agreement and on this the Soviet side wanted to [accept?] without

delay or procrastination. “Our delegation in Geneva has been given in-

structions to discuss and coordinate all remaining questions and we

hope similar instructions have been given to the American delegation.”

The main thing now was to abide by the understandings of principles

already achieved and not to alter them. He was sure that in the nearest

future there could be the complete preparation of a SALT agreement. In

this connection Brezhnev noted that the two sides were also discussing

a number of other questions related to arms limitation and disarma-

ment. In all of these talks the Soviet side stood for mutually acceptable,

practical solutions.

5. CTB–PNE’s—Brezhnev said he wanted to call special attention

to his Nov. 2 statement of readiness to reach agreement on CTB in-

cluding a moratorium of PNE’s. “Speaking directly, it was not easy for

us to take such a decision, as it directly affects our national economic

plan; and we expect that the U.S. and the U.K. as participants in the

talks which are underway will in the end respond with appropriate rec-

iprocity” so as to achieve agreement on this major issue.

6. Anti-satellite—Referring to the paragraph of the President’s

[letter] dealing with anti-satellite developments, Brezhnev said he did

not wish to dwell at length on this. Claiming that the Soviet side was

“strictly adhering to the provision of existing agreements” and acting

in accordance with the principles of the SALT negotiations which were

underway, he stressed that the Soviets were not doing anything to de-

stabilize the situation. “I emphasize that the Soviet Union is not seeking

unilateral military advantage for itself.”

7. NUF and NNFU—in his Nov. 2 speech, Brezhnev said he had

re-emphasized the Soviet goal of promoting and strengthening interna-

tional peace and security by practical measures. He had in mind such

measures as

—a world treaty on non-use of force

—an agreement by all participants of the European (Helsinki) Con-

ference on non first use of nuclear weapons.

These were part of the Soviet objectives in the consolidating mili-

tary detente. “We expect that the U.S. will give positive consideration

to these proposals” whose implementation would serve to avoid a nu-

clear war and to further the interests of universal peace.

June–December 1977

8. Geneva conference—Of late, Brezhnev noted, there had been

considerable movement toward reconvening a Geneva Middle East

conference thanks in large part to joint efforts by the USSR and US as

Geneva co-chairmen. “We proceed from the assumption that, as

agreed, it should be reconvened before the end of this year.” Of course

in seeking agreement on practical matters related to the preparation

and conduct of the conference “we act so as to assure the legitimate

rights and interests of all, I emphasize all, parties without exception.

No one has the right to dictate conditions to others and this applies to

Israel as well.” Only on this basis could the Geneva conference attain its

objective—the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle

East. Our two countries should continue to coordinate their efforts in

this direction.

9. Microwave radiation—Regarding certain other matters in the

President’s message, Brezhnev declared he’d merely like to say the fol-

lowing: Concerning the allegations of certain “ill-disposed” people

about supposed unfavorable working conditions of U.S. Embassy per-

sonnel, “you live here and it’s for you to judge” Embassy working con-

ditions. For some reason this matter had been raised four or five times

(Aleksandrov intervened to claim that each time the Soviet side had

given an answer). “Let me just say that we have set forth our position

exhaustively and there’s no need to return to this.” The question was

being used, claimed Brezhnev by “certain agencies for unseemly pur-

poses” which are very remote from improvement of relations.

10. Amnesty for dissidents—Lastly, remarked Brezhnev, he

wanted to refer to one question in the President’s letter the very posing

of which was incomprehensible and unfounded. “I must emphasize

that if we want our relations to develop normally there must be no at-

tempts to interfere in each other’s internal affairs. As experience shows,

only when both sides really follow this principle can we avoid needless

friction and find solutions to questions, including those which are most

important to the U.S. and U.S.S.R.

11. Repeating that he would give President Carter’s message addi-

tional consideration and communicate a reply, Brezhnev requested that

I transmit greetings and best wishes to the President from him and his

colleagues.

12. After a brief exchange of quips on the toasts we both had con-

sumed at his Nov. 7 reception, I thanked Brezhnev for receiving me and

for giving me the opportunity to hear his views. These and his best

wishes I would transmit to the President promptly. With his permis-

sion I then said I wanted to comment briefly on a few of his remarks

and to ask a few questions:

(A) Gromyko talks—Recalling that I had attended Gromyko’s

talks in Washington, I said I thought they were very useful and I knew

that the President did as well;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

(B) SALT—I assured Brezhnev that before I left Washington

Warnke had been given instructions similar to those given the Soviet

delegation and we could both therefore hope for an early agreement

(Brezhnev interjected “Good”);

(C) CTB, and Brezhnev’s desire for peace—We recognize, I said

that Brezhnev’s Nov. 2 proposal for a moratorium on PNE’s was not

easy and we believe that it will be of great help in reaching agreement

on unresolved questions. As I started to mention the anti-satellite issue,

Brezhnev turned to Aleksandrov and in an aside said the sooner we

could agree on such matters “the sooner we (meaning President Carter

and himself) can meet each other.” He then turned to me and said

somewhat emotionally that as I could see from the media coverage of

the sixtieth anniversary celebrations the people want “peace, peace,

peace, peace, peace. Down with the neutron bomb and other things like

that. It wasn’t I who arranged all this—truly this is what the people of

the whole world including Asia and Africa want. What does this mean?

My fervant hope is that President Carter will understand what guides

me”. (In an aside to Aleksandrov: “What do we say to the people?”) I

reminded Brezhnev that I had told him on Nov. 7 that I was sure Pres.

Carter shares his desire to establish a permanent and just peace in the

world. There were some at this table (meaning my political counselor

and Sukhadrev) who were too young to experience World War II. But

Brezhnev had played an active part as had I, and we both knew what

world war meant. (At this point, 1310 hours, Brezhnev was seized by

heavy coughing for about a minute.);

(D) Anti-satellite—I said I was somewhat puzzled by Brezhnev’s

remarks on this score. It seemed clear from the President’s letter that

we have firm evidence that the USSR has tested anti-satellite devices in

outer space. Was I to understand from Brezhnev’s remarks that this

was not the case? (Brezhnev replied “this is not the case at all. I’ll reply

in detail to Pres. Carter.”)

(E) PLO position—referring to Brezhnev’s remarks on the Geneva

conference and the need to exchange views, I noted press reports that

PLO official Qaddumi had recently visited Moscow for talks with Gro-

myko and others. I wondered if Brezhnev could tell me something on

the current attitude of the PLO as revealed by Qaddumi which I could

pass on to the President? (Brezhnev was genuinely unknowledgable.

“Gromyko hasn’t told me anything. My honest word.” In an aside

Aleksandrov

explained

to

Brezhnev

that

Qaddumi

was

“The

Palestinian”);

(F) Microwave radiation—I said I found my life in Moscow to be

comfortable and I was proud to be Ambassador here but I did not like

to be the target of microwave radiation. Brezhnev was right in noting

that we had raised the question before and that the Soviet side had

June–December 1977

given replies but I must state in all frankness that these replies had not

been satisfactory. (Thumping the table, Brezhnev interjected: “Excuse

me. Your own specialists came here to test. They came to the conclusion

that your radiation dosage is higher in the U.S. than here.” Aleksan-

drov added that our dosage here was below the “sanitary norms” of

both the U.S. and USSR. Drawing a rectangle on paper Brezhnev said

he couldn’t understand the U.S. position. Radiation could not be

(merely) aimed at a particular object for it also affected the people

living around that area. “This is stupidity.”) I said that in view of his

further remarks I was compelled to show some evidence. Presenting

photographs of the Soviet microwave radiation projection both east

and south of the Embassy, I said I was not complaining about the gen-

eral level of radiation in the general vicinity: I was complaining about

radiation beams specifically aimed at the Embassy from these two

sources. I hoped he would examine the evidences for the issue was of

great importance not only to me but to all in the Embassy. (Pointing at

the photos Brezhnev exclaimed: “To be silent is to indicate tacit con-

sent? This is just not true. Your former Ambassador—what’s his name?

(Aleksandrov: “Stoessel”)—also participated in these studies and he

said it was not true. Now there’s a new Ambassador and the same old

story. Not one person has fallen sick or will fall sick. You should heed

us, heed me, heed the facts of the matter. These stories are put about by

ill wishers who want to worsen relations.”) I said that I must take issue.

These were not put out by ill wishers. They were a fact of life. I could

not believe that Stoessel had made the statements attributed to him and

I hoped Brezhnev would study the matter. (Brezhnev: “All right, I’ll

study it.”)

(G) Amnesty for dissidents—Regarding that portion of President’s

letter implicitly touching on this subject (Note: The words amnesty and

dissident were never mentioned in the entire conversation) I said I

could assure Brezhnev that the President has no intention of interfering

in Soviet internal affairs. He simply wanted to call attention to the fact

that certain developments here have a bearing on our bilateral relations

and give rise to considerable concern in the U.S. This question had been

discussed at length when Gromyko was in the U.S. (At this point Alek-

sandrov remarked that Brezhnev had exchanged letters with many

heads of state but none of these had ever raised a question pertaining

purely to Soviet domestic matters “and that is why this evokes such a

reaction”).

13. In closing I again thanked Brezhnev for receiving me and for

the frankness of such exchanges which can only lead to better under-

standing, not to misunderstanding. Brezhnev said he agreed. Asking

me to convey best regards to the Pres. he said he hoped we could accel-

erate steps toward greater peace and security throughout the world

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

which met the interests of billions of people. After side prompting by

Aleksandrov he noted that Patolichev was leaving for the U.S. today (I

interjected I had seen him off at airport this morning) and hoped that he

could “do big business there.” When I said I hoped to see Brezhnev

himself soon visit the U.S. he replied that “the sooner we prepare mate-

rials for agreements” the sooner such a meeting could take place.

14. As we stood up Brezhnev said that TASS would put out a brief

account of our meeting and that I was free to do the same.

15. Comment: Apart from his rather emotional words on the need

for peace and security, Brezhnev was visibly angry and disturbed in his

interventions on the radiation and amnesty issues. After a tough week

of anniversary celebrations he seemed physically fit; his speech was no

more slurred than usual; he read his text well and his ad hoc remarks

were lucid, cogent. Sometimes he thumped the table with the fingers of

his right hand to drive a point home. Three times during the conversa-

tion he coughed heavily, once bringing a handkerchief to his mouth.

Again, I saw no evidence of an incision on his left cheek or any sign of

makeup.

16. I was also struck by several cases of prompting from Aleksan-

drov but these in no way indicated that Brezhnev had lost track; rather

they were supportive of points he was already in the process of

making.

Toon

60.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

November 15, 1977

Dear Mr. President,

The US Ambassador has delivered to me your message. In con-

versation with him I set forth, in a preliminary way, my considerations

on the questions you touched upon. Additionally I would like to say

the following.

We are also satisfied with the advance forward which was

achieved of late in the relations between our countries. The task now is

to carry it further on, to realize it in practical actions. Between us there

is an understanding that first of all it relates to the earliest completion

of the work on a new strategic arms limitation agreement.

The solutions of principle, found in the course of recent talks with

you in Washington4 on the remaining outstanding questions have

opened the way for an agreement to be prepared without delay for

signing. Our Delegation in Geneva is thus instructed. I believe that you

know about the constructive line which we follow at the negotiations.

The main thing is to adhere to the already achieved mutual under-

standing of principle, not to try to touch up or erode what has been

agreed upon. In one word, we are for the conclusion of the agreement

at the earliest possible date and we hope that the U.S., on its part, will

also do all necessary for it.

As is evident from the message you assess properly the readiness

expressed by us to agree that, along with a ban for a definite period on

all nuclear weapon tests, a moratorium on nuclear explosions for

peaceful purposes would be declared. We expect that the U.S. and the

United Kingdom would take at the negotiations such position which

would permit in the near future to agree on the complete cessation of

nuclear weapon tests.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Our countries are also discussing other specific questions related

to arms limitation and disarmament. We count on achieving in the

course of these negotiations practical results.

I would also like to draw your attention, Mr. President, to the im-

portant proposals in the field of reducing the danger of war which were

put forward by the Soviet Union. Among them are: concluding World

Treaty on the non-use of force; achieving an agreement to the effect that

the States-Participants of All-European Conference are not to be first to

use against each other nuclear weapons; measures on consolidating

military relaxation in Europe. The imperative need of solving these

matters is obvious and we call upon the U.S. to discuss them.

You are interested in our conception of carrying out the proposal

on a simultaneous halt in the production of nuclear weapons by all

states and a commitment of the nuclear powers to start the gradual re-

duction of stockpiles of such weapons up to their total destruction. In

my view, now it is first of all important that the nuclear powers would

express their positive attitude to this idea as a matter of principle. Of

course, it is hard to name right away ready-made recipes of carrying it

out into practice. But if there is consent of all nuclear powers then they

all could be gathered together and think over as to specific means and

ways of realization of this proposal.

We would be ready to hold consultations on the question, you

raised, concerning means of anti-satellite devices in space. Such discus-

sion would include, of course, all the systems and means which possess

such potential capability including manned space shuttles.

In our view it is important to continue joint efforts of the U.S.S.R.

and the U.S. for the resumption by the end of this year, as it was agreed

between us, of the Geneva Peace Conference on the Middle East. We

have been working in this direction and intend to continue to be in con-

tact with the U.S. In settling practical issues it is necessary to have the

legitimate rights and interests of all the parties involved into the con-

flict, without exclusion, ensured. Only such an approach can guarantee

a just and lasting peace in that area.

As for the so called question of “adverse” conditions for the U.S.

Embassy’s personnel in Moscow the Soviet side has repeatedly given

exhaustive explanation on this matter.

In conclusion I wish to lay emphasis on the following: the change

for the better in our relations serves in equal degree the interests of both

countries, opens a possibility to move further along the way of relaxa-

tion of tensions, consolidation of peace and cooperation. It is important

to regard with care to what has been achieved, be guided by long-term

perspectives of Soviet-American relations, which can fully be and

61.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Brezhnev Letter and the Middle East

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

The President

Secretary of State Cyrus Vance

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Reginald Bartholomew, NSC Staff

Dobrynin presented the President coins commemorating the 60th

Anniversary of the Soviet Revolution and commemorating the 1980

Olympics in Moscow.

Dobrynin said that he wished to present Brezhnev’s letter in re-

sponse to President Carter’s earlier letter. Before doing so, Brezhnev

had asked him to say the following. First, Brezhnev extends his best

personal wishes to the President. He was pleased to resume the ex-

change of personal letters since it had been some time since the last ex-

change. Second, on Senator Jackson’s possible visit to the Soviet

Union, a Soviet Parliamentarians group will invite the Senator to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Moscow. The Senator could come either before or after the New Year—

the time would be left to him. As for whether the Senator would see

Brezhnev, Dobrynin had to say that was not a good possibility. Do-

brynin asked whether in extending the invitation to Jackson he should

mention the Administration’s role in it. The President thought it would

be better to have it be an invitation from the Soviets. Dobrynin said that

he would follow this and extend the invitation to Jackson on Tuesday

morning. The President said that he thought the visit will help Senator

Jackson’s understanding of the Soviets and that he knows the Senator

wants to go to the Soviet Union.

Dobrynin then presented the Brezhnev letter, which the President

read.

The President said that he appreciated the letter—it was positive

and constructive. He had also found Brezhnev’s oral response to Toon

encouraging. He felt that there was increasing ease of communication

and mutual trust, and that this was developing at an increasing rate. He

thought that it was especially useful to have private communication on

important questions before taking public positions.

The President said that the Middle East was the most immediate

question. He was discouraged by the delay of a reply from Brezhnev on

convening the Geneva Conference. (In response to Dobrynin’s query,

Secretary Vance specified that the President was speaking of the request

relayed to Gromyko.) The President said that the Soviets had not even

answered. He said that if Brezhnev would look into this and let us hear,

it would be very helpful. Delay would mean problems in keeping the

parties together on track toward Geneva. The President said that he did

not know about Sadat’s visit to Israel beforehand, but that he favored

the visit and had told Sadat and Begin this. It would be very helpful if

the Soviet government took a positive position on the visit so that if it

were fruitful, the world would know that both we and the Soviets hope

Israeli/Egyptian talks can be productive.

The President said he thought it important for the US within the

bounds of our influence to encourage the parties to go to Geneva

without delay and that he thought it important for the Soviet Union to

use its influence to encourage the parties to go to Geneva without

delay. It would be valuable to have the Middle East nations and the rest

of the world recognize that the US and the Soviet Union are acting in

concert on this and that there are no differences between them. (Do-

brynin agreed.) The President said that he thought this was an accurate

description (of US and Soviet agreement) but that the public was uncer-

tain about it. The President said that the PLO and the Syrians looked to

June–December 1977

the Soviets for guidance. Soviet support and encouragement of them to

go to Geneva is important to us.

The President said that Brezhnev has his personal good wishes. The

letters between them were helpful. As he had told Patolichev, move-

ment on SALT, CTB, and the Indian Ocean, and possible talks on

anti-satellites, cooperation in the Middle East, and enhancing trade re-

lations, all go hand in hand and we are making good progress. The

President was eager to get Brezhnev’s advice on how we go on from

here. Congress and the American public support this. The President

said that the most immediate concern is the Middle East—a reply from

the Soviet Union on convening the Geneva Conference, support for the

Sadat visit, and help with the PLO and Syrian response.

Dobrynin said that one cannot know the results of the Sadat visit.

Some Arabs welcomed it (Morocco and others); others such as the PLO

and the Syrians had made strong statements. Secretary Vance said this

is why it is important to make it clear that both the US and the Soviet

Union think the Sadat visit is a constructive step toward Geneva. If

others see us talking and agreeing, this has its effect.

Dobrynin agreed and said that that was Soviet policy as Gromyko

had discussed with Secretary Vance and the President and as reflected

in the Joint Statement. The Soviet Union had consistently supported

the Joint Statement and had never criticized it. But the Soviets were

uncertain about Sadat’s visit: will it lead to Geneva or away from it. Dr.

Brzezinski said that we want to avoid a polarization of opinion around

the visit that would lead away from Geneva. Dobrynin reiterated that

the question was whether the Sadat visit was a plus or minus for Ge-

neva. Dr. Brzezinski said that we should try to exercise influence on how

it is played.

Secretary Vance said that even if the Sadat visit does not help, it is

still important to go to Geneva. Dobrynin agreed and said that was the

Soviet belief as well.

The President said we have been holding up on steps to Geneva

until we hear from the Soviets. We do not want to act unilaterally.

62.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 28, 1977

SUBJECT

Middle East

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoly Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

After Dobrynin came in at the Secretary’s request to discuss the

forthcoming meeting in Cairo, in reviewing the present situation, the

Secretary made the following points:

1. The US proposes to send someone to the meeting to talk to the

parties and to stay in touch with developments.

2. We would make an effort to get a delay in the time for the Cairo

meeting in order to allow more time for preparations.

3. It had not been decided whom we would send, but our intention

was to send someone at the expert level. We felt that it would be a bad

move if we sent no one, that it would allow the situation to drift and we

would lose an opportunity to move the developments into a Geneva

context. We would hope the Soviet Union would do the same. The

President had asked that Dobrynin pass along his personal hope that

the Soviet Union would send someone at the expert level to the Cairo

meeting. He and the Secretary were concerned that unless the US and

USSR keep their hands in developments at this state, it could drift into a

bilateral rather than into the broader framework that could lead to a so-

lution of the Middle East problem.

Dobrynin asked whether it was necessary to send someone when

we have an embassy there.

The Secretary replied that we had been thinking about it in these

terms but had also weighed the possibility of sending Assistant Secre-

tary Atherton.

Dobrynin commented that Atherton would be regarded as a

high-ranking representative, the Secretary’s deputy, in the Russian

sense, rather than as an expert. The Secretary made it clear that if this

were done it would be with the thought that Atherton would bring the

appropriate level of expertise to the meeting, rather than the sym-

bolism of high office.

June–December 1977

Dobrynin then prefaced his reply by saying that he had not yet re-

ceived any official reaction or instruction, which he was expecting at

any moment, and for the time being would be communicating only his

own thinking. He stressed the importance of having joint Soviet-

American action, consistent with the Vance/Gromyko statement com-

mitting the two countries to support of a comprehensive agreement.

Recent developments were leading to a split in the Arab world which

would threaten the idea of the Geneva Conference. Our feeling, he said,

is that we should try to restore the movement toward Geneva and not

encourage this separate development. If the US should send an expert

at the level of an assistant secretary it would encourage an adverse

trend. “I may be wrong, but I doubt that we will send such a person. I

doubt that we will send anyone; maybe we will use our embassy.” (“In

any case,” Dobrynin observed in an aside to Shulman, “our Ambas-

sador would, of course, be reporting on the meeting, but this is not the

same thing as designating him as a representative.”) We feel that this is

a distinctive departure from the movement toward Geneva and that all

of us, including the Secretary General, should now be working to try to

get the process back on the rails and not be giving these developments

our blessing. We feel it doesn’t help Geneva to be moving toward a

split among the participants. This weakens what the Soviet Union and

US have been trying to do to get the parties to Geneva. We were quite

close before this move; now if we give our blessing to this kind of

policy, it will encourage the split in the Arab ranks which will make it

more difficult to convene Geneva.

The Secretary responded by saying that the other side of the

problem was that if we did not participate it could have the effect of let-

ting the two parties break out on their own and making a separate

peace settlement, which would then make it more difficult to fit it into

the Geneva framework. We should take at face value Sadat’s statement

that this was intended to be a preparation for Geneva.

Dobrynin responded by saying that when we discussed the Geneva

meeting, neither of our two countries ever had objected to any contact

between the parties. If the Egyptians and Israelies had met quietly, that

would be their business, but the glare of present publicity changes the

prospects for moving from a broad settlement to a narrow one, without

the other parties.

The Secretary inquired whether it was Dobrynin’s judgement that

the effect would be appreciably different if we were to be represented

by our embassy in Cairo.

Dobrynin thought that this would be preferable, but still thought

that our designation of anyone to be a representative would lead to a

split—not only within the Arab world but also between the co-

chairmen. Our concern is not with public pride about our role as co-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

chairman and it is not that we have objection to Sadat’s talking to the

Israelis, but we feel that this will lead to a separate agreement which

will undermine prospects for Geneva. Dobrynin added he didn’t know

yet what the Syrians would do, whatever they may be saying publicly.

The Syrian Foreign Minister is now in Moscow and he hoped to have a

report on these conferences soon. He felt sure that if we supported

Sadat this would serve to inflame the rest of the Arab world. He felt

that it would have been difficult for Assad to refuse to go to Geneva but

now Sadat had made it easier for him to do so, and he called attention

to the emotionalism of Assad’s statements. He said that the Soviet

feeling has been that only a united Arab front could make Israel yield

on the territorial and Palestinian issues and that the split in Arab ranks

therefore made this kind of settlement less possible. Under pressure to

prove that his moves were successful, Sadat, he thought, would be

forced to make concessions in order to survive, and this would further

split Arab ranks. He also felt that these developments would lead to the

appearance to the world that the US and the Soviet Union were also

splitting on the Middle East, and he warned of the serious conse-

quences of this development.

Marshall Shulman observed that one effect of the Sadat initiative

was to encourage movement in the political debates within Israel

which might result in more flexibility in Israeli policy, and that this

could be a constructive development.

Dobrynin, in conclusion, pressed for a joint statement by the two

co-chairmen, reemphasizing their desire for convocation of the Geneva

meeting before the end of December, together with renewed efforts to

work out the PLO representation problem, and said that if we did so,

“at least our conscience will be clear.” If the Sadat initiatives could be

brought within this framework, we would not object. It would then

give some alternative to the moderate Arabs.

June–December 1977

63.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 29, 1977

SUBJECT

Middle East

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Mikhail Solomentsev, Chairman

Marshall D. Shulman

of RSFSR Council of

Ministers, Candidate Member

of CPSU Politburo

Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin

Meeting in the Secretary’s office before a luncheon in honor of So-

lomentsev, Dobrynin expressed the hope that the US would not take

unilateral action with respect to developments in the Middle East;

rather he hoped the US and USSR could move ahead together. He said

the Soviet Union would welcome a US representative in Moscow on

December 5 to discuss future courses of action in the Middle East. He

informed the Secretary that he had not yet received any definite word

on how the Soviets would respond to the invitation to the talks being

organized in Cairo.

The Secretary told Dobrynin that we had delayed our announce-

ment of US participation in the Cairo meeting, but that we would now

proceed to do so. He proposed to indicate that we would have a repre-

sentative at the expert level. We are weighing the intention of having

our ambassador in Cairo serve in this capacity, although this would not

be announced at the present time. The UN Secretary General had in-

formed us that he would name Gen. Siilasvuo2 as an observer at the

Cairo meeting.

(In translating the foregoing for Solomentsev, Dobrynin com-

mented favorably on the fact that both the US and the UN might be rep-

resented by people who are already in the area.) Dobrynin acknowl-

edged that the Soviets had recently held talks with a PLO official and

with the Syrian Foreign Minister; he said he hoped to have further in-

formation to report on these talks soon.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

After the luncheon, Dobrynin and Solomentsev returned briefly to

the Secretary’s office. Dobrynin reported on the basis of a cable from

64.

Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State

Vance in Cairo

For the Secretary from INR-Kirk and EUR-Vine2 through S/MS-

Shulman.

1. A number of current developments suggest that US-Soviet rela-

tions are approaching a more difficult period in which the prospect of a

SALT agreement will carry the main burden of maintaining a positive

balance in the relationship.

2. Habib’s talks with Gromyko and others in Moscow3 revealed the

bitterness of Soviet belief that the United States was responsible for

Sadat’s initiatives toward the Jerusalem visit and the calling of the

Cairo conference. The conversations surfaced Soviet anxieties that

these developments threaten to elbow them effectively out of the action

in the Middle East. Their own insensitivity and short-sightedness have

contributed to their problem, but they tend to hold us responsible for

cret; Cherokee; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Paul Cook (INR/RSE) and Mark Garrison

(EUR/SOV); cleared by Shulman, Luers, Roger Kirk (INR), and Anderson; approved by

Shulman. Sent to the White House at 2005Z, with the notation “Eyes Only for Brzez-

inski.” Vance was in the Middle East December 9–15.

June–December 1977

undermining the collaborative relationship they felt they had estab-

lished in the joint statement. They may have been influenced by

Sadat’s statement that a letter from the President inspired his initiative.

His closing of Soviet cultural and consular centers will deepen their

suspicion that we are prodding him into anti-Soviet actions. Their reac-

tion is likely to be virulent.

3. The Kremlin probably sees the Secretary’s visit to the area—with

its implication of a new US role as mediator between Sadat and his

Arab critics—as indicating US willingness, if not intent, to leave the So-

viets on the sidelines. Recent US statements putting Cairo rather than

Geneva at the center of the peace process at present, probably

strengthens this view. Meanwhile they continue their efforts to dis-

credit next week’s meeting, though they are keeping their options open

to see what emerges.

4. In their present state of mind the Soviets also might read into our

handling of the Indian Ocean and CTB talks a belief that we are drag-

ging our feet and backing off agreed positions. So far, however, we

have not encountered such a reaction. Their approach at this resump-

tion of both talks was businesslike. The Soviets in fact initially re-

sponded positively to Paul Warnke’s presentation on CTB.

5. Of perhaps more immediate concern is academician Sakharov’s

hard-hitting speech to be read to the AFL–CLO convention which

opened December 8. In it he praises George Meany and the philosophy

behind Jackson-Vanik, calls for a more militant VOA policy, and casti-

gates Soviet observance of Helsinki Basket III. Were he someone else

these statements would be grounds for immediate incarceration or dra-

matic expulsion. Embassy Moscow’s obvious role as his communica-

tion link to the AFL–CIO will undoubtedly be protested once the

speech is read.

6. We have many programs going forward with the Soviets which

they regard as useful, such as cooperation under our agreements on

space and agriculture. But their main criterion for assessing the rela-

tionship continues to be SALT. Continued progress toward a SALT

agreement should be an important stabilizing factor.

7. There are unpredictable elements however, including Brezh-

nev’s own amour-propre. There is a danger that he will add up a

number of these current developments and take them as a signal that

the Carter Administration has demonstratively brushed aside his offer

of “friendly relations” made in his November 2 speech5 and reiterated

here by his colleague Solomontsev.

65.

Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State

Vance in the Middle East

Tosec

For

Dr

Brzezinski.

Following

repeat

Quote. Moscow 17909. For USDel Secretary. Subject: Soviet Ac-

tions in the Horn of Africa. Ref: (A) State 295721 Tosec 120122, (B) Secto

1. During my December 12 meeting with Gromyko I made the

talking points set forth in Ref A as amended by Ref B.

2. During a twenty minute discussion Gromyko made the fol-

lowing points:

—There was one “very good thesis” in my presentation: The US

had warned Siad Barre that there was no possible military solution to

the problem. “This is true and we so warned Siad Barre when he was in

Moscow and even before that, at the very outset of the conflict when

the winds of war began to blow.”

—The main difference in US and Soviet position on this thesis is

that Moscow states it both privately and in public whereas to the best of

Gromyko’s recollection the US has not publicly stated that the war

should be stopped, Somali troops should be withdrawn from Ethiopian

territory and that a political resolution should be sought at the negotia-

June–December 1977

ting table. If the US would publicly announce such a position its influ-

ence would have a telling effect.

—Soviets arms supply to Ethiopia is insignificant (Neznachitel’

niy—Sukhedrev translated this as “not considerable”) although

Western commentators, especially in the US, exaggerate “tens of

times.” Similarly the Soviet airlift is by no means “huge” for it is simply

impossible to airlift large quantities of heavy equipment. Ethiopia was

much larger in population and size than Somalia. Yet it was Somalia

which had invaded Ethiopia and had its troops in Ethiopian territory.

How could this have happened if the Soviet Union had supplied Ethi-

opia with “huge” amounts of weapons, or even with as much as So-

malia had?

—He didn’t know about US arms supply policy but when Moscow

supplies arms it attaches official provision forbidding their use against

a third country; they must be used only for self defense. Somalia, how-

ever, had violated this agreement and had invaded Ethiopia in a

manner of which the US was well aware.

—He seemed to discern in our presentation concern over an al-

leged Ethiopian threat to invade Somalia. “As far as we know that is to-

tally excluded. We talked about that at a sufficiently high level with the

Ethiopians. They don’t have any plan to invade Somalia.”

—The US and USSR could cooperate productively by their joint ac-

tion to bring about an end to the armed conflict, the withdrawal of So-

malian troops and negotiation on a peaceful political solution. If we

could pool our efforts this would be a good example of US-Soviet

cooperation.

—The USSR is far behind the US in arms supply. Moreover in

many cases US supplied arms have been used for purposes which were

very remote from defensive.

—On Dec. 14 we will begin bilateral discussions on (conventional)

arms supply to third countries. If we could reach a mutually acceptable

position this would indeed be a major step forward with positive effect

on our bilateral relations and on the general world scene.

3. In response I said:

—It was wrong to say that we had made no public statement on

the desirability of ending the Somali-Ethiopian conflict. (Gromyko in-

tervened to insist that we had not called for withdrawal of Somali

troops from Ethiopian territory.)

—When the Somalis had approached us for arms we had made

clear that we would not provide them as long as the present conflict in

Ogaden lasted.

—We have strict provision for arms supply prohibiting the use of

US supplied arms in third countries. Applying this rule to present case,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

we had specifically stipulated that US origin arms must not be trans-

ferred to Somalia by third countries.

—As to the resolution of this conflict I emphasized that the African

countries considered this an African problem and wanted the major

powers to disengage. We support the OAU’s initiatives and it would be

useful if the USSR did too.

—While I was glad to hear Gromyko’s assertion that Soviet arms

supply to Ethiopia was insignificant or not considerable, that assertion

did not seem to match our information but I would certainly report it to

Washington.

—I was glad to hear that Ethiopia did not want to go beyond its

borders. (Gromyko intervened to say that earlier Siad Barre had voiced

his fear of an Ethiopian invasion to the Soviets who had in turn assured

him on the basis of an official statement by Mengistu that he had no in-

tention of attacking Somalia. Siad Barre knows this to be true, said Gro-

myko, but continues his misinformation campaign in furtherance of his

own goals.

—I would also report his suggestion for US and Soviet action to al-

leviate the Somali-Ethiopian conflict and we would be willing to listen

to specific recommendations. Meanwhile it would be best for the big

powers to stay out and let the OAU play a mediatory role.

4. In closing Gromyko said the USSR was not involved in the con-

flict. Its only desire was for a peaceful settlement which might be ob-

structed if “some of your friends get involved and involve you.”

5. Comment: I find Gromyko’s reference to the upcoming conven-

tional arms talks in Washington rather intriguing. We had suspected

that the Soviets might be reluctant to discuss arms transfers in the Horn

(septel) for fear that to do so would limit their policy options in this

contested area. Gromyko’s remarks may indicate otherwise. But if Sovs

should be prepared to discuss the Horn, we can be sure they will also

wish to discuss Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Israel.

Toon.

Unquote

Christopher

June–December 1977

66.

Central Intelligence Agency Information Cable

December 14, 1977

[cable number not declassified] Country: USSR/Cuba/Ethiopia.

DOI: Late November through early December 1977.

Subject: Increased Support for Ethiopia by the USSR and Cuba; Ar-

rival by Air of Additional Soviet and Cuban Military Personnel and

Military Supplies.

ACQ: [less than 2 lines not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

aircraft. No such role is envisioned for Soviet personnel at this point.

Presently, neither Cuban nor Soviet personnel are flying combat opera-

tional missions in Ethiopia, although Soviet instructor pilots are flying

training missions from Harar Meda Airbase at Debre Zeit.

4. Seventeen MIG–21 aircraft have so far arrived at Bole Airfield in

Addis Ababa, where they are now being assembled. It is likely that

Cuban pilots will begin flying some of these aircraft in the next 2–3

weeks. (Source comment: Only MIG–21 aircraft are currently arriving

by the airlift from the Soviet Union since Ethiopian Air Force personnel

are not sufficiently trained on the MIG–23’s to justify advanced de-

livery of this aircraft, the first of which will probably not arrive before

January 1978.)

67.

Backchannel Message From the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Ambassador to

the Soviet Union (Toon)

WH72665. Moscow: Please deliver this message to Ambassador

Toon immediately upon opening of business.

Please convey the following to Brezhnev personally or, failing that,

to Gromyko.

Begin text:

Dear Mr. President:

With the approaching holidays, I wish to take advantage of our

correspondence to wish you personally, your family, and the Soviet

people the very best for the coming year. Let us hope that it will bring

us all closer to the goal that we share: a genuine peace and closer friend-

ship between our peoples, and all the peoples of the world.

hopeful that before too long we will be reaching agreement in a number

of areas of importance to our two countries. Our delegations are

June–December 1977

making good progress in regards to strategic arms limitations and the

Comprehensive Test Ban; I am also encouraged by the fact that we have

opened new discussions regarding arms transfers, and that our delega-

tions are fruitfully pursuing reciprocal arms restraint in the Indian

Ocean. In spite of continuing differences between our two countries,

and these differences admittedly are deep-rooted and will take time to

fade, we are making steady progress in widening the scope of our

collaboration.

I was especially gratified by your comments regarding nuclear

weapons. It is my fervent hope that you and I will succeed in signifi-

cantly reducing, and perhaps even eliminating, the dependence of our

countries on these terrible weapons of mass destruction. I am—as you

are—deeply dedicated to that goal.

At the same time, I would be less than candid if I did not register

some concern over recent developments in two important regions. I

was disappointed to learn that Minister Gromyko feels that the recent

peace initiatives by President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin were

somehow contrived by the United States, in part in order to move away

from the principles to which we jointly subscribed earlier in the year.

As Secretary Vance has already stated, these events were not initiated

by the United States; nonetheless, we do welcome them as potentially

positive steps toward peace, and we hope that both the United States

and the Soviet Union can continue to encourage all of the parties to

reach a comprehensive settlement. Such a settlement will have to be

negotiated finally at Geneva, and we count on collaborating closely

with you in making these negotiations as fruitful as possible. In our

view, present trends in the Middle East do involve an increasing will-

ingness on the part of the parties concerned to adopt positions which

make a compromise solution more likely. We would hope that the So-

viet Union would be party to that process and would help to dis-

courage the extremist positions of some of the Arab parties. Without

such Soviet help, it might prove difficult to reach the common goals of a

comprehensive settlement negotiated in Geneva, as emphasized in

your letter of December 15.

Also in your letter, you make the point that the representative of

the Palestinian people is a necessary element in the Geneva Conference,

with which I agree, but I confess to a sense of disappointment that the

leadership of the PLO has not been more helpful to our efforts to work

out a formula for Palestinian representation at the conference accept-

able to the parties.

In response to the questions you raise about the procedures to be

followed at the Geneva Conference, I am inclined to feel that these

matters can best be settled in consultations with the parties to the con-

ference. I understand your concerns, and I am confident that these

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

matters

can

be

satisfactorily

resolved

when

the

conference

is

reconvened.

During the past several days, I have had conversations with Prime

Minister Begin and by telephone and cable with President Sadat. I con-

tinue to find both of them committed to a comprehensive peace, and I

have stressed that this is our goal as well. While Prime Minister Begin

has developed tentative proposals on the Sinai and the West Bank and

Gaza, I have not endorsed these proposals but have made clear that the

ultimate judgment on their acceptability must be made by those who

will sign the peace treaties. It is my belief, however, that they in no way

preclude moving negotiations at an appropriate time to a broader

forum or discussing other fronts.

I would also hope that the United States and the Soviet Union

could collaborate in making certain that regional African disputes do

not escalate into major international conflicts. The fighting that has de-

veloped between Ethiopia and Somalia is a regrettable development,

one which should be contained and terminated before it spreads fur-

ther. We are encouraging the parties to accept mediation, we are re-

fraining from the export of arms to any of the parties involved in this

struggle, and we are urging the other African states to take an active

role in the early resolution of the conflict. We hope very much that you

will adopt a similar position, and we would be glad to work closely

with you to attain these goals.

I mention these concerns because I deeply believe that it is impor-

tant for us, to the extent that it is possible, to avoid becoming involved

in regional conflicts either as direct protagonists or through proxies.

We know from recent history that such involvement stimulates addi-

tional tensions and tends to paralyze progress towards wider coopera-

tion, which we both desire. I write about this because it is my determi-

nation to do my utmost to improve the American-Soviet relationship.

Precisely because we live in a turbulent world, it is encumbent upon us

to reach the greatest degree of mutual understanding regarding re-

gional disputes and to exercise the greatest degree of self-restraint.

I value our correspondence highly for it gives us both an opportu-

nity to speak frankly about the obstacles we encounter on the road to

the objectives of peace and friendship that we both share.

We still await your visit when it is convenient for you.

With best personal wishes,

Sincerely,

Jimmy Carter

68.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, January 10, 1978

SUBJECT

Anticipated Soviet Moves in the Shcharanskiy Case

1. Although the Soviets on 15 December extended the investigative

period on Shcharanskiy for up to another six months, they clearly in-

tend to put him on trial, possibly soon, and probably on severe

(treason) rather than lesser (anti-Soviet activities) charges.

—Arbatov communicated to Marshall Shulman on 26 December

that he had seen part of the evidence against Shcharanskiy, and it con-

tains “clear-cut evidence of CIA involvement.”

—the Soviet central press (Literaturnaya Gazeta) on 28 December

explicitly asserted that Shcharanskiy’s innocence or guilt, and if the

latter his degree of guilt, would be decided in a Soviet court on the basis

of evidence.

—last Friday Soviet authorities told Shcharanskiy’s mother and

brother to find him a Soviet defense lawyer by 13 January since the in-

vestigation would be completed by then. The authorities said that

charges will be brought under Article 64–A of the Soviet criminal code

which includes treason and espionage.

2. CIA’s assurance last June that the Agency had nothing whatever

to do with Shcharanskiy is correct. However, the Soviets have been

laying publicly and privately a trail of innuendo and guilt by associa-

tion. Specifically, we think the Soviets intend to tar Shcharanskiy with

the charge [1 line not declassified]

publicly confessed to having been a CIA agent, and along with other

prominent dissidents accused Shcharanskiy, his former room-mate, of

similar involvement with American intelligence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

6. Shcharanskiy himself was arrested two weeks after Lipavskiy’s

March 1977 public confession and has, as you know, been held incom-

municado ever since. We presume that part of Lipavskiy’s deal with

the KGB has involved extensive testimony against Shcharanskiy. We

do not know any specifics of this testimony.

7. Valentin Turchin, another prominent Soviet dissident who has

since emigrated, told Embassy Moscow in late May 1977 of another

possible basis for a Soviet charge of espionage against Shcharanskiy.

Some time before, Shcharanskiy had compiled a list of refuseniks

whose exit visas were denied on grounds they had done classified

work in Soviet institutes. The specific institutes were listed. While

Shcharanskiy did not use classified information in drawing up his list,

Turchin felt he could be accused of espionage because he had shown

the list to Westerners as well as Soviets. Shcharanskiy, of course, had

extensive contacts with Western diplomats and correspondents during

his two years of active campaigning for Jewish emigration and broader

human rights concerns prior to his arrest.

8. One of Shcharanskiy’s many correspondent contacts, Bob Toth

of the Los Angeles Times, was interrogated extensively by the KGB in

June 1977 as a “witness” in connection with his relations with Shchar-

anskiy. Toth admitted to his interrogators that Shcharanskiy had given

him lists of refuseniks, their places of employment, reasons for their

visa denials, and information about alleged violations by Soviet author-

ities of Soviet law and the Helsinki accords. Toth signed the protocols

drawn up after each interrogation, and was permitted to leave the

USSR on 16 June. Embassy Moscow concluded (in EXDIS Moscow 8811

marily at Anatoliy Shcharanskiy . . . The clear intent . . . is to show that

Shcharanskiy is guilty of passing information—written and oral—in vi-

olation of Article 64 (treason) and perhaps Article 70 (anti-Soviet

slander and activities) of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Re-

public Criminal Code.”

9. A further Soviet effort to link Toth, (and presumably Shcharan-

skiy thus indirectly,) to American intelligence surfaced in a 31 August

January–June 1978

not declassified] letter: “This theme is of great interest to General Haig,

and you will be able to have a fruitful discussion about it next time you

see him.”

When asked by a State Department official about his correspon-

dence with Toth, [9½ lines not declassified]

Izvestiya, Lipavskiy named both his original FSO contact, Levitsky, and

Levitsky’s FSO replacement, Joseph Presel, as “CIA agents”, as well as

Allyn Nathanson, who has since resigned from the Foreign Service. All

three charges are of course false. All three officers had Embassy contact

and reporting responsibilities for the Soviet dissident community. Li-

pavskiy, however, told Izvestiya that Levitsky had recruited him for

CIA; he demonstrated the spy gear he had received during his recruit-

ment meeting with Levitsky and from later deaddrop contacts. The Iz-

vestiya coverage of Lipavskiy’s confession clearly implied that the So-

viets also regarded Presel as one of the “Westerners” conspiring with

Shcharanskiy.

11. We must anticipate from all of this that the Soviets can prob-

ably put together a circumstantially plausible case against Shcharan-

skiy. They would seem to have several options for trying and disposing

of this case:

(a) a treason charge, conviction, and a death sentence;

(b) a treason charge, conviction, and a long prison term;

(c) a treason charge, conviction, a long prison sentence, but depor-

tation after a face-saving interval;

(d) a charge and conviction on anti-Soviet slander, and a prison

sentence;

(e) a charge and conviction on anti-Soviet slander, and a prison

sentence, but with deportation after a face-saving interval;

(In any of the preceding trial alternatives, of course, the Soviets

will have various options on how much to implicate US intelligence

specifically in the charges.)

(f) deportation without trial.

We consider (f) quite unlikely at this point. Options (d) and (e) are

possible, but growing increasingly doubtful given recent Soviet signals.

Any of options (a) through (c) are more likely, with option (c) probably

the best that can be hoped for.

69.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

422. Subject: Letter for President Carter From Vladimir Slepak.

Summary: Embassy has received letter for President Carter from

Moscow human rights activist and refusenik Vladimir Slepak. Letter

recounts plight of Slepak family and requests President’s assistance.

We are forwarding it to EUR/SOV for disposition. English language

copy we have received (which is being pouched to EUR/SOV) is signed

carbon and we assume Slepak is sending original, and perhaps other

copies, by other means. Slepak believes his son may have appointment

with President on January 29 and is obviously trying to get letter to

President before that date. Slepak says he does not plan to release letter

to press, but there is no assurance that someone else will not if, as we

suspect, he is having other copies carried out by tourists. Text of letter

follows. End summary.

The White House, Washington, DC, U.S.A., Dear Sir: You are known as

a man thanks to whom human rights have become the basis of trust be-

tween peoples, thanks to whom the civilized nations seek to one degree

or another to see human rights observed the world over.

During your election campaign and now as President, you have re-

peatedly raised the issue of violations of human rights in the USSR.

This stand of the President of one of the great powers of the world

has added strength and hope, both to fighters for human rights in the

Soviet Union and to anyone else who seeks to enjoy those rights. In one

of your election speeches in 1976, you cited the condition of my family

as an example of violation of human rights in the USSR. For many

years we have been deprived of the chance to enjoy our right to emi-

grate to Israel. You said at the time that you would never give up till

families like the Slepaks got the chance to emigrate from the USSR.

After a group of Jews seeking to go to Israel was beaten up by KGB

agents in October 1976, I received your message expressing concern

January–June 1978

over what had happened and your deep personal interest in our fate.

We realized that we not [now?] had a strong ally in our difficult

struggle.

Meanwhile, the Soviet authorities took a stiff course towards de-

fenders of justice in the USSR. They followed with the arrests of Alex-

ander Ginzburg, Yuri Orlov, Anatoly Shcharansky, Joseph Begun, and

many other fighters for human rights in the USSR.

This is a difficult time for us now. It is adversely affecting my

family. Let me remind you of my family’s story in brief.

We were invited to go to Israel in March 1969. In April 1969 I had

to give up my job as a chief of a laboratory in the Television Research

Institute. I have never worked in my specialty since then. I managed to

get various jobs at different times, but had to leave them every time my

chief was informed about my intentions to emigrate. I have not been

working at all since September 1974. We were able to apply to emigrate

only one year after receiving our invitation to Israel. The five members

of my family, my wife, her mother, our two sons, and I, applied to-

gether. That was in April 1970. Two months later we were refused per-

mission. In March 1971 my mother-in-law was allowed to go, and went

to Jerusalem. Old and sick, she has since then been living alone, with

the one dream of seeing us again.

Last October the Soviet authorities had to release our older son

Alexander from the USSR, since he was married to an American.

All these years my family has been subjected to various forms of

harassment and persecution, from house raids, arrests and imprison-

ments, to beatings, dismissals from work, and so on.

Another horror came creeping up on us when our younger son Le-

onid approached the military conscription age. Ever since he was ten

years old, Leonid grew up in a family fighting to leave the Soviet

Union. He was persecuted along with the rest of the family. He had al-

ready been honored with Israeli citizenship. Our family had rejected its

Soviet citizenship (but has never received any answer to our rejection).

How could he possibly swear allegiance and loyalty to the Soviet Gov-

ernment, as all soldiers most?

We decided on a desperate step. In January 1976, my wife and I of-

ficially divorced so that she and our son could apply to leave sepa-

rately. They were refused on the grounds that the authorities did not

regard that as a reunification of a family. They said, “You and your son

are one family, and your mother is another.”

When Leonid reached the military conscription age of 18, last year,

he was called in and told he would have to serve in the Soviet Army.

He refused. He sent the Minister of Defense a statement pointing out

that he is a citizen of Israel, and considers Israel his only homeland. He

70.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

January 12, 1978

Dear Mr. President,

I have carefully studied your letter of December 22. First of all I

wish to thank you for your New Year greetings and good wishes to the

Soviet People and to me personally. On my own part, I sincerely wish

you, Mr. President, your family and the American people peace and

well-being in this year.

Our point of view on a number of specific questions raised in your

letter has already been brought to your attention lately. Recently I con-

sidered it necessary to address you specially on the question of neutron

January–June 1978

weapons, to the solutions of which in the interests of peace we attach

most serious importance.

Now, that we stepped over the threshold of the new year, I think, it

would be timely to share with you some thoughts of a broader context

as well—on how relations between our countries are developing in

general.

Looking at the general results of the past year one may note with

satisfaction that—although not without stallings—predominant in

Soviet-US relations remained the trend to their constructive develop-

ment on the basis laid down by joint efforts of both sides.

Of special importance seems to be the fact that general under-

standing has been reached between us concerning main directions of

mutual action and application of joint efforts of the USSR and the US.

Those are measures to reduce the danger of war, to limit and subse-

quently reduce armaments, to prevent and eliminate dangerous hot-

beds of international tensions. It is an undisputable positive that on

these and other questions a dialogue between our countries at various

levels continues and further develops.

But one cannot fail mentioning something else. A situation can

hardly be considered satisfactory when negotiations on problems

which are indeed urgent and acute are being conducted for protracted

periods of time, in some cases for more than one year, and so far there

have been no practical results.

I am sure that such state of affairs meets neither the interests of our

two countries nor the broader interests of international peace. And here

the task, as we see it, is to exert energetic efforts to achieve already in

the near future significant specific agreements.

This relates above all to the problem of strategic offensive arms

limitation. There is mutual understanding between us as to the direc-

tion of a new agreement and its main components. Nevertheless, the

preparation of the agreement has not yet been completed. As is known,

Mr. President, taking into account your wishes we moved last fall to

meet the US position on a number of important questions. A certain

flexibility on some questions was also displayed on your part. In the

course of subsequent negotiations we again showed readiness to seek

mutually acceptable solutions to the outstanding questions. Unfortu-

nately, in all candor, we do not see equivalent steps from the US side

towards us.

Naturally, we took note of recent remarks by US representatives

regarding the possibility of completing the work on the agreement next

March. As to us, we are prepared to complete the working out of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

agreement even earlier. But since the US side thinks in terms of that

timing it is necessary in any case to do everything possible to keep to

this schedule.

It is evident that concluding a new strategic offensive arms limita-

tion agreement remains for both sides the number one task.

These same ends would be served by achieving practical agree-

ments also in the ongoing negotiations, in which our two countries take

part, on other issues of disarmament—such as comprehensive cessa-

tion of nuclear weapon tests, prohibition of chemical weapons, banning

new types and systems of the weapons of mass destruction, limiting

military activities in the Indian Ocean. There is no lack of readiness on

our part to seek agreements on this set of questions and you are aware

of the constructive steps taken by the Soviet Union for finding appro-

priate solutions. Here again we would like to count on a higher degree

of reciprocity, on a constructive approach of the US side. We also ex-

pect a positive response to those of our proposals on which the US has

not yet given us any reply at all.

Quite a lot is to be done this year also in the domain of interna-

tional problems. Time and again experience confirms that practical so-

lutions to these problems cannot be found without close interaction

and cooperation between the USSR and the US. On the other hand, the

efforts of our countries aiming in the same direction, undoubtedly, help

the development of Soviet-US relations to have a beneficial influence

upon the world situation.

Recently I already expounded to you in detail our attitude toward

the developments in the Middle East and there is no need to go into

that again now. I would like only to say that the course of the latest

events in the area fully confirms the correctness of our appraisal of the

situation, i.e. the policy aimed at separate deals in no way brings closer,

but on the contrary, puts off the achievement of an effective compre-

hensive settlement. This policy is directed at circumventing key

problems without the solution of which there cannot be a just and, con-

sequently, a lasting peace in the Middle East. Therefore a sharply nega-

tive reaction of the majority of the Arabs to those deals is quite under-

standable. It cannot be any different. And the matter is not at all of their

extremism of some kind but of the policy and designs of those who re-

tain the occupied Arab lands.

In your letter you express disagreement with the point of view that

the latest US actions in the Middle East are in contravention with the

January–June 1978

But to get convinced that it is indeed so, suffice it to refer to the text

of the said document. It explicitly sets down agreement between the So-

viet and the US sides that the only right and effective way for achieving a

fundamental solution to all aspects of the Middle East problem in its entirety is

negotiations within the framework of the Geneva Peace Conference, specially

convened for these purposes, with participation in its work of the repre-

sentatives of all the parties involved in the conflict, including those of the Pal-

estinian people.

The argument to the effect that a settlement in the Middle East

should ultimately be achieved within the framework of the Geneva

Conference with cooperation of our two countries does not change the

heart of the matter. I must say it straight: the calculations to use the Ge-

neva Conference as a cover for separate deals, as a kind of a parade-like

forum are groundless.

We are convinced that there can be only one way out from this sit-

uation: it is necessary to put negotiations back on the track of a compre-

hensive settlement within the framework of the Geneva Conference

with the participation of all the parties concerned, on the basis of re-

spect for their legitimate rights and interests. The sooner it is done, the

better. If the US is ready to follow this path, which is the only right one,

then it will find in the Soviet Union a solid partner.

As to the conflict in the Horn of Africa which you also mention in

your letter, Mr. President, I want to stress once again that we are for

having peace restored in that area of Africa. The USSR does not seek

any advantages there for itself, it does its best to avoid the escalation of

the Somali-Ethiopian conflict. A really just solution should, of course,

provide first of all for cessation of hostilities and for withdrawal of So-

mali troops from Ethiopia.

I would like to express the hope that the year we just entered will

see the continuation, also through joint efforts of our countries, of the

process of consolidating the relaxation of tensions and developing

peaceful cooperation in Europe. The immediate goal in that regard is to

conclude constructively the meeting in Belgrade.

Still a lot can and should be done in a number of practical spheres

of our bilateral relations. Here, there continue to exist obstacles and ar-

tificial hindrances—for example, in the field of trade and economic

ties—which it is high time to remove. There are potentials for more ac-

tive cooperation in the field of science and technology, parliamentary

and other contacts called to serve the cause of strengthening mutual

understanding and trust between our countries and peoples.

To say it short, not a small work lies ahead. And it is important for

us to move steadily forward building upon what has already been

achieved in our relations.

71.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 14, 1978

SUBJECT

The Middle East

Part I of III

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

Dobrynin asked when the Secretary was leaving for the Middle

East. The Secretary said he planned to leave that evening, but he did

not want to go unless there could be advance agreement on the agenda.

He said that he had sent word to the parties that he would not go unless

the agenda were agreed upon before his departure. He said that he pro-

posed to talk about three things at the Jerusalem meeting. The first and

January–June 1978

most important was a broad statement of principles, which would be a

framework for Geneva. The second would be a discussion of possible

guidelines for the West Bank/Gaza matters. The third, of minor impor-

tance, was a discussion of the essential elements for a treaty, which

would include, for example, a definition of peace and what would flow

from that. It would also include the provisions for withdrawal from the

occupied territories.

Dobrynin asked if this were just a treaty between Egypt and Israel.

The Secretary replied that yes, it would be in the first instance, but that

it would be essentially the same as in any of the peace treaties. Do-

brynin asked what kind of principles would be specified regarding Pal-

estinian representation. The Secretary replied that the Palestinians

must be enabled to participate in the determination of their own future.

Dobrynin asked what principle would be advanced regarding troop

withdrawal. He commented that as of now Israel claimed that no

troops would be withdrawn for several years. He said that if this kind

of principle were applied elsewhere, for example in regard to Syria, it

would be difficult to accept. The Secretary observed that this was an

opening bargaining position. He thought that in the negotiations it

would come down to perhaps one year. He said that the principle of

242 would prevail, that Israel must withdraw from occupied terri-

tories, and that this would be part of establishing “secure and recog-

nized borders.” The details, as for example, when the withdrawal

should take place, would be up to the negotiating parties.

Dobrynin returned to the question of what kind of principles

would be established regarding the Palestinian questions. The Secre-

tary replied that if agreement could be reached on self-determination,

this would be a break-through. Dobrynin observed that as of now the

position was “self rule.” The Secretary replied it was unclear for what

period this would be, whether it would be just for the interim period.

Dobrynin said that in general he was worried that in their dealings

with the Palestinians, it looked as if there would be no clear end in sight

beyond the interim solutions. The Secretary replied that we would

have to see if we can get a solution, and an element involved in this

would be how long the interim period should be. Dobrynin asked if

you could get a solution without the presence of the Palestinians. He

also asked what kind of guidelines would be established—would this

provide for self rule in five years or ten years? The Secretary replied

that self rule would apply in the immediate future, leading up to a final

role in which the Palestinians would participate in determining what

kind of homeland would be established. Dobrynin thought this would

still be unclear. The Secretary replied that this was why we need the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Geneva conference, to work out the details. Dobrynin objected that this

would be a pre-determined framework, already established before a

Geneva meeting were convened. The Secretary answered that these

questions cannot be determined without the involvement of the Pales-

tinians. Dobrynin objected and asked what kind of a framework would

be established if there were only three parties negotiating it.

The Secretary said, in further explanation, that these principles

would cover:

—the nature of peace, not only an end of the war but the establish-

ment of normal relations;

—the withdrawal from occupied territories and the establishment

of secure and recognized borders;

—the Palestinian question must be resolved in all of its aspects,

with the Palestinians themselves as full participants in the solution,

taking account of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.

The Secretary said that this was essentially what the US and the

USSR had agreed in the joint statement, and if we could get Israel to ac-

cept these points it would be a step forward. Dobrynin said, with re-

gard to the Palestinian question, that there was a difference between

the “interim” and the “ultimate” solutions. (There was a bit of by-play

at this point about the Aswan dam. The Secretary observed that it was a

fine dam and Dobrynin acknowledged that it was because he knew the

chief engineer who built it.)

Dobrynin repeated his concern about the Palestinian repre-

sentation issue, and the Secretary again repeated that this was why the

Geneva conference was needed, to work out these details. Dobrynin re-

ferred to two statements, by the President and by Begin, opposed to the

Palestinian state. He said this prejudged the issue. The Secretary re-

plied that the President said his preference was that there should not be

an independent Palestinian state, but if the parties decided otherwise,

we would accept it. He added that he did not believe the people there

believed in an independent state. Dobrynin asked what parties—the

Palestinians? The Secretary replied that some Palestinians don’t want

an independent state; they prefer one that would be affiliated with

Jordan. Dobrynin asked if the Secretary would stop in Cairo and the

Secretary replied that he probably would. In reply to a further question,

he said that he expected to be back either Wednesday or Thursday. The

Secretary added that he wanted to see the negotiations broadened as

soon as possible to bring in all parties, including the Soviet Union. Do-

brynin replied that the Soviet Union was prepared now to participate

fully, that it did not like to have one of the co-chairmen determining the

future.

Dobrynin asked what the position of the Syrians was. The Secre-

tary replied that the Syrians would sit on the sidelines and see what

January–June 1978

happens. If we were able to come up with an appropriate framework,

the Syrians would consider whether to participate, but would not do so

now.

72.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 14, 1978

SUBJECT

The Horn of Africa

Part II of III

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

The Secretary noted that he had received the Soviet message on

this point, but he had noted with concern that aircraft were flying over

73.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 14, 1978

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Bilateral Issues; MBFR

Part III of III

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

Secretary’s Speech: Ambassador Dobrynin commented favorably on

the Secretary’s speech in Los Angeles. He characterized it as a con-

structive speech.

PNG Exchange: The Secretary expressed concern that the US and

the USSR might be headed toward a serious spiral of actions which

could affect our general relationship, and reviewed the steps we would

be obliged to take if the Soviets did not reconsider their action against

our number three man in the commercial office in Moscow. The Secre-

tary generally followed the talking points (attached) and added with

some feeling that it was unfortunate that both countries were getting

involved in a series of steps which were disturbing. This was childish

and would not be conducive to good relations. He said he would like to

see us “knock it off.” Relations were too important to have endangered.

Dobrynin began his reply by referring to the two cases in Moscow. He

said the USSR didn’t want to make a public fuss about it, but they were

good cases. At the time of the first one, he was in Moscow and saw the

documentations and he also was well informed of the second one. He

said that it related to very sensitive matters in the foreign ministry itself

January–June 1978

and it led directly to the CIA. He then went on to characterize the

Avdyunin expulsion as a clear case of fabrication to even the score.

Dobrynin said that his Minister, Vasev, would be coming in this af-

ternoon to see Marshall Shulman to transmit a note which would:

(a) call for Kursch’s immediate departure; (b) protest the provocation

against Avdyunin; and (c) point out that our commercial repre-

sentatives outnumbered theirs if the representatives of private firms

were taken into account. The Secretary pointed out that if this note

were delivered, there would be no turning back from our retaliatory ac-

tion against them. Therefore, it was arranged that Vasev would limit

himself to an oral communication, and that Dobrynin would recom-

mend to Moscow that action be suspended until next week, by which

time he or his representative could review the evidence against their

man and judge whether this was, as we maintain, not a fabrication.

Cosmos 954: The Secretary inquired if Dobrynin had received any

information from Moscow on this, in response to our query. He said

that a message had just begun to come in to the Embassy, and that he

would telephone the Secretary this afternoon to report on its contents.

MBFR: The Secretary expressed regret that the data exchange had

not gone forward during the recent meeting, and urged that it be made

the first item of business at the next meeting. He stressed the impor-

tance of progress on MBFR.

List of Outstanding Issues: Dobrynin handed the Secretary a list of

four questions in the disarmament field to which he is awaiting re-

sponses from the US: (a) world treaty on non-use of force in interna-

tional relations; (b) non-first-use of nuclear weapons by Helsinki partic-

ipants; (c) world disarmament conference; and (d) an agreement on ban

on neutron weapons.

Brezhnev’s Health: In response to the Secretary’s inquiry on this

subject, Dobrynin said that Brezhnev had experienced a rather serious

bout of the flu, but was now recovered.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

74.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Dobrynin

75.

Non-Note From the Soviet Leadership to the U.S.

Leadership

January 24, 1978

Moscow has considered with attention the remarks of the Secre-

tary of State regarding the situation in the Horn of Africa, made in the

conversation with the Soviet Ambassador on January 14.

The statement by the Secretary to the effect that the US side has no

intention of interfering in the Somali-Ethiopian conflict and that it took

decision not to provide arms, directly or indirectly, to either side in the

conflict, could only be welcomed. However, the very next day after that

conversation an official of the Department of State said publicly some-

thing quite different, namely, that the US “decided to provide Somalia

with defensive weapons”. Naturally, we cannot help asking the ques-

tion: what is the real state of affairs?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Public statements of the US officials, including those at the highest

level, misrepresenting the position and actions of the Soviet Union in

connection with the Somali-Ethiopian conflict, are also in no way

helpful but only aggravate the situation.

Meanwhile, the US government is, undoubtedly, well aware of the

fact that even before the start of the conflict we urged the Somali side to

give up the attempts to solve its problems with Ethiopia by force. And

when the Somali leadership, nevertheless, resorted to military opera-

tions in Ogaden we made great efforts aimed at the cessation of that

conflict and its settlement through negotiations on the basis of mutual

respect by the sides for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, inviola-

bility of frontiers and non-interference in each other’s internal affairs.

And it is by no means the Soviet Union’s fault that Somalia continues

its military interference in Ethiopia, trying to retain by force a consider-

able part of the territory of that country.

The material and technical assistance that we render Ethiopia at its

request has the only purpose of halting the aggression and eliminating

its consequences. The Soviet Union does its utmost to prevent further

escalation of the Somali-Ethiopian conflict. There are no, for that

matter, reasons for such aprehensions unless, naturally, those who are

on the side of Somalia now take a hand in that. On its part the gov-

ernment of Ethiopia clearly stated that its aim is only the repulse of the

Somali aggression and restoration of its territory, and by no means the

invasion of Somalia.

The US side as it follows from the Secretary’s remarks, favors ne-

gotiation between Somalia and Ethiopia “without preconditions”. But

thus the substance of the question is missed: that it is Somalia that has

seized and occupies the Ethiopian territory.

Thus a necessary prerequisite of peaceful settlement of the conflict

should be not simply a termination of military operations but an imme-

diate withdrawal of Somali troops from Ethiopia, about which the US

side for some reasons prefers to keep silent. Any other approach to this

question, which would fail to discriminate between the aggressor and

the victim of aggression, would in fact lead to the protraction of the

conflict, the creation of a new permanent source of tensions. Suffice it to

recall what did happen in the Middle East when, in 1967, a cease-fire

was not followed by the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from the occu-

pied Arab territories. These forces still continue to be there and, as a re-

sult, the Middle East crisis can explode anew at any moment as it was

already the case in 1973.

As to the Soviet Union, we would like to stress once again that we

do not seek in the Horn of Africa or anywhere else any advantages for

ourselves including those at the expense of the US or along the line of

confrontation with the US. If the US side also supports the territorial in-

76.

Telegram From the Department of State to the U.S. Mission

to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

20409. Exdis—Belgrade for USDel CSCE. Subject: Brezhnev Letter

1. Following is unofficial translation of Brezhnev letter to President

on enhanced radiation weapons. Mission is authorized to provide text

to SPC for analysis and comparison with other letters as discussed

2. FYI, Soviets initially gave us only English-language version. We

now have Russian-language text, and it is evident Soviet English trans-

lation was inaccurate in several places, including phrase “respond in

kind” quoted Ref (B). This phrase does not repeat not appear in the

Russian text.

cret; Immediate. Drafted by Lyall Breckon and Donald McConnell (EUR/RPM); cleared

by Gregory Treverton (NSC), John Hawes (PM/ISA), James Thyden (S/S–O), Kent

Brown (EUR/SOV), Stephen Ledogar (EUR/RPM), and Shinn; approved by James

Goodby (EUR). Sent for information to all NATO capitals; Moscow; Belgrade for the U.S.

CSCE delegation; USNMR SHAPE; and USLO SACLANT.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Begin text. January 5, 1978

Dear Mr. President,

—This time I am addressing you on only a single question, but one

which assumes significant acuteness, both in the relations between our

two countries, and from the point of view of the development of the in-

ternational situation as a whole. What I have in mind are the plans to

produce neutron weapons and to deploy them in Western Europe. The

seriousness of the subject demands that talk be candid.

—You know our position regarding these plans. It is sharply nega-

tive. As for the gist of the matter, a new direction of the arms race is

being opened with all the dangerous consequences flowing from it, a

severe blow is being dealt to peoples’ hopes to eliminate the threat of

nuclear war. This is seen not only by us but by many other states and

broad masses of people in different countries of the world as well.

—I will say it frankly. We view attempts to belittle the threat which

has arisen as a desire to confuse those in the world who now feel a

rising alarm, and who are raising ever louder a voice of protest against

the neutron bomb. Can it indeed be possible to believe that neutron

weapons, if they are used, will be used on a limited scale, only on the

battlefield and only against one or another type of forces? If one thinks

in military terms, it is clear that in the case of such a conflict circum-

stances will dictate their own logic to the actions of one side or the

other.

—By their nature and their destructive characteristics neutron

weapons can strike not only people wearing military uniforms but also

huge masses of the population. These are inhuman weapons of mass

destruction; they are directed against people. Their appearance will not

diminish the likelihood of nuclear conflict but enhance it. The reality is

that if neutron weapons are ever used, a devastating scythe will sweep

across the territories of entire countries, probably not leaving a single

inch untouched.

—Perhaps the calculation is made that neutron weapons will be

used only where they are to be deployed—that is in Europe. Perhaps

some entertain the hope to stay on the sidelines if and when the point is

reached that neutron weapons are killing Europeans. This calculation is

illusory in substance. Today neutron weapons are thought of in con-

nection with one means of delivery, but tomorrow, or the day after they

may be attached to other vehicles of a completely different range—not

of hundreds but of thousands of kilometers. Today these weapons have

one yield, but tomorrow—it could be ten or a hundred times greater.

Such is the law of the arms race once one side begins a new spiral.

—Plans connected with neutron weapons, are already having a

dangerous effect on the world political atmosphere and their realiza-

tion would entail even greater costs. In what light would the negotia-

January–June 1978

tions currently underway between the USSR and the US on a series of

major issues for arresting the arms race appear if simultaneously the

deployment of neutron weapons was forced? Not much would be left

of people’s trust in solving the problem of disarmament, in the success

of ongoing negotiations. Moreover, the negotiations themselves, at

least in some cases, would face the threat of being broken off.

—What mutual trust, what cooperation between the USSR and the

US in solving the great task of freeing peoples from nuclear danger can

there be if the U.S. side puts its stake on new sophisticated weapons

aimed—and this is not being concealed—against the Soviet Union.

—It is no secret that the decision whether to start production and

deployment of neutron weapons depends now above all upon the US

Government, upon you, personally, Mr. President. But this decision is

of the kind that a chain of events is put into motion which in the last

analysis is connected with the risk of devastation of whole countries,

and the loss of millions of people. The responsibility here is exception-

ally great and it is this that prompts me to address you. Since, if the

choice of the United States is in favor of the neutron bomb this will put

the Soviet Union before the necessity to meet the challenge, that is to act

in the same way as we were forced to act when atomic weapons came

into being.

We have simply no right to forgo the security of our people and the

security of our allies.

—But it is still not too late to stop. There exists an alternative to the

dangerous aggravation of the arms race and we propose it. You of

course know that in my public address at the end of the last year I pro-

posed that agreement be reached on the mutual repudiation of produc-

tion of neutron weapons. I now confirm this proposal. We are prepared

to conclude an appropriate agreement with the United States and other

states. We are prepared to enter into negotiations on this matter at

any moment. Such an agreement would respond to the spirit of the

times, to the interests of strengthening peace and detente, to peoples’

aspirations.

—I would like to hope, Mr. President, that you will treat the above

considerations with full attention, and that the Soviet Union and the US

will be able before irreversible steps are taken to reach mutual under-

standing concerning the repudiation of neutron weapons.

—At the same time I am addressing the leaders of a series of other

states—participants of the all-European conference—on this issue.

Sincerely,

L. Brezhnev [End text.]

Vance

77.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, January 25, 1978

Dear Mr. President:

I was pleased to receive your letter of January 12. I was particu-

larly gratified by your view—which I share—that the predominant

trend in U.S.-Soviet relations is a constructive one, based on our jointly

shared determination “to reduce the danger of war, to limit and subse-

quently reduce armaments, to prevent and eliminate dangerous hot-

beds of international tensions.” Our personal dialogue is dedicated to

these ends.

Let me add that I am also gratified by the progress that we made in

1977. Despite the complexities inherent in SALT, our delegations have

moved forward—and Foreign Minister Gromyko’s visit to Washington

was particularly helpful in overcoming some obstacles. We also initi-

ated a wide range of additional negotiations, all of which have the pur-

pose of shaping a more stable and cooperative U.S.-Soviet relationship,

an objective that I consider essential.

I hope, therefore, that we can move expeditiously toward a SALT

II agreement. I have so instructed the U.S. delegation. At the same time,

I am sure that Ambassador Dobrynin keeps you fully informed re-

garding the strong domestic opposition already generated by the con-

cessions we have made. U.S. willingness to count heavy bombers with

air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs) within the 1320 total for both

MIRVs and ALCMs and to limit cruise missiles has been perceived by

many Americans as insufficiently offset by Soviet concessions, compli-

cating the eventual process of ratification. This is why I hope that the

Soviet side will adopt a very positive attitude regarding the out-

standing issues, notably on the questions pertaining to MIRV sub-

limits, modernization, and the Backfire bomber.

Agreement in SALT would doubtless help us both generate a

wider movement in many of the other negotiations between our two

governments.

I am concerned that several developments may already be gener-

ating needless complications in our relations:

January–June 1978

The first involves the Soviet propaganda campaign directed at the

United States and its Allies against the defensive tactical nuclear

weapon called by you “the Neutron Bomb.” That particular weapon is

defensive; it is a tactical weapon of limited range; it is designed against

concentrated tank formations; it is meant to be used primarily against

military targets; and it is not even being produced. In every respect, it

contrasts vividly with the Soviet SS–20, which can be used in an offen-

sive attack; which has extensive range; which can be targeted against

industrial and urban centers in Western Europe; which generates three

times as much radiation and more than ten times the blast damage; and

which is already being deployed. I am quite prepared to discuss the

issue in a serious and thorough manner, but I do not believe that public

campaigns, designed to inflame emotions, are helpful to a constructive

dialogue on as complicated a matter as theater or tactical nuclear

weapons of either NATO or the Warsaw Pact.

Secondly, I am concerned that our respective policies in the Middle

East may be pointing in different directions. We are not promoting

“separate deals.” We are seeking a comprehensive settlement, to be

worked out within the Geneva framework. We believe the current

Egyptian-Israeli negotiations can be channeled in that direction and en-

larged in their scope to embrace, as you say, “all the parties,” including

moderate Palestinians prepared to accept the existence of Israel. This is

why we have kept you fully informed regarding our initiatives and at-

titudes, and we continue to hope that the Soviet Union will use its good

offices to encourage Syria and the Palestinians to adopt a moderate and

constructive attitude. Such a development would make the holding of

an early Geneva conference more likely.

Finally, let me turn to the most worrisome concern: the Horn of Af-

rica. The United States is not supplying arms to either side, nor have I

been exaggerating when I expressed U.S. reservations regarding Soviet

and Cuban involvement. That involvement is a fact, and is very trou-

bling to us.

At the same time, the United States has abstained from becoming

involved and has not encouraged concerned neighboring states to be-

come involved. We do not wish either to intensify nor to perpetuate the

Ethiopian-Somali conflict. Our preference is an early and peaceful set-

tlement respecting the territorial integrity of the African states, and the

complete removal of all foreign military personnel from both Ethiopia

and Somalia. We intend to promote such a peaceful resolution of the

conflict—and I think it would be a most constructive development if

our two countries could join in proclaiming the need for a negotiated

solution, based on respect for the territorial integrity of both Ethiopia

and Somalia, accompanied by the immediate recall of both Soviet and

Cuban military personnel from Ethiopia.

78.

Paper Prepared by Professor William E. Griffith

undated

THE HORN AND U.S. POLICY

For a situation as complex and fluid as the Horn of Africa, correct

categories of analysis are absolutely necessary, both in general and be-

cause the current crisis in the Horn is a classic example of the interac-

tion between global (Soviet/U.S.) and regional issues.

CATEGORIES OF ANALYSIS

1. While the origins of the crisis are primarily regional, and it did

not begin as a “Soviet expansionist plot,” its primary significance for

U.S. policy is the Soviet involvement. This is true because of:

January–June 1978

a. the questions it raises about U.S.-Soviet relations in general;

b. it follows, and the Soviets were stimulated by, the Soviet-Cuban

victory in Angola;

c. it is another example of Soviet-Cuban collaboration where

Cuban troops are politically less unacceptable than Soviet, while the

West, unlike the Shaba, has so far no equivalent for the Cubans;

d. in Angola several thousand Cubans can make the difference be-

tween victory and defeat;

e. the Horn is geopolitically far more important for the West than

Angola; and

f. Soviet bases in the Horn would be very useful for future Soviet

involvement in southern Africa.

2. However, the U.S. faces major regional obstacles to checking ex-

pansion of Soviet influence in the Horn: Ethiopia’s Soviet-supported

struggle against the Somali invasion of the Ogaden is a position which

the OAU unanimously supports, and which the U.S. can hardly con-

test, while the U.S.’s principal Arab allies support Somalia. Kenya fears

both Soviet influence in Ethiopia and Somali irredentism in northern

Kenya.

3. In domestic U.S. politics, the “Vietnam syndrome” generally in-

hibits U.S. action. However, U.S. opinion on the Soviet Union is in-

creasingly negative, and Ethiopian-Soviet-Cuban victories in the Horn

could merge with a worsening Middle Eastern situation (at least very

possible) to endanger any SALT agreement and destabilize U.S. rela-

tions with the Soviet Union and the whole international situation.

4. How to influence the Soviet Union to limit or reverse its inter-

vention in the Horn requires a global and regional analysis of available

“pressure points” on the Soviet Union and the degree of priority for

their use for this purpose as compared to other Soviet-U.S. issues which

these points involve.

5. The Horn suffers, from the U.S. viewpoint, from a very high

level of unpredictability, for the combatants involved are not subject to

decisive Soviet influence and certainly not to U.S. influence, and the

military outcome will be the major factor in determining the future.

6. No matter what the military and political outcome is in the near

future, U.S. planning should assume that the Horn will be an intermit-

tent crisis area over the next decade or two.

7. Even if the Ethiopians, Soviets, and Cubans do win a military

victory, and particularly if they do, conservative Arabs and the Shah

will be the more anti-Soviet for Moscow’s expansion of its influence

and support of Ethiopian “ex-Christian communists.”

8. If the U.S. does not check the Soviets in the Horn, they and the

Cubans are more likely to become involved in southern Africa, particu-

larly if a black civil war breaks out in Zimbabwe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

9. Moreover, the Saudis and Sadat will feel that if the U.S. cannot

be counted on to counter the Soviets in the Horn, it also cannot be

counted on to bring about a Middle Eastern settlement. Both will there-

fore be more likely to anticipate a breakdown and another Middle

Eastern war and therefore be less willing to compromise with Israel.

U.S. inaction in the Horn would thus worsen the Middle Eastern situa-

tion and U.S. influence there.

U.S. POLICY

1. Because without massive Soviet and Cuban assistance the Ethio-

pians cannot reconquer the Ogaden or crush the Eritrean rebellion and,

because as long as they cannot, they are unlikely to begin negotiations,

and because the U.S. has no significant pressure points vis-a-vis the

Cubans, who will not quit on their own, the U.S. must find and use

pressure points on the Soviets. I suggest three, listed in graduated

order of importance and to be used in flexible escalation.

a. The Indian Ocean Negotiations. The Soviets should be informed

privately that if they continue their present level of involvement in

Ethiopia, we will break them off; and if they do, we should.

b. The Chinese. The Soviets clearly fear more extensive U.S. involve-

ment with the Chinese. To prevent this has been one of Moscow’s main

motives for Soviet-U.S. detente. The U.S. objective, therefore, should be

to make the Soviets believe that if they continue in the Horn, we will

move farther toward Peking. This should initially involve expanded

U.S. consultations with the Chinese on the Horn to convince the Soviets

of their menace. The U.S. should end its attempt to normalize relations

with Hanoi, which Moscow supports, and improve U.S. relations with

Laos. Steps like this are necessary to convince the Chinese that we

mean business (including in the Horn) for otherwise the Soviets will

not be convinced themselves that we do and will work with the Chi-

nese on this problem.

c. SALT. Whether or not a SALT II agreement can be produced

which will be satisfactory to the Soviets and two-thirds of the U.S.

Senate (which at the moment seems far from certain), the Senate will

hardly ratify SALT II if the Soviets and the Cubans are still moving for-

ward in the Horn. For the Soviets SALT is the core of Soviet-U.S. de-

tente, and therefore their most vulnerable pressure point, the more so

because they fear U.S. deployment of MaRV and cruise missiles and,

perhaps most of all, U.S. technological assistance to its allies (and

perhaps eventually even to the Chinese) in deployment of cruise mis-

siles as well. Since it is not in our interest to deny our allies access to

cruise missile technology in any case, there is all the more reason, if

necessary, to indicate to the Soviets that we will speed it up if they con-

tinue to act as they have been doing in the Horn.

79.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 31, 1978

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

The Secretary transmitted to Dobrynin a copy of the President’s

letter to Brezhnev of January 25, the original of which had been deliv-

ered in Moscow yesterday.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

PNG Exchange: The Secretary noted that Dobrynin has preferred

not to accept our offer to show him the film on the Avdyunin case, ex-

pressing instead a desire to talk privately about our mutual under-

standing on how such cases are handled. Dobrynin said he understood

from Vasev that the movie made it clear that the episode was set up for

the purpose of making the movie, that the questions asked were

leading and insinuating and that, in short, there was no doubt in their

minds that this entrapment was arranged in retaliation against the

Moscow cases.

The Secretary said there was no question in our minds about the

man’s guilt, that the film was merely confirmatory of what he had been

doing. Shulman added details in support of this point.

(Although Dobrynin had earlier expressed a desire to talk over the

“rules of the game,” he now fenced and asked if the Secretary or

Shulman had anything to suggest, showing reluctance to initiate

discussion.)

After a further repetition of the contradictory views of the

Avdyunin case, it was agreed by both Dobrynin and the Secretary that

the matter should be “cooled down.” It was also agreed that it would be

desirable to avoid publicity, although Dobrynin protested that the US

sometimes engaged in one-sided publicity. He warned that this would

create a temptation to Moscow to publicize matters that had previously

been handled with restraint.

Ponomarev Group: The Secretary expressed sadness over the epi-

sode in Los Angeles in which a member of the group had been splat-

tered with salad thrown by a demonstrator. He added that additional

security would be provided at subsequent stops. Dobrynin expressed

appreciation for the Secretary’s sentiments, which he said he would

transmit to Ponomarev when he saw him in New York February 1. In

general, Dobrynin said, the trip had been successful.

Middle East: The Secretary said that he would give Dobrynin a re-

port on the results of the Sadat visit during the coming weekend. He

said, in response to questions, that the Political Committee was consid-

ering resumption of its activities, with Atherton serving as a go-

between, that the main issue involved concerned Palestinian repre-

January–June 1978

sentation, and that the Sinai settlements issue was being handled in the

Military Committee, in which we were not involved.

SALT Ratification: Dobrynin observed that during the meetings be-

tween the Ponomarev delegation and the Congress, there had been

some mention that SALT might be referred to both Houses of Congress

for a simple majority vote. The Secretary said that this procedure, while

it would relieve the necessity of having a two-thirds vote in the Senate,

would raise other risks in involving the House.

Belgrade: Dobrynin asked the Secretary to take under consideration

the situation at Belgrade, where he felt the draft text submitted by the

Soviet Union, although admittedly imperfect, had not received fair at-

tention. He expressed concern that the situation at Belgrade had degen-

erated into polemical exchanges, and that the opportunity for construc-

tive agreement was being lost. The Secretary agreed to examine the

various draft proposals.

The Horn: The Secretary referred to the principles he had discussed

with Ponomarev, in the hope that the Soviet side would examine them

and present any ideas it might have for moving toward a negotiated so-

lution to the problem. Dobrynin said that he would be discussing the

subject with Ponomarev in New York on February 1. The Secretary

then went on to make the point that the increase in Soviet ships in the

Red Sea, including landing ships, and the Indian Ocean, was having a

negative effect, would make negotiations and a solution to the problem

more difficult, and would have a provocative effect. He stressed the se-

riousness with which such steps were regarded here, and said we

ought to be moving in the other direction, toward establishing the con-

ditions for a negotiated solution. Dobrynin said he understood, and

would pass on the message.

At a subsequent point, the discussion returned to this subject, and

Dobrynin said a crucial consideration for the start of negotiations was

to get Somali withdrawal from the Ogaden. The Secretary said he

agreed, but it was necessary to work out the timing of the withdrawal,

and an agreement on what should take place after the withdrawal,

leading to some form of self-determination and autonomy.

SALT and Miscellany: Dobrynin observed that Brezhnev was back

on the job, and that Gromyko was now away on a two-week vacation,

although not far from Moscow. He thought that ultimately a meeting

between Gromyko and the Secretary might be required to work out the

final unresolved issues in the SALT negotiations. In this connection, the

Secretary said that he would soon be giving Dobrynin a list of matters

concerning Backfire which remained to be worked out. Dobrynin said:

“Fair enough.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

80.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

27089. Subject: Letter to President From Vladimir Slepak; Slepak

Family Case. Ref; Moscow 422.

1. Please inform Vladimir Slepak at appropriate occasion that his

letter to the President was received with sympathy and concern. Please

tell him that we have his case very much in mind and that we will try to

assist Slepak family’s effort to emigrate.

2. Vladimir Slepak’s son, Alexander, and his Amcit wife, Elaine,

had meetings recently in Washington with Assistant Secretary Derian

and with officers from HA and EUR/SOV. In discussing case with

81.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 14, 1978

SUBJECT

Middle East, Horn, Belgrade CSCE, SALT

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Ambassador Dobrynin came in at our request February 14. The

discussion covered the following matters:

1. Middle East. The Secretary reported that the Sadat visit2 had been

useful and that agreement had been reached to continue the negotia-

tions, with an effort in the first instance to reach agreement on a

statement of general principles, and then to bring others into the

discussions.

In his meeting with Dayan on Thursday, the Secretary said, he

proposed to review the statement of general principles, the question of

Israeli settlements, and the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian issues. On the

latter cluster of issues, we would maintain our preference for a Pales-

tinian homeland linked to Jordan, but a number of problems would

need to be resolved beforehand, including Palestinian participation in

the determination of their own future, and the conditions for an interim

arrangement. Although the Israelis had manifested their unhappiness

with some of our recent statements, the Secretary said it was evident

that these statements were not new, and that the Israelis were prepared

to have the US continue to perform a facilitating role. After the meeting

with Dayan, he said, Atherton would be leaving for the Middle East, to

move as necessary between the capitals to seek acceptance of the decla-

ration of general principles as a first step in the process.

The Secretary gave Dobrynin advance notice of an announcement

to be made later in the day concerning the US intention to permit the

sale of specified aircraft to Israel, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.

2. Horn. The Secretary spoke of the mounting US concern over the

course of events, and the need for prompt movement toward a cease-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

fire and a negotiated settlement. He expressed the belief that the time

had come to work through the UN Security Council, and reported that

he had asked Andrew Young to talk about this with Ambassador Troy-

anovsky in New York. In response to a question from Dobrynin about

the results expected from a Security Council discussion, the Secretary

listed the following: ceasefire; recognition of international boundaries;

withdrawal of the Somalis from the Ogaden; withdrawal of all foreign

troops, including Soviet and Cuban, from Ethiopia and Somalia; and

the beginning of steps leading toward a negotiated solution. Dobrynin

expressed the view that there should be an immediate appeal for a So-

mali withdrawal, since this was, in the Soviet view, a precondition for

the other steps. Dobrynin asked who should take the initiatives in

calling for an SC meeting. The Secretary said it would be best if Nigeria

or Gabon did so, since an African initiative would not make it appear

that the UN was taking matters out of OAU hands, but that we would

do so if necessary. Dobrynin said it should not appear to be a Soviet-

American confrontation, and the Secretary agreed that an African initi-

ative would be better from this point of view as well.

The Secretary emphasized the importance of a firm commitment

that the Ethiopians and the Cubans would not cross into Somali terri-

tory, and the serious consequences that would follow if they did. Do-

brynin repeated the assurances of the Ethiopians on this point, and

added that Raul Castro4 had also made it clear during his visit to

Moscow that the Cuban forces had no intention of moving into Somali

territory. Dobrynin did not dispute the assertion that the Cubans were

participating in the fighting, but insisted that Soviet personnel were not

doing so.

Dobrynin said he would transmit the message to Moscow, and

could not anticipate what its reaction would be to the Security Council

move. He pointed out, however, that it had been negative up to this

point and the USSR had insisted upon prior Somali withdrawal as a

prerequisite to negotiations. He ventured his own opinion that a decla-

ration of Somali intention to withdraw might suffice to start the

process, if it were given without conditions, and if the withdrawal were

to be completed within a definite time period, such as two weeks.

3. Belgrade CSCE. The Secretary expressed concern that Vorontsov

had not been negotiating seriously on the neutral/non-aligned draft,

and said that while the draft was not altogether to our liking, it offered

an opportunity to move forward in a constructive way. Dobrynin re-

plied that Moscow was determined not to have any language that

changed the emphasis of the Helsinki accord, with its distribution of at-

82.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

43255. For the Charge from the Secretary. Subject: Meeting With

Dobrynin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

1. Ambassador Dobrynin came in this morning at his request.

2. He delivered a non paper in response to our inquiries on Feb-

ruary 142 about the Soviet attitude toward bringing the question of the

Horn to the Security Council. In brief, the Soviet position is that they

prefer that we try first to ascertain fully whether there is any possibility

of OAU action. He said that they had checked with most of the African

states at the UN and found them to be opposed to raising the matter in

the Security Council. It was agreed that we would talk again next week,

after further soundings. I informed Dobrynin that we had made repre-

sentations to the Somalis urging the withdrawal of their troops.

3. I reported to Dobrynin that we would have a low-level U.S. dele-

gation going to South Africa on February 20 to continue our efforts to

gain South African agreement to adhere to the NPT and also to seek

further information on the Kalahari test side [site?].

4. We discussed again briefly the discrepancies between the Pravda

editorial on SALT and the Soviet position at Geneva. Dobrynin said

that he had checked his own files and did not find adequate informa-

tion on this point. We agreed to supply information, particularly con-

cerning the two disparities on cruise testing and on wide-bodied

aircraft.

5. Text of Soviet non paper:

We have already more than once exchanged opinions at various

levels concerning the Somali-Ethiopian conflict. The U.S. side could not

help noticing that the Soviet Union from the very beginning consist-

ently pursues a principled line in this matter. It is known that in this

conflict there is one side which unleashed it and the other side which is

a victim of an aggressive action. There was no lack in the efforts by the

Soviet Union to prevent the Somali-Ethiopian conflict, to induce both

sides to search for peaceful ways of solving problems existing between

them.

And the U.S. side is well aware of that.

To face the truth, it is obvious that the Somali leadership, encour-

aged by certain forces from outside and counting on their help, has em-

barked on the path which cannot be regarded otherwise than that of

aggression.

Moscow would like to draw the attention of the U.S. side to the po-

sitions of the majority of African states which did not and do not sup-

port the expansionist policy of the Somali leadership. We are getting an

impression that neither the organization of African unity nor its appro-

priate bodies have so far exhausted all possibilities to obtain a settle-

ment of the Somali-Ethiopian conflict on a just basis. Therefore Moscow

January–June 1978

expresses great doubt with regard not only to the advisability but also

to the usefulness of submitting this question to the UN Security

Council for consideration. What is at the basis of this approach?

Firstly, the parties to the conflict themselves—Somalia and Ethi-

opia—did not and do not put forward such a proposal. Moreover, Ethi-

opia pronounces itself against the discussion of this question in the UN

Security Council in order not to internationalize the conflict.

Secondly, as it has been already mentioned, the Organization of

African Unity and its committee established specifically for the pur-

pose of mediation in a settlement of the conflict, continue their efforts,

which is in keeping with the position of the majority of member states

of that organization. And the consideration of the question in the Secu-

rity Council would be detrimental to the efforts of the OAU, would

depreciate its importance and could lead to differences among its

members.

Thirdly, we proceed from the necessity to prevent further aggrava-

tion of the situation around the Horn of Africa. If our understanding is

correct the U.S. side also proceeds from this. Whereas the consideration

of this question within the framework of the Security Council would

rather aggravate the situation, would cause between the sides in the

conflict undesirable polemics which would also inevitably involve Se-

curity Council members themselves.

Finally, the specific questions mentioned by the Secretary of State

as a possible subject of discussion in the Security Council, are obviously

unbalanced and provide evident advantages to the side that unleashed

aggression, i.e. to Somalia which could use the presence of its troops in

the territory of Ethiopia for bargaining from the position of force.

As we have already stated on more than one occasion the Soviet

Union is always prepared to cooperate with the United States, in the

United Nations as well, but, naturally, not at the expense of the in-

terests of third countries. Moscow continues to believe that an effective

settlement of the conflict in the Horn of Africa may be achieved on the

basis of the proposals we have already set forth which, as we under-

stand, coincide to some extent also with your proposals, namely, not

only by way of the cessation of hostilities but also through a complete

and immediate withdrawal of the Somali forces from the seized areas

of Ethiopia and through negotiations between the parties on the basis

of the principles of mutual respect for sovereignity, territorial integrity,

inviolability of frontiers and non-interference into each other’s internal

affairs.

As for the apprehensions concerning possibilities of crossing the

border of Somalia by the Ethiopian troops after the liberation of the

Ogaden is completed, we, as it has been already repeatedly stated to

the U.S. side, continue to regard with full confidence the well-known

83.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 21, 1978

SUBJECT

Horn, Arms Control, Middle East, Misc.

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoly F. Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman, S/MS

Ambassador Dobrynin came in at our request. We discussed the

following matters:

1. Horn. The Secretary reviewed the results of Aaron’s meetings

with Mengistu. He indicated that Mengistu had repeated his assurance

that Ethiopia had no territorial ambitions beyond its own border, but

was determined to have the Somalis withdrawn from the Ogaden.

Mengistu also indicated that any initiative at the present time would

have to come through the OAU, and that emissaries had been sent to

see Garba in Lagos. The Secretary reported that Mengistu had agreed

to receive an Ambassador from the U.S. The supply of non-lethal

equipment was also discussed. On the whole, the conversations had

been successful in keeping the channels of communication open.

January–June 1978

The Secretary reported that the Somalis had been urged to with-

draw from the Ogaden. He expressed his concern that the conflict

could go on, and could spill across the border, creating great complica-

tions. The Secretary urged that the Soviet Union join with us in putting

maximum efforts behind the OAU initiative for a ceasefire and

mediation.

Dobrynin replied that the Soviet Union is prepared to do this, par-

ticularly because it believes that nothing useful can be achieved at the

UN Security Council at the present juncture. He said that the Soviet

Union had learned two days ago from the Nigerian Foreign Minister

that he believed it possible to accomplish something useful, and that

his complaints at this point were directed more against the Somalis

than against the Ethiopians.

Dobrynin referred to a previous inquiry about a report that the

Ethiopians might be contemplating an effort to take the town of Har-

geisa as a hostage against Somali evacuation of the Ogaden. He said he

was personally skeptical about the report, but that he had forwarded

the inquiry to Moscow, without any response so far.

The Secretary observed that he had, in testimony that morning, as-

serted his belief that the Soviet Union had no aspirations against So-

malia. Dobrynin replied that this was a safe statement.

2. ASAT. The Secretary mentioned that he would be presenting a

paper to the Soviet Union, probably sometime next week, with specific

suggestions for a meeting on this subject.

3. Israeli Nuclear Weapons. Dobrynin gave the Secretary a non-paper

asking for clarifications of CIA press reports that Israel possessed nu-

clear weapons, and urging US influence to gain Israeli accession to the

non-proliferation treaty. The Secretary said that the Israelis had denied

the possession of nuclear weapons; that the CIA had indicated that Is-

rael had the capability of producing them, but was divided on the ques-

tion of whether it had already done so. He said that he would study the

paper and reply.

4. UN Charter Revision. Dobrynin also gave the Secretary a paper, in

Russian, agreeing with the US position on not undertaking a revision of

the UN Charter at the present time. (A similar paper is apparently

being presented to other capitals.)

5. Indian Ocean. Dobrynin said conversationally that Mendelevich

was disappointed at the small progress achieved in the Indian Ocean

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

negotiations, and the unwillingness of Warnke even to set a date for the

next meeting.

6. Gromyko’s Health. In answer to a question, Dobrynin said that

Gromyko had been operated on for prostate two days before, and that

it would be several days before it was known how serious the effects

would be.

7. Asad in Moscow. The Secretary inquired about the conversations

with Asad in Moscow. Dobrynin said he had not yet received informa-

tion, but would report on the conversations later.

8. Congressional Committee Visit to Moscow. Dobrynin mentioned

that his military attache, at a Pentagon lunch, was told that the House

Armed Services Committee had expressed an interest in visiting

Moscow, and asked for guidance. The Secretary expressed the view

that it might be useful to have some selected members of that Com-

mittee make such a visit.

9. Soviet SALT Compliance. In a separate conversation, Shulman

told Dobrynin that a report was being prepared for presentation to the

Senate Foreign Relations Committee in a few days that would answer

charges of Soviet non-compliance with the SALT I agreement. Shulman

explained that the US was sensitive to the confidentiality of SCC pro-

ceedings, in which these issues were resolved, and while the paper

would draw upon the SCC proceedings, it would avoid unnecessary

detail about them. Dobrynin said this sounded fine to him, and that he

would inform Moscow, but he anticipated no objections. Shulman said

that he would send Dobrynin a copy of the paper when it was ready for

presentation to the Congress.

84.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

February 27, 1978

Dear Mr. President,

Your latest letter transmitted through the US Embassy in Moscow

on January 30, has evoked, I will put it straight, mixed feelings and

some reflections which I consider necessary to share with you in the

spirit of frankness inherent in our correspondence.

As it follows from the letter, you share our assessment of the pre-

dominant trend and main direction of Soviet-US relations at present

and for the future. This cannot but cause satisfaction. Agreement on the

basic approach, it would seem, should facilitate to a considerable extent

the solution of specific issues which are on the agenda of our relations.

In its turn, an active advance in those issues would not only be a logical

continuation of all the positive things that have already been done

through efforts of both sides in recent years, but would also open new

prospects for fruitful cooperation in the interests of both our countries

and the entire world.

We generally consider that the central task of international rela-

tions of today—if we do not want the world to be again overflowed by

the wave of mutual fears, suspicions, by uncurbed arms race—is ex-

actly to take, and without any delay, practical steps which would

deepen emerging relaxation of international tension, consolidate what

is new in relationship among nations, which constitutes the only alter-

native to returning to the “cold war”.

For understandable reasons the most important role here belongs

to our two countries, to their ability to find mutually acceptable solu-

tions based on the account of each other’s legitimate interests, on the

understanding of actual realities of the developments. This, of course,

requires constructive political will, determination to act proceeding

from broad interests and long-term perspective of the world develop-

ment, and not under the influence of some or other momentary factors.

I say all this only because the current situation in relations between

our countries prompts me to do so. Indeed, one cannot fail to see that in

specific and, for that matter, major problems of these relations a

progress is either hardly noticeable or is not there at all.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Let us take the main problem—the state of affairs with the prepa-

ration of the strategic offensive arms limitation agreement. In my pre-

vious letters I have already noted that after agreement of principle on a

number of major issues was achieved during the meetings with you of

the USSR Minister of Foreign Affairs last September, from the US side,

notwithstanding the readiness we showed to seek mutually acceptable

solutions to outstanding questions, there followed no equivalent steps

towards the Soviet position.

Moreover, judging by your letter, now an attempt is made to intro-

duce into the preparation of the agreement, as a new factor, references

to the domestic opposition in the US, for the satisfaction of which we

are called upon to make further concessions. And among unsolved

issues such questions are again mentioned (as the Backfire, for ex-

ample) which should have been closed long ago. Such approach is in no

way helpful. It is easy to imagine what would happen if the Soviet side

acted in a similar manner.

We, of course, are prepared to continue to seek mutually accept-

able solutions to outstanding problems. We are also ready to con-

tribute—to the extent it depends on us—to creating a favorable atmos-

phere in the US around the future agreement. But successful

completion of the agreement, in which objectively both our countries

are equally interested, requires that the US side also make its part of the

road. And, of course, our efforts in favor of the approval of the agree-

ment in the US can by no means be regarded as a substitute for efforts

in the said direction by the Administration itself which, naturally, is

fully responsible for that.

Frankly speaking, I also expected a more constructive reply to the

letter I had sent to you specifically on the question of neutron

weapons. I shall not repeat now our stated assessment of this new va-

riety of weapons of mass annihilation. I wish, however, to stress again

one aspect of principle. If we take purely military characteristics of that

weapon, to which the matter is actually reduced in your letter, even

then such an approach clearly shows its pernicious consequences for

international peace and security. In fact, the production and deploy-

ment of that weapon would inevitably lead to reducing the so called

nuclear threshold, to a temptation to use it at earlier stages of a conflict

and, consequently, to increasing the risk of a nuclear war. Is this alone

not sufficient to cause concern that prompted the proposal I put for-

ward? And it is not the matter of propaganda here at all.

We confirm our proposal to agree on a mutual refusal to produce

neutron weapons and we would like to hope that this proposal will be

January–June 1978

considered by the US side with due attention, impartially and without

attempts to link it with other questions.

A few words concerning other issues of disarmament which are

the subject of negotiations between our countries. In addition to the

agreement on strategic armaments which is under preparation, the

achievement of practical results at these negotiations would in itself

mean a step forward towards restraining the arms race. This has been

recognized more than once also by the US side. The more unjustified

are its attempts lately to link in some way or other the solution of these

questions with the development of the situation in various parts of the

world. Artificial linkage of such kind has never brought about anything

good in the past, nor will it be of any benefit now. There may be only

one result—complication, delay in negotiations. But is this what our

countries should strive for?

No less puzzling is the attempt to represent the Soviet Union as al-

legedly trying to get some advantages from the conflict in the Horn of

Africa, and even to speak of a possibility of negative consequences for

Soviet-US relations. We have already on more than one occasion

brought to your personal attention, Mr. President, as well as to the at-

tention of the US Secretary of State, that our policy in the questions re-

lated to the Somali-Ethiopian conflict pursues the sole purpose of re-

storing justice and peace in that region. It is precisely for that reason

only that we are helping Ethiopia as a victim of aggression on the part

of Somalia. If Somalia withdraws its troops from Ethiopia—and the

sooner outside support of Somali aggressive actions is discontinued the

earlier such withdrawal would occur—then the cause of the conflict

would cease to exist.

A settlement in the Middle East undoubtedly remains an impor-

tant question urgently requiring mutual efforts of our countries. In

your letter you would seem to reproach us for the fact that actions of

the USSR and the US go in different directions. And this is said despite

the fact that it is the United States and not the Soviet Union that has de-

parted from the Statement jointly adopted on October 1, 1977, has em-

barked upon the path of encouraging separate negotiations between

Egypt and Israel. Can this be regarded as an objective approach to the

issue? Of course, not.

Whatever is said in an attempt to justify those separate actions it is

perfectly obvious that the present course of events seriously compli-

cates the achievement of a genuine peace in the Middle East. Even if the

negotiations of Egypt with Israel deal not only with working out a sep-

arate agreement on Sinai but also with some general “principles of a

85.

Informal Notes on a Meeting Between Secretary of State

Vance and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin

Washington, February 28, 1978

1. Dobrynin came in at his request for the purpose of delivering a

letter from Brezhnev to the President. He presented the Russian text

and an unofficial translation prepared in the Soviet Embassy. (He com-

mented as he did so that he was doing our work for us, and that we did

not generally prepare a Russian translation of our letters to Brezhnev.)

January–June 1978

2. The Brezhnev letter is a reply to the President’s letter of January

, and matches the President’s letter in its blunt tone, and

round-up coverage of a number of issues. However, it is in line with re-

cent Brezhnev speeches that express concern about the state of

US-Soviet relations and a desire to seek an improvement. It probably

was written before the Brezhnev speeches of last week, and lacks the

upbeat suggestion of steps to infuse a new dynamism in the

relationship.

The letter expresses disappointment at the lack of progress in the

SALT negotiations since the Gromyko visit to Washington last Sep-

tember, and protests what he sees as our use of domestic opposition to

SALT to gain bargaining advantages.

On the neutron bomb, the letter also expresses disappointment

with the President’s reply, and repeats the concern that the neutron

bomb would lower the nuclear threshold.

He remonstrates US linkage of arms control negotiations with

other issues, particularly the Horn, and repeats that Soviet objectives in

the Horn are limited to helping Ethiopia resist Somali aggression.

On the Middle East, the letter responds by saying that it is the US,

not the SU, that has departed from the common approach agreed upon

in the joint statement of October 1, and has encouraged separate negoti-

ations between Egypt and Israel. Other Arab states will not participate

even if these bilateral negotiations succeed, he says, and therefore only

a comprehensive settlement at Geneva can resolve the situation.

3. The Secretary asked if Dobrynin had a report on the Assad con-

versations in Moscow. Dobrynin said he had not yet received the infor-

mation, but would hope to be able to convey a report shortly.

4. ASAT. The Secretary informed Dobrynin that the US is prepared

to begin discussions on this subject in April at Geneva, and covered the

other points set forth in the agreed talking points.

Dobrynin replied that, as Brezhnev had said in a previous letter,

the ASAT discussions should cover not only the satellite versus satellite

problem, but also the shuttle system versus satellite situation.

5. Sparkman Letter on Compliance. The Secretary then conveyed to

Dobrynin excerpts from a statement made 2/28 by Senator Sparkman,

Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, in putting into

the Congressional Record the paper prepared by the State Department

on the record of compliance with the SALT I agreement. Dobrynin re-

plied with satisfaction to Sparkman’s statement absolving the Soviet

Union of the charge of cheating on the agreement.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

6. Matzoh Packages. The Secretary raised with Dobrynin the ques-

tion of the Soviet postal ban against the shipment of matzohs for the

Passover, and said a repeal of the ban would be welcomed here. If this

were not possible, at least it would help if the Soviet authorities would

make a sufficient quantity of flour available for matzoh production by

the Jewish communities in the larger cities.

Dobrynin at first replied with a diversion about how many dissi-

dents, most of them Jews, received certificates from abroad which en-

abled them to purchase whiskey at the dollar shops. When he was

brought back to the matzoh issue, he suggested that Toon should raise

the matter in Moscow. He then added more seriously that when rela-

tions were good, such small issues could be more easily resolved, but

when relations were bad, people in Moscow tended to respond by

asking why they should accommodate us.

7. SALT. In a brief exchange, Dobrynin expressed concern about re-

ports that the US did not intend to proceed with the Treaty and its rati-

fication this year. He said the Soviet side had made all the concessions

since the Washington meeting, but there had not been a corresponding

action on the US side, and reports, including a conversation with Sen-

ator Cranston, indicated that ratification was not likely this year. The

Secretary replied that it was the President’s intention to proceed expe-

ditiously with the negotiation of the Treaty (which could be possible by

the end of May), and to send it to the Senate for ratification soon there-

after. Dobrynin commented that it would depend upon whether the

President chose to exert his leadership strongly on this issue. The Secre-

tary said he would do so.

8. Horn. Dobrynin made a side comment expressing regret that in

to the Brezhnev speeches, the effect was spoiled by appending a

warning on the Horn.

In the subsequent discussion of the Horn, Dobrynin asked: “What

else could we do? We have transmitted assurances from the Ethiopians

and the Cubans that they will not invade Somali territory.” He also

asked: “Why are the Somalis so resisting the idea of withdrawing from

the Ogaden?”

The Secretary pointed out that the large number of Cubans trans-

ported to Ethiopia and participating in combat was troubling to many

Americans. To this, Dobrynin answered by comparing the situation in

Ethiopia with the situation in Angola, where nothing had prevented

86.

Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, March 1, 1978

SUBJECT

Possible Actions to Drive Home to the Soviets and Cubans the Need to Moderate

their Intervention in the Horn

If we respond to the Soviet and Cuban intervention in the Horn

only in the Horn area itself, we run the risk of negative and counterpro-

ductive entanglement and Soviet counteractions which could prove

embarrassing. If we encourage friendly Muslim countries to place

troops in Somalia, e.g., and these are attacked by the Ethiopians/So-

viets/Cubans, we will have some obligation to come to their defense. If

Congressional restraints prevent us from doing so, or if the prospect of

escalating involvement forces us to reconsider after we have launched

an action, we and our friends could suffer a political and psychological

defeat of some magnitude. The same could prove true in Eritrea if we

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

were to insert ourselves into that conflict in support of Muslim coun-

tries who support the rebellion.

The Soviets and Cubans have legality and African sentiment on

their side in Ethiopia—they are helping an African country defend its

territorial integrity and countering aggression. They can monopolize

this position only if we permit them to do so. Our recent actions and

policy statements have placed us firmly behind these principles, too,

and we should not waver from them. We should, in fact, be very careful

to avoid any appearance of a persisting sentimental tilt toward So-

malia, because the Soviets will exploit this against us in Ethiopia and in

Kenya. If Somalia is invaded and we do back some counteraction, we

must be very clear about the circumstances. The wily Somalis already

know that it is in their interest to claim and appear that they are being

invaded—and they may well work out a scenario that achieves this

aim.

The way to bring home to the Soviets and Cubans the high cost of

further consolidation of their position in the Horn is to cool relations in

other areas and take steps that force them to weigh the costs of Horn in-

tervention against gains they have been expecting from other aspects of

their relations with us. Possibilities include:

• Straightforward abandonment of Indian Ocean Talks.

• Abandonment of talks on limiting conventional arms transfers.

• Suspension of SALT.

• Limitations on economic relations, transfer of technology, etc.—

announced or unannounced.

• A more active program of challenging, critiquing and countering

Soviet initiatives elsewhere in Africa and in the Third World.

• Abandonment of joint space ventures.

• Demonstrative efforts to consult with the Chinese—without

specifying the exact purpose of the consultations.

• Selective restriction of those cultural exchange activities which

are, on balance, more advantageous to the Soviets than to us.

In respect to Cuba, I find the suggestions Bob Pastor makes in his

memorandum to you of 28 February appealing. Perhaps we should

broaden our consideration of possible efforts against the Cubans and

systematically review every aspect of our present relationship from the

viewpoint of how adjustments disadvantageous to the Cubans could

be made.

We must not neglect the public relations/propaganda dimension

of the problem. So far, I fear, the U.S. Government has provided the

world a spectacle of being rather undifferentiatedly fussed up about

the Horn but incapable of doing much except sputtering and de-

nouncing. When we take any of the actions listed above, we should

give advance thought to how we announce and explain them. Our

statements and backgrounders to the media and our broadcasts over

87.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 6, 1978

SUBJECT

South African Nuclear Developments, Horn of Africa

SALT, Other Arms Control Matters

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

SUMMARY: In a personal message from Brezhnev to President

Carter, the Soviets voice concern about evidence of further South Af-

rican steps toward developing and testing nuclear weapons. The So-

viets are agreeable to consulting with us in New York on forthcoming

US Special Session on Disarmament issues. They also propose re-

suming consultations on conventional arms transfers in Moscow in

later March or early April. Dobrynin said the Somalis had approached

the USSR for assistance in bringing about a mediation effort in the

Horn. He asked whether Warnke was returning to SALT with new in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

structions. Dobrynin said he is being called to Moscow for consulta-

tions on US-Soviet relations, leaving Washington about March 16.

Ambassador Dobrynin came in at his request March 6, and the fol-

lowing subjects were covered:

1. Dobrynin delivered an oral note (in Russian, with translation at-

tached) from Brezhnev to President Carter on the subject of South Af-

rican nuclear weapon capabilities. The note cites new Soviet data that

work is continuing in South Africa to develop nuclear weapons and

prepare test explosions. It asserts that one test site is being completed

and another has been started; that an industrial reactor is being built to

produce weapons-grade plutonium, and a facility is being planned for

the production of enriched uranium.

2. A second oral note2 (in Russian) conveyed Soviet agreement to

engage in consultations on the UN Special Session on Disarmament, of-

fering to meet in New York either in the course of the preparatory

meeting, April 4–21, or immediately afterwards.

3. A third oral note3 (also in Russian) proposed to continue the con-

sultations on the international sale and transfer of conventional

weapons. It proposes the meeting be in Moscow at the end of March or

the beginning of April, but expresses willingness to meet at any other

place of mutual convenience. The note adds that there will be a change

in leadership of the Soviet side; it will be headed by Lev Mendelevich,

and his assistant will be P. I. Galkin.

4. Dobrynin informed the Secretary that he was being recalled to

Moscow for consultations on the state of US-Soviet relations, and will

leave on or about March 16.

5. On the subject of the Horn, Dobrynin said that the Somalis had

approached the Soviet Union for assistance in bringing about a media-

tion effort, but had been told that no negotiations were possible until

there had been a Somali withdrawal from the Ogaden. He added that

he hoped the Horn problem would soon be over, and that this would

help to improve Soviet-American relations. In his side comments, Do-

brynin said the Soviet side was by no means happy with the course of

events in the Horn, but also made the point that people who thought

everything was done in accordance with a master strategic design in

Moscow tended to underestimate the degree of improvisation in-

volved. He added that the US seemed to be much more ideologically-

inclined than the Soviet Union these days.

6. On SALT, Dobrynin inquired whether Warnke was returning to

Geneva with new instructions, and was told that the matter was being

88.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

60448. Subject: Horn of Africa: Somali Withdrawal.

1. Secretary sent oral message to Siad Barre March 8 strongly

urging Somali announcement of withdrawal from all of Ogaden. Siad

informed our Ambassador Loughran2 late that same day he accepted

President’s appeal and would be making announcement of all Somali

troop withdrawal shortly. Announcement has not been made at this

point.

2. Deputy Secretary informed Dobrynin at midnight tonight of

Siad’s decision and appealed to Soviets to take steps to urge prompt

ceasefire on Ethiopians in order to facilitate peaceful withdrawal and

avoid further bloodshed. Dobrynin made no substantive comment but

indicated he would inform Moscow immediately.

cret; Niact; Exdis; Distribute as Nodis. Sent Niact Immediate to U.S. Interest Section, Ha-

vana. Drafted by Paul Kreisberg (S/P); cleared by Shulman, Anthony Lake (S/P), and

Sydney Goldsmith (S/S–O); approved by William C. Harrop (AF).

89.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 11, 1978

SUBJECT

Horn of Africa, Rhodesia (Part 1 of 2)

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin

Deputy Secretary

Marshall D. Shulman

Summary: Dobrynin came in at the Secretary’s request, primarily to

discuss the Horn. In response to the Secretary, he indicated some Soviet

willingness to influence Ethiopia against reprisals, but he maintained

that outside observers and Soviet/Cuban withdrawal were matters for

internal Ethiopian jurisdiction.

The Horn:

The Secretary began with an expression of appreciation for Do-

brynin’s telephoned response on March 10 to our approach to him

during the night of March 8. (The Secretary had recorded Dobrynin’s

response as positive in tone, indicating that the Soviet government had

communicated to the Ethiopians the US desire that the Ethiopians not

exact reprisals in the Ogaden and not “butcher” the withdrawing So-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

mali troops. He also recorded Dobrynin’s expression of the Soviet

government’s positive reaction to the consultation, and readiness to

reciprocate.)

The Secretary suggested further measures of cooperation that

would be useful: 1) that the Soviet Union use its influence with Addis

to moderate its reported unrealistic conditions for a ceasefire and settle-

ment; 2) that the Soviet Union cooperate in making it possible for an

outside observer group to be sent to the area as soon as possible, with

the support of African countries; [3)] that Soviet and Cuban troops

begin the process of withdrawal from the area promptly, and that the

introduction of additional Soviet or Cuban soldiers be prevented; 4)

that foreign advisers not be introduced into Eritrea; and 5) that consul-

tations be held to prevent the introduction of foreign troops into

Southern Africa.

Dobrynin said the Soviet government had given him no instruc-

tions on the questions of an observer group or on reductions in Soviet

or Cuban forces in Ethiopia, but he reaffirmed that it had urged the

Ethiopian government to avoid any reprisal action in the Ogaden. He

asked if it was the intention to post observers in the Ogaden or only

along the border, and expressed the personal opinion that it would be

more difficult to get Ethiopian agreement to the presence of such a

group on Ethiopian territory. On both this issue and the Cuban-Soviet

troop withdrawal, he took the position that these were matters within

the internal jurisdiction of the Ethiopian government.

In response to the Secretary’s repeated stress on the importance of

prompt action on these points to prevent further bloodshed, and on

preventing the arrival of additional Cuban troops reportedly on the

way, Dobrynin said that he would communicate these concerns to Gro-

myko promptly.

With regard to a reported hardening of Ethiopian conditions for a

ceasefire, Dobrynin said he was only aware of press reports from

Kenya on this point, which he was inclined to discount.

(Comment: Despite the foregoing disavowal, it seems likely that

Dobrynin’s back-pedalling reflected an awareness of the substance of

the Ethiopian position, made public in a communique issued by the

Ethiopian Ministry of Foreign Affairs on March 11, hardening its condi-

tions for the acceptance of a ceasefire, and rejecting the demand for the

withdrawal of foreign troops as “an unacceptable interference in Ethi-

opia’s domestic affairs.”)

Rhodesia:

Flowing out of the discussion above, on the question of consulta-

tions to avoid a similar confrontation on the Rhodesian issue, Dobrynin

said that both he and his government regarded this as a good idea. In

January–June 1978

response to the Secretary’s description of efforts to compose differences

between the internal settlement and Nkomo and Mugabe, Dobrynin

said that this would not solve the problem, and he pointed out caus-

tically that the Security Council had refused to hear Muzorewa. He

added, however, that if they agreed (presumably meaning Nkomo and

Mugabe), the Soviet government would then also agree.

90.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 11, 1978

SUBJECT

SALT; South African Nuclear Test; Middle East; Yugoslavia; China;

Environmental Modification (Part 2 of 2)

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin

Deputy Secretary

Marshall D. Shulman

Following a discussion of the Horn of Africa, Dobrynin raised sev-

eral other topics.

1. SALT. Dobrynin asked if there had been any developments in

the U.S. position on SALT issues. The Secretary said these matters had

been worked on, and were still in the decision process. Dobrynin said

that he had tried to be of help at a recent dinner given by the British

Ambassador which was attended by many prominent Senators and

91.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Anatoliy Dobrynin

During a prolonged and quite candid lunch with Ambassador Do-

brynin, the following points were made:

1. Ambassador Dobrynin enumerated examples of what he consid-

ered to be either the hostility or excessive hardness of the Carter Ad-

ministration. He mentioned specifically human rights, the Middle East

and particularly U.S. unwillingness to make further concessions in

SALT after Gromyko’s visit here. He particularly stressed the proposi-

tion that in a collective leadership, such as the Soviet, U.S. hardness

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tends to produce rigidity on the part of the Soviets and an inclination to

be equally hard.

2. In my response I indicated to him that he ought to be aware of

our concerns. I suggested to him that Soviet behavior in the Horn, even

if that was subjectively motivated by concerns for territorial integrity,

objectively creates consequences which we cannot entirely dismiss. I

mentioned in this connection our concern for Southern Africa, as well

as the fact that they should be aware that any Cuban deployment into

Yemen would precipitate the most serious reactions from the Saudis

and that we could not be indifferent in that context. This point was

clearly registered with him. I also mentioned the Soviet campaign re-

garding human rights, the neutron bomb, and lack of genuine coopera-

tion in the Middle East. Finally, I mentioned that it might be useful for

the top leaders to talk about these matters in a purely consultative set-

ting; if that is not possible because of the Soviet desire to tie meetings to

major agreements, perhaps some thought should be given to top level

officials of the two countries engaging in such discussions. I stressed

that this was purely an informal thought which I was presenting to him

in the context of this discussion.

3. Dobrynin rebutted the above analyses but showed considerable

interest in the idea of such consultative meetings. At the same time, he

indicated that it would be useful to tie such a consultative meeting to at

least one positive item, which would be concrete and which would in-

dicate a spirit of accommodation on the part of the United States.

4. On leaving, he again returned to the idea of such a meeting and

wanted to know whether I might be in a position to pursue it further

with him before he leaves this Friday. I made no promises and I did

not respond to that any further.

5. Additional points of interest. He mentioned in passing that the

American agent detained some time ago by the Soviets—in the case in-

volving a female CIA operative—passed his poison to a girlfriend of his

who used it (the friend was apparently implicated in his activity); So-

viet leaders have no way of discriminating intended targets for U.S.

missiles in the event of a U.S. missile attack; he rejected any linkage be-

tween the neutron bomb and the SS–20.

92.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 16, 1978

SUBJECT

Middle East, Horn of Africa, SALT, Other Multilateral Matters

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall Shulman, S/MS

Gerard Smith, S/AS (Portions)

SUMMARY: During a tour d’horizon at a luncheon prior to Do-

brynin’s return to Moscow on consultations, the Secretary handed Do-

brynin oral notes2 responding to previous Soviet inquiries about South

African nuclear test plans and Israeli possession of nuclear weapons.

Dobrynin presented an oral note4 deploring the Israeli military action

in southern Lebanon and urging the US to use its influence to induce

Israeli withdrawal. The Secretary said we would call for Israeli with-

drawal and the establishment of a UN peacekeeping force. On the Horn

of Africa, the Secretary expressed satisfaction that the Ethiopians had

not crossed the border into Somalia but indicated concern about re-

ports of reprisals in the Ogaden. Dobrynin said the Ethiopians had

been told that the Soviets and Cubans “did not intend to and preferred

not to” become involved in Eritrea.

MIDDLE EAST: Dobrynin handed over an oral note on the Israel-

Lebanon situation. The note asserted that Israel’s military action is dan-

gerous and that the risk of involvement by other Middle East states

cannot be ruled out. It said Israeli military intervention in Lebanon

could set back by many years the possibility of a Middle East settle-

ment and urged the US to exert influence on Israel to halt the interven-

tion and withdraw.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Secretary told Dobrynin that we would call for Israeli with-

drawal from Lebanon and the establishment of a UN peacekeeping

force in the area to stabilize the situation. He said we hoped the Leba-

nese would bring the matter to the Security Council, but that we would

consider doing so if they did not.

Dobrynin replied that the Soviet position was simply to call for Is-

raeli withdrawal without conditions. He expressed the opinion that the

Lebanese would agree to a peacekeeping force only if it had the concur-

rence of the Syrians. He said that he would keep us informed of any de-

velopment in the Soviet position, and the Secretary said that we would

keep the Soviet Union informed of our plans with regard to the Secu-

rity Council.

On the topic of a comprehensive Middle East settlement, Dobrynin

explained why the Soviets reacted so strongly to the Sadat initiative. He

said they had just succeeded in obtaining Syrian agreement to go to a

Geneva conference when Sadat announced his trip.

HORN OF AFRICA: The Secretary told Dobrynin we were pleased

the Somalis had withdrawn, and that the Ethiopian forces and those

fighting with them had respected the border, but he expressed concern

at recent reports of reprisals in the Ogaden. Dobrynin expressed the

personal view that this might be because of Siad Barre’s support of ir-

regular forces left behind. The Secretary said we were planning to give

support to the UN High Commissioner’s efforts to deal with human

needs in the area, and hoped the Soviets would cooperate. He also in-

formed Dobrynin that the President would be sending Moose as emis-

sary to Siad Barre.

Dobrynin implied that the reduction or withdrawal of Soviet

forces from the area would be less difficult if there were not public

statements to make it seem that this was being done under pressure.

Dobrynin said the Ethiopians had been informed that the Soviets and

Cubans would be very careful not to be involved in Eritrea. When ques-

tioned about the Cuban and Soviet presence on the coast around Assab,

Dobrynin said he had no information, but that he would find out when

he got to Moscow.

Dobrynin made the familiar point about the presence of US forces

in Iran in justifying a Soviet case for a presence in Ethiopia, adding that

the Administration had testified before the Congress that the US mili-

tary presence would go as high as 40,000. The Secretary corrected him

and pointed out that the US has about 1200 uniformed personnel plus

about 6000 civilian contract employees connected with sales of military

equipment. He said that the total US community, including the above,

their dependents, and businessmen, is about 40,000.

In the course of the conversation on the Horn, Dobrynin men-

tioned that the Somalis had recently raised with the Soviet Union the

93.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

70455. Subject: Bessmertnykh Call on Shulman March 18.

1. Summary. At his request Bessmertnykh came in March 18 to de-

liver response to the points made by the Secretary to Dobrynin on the

Horn in their meeting of March 11. He also delivered a non-paper on

the Arafat visit. Shulman took advantage of the meeting to stress the

pro-SALT intentions behind the President’s speech at Wake Forest.

End summary.

2. The non-paper Bessmertnykh brought in on the Horn makes the

following points:

cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Shulman; cleared by Tarnoff; approved by Shulman.

January–June 1978

—Somali withdrawal has not been a gesture of good will, but

rather a step forced on it;

—and “the Ethiopian leadership” rejects the idea of foreign ob-

servers in the Ogaden because of the implicit support for Somali territo-

rial claims which would result.

Non-paper goes on to claim absence of Ethiopian aggressive inten-

tions vis-a-vis Somali, though implicitly links it with withdrawal of So-

mali irregular units and renunciation of territorial claims. It praises

President Carter’s call for Somali commitments not to “dishonor” the

Ethiopian and Kenyan borders, but again reiterates, at length and in

usual terms, rejection of U.S. claims that Soviet and Cuban motives in

their intervention are anything but the purest.

3. Non-paper asserts that to let events in the Horn further burden

our bilateral relationship will do neither side any good, and calls for

rapid implementation of U.S. alleged interest in early elimination of

negative consequences and early progress in other practical aspects of

the relationship.

4. Non-paper also rather sharply chastises U.S. for claiming, in

“press reports attributed to official sources,” Soviet agreement to sta-

tioning of foreign observers in the Ogaden and to reductions in Cuban

forces, adding that such “misrepresentations” do not contribute to a

resolution of the matter and reduce the effectiveness of the exchange of

opinions with the U.S. on the question.

5. Non-paper on the Arafat visit offered nothing new and included

following standard points:

—Separate negotiations between Egypt and Israel have, in effect,

cancelled positive movement toward comprehensive Middle East set-

tlement as mutually expressed in joint US-Soviet statement of Oct 1,

1977.

—PLO leadership views negatively efforts supported by US to

work out a so-called “Declaration of Principles” and PLO disapproves

of attempts to hold any preliminary conference under aegis of UN.

—In Moscow discussions, Arafat confirmed readiness of PLO to

take part in achieving comprehensive Middle East settlement if it is re-

turned to channel of collective efforts, with PLO participation and a

clear turning away from separate agreements.

6. Shulman, under instructions from the Secretary, passed the fol-

lowing non-paper to Bessmertnykh on the President’s March 16

speech, and orally further reinforced its main points. Bessmertnykh

said he would send “private message” relaying the non-paper and

sense of the discussion to Dobrynin immediately.

Begin text: President Carter’s address at Wake Forest University

on March 16 should be read as emphasizing to the American public and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

its decision-makers our confidence in our defensive potential, and our

determination to maintain that confidence in the future. When our

public is reassured that our armed forces are sufficiently strong to carry

out their responsibilities, it will support further arms control agree-

ments. If it is uncertain, its acceptance of such agreements is put in

doubt. President Carter’s speech should thus be interpreted as sup-

porting a SALT II agreement, and further progress beyond that to even

more comprehensive arms limitation agreements.

We are confident that a careful reading of the entire text of the

President’s address, rather than reliance on excerpts which the media

may choose to publicize, will make this point clear. End text.

Vance

94.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

91104. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Subject: Meeting

With Dobrynin.

1. I met with Dobrynin today following his return from

consultations.

2. On the basis of his several hours of discussion with Brezhnev,

and lengthy consultations with Gromyko and other authorities, Do-

brynin emphasized the crucial importance of my trip to Moscow as a

possible turning point in US-Soviet relations. He said that Brezhnev is

expecting to meet with me, and urgently hopes that I will be able to

bring him evidence of our serious commitment to move forward on

SALT. This is in his view the key issue. “He does not ask that the Amer-

ican side make all the concessions,” Dobrynin reported, “but only that

it show that it is willing to negotiate seriously to clear away the re-

maining issues.” There should be no doubt, he said, that Brezhnev

would like to meet with the President, if there is a prospect of a suc-

cessful outcome, following the Moscow talks, and, if necessary, the

talks with Gromyko back here in May.

January–June 1978

3. We found that his list of the principal issues to be resolved in

SALT corresponded with our own.

4. In the course of our general discussion of US-Soviet relations, I

emphasized the importance of the factor of Soviet arming and transport

of Cuban troops to Africa in contributing to the deterioration in Soviet-

American relations. Although he argued about the justification of this

reaction, he recognized that it was a fact, and said in response that in

the present climate, in which there was anger among the Soviet leaders

about the “pin-pricks” and “propaganda warfare” from the US side,

when the air was filled with “threats” and there was an absence of any

positive steps in the relationship, it was difficult to get support in

Moscow for any measures to accommodate American sensibilities on

this or any other points, large or small. In this climate, he said, the

propagandists felt free to respond to US attacks on a tit-for-tat basis,

though there was a taboo against personal attacks on the President. He

expressed the hope that, if the Moscow talks succeed and this was fol-

lowed by a successful summit, there would be a disposition to try to be

more responsive to American concerns in Africa and elsewhere.

Vance

95.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 12, 1978

SUBJECT

SALT, Moscow Visit, Shevchenko, Moscow Accommodations

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Paul Warnke

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

SUMMARY: During a brief meeting on April 12, the Secretary and

Dobrynin discussed SALT and other matters that will come up during

the Secretary’s visit to Moscow; the Shevchenko case; and the problem

of delays in providing accommodations for our Embassy personnel in

Moscow

Ambassador Dobrynin came to the Department April 12 to discuss

subjects related to the Secretary’s trip to Moscow April 20–22.

I. SALT: The Secretary told Dobrynin that the President would be

signing instructions for the trip within the next 24 hours, and that

Warnke would convey to Dobrynin elements of the positions to be dis-

cussed that would help Soviet authorities to prepare for the meeting.

Warnke said he would also be sending information to the SALT delega-

tion at Geneva, and Dobrynin replied that this would be good; Sem-

enov, he said, was fully au courant.

The Secretary said that the President wished him to stress the need

for Soviet understanding of the political importance of bridging the gap

on the Backfire issue. Dobrynin replied that it was not a problem of un-

derstanding, but the unacceptability to the Soviet Union of the repeated

new demands since Gromyko’s efforts to meet US needs last Sep-

tember. At that time, he said, Gromyko had gotten approval from the

Politburo to go as far as he did on the strength of his assurance that this

would remove the Backfire obstacle to a SALT agreement.

In the course of the discussion, Dobrynin agreed that new systems

and modernization would be the key issue. In response to a question,

the Secretary said that he proposed to start with a discussion of SALT,

and then take up the Middle East (at Soviet request) and Africa, and

then return to SALT, CTB, and MBFR. Dobrynin agreed, and asked if

the Secretary were prepared to continue the discussions into Saturday

if necessary. The Secretary replied affirmatively. It was agreed that so-

cial functions should be held to a minimum, in order to maximize

working time during the visit.

II. Shevchenko: The Secretary told Dobrynin we had no objection to

Soviet doctors examining Shevchenko if he agreed. He added that we

had passed the Soviet request to his attorney. Dobrynin asked if we

would compel him to submit to examination, and the Secretary said no.

The Secretary said we had also passed on Dobrynin’s request for an-

other meeting with Shevchenko. The Secretary and Shulman then took

Dobrynin to task for the intemperate statement issued by the Soviet UN

Mission yesterday. Dobrynin disclaimed responsibility for it.

III. Embassy Moscow Housing: Dobrynin raised the question of

apartments for Embassy Moscow and our decision to close the con-

struction site of the Soviet Embassy at Mt. Alto, stating that he under-

stood the housing problem was starting to be solved. He was told that

pending clarification of discussions on housing in Moscow, we were

96.

Letter From President Carter to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, April 14, 1978

Dear Cy:

Your visit to Moscow can be an important step towards our major

foreign policy objectives: a more peaceful world based on the reduction

and control of arms; a deeper understanding with the Soviet Union; a

resolution of regional conflicts and restraint on the part of the major

powers. For this reason your visit requires that we address the entire

scope of our relationship with the Soviet Union, including particularly

those issues which are the source of deep concern to me and to the

American public at large.

It is in the interest of both countries that SALT succeed. However, I

am concerned that Soviet strategy is to focus attention on SALT as

proof of progress in U.S.-Soviet relations while the Soviet Union

pursues its political objectives elsewhere by military means. Therefore,

you should begin the discussions with a broad review of U.S.-Soviet re-

lations, emphasizing that the U.S. seeks a detente that is increasingly

comprehensive and genuinely reciprocal. Unless this happens, some of

the central factors of our relationship, including SALT, will be ad-

versely affected by the consequent deterioration in the political envi-

ronment. It is for this reason that you should stress that detente cannot

be compartmentalized and that mutual restraint lies at the core of a de-

tente relationship.

You should make clear that we regard the U.S.-Soviet relationship

as central to world peace and global stability. This relationship must

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

therefore be one of mutual restraint. In this connection, specific refer-

ence should be made to the Brezhnev/Nixon Communique2 in which

the joint rules of restraint by the U.S. and Soviet Union were explicitly

defined. The Soviet Union should understand that we would have no

choice but to compete in all areas of our relationship if these rules are

not observed.

In this connection, you should seek Soviet clarification as to their

objectives in Africa, in particular Southern Africa. You should empha-

size that this is required in order to provide a positive political frame-

work for pursuing other issues of importance to both our countries.

You should caution the Soviets against being drawn into an effort

to resolve the Eritrean issue by violence. You should make clear that

continued Soviet/Cuban combat presence in the Horn of Africa will

provoke a reaction from Ethiopia’s neighbors—our friends—that can

only lead to further tension and possible conflict. You should explain to

the Soviets that their military intervention in Africa is becoming intol-

erable, and ask when Soviet/Cuban forces will be withdrawn from

Ethiopia.

You should indicate that, while we have no objection to Soviet co-

operation with the Patriotic Front and Frontline countries in Southern

Africa, Soviet/Cuban military intrusion into Southern Africa will jeop-

ardize detente as a whole and the U.S. will react strongly. This should

be stated at the highest levels directly, unambiguously, and forcefully.

You can make clear my personal view that the depth of our feeling

concerning developments in Africa derives not only from our national

interests but from our entire national experience. Efforts to fan the

flames of a major racial war in Southern Africa can only provoke the

most profound and adverse reaction on the part of the American

people.

For this reason you should explain to the Soviets that we believe

our relationship is now at a watershed. We are willing, anxious and

ready to try to improve it, to widen the scope of cooperation to other

areas, and to work together on the widest possible range of issues; but

we cannot accept a selective detente. Decisions made in the near future

on SALT as well as other issues such as Africa will affect our relation-

ship for many years to come.

On SALT you will receive separate instructions. You should make

clear we are willing to negotiate SALT on its own terms but that it

cannot of course be pursued in isolation from the rest of our relation-

January–June 1978

ship. Also emphasize the importance to us of a comprehensive test ban

agreement.

On European security issues, you should point to our initiative on

MBFR and say that we expect commensurate concessions on the part of

the Warsaw Pact.

You should tell the Soviets that I have taken a politically difficult

decision to defer production of the enhanced radiation weapon in the

face of considerable support for going ahead here and in Europe, sup-

port which was stimulated rather than weakened by the Soviet propa-

ganda campaign. You should add that I was personally offended by the

campaign. My future consideration of the enhanced radiation weapon

will be strongly influenced by signs of Soviet restraint in their military

programs—particularly as they relate to Europe—and by constructive

and tangible Soviet arms control initiatives.

On human rights, you should make clear to Gromyko our contin-

uing interest in the Scharanskiy case, stating that a trial which sought to

connect Scharanskiy to the U.S. Government would lead to a serious

adverse reaction on the part of the American people and on my part

personally.

It is my hope that you can achieve progress in SALT and a deeper

understanding concerning a broader detente and a more meaningful

measure of reciprocal restraint. You should underscore that the polit-

ical significance of SALT lies not so much in the technical limitations on

strategic arms, as important as these may be, but in the joint commit-

ment to reduce the military dimensions of U.S. and Soviet competition.

We cannot permit the agreement in this area to transform itself into So-

viet efforts to pursue military advantage in other areas and regions of

the world. This is the real importance of SALT and the reason why de-

tente must be seen as an indivisible objective.

You should also emphasize to the Soviet leaders that the United

States would welcome closer cooperation with the Soviet Union in

dealing with the many global problems that mankind today confronts.

The North-South relationship would become more constructive if the

Communist countries were prepared to cooperate more closely with

other developed countries in helping the developing countries over-

come the many difficulties that they confront. It is our view that such

cooperation would benefit not only mankind but would provide addi-

tional opportunities for closer friendship between the United States

and the Soviet Union. Indeed, we would prefer to cooperate in this

manner rather than to confront each other politically or militarily in the

Third World. In making this point you could cite specific examples of

ways in which our two countries could cooperate more closely (agricul-

tural development, trade, a common fund, technology transfer, etc.).

98.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, April 19, 1978

SUBJECT

Soviet Criticism of US Foreign Policy and Leadership

2. [1 line not declassified] characterized his wide-ranging conversa-

tion with Kirilenko as one in which the latter was extremely critical and

deprecatory of US foreign policy, including Washington’s approach to

the SALT negotiations. The initial target of Kirilenko’s criticism was Dr.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Brzezinski whom he described as viscerally anti-Soviet and particu-

larly dangerous because of his high level of intelligence. Kirilenko

charged that Brzezinski was a “dangerous influence” over President

Carter and that this influence would lead to some serious US-Soviet

crises.

3. Kirilenko insisted that the Soviet Government does not trust any

of the statements or declarations made to them privately or publicly by

President Carter, largely because of the influence of Brzezinski. The

Kremlin simply does not believe anything Carter says and has no confi-

dence in whatever negotiations the US might enter into vis-a-vis the

USSR.

4. Kirilenko stated that the Soviet Government does not feel the

need to deal with the Carter Government because Moscow assumes it

will disappear in 1980. He commented that there is a world of differ-

ence between visits to Moscow of former Secretary of State Henry Kiss-

inger and those of Secretary Cyrus Vance. The latter, according to Kiri-

lenko, simply carries out instructions. Kirilenko reminisced that

Kissinger and former President Richard Nixon had real credibility with

the Kremlin because they had demonstrated their willingness to en-

gage the US militarily, rather than merely moralizing.

5. Kirilenko pointed to the US Government’s willingness to com-

promise even its moralizing principles during the session of the Con-

ference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) then underway

in Belgrade as an example of the lack of credibility which the Kremlin

attributes to Washington.

6. Otherwise in the conversation, Kirilenko also discussed Africa.

The Soviet Government was using the Somali-Ethiopian situation to

prove its hypothesis that the US has now become a “paper tiger”. The

USSR would continue testing the US in Africa, next in the Moroccan-

Algerian context, picking up whatever gains it could until it meets

effective US-backed resistance, after which it would reconsider its

hypothesis.

8. The above memorandum is being made available to the Acting

Secretary of State as well as to Secretary Vance in Moscow.

Stansfield Turner

99.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 4122. For Christopher from the Secretary. Department pass

White House for the President and Brzezinski and DOD for Secretary

Brown. Subject: Private Discussion With Gromyko April 20.

1. After morning and afternoon sessions with our full delegations,2

he and I had a productive private meeting this evening. We covered

the following points:

2. Non-circumvention: Gromyko agreed to our fall back language.

To his argument that we must agree on the meaning of the language, I

replied only that the language speaks for itself and that we will not cir-

cumvent the agreement.

3. Aggregates: Gromyko agreed to the 1200 limit on MIRVed bal-

listic missiles provided we accept the 2250 SNDV level. (Incidentally

worked, e.g., whether they were compelled to build up to the various

levels.) I finally straightened him out on this.

4. New types: He delayed any response on our revised definition

of “new type” until tomorrow. I made clear that our discussion of other

new types issues proceeded on the assumption that we would reach a

satisfactory agreement on definitions. On the exception, he tentatively

agreed that the excepted ICBM would be either MIRVed or not but he

said he would have to consult with his colleagues before he could re-

spond to my proposal that the new types limits would apply for the full

period of the agreement through 1985. He promised to give me a posi-

tion in our next meeting. The question of SLBMs new types did not

come up; I will seek to clarify the issue tomorrow.

5. Backfire: This was hard going indeed. The Soviets suggest in

their position that the Backfire lacks the range for CONUS missions.

(Ogarkov wanted Rowny4 to try to fly a Backfire from the USSR to

Cuba without refueling and promised flowers for the widow.) They in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

sist they will not go beyond their “good will” unilateral statement—

though they accepted our proposal for an oral response stating that we

are signing the SALT agreement in part in reliance on the Soviets’ Back-

fire statement, and recognized that it would be given to Congress.

However, in the text of the statement as they read it to us, they said

they were giving us the production rate assurance only “as a matter of

information.” They insist that phrase was in their September statement,

but it is not in our memcons. As to the rate itself, Gromyko refused to

offer a number, but proposed that we state the rate in our oral response

and they would not contradict it.

6. On the whole, I am convinced they want an agreement, that we

can solve the numbers/duration issue and that we cannot settle the

Backfire question here. We may know their reaction to the conclusion

of the new ICBM ban in the treaty tomorrow.

7. My next private meeting with Gromyko is at 11 a.m. Moscow

time Friday5 (3 a.m. Washington time).

8. Action requested:

A. I recommend that you authorize me to accept the 2250/1200

package, if it includes a Soviet agreement to the duration/timing posi-

tion I presented this morning, that is reductions beginning January 1,

1980 and proceeding at a steady pace to completion not later than Dec

31, 1980, on which date the protocol would expire.

B. Dismantling and reduction of excess systems:

Gromyko has indicated a Soviet willingness to consider an ar-

rangement whereby systems to be dismantled or destroyed might be

rendered inoperable before the end of the protocol period if we could

accept a longer period for complete dismantling or destruction. Should

we indicate an interest in extending the period for complete disman-

tling or destruction beyond Dec 31, 1980, in the context of such earlier

“deactivation?” This is clearly a political decision, particularly if we

were to get responsible, verifiable assurances regarding early deactiva-

tion of systems to be destroyed at the outset of the period. I recommend

I be given authority to exercise my judgment in light of the then ex-

isting circumstances.

Vance

January–June 1978

100.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 4123. For Christopher and Brzezinski from the Secretary.

Pass DOD for Secretary Brown. Subject: April 20 Meetings With

Gromyko.

1. I met for three hours with Gromyko this morning and one hour

this afternoon with our full delegations. Participants on the Soviet side

included First Deputy Defense Minister and Chief of Staff Ogarkov,

his Deputy Koslov, Korniyenko, Dobrynin and Semenov. Following

the afternoon session he and I met privately, accompanied only by

interpreters.

2. During the morning session I gave an overview and then pre-

sented our positions on aggregates, duration/dismantling, new types

and principles. I suggested that we discuss Backfire privately. Lack-

ing any response to Warnke’s Washington presentation on non-

circumvention, I made only a brief reference to our previous position. I

did not initially go into the exemption question.

3. Gromyko’s response in the morning session was a dusty replay

of previous Soviet positions. He complained at length about U.S. posi-

tions and public statements. A few points were of interest:

A. He warned that the Soviets have to take decisions on “new pro-

grams” in the immediate future which depend on whether there is to be

a new agreement, noted calls in the U.S. for new (military) appropria-

tions, warned that for their delay in agreeing on SALT II could jeop-

ardize arms control accomplishments already achieved, and urged that

we should take account of each other’s interest.

B. On duration of the protocol and duration of the dismantling pe-

riod, Gromyko after recapitulating their position said nevertheless that,

provided agreement were reached on overall time limits for reducing

aggregates, “thought could be given” to ways to give confidence in the

early stages that systems to be dismantled and destroyed would be

ruled out of operational employment. When I sought to clarify whether

the systems would be rendered inoperable he was vague, saying that

cret; Immediate; Nodis.

are in Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

since by the end of the period the systems would be destroyed thought

could be given to ways to provide confidence that that was being done.

101.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 4131. For Christopher from the Secretary. Dept pass White

House for the President and Mr. Brzezinski. Pass DOD for Secretary

Brown. Subject: SALT Meetings With Gromyko, April 21.

January–June 1978

1. In a two-hour private meeting with Gromyko this morning, we

covered the following ground.

2. On the new ICBM types issue, he did not give a substantive reac-

tion, but suggested the definition be handled in Geneva. He said the So-

viet Union is prepared to include the ban on new ICBM types in the

treaty, but only if the exempt type is required to be non-MIRVed. I re-

peated that any exception and any settlement of the ICBM new types

issue depends on satisfactory resolution of the definition issue, and that

our proposal for an exception required that each side have a choice of

whether the new ICBM would be MIRVed or not.

3. I reviewed our position on an SLBM new types ban and we

agreed to refer the issue (including exceptions from the ban) to Geneva.

4. On aggregates, he reiterated his offer of yesterday to accept

they continued to object to the principle of a fixed date.

5. On timing for reductions, Gromyko stressed again the practical

obstacles to completing dismantling and destruction in less than 18

months. He said, however, that they will offer us specifics on his con-

cept, first advanced yesterday, of measures to increase confidence that

launchers on which dismantling and destruction has been started will

be ruled out for combat use.

6. He reaffirmed our agreement on the non-circumvention fall-

back language.

7. We agreed that the Statement of Principles will be handled ur-

gently in Geneva, within the agreed concept of a more general ap-

proach. (While I was meeting with Gromyko, Korniyenko and Ogarkov

took up this issue with Warnke and others, and agreed to proceed in

Geneva; the Soviets declined to discuss principles language in Moscow,

and reiterated their desire for a reference to GBS.)

8. On Backfire, Gromyko was slightly more forthcoming than yes-

terday, agreeing to give a flight profile for their radius claim and to con-

sider modifying the phrase “for your information” which they inserted

into their production rate statement yesterday.

9. On procedure, we agreed that the remaining issues would be ad-

dressed urgently in Geneva, with the objective of resolving as many as

possible prior to Gromyko’s SSOD visit. As many as possible of those

still unresolved then will be settled at that time in Washington, with the

goal of positioning us for a summit to settle one or two remaining

questions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

10. SALT came up only briefly in the afternoon session, but a very

critical point was underlined. In all my sessions with Gromyko, I

stressed that the positions advanced are an integrated whole, with no

one point to be considered agreed until all are agreed. Gromyko

stressed the same point with special force this afternoon. He said that

the issues have been discussed as a complex, thus we have not repeat

not yet reached new agreements.

11. Gromyko went on to say that, if there is any inaccuracy about

this in reporting by the U.S. press, his government will feel compelled

to correct it publicly. In this regard, he stressed the discussions on the

exception for a new ICBM.

12. I feel very strongly that we should say nothing beyond that the

Moscow talks were helpful and that some progress was made, any

statement beyond this, public or private, would put every step the So-

viets have taken into jeopardy.

13. Non-SALT issues in afternoon session reported septel.

Vance

102.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Vance-Gromyko Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

Secretary of State Vance

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

First Deputy Foreign Minister

Ambassador Paul C. Warnke

Korniyenko

Ambassador Ralph Earle, II

Dep. Foreign Minister Semenov

Mr. Leslie H. Gelb

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Ambassador Marshall D. Shulman

Marshal N.V. Ogarkov

Mr. Reginald Bartholomew

Col.-Gen. M.M. Kozlov

Lt. Gen. Edward L. Rowny

Mr. V.G. Makarov

DAS of Def. Walter B. Slocomb

Mr. N. Detinov

Mr. Mark Garrison

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Mr. William D. Krimer

Mr. A.A. Obukhov, Note Taker

(Interpreter)

Mr. V.F. Isakov, Note Taker

Before proceeding to substantive matters, Minister Gromyko in-

formed Secretary Vance that Brezhnev would like to see him tomorrow

at noon.

Middle East

The Secretary said he wanted to discuss the Middle East situation

and asked Gromyko how they should proceed.

Gromyko agreed that this question required discussion, but sug-

gested they be economical in words since they had a number of other

questions to discuss as well.

The Secretary said that insofar as the current situation in the Middle

East was concerned, the positions today were stalemated. Discussions

between Israel and Egypt continued on a sporadic basis but no

progress was being made. The last visit of Defense Minister Weizmann

to Cairo had produced no new results. On his way back from Africa to

London, the Secretary had stopped and met with Foreign Minister

Kamel for 45 minutes. The Foreign Minister’s impression was the same

as the Secretary had just described. As Gromyko knew, several weeks

ago Prime Minister Begin had come to the United States for a set of

meetings that lasted two days. As a result of these meetings, sharp dif-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ferences on a number of items emerged and were made public. These

differences were three in number:

1. The meaning of UN Resolution 242. The position of the present

Israeli Government is that 242 does not necessarily cover withdrawal

from the West Bank. This is contrary to our view that 242 applies on all

fronts. It had also been the constant position of all Israeli Governments

since 1967 that 242 applied to all fronts. Thus, the position of the

present Israeli Government had changed from that of previous gov-

ernments. If Israel adhered to the position that Resolution 242 did not

apply to the West Bank, then in the Secretary’s view no solution is pos-

sible. We had reaffirmed our position to this effect publicly on a

number of occasions. The Secretary knew that the Soviet Union held

the same view; in fact, it was a view almost universally held by world

public opinion.

2. The second area of difference concerned the Palestinian question

and how to resolve it. We believe, as we indicated in the Joint Statement

issued with the Soviet Union, that the Palestinian question had to be re-

solved in all its aspects, that the legitimate fights of the Palestinian

people had to be recognized, and that the Palestinians have the right to

participate in determining their own future. There is a difference of

views between us and Israel on this question. That difference appears

in two respects:

a. our reference to legitimate rights; and

b. the question of whether or not the Palestinians are entitled to

participate in determining their own future.

3. The question of settlements. Our view is that settlements in the

Sinai, the West Bank and Golan are contrary to international law as re-

flected in the Geneva 4 Conference, that all further work on settlements

must stop, and that there should be no new settlements. The Israelis

take a different view of the legality of the settlements. They say that

they will not stop all construction on existing settlements and will not

agree to refrain from starting new ones. When Begin was in the United

States, he had said that in the future, insofar as the West Bank was con-

cerned, no new settlements would be started without a Cabinet deci-

sion. Since that time he has changed his position, no longer requiring a

Cabinet decision, but merely a decision by the Defense Council. Israel

has informed us that it would refrain from establishing new settle-

ments in the Sinai, but would continue work on expanding existing

settlements.

The Secretary said that these three differences were fundamental,

had surfaced and were now known in our country, in Israel, and, in

fact, throughout the world. We supported the principle of reaching

agreement on a Declaration of Principles to create the framework for re-

convening a conference of all the parties in order to achieve a compre-

January–June 1978

hensive settlement. We continued to believe that the only true and

lasting solution to the Middle East situation was a comprehensive

settlement.

Gromyko asked what were the principles in the declaration.

The Secretary said the declaration would deal with the nature of the

peace, resolution of the Palestinian question, and the principle of with-

drawal from occupied territories on all fronts in accordance with 242

and 338, as the basis of reconvening the Geneva Conference. This was

the same position we had held all along. Finally, as Gromyko knew, in

the so-called political meeting in Jerusalem several months ago in

which we participated, the subject of discussions between Israel and

Egypt had been the attempt to draft an agreed Statement of General

Principles. Further work has been continued, but it has not proved pos-

sible to reach agreement. The Secretary had kept Ambassador Do-

brynin informed of the various meetings.

Gromyko had the following question to ask and would ask the Sec-

retary to reply if he felt it advisable to do so. How did he see the Middle

East situation in the immediate future? What steps was the Secretary

thinking of in terms of normalizing the situation there?

The Secretary said that he would, of course, reply. Our own feeling

was that for the present one should let the intellectual ferment in Israel

continue. A real debate was going on in Israel regarding the three key

points he had mentioned. We felt it better to let discussions in Israel

mature for a few weeks before taking the next step.

Gromyko remarked that in Israel they loved to discuss things, pref-

erably for years rather than weeks.

The Secretary expressed his belief that one could not let things drift

much more than a few weeks. He had one more point to make. Since he

had left on his trip to Africa and Moscow, he had received a request

from Foreign Minister Dayan to meet with him on April 26 and 27. He

said he had some new ideas to present. The Secretary had replied that

he would be happy to listen. After that meeting he intended to commu-

nicate with Gromyko about the results, if any. He came back to his

point that the only ultimate solution is a comprehensive one, which can

only come out of a meeting of all the parties.

Gromyko asked what forum the Secretary had in mind, the Geneva

Conference or something else.

The Secretary replied that he meant the Geneva Conference, if all

the interested parties could be pursuaded to attend. A declaration of

general principles would serve as a framework for the Conference. This

was the subject of discussions between Egypt, Israel and ourselves.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Such a framework would be wholly consistent with the joint Soviet-

American statement.

Gromyko said he would be brief in his reply, because there was not

much time.

First, Gromyko wanted to present a complaint, a serious com-

plaint. This was occasioned by the fact that the U.S. side had violated

the Joint Statement he and the Secretary had worked out together

toward the end of last year. Only a little time had passed after that

Statement was issued, weeks or even days, before the United States had

overturned that Statement. As he saw it, the U.S. side was taking a

rather lackadaisical attitude toward such a document. The Soviet lead-

ership would have to take that into account in the future.

Last fall events had been moving toward reconvening the Geneva

Conference, where all the aspects of a Middle East settlement would be

considered. The only thing lacking at that time was a firm and consist-

ent policy on the part of the United States and firm efforts by the United

States to bring a strong influence to bear on Israel. Now Gromyko did

not know how a Geneva Conference could be convened without a

sharp turnabout in the policies of the United States, Israel and, of

course, Sadat. He would say that the Geneva Conference was now

“paralyzed”, not to say “buried.”

Gromyko said that it was quite understandable that the Secretary

did not agree with some of the extremist positions Israel had taken.

What needed to be done was to give some thought to how the situation

could be rectified. Without the participation of all interested parties,

and without the participation of the United States and the Soviet

Union, it would be impossible to secure a lasting peace settlement in

the region. The Secretary had mentioned a Declaration of Principles as

a first step, and envisaged the authorship of that Declaration to consist

of Egypt, Israel and the United States. Was the Secretary sure that all

the parties concerned in that region would accept the idea that the

United States, Egypt and Israel prepare a Declaration of Principles, and

then everybody had to sit down at a table and sign it? Was he not being

excessively optimistic?

Gromyko would say further that the Secretary had, of course,

acted correctly in objecting to Israel’s position on U.N. Resolutions 242

and 338. On the other hand, he was not overly inclined to praise the

Secretary for this, because he did not believe that the United States and

the Soviet Union had the same position with regard to either Resolu-

tion. The Soviet Union believed that Israel should withdraw from all

occupied territories. The U.S. position was somewhat different. As for

the Palestinians, the Soviet Union not only held that the Palestinians

must participate in a Middle East settlement in order to be in a position

to defend their legitimate rights, but also that the Palestinians had the

January–June 1978

right to establish an independent state, albeit a small one. The question

of legitimate rights could be understood in different ways. The United

States had mentioned this in terms of representation in some form or

other, but not in terms of independent Palestinian representation as

such. Evidently the United States wanted to hitch the Palestinians onto

somebody rather than ensure their independence.

On the whole, Gromyko could not recall any occasion when he and

the Secretary had had the opportunity of discussing Middle East

matters in detail. They were always touching upon them in some hur-

ried fashion, in passing as it were. He hoped that they would find the

time to have a thorough discussion if the United States was willing. He

repeated that the Soviet Union wanted the Palestinian people to enjoy

its legitimate rights, including the right to establish an independent

state. Such a state would certainly not be a threat to anyone. He thought

that all concerned knew this very well. He did not know if the Secretary

had ever had occasion to see how the Palestinians lived. As for himself,

he had seen that in refugee camps in Syria—they lived in almost in-

human conditions. The U.S. press frequently voiced apprehensions to

the effect that if a small Palestinian state were established, it would be-

come a Soviet base, even a Soviet satellite. Where did such nightmares

come from? He would say that a person must have spent many sleep-

less nights to come up with such nightmares. This particular idea was a

pure concoction. The Soviet Union had no special ties with the Pales-

tinians. If anyone did, it was perhaps France, Great Britain, other Arab

states, even the United States, but certainly not the Soviet Union.

Gromyko said it was necessary to reflect on how a broad forum

could now be revived. The Soviet Union was very much in favor of re-

convening the Geneva conference with all interested parties partici-

pating, including the Palestinians. If that were done, there should be no

concern about anyone’s attempting to “bite off” the U.S. position. The

U.S. would certainly participate in the Conference, which would be a

forum for serious discussions. It was better to be discussing problems

for six months or even for a year than to fight a war for just one day.

As matters stood now, each passing day increased the potential for

violence.

The Secretary said he would respond. First, he had to take issue

with Gromyko’s saying that he had reasons to complain about U.S.

policy. Gromyko had said that things last fall had been proceeding sat-

isfactorily toward reconvening the Geneva conference. The Secretary,

too, had thought for a while that this was the case. However, the

Syrians had refused to discuss details concerning the Geneva Confer-

ence. Thus, matters had dragged on. In order to get things moving and

resolve the question of Palestinian representation at the Geneva Con-

ference, we had suggested a Pan-Arab Delegation in which the Pales-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tinians would be represented. We believed that this was a realistic and

practical way to proceed, because Israel had stated that it would not sit

down at a negotiating table with a separate Palestinian Delegation. The

Secretary had thought that we were making some progress to resolve

this problem, but the Syrians had not agreed. As a result of lack of

progress President Sadat had taken the initiative of going to Jerusalem.

Since the Secretary had informed Ambassador Dobrynin, Gromyko

surely knew that we had not known in advance that Sadat would take

this step. He had taken it because he had become fed up with waiting

for the Geneva Conference, since the parties involved could not agree

on procedures and a framework for that Conference. President Sadat

had made it very clear by his statements that he reaffirmed his advo-

cacy of a comprehensive solution. As the Secretary had said before, the

objective we had been pursuing since Sadat’s initiative was to develop

a declaration of principles and guidelines for negotiations with Resolu-

tion 242, so as to make possible a comprehensive meeting and a com-

prehensive settlement. We continue to recognize the importance of

Syrian and Palestinian participation in negotiations. It is our hope that

if a suitable framework can be developed, they would join in the

negotiations.

Regarding Gromyko’s question as to acceptance of such a declara-

tion of principles by others, the Secretary believed that others will ac-

cept the resolution if Israel does. The problem now was to get Israel to

sign it.

On another point, he knew that there was a difference between us

regarding one aspect of Resolution 242. He knew that the Soviet posi-

tion was that 242 applies to “all the territories” occupied during the

1967 war. As Gromyko knew, our position was somewhat different. We

believed that it applied to “territories” occupied in 1967. The question

of what these territories are is a subject for negotiations between the

parties. This question of different interpretations, of whether or not 242

applied to all territories or merely territories goes back, as Gromyko

would recall, to the discussions in the Security Council in 1967. The So-

viet proposal to say “all territories” had not been accepted by the Secu-

rity Council and finally the word “territories” was included in 242.

Another difference between us concerned the view of whether

there should be an independent Palestinian state as opposed to a Pales-

tinian state affiliated with Jordan, for example. Finally, regarding Pal-

estinian representation in the Geneva Conference, he still believed that

the practical way to solve this problem is to include the Palestinians in a

Pan-Arab delegation. We believe this is the only practical way to over-

come the hurdles in the way of the Geneva Conference. The Secretary

would quite agree with Gromyko that the situation of the people living

in camps is sad and serious. He had seen this personally in both Syria

January–June 1978

and Lebanon. Therefore it is essential that we resolve the Palestinian

question in all its aspects and find a way to take care of Palestinian ref-

ugees no matter where they are. This could best be done at a broad in-

ternational conference.

The Secretary had one final point. He would be happy to have a

full discussion of Middle East problems with Gromyko at some suit-

able time. Perhaps this could be done when Gromyko comes to the

United States to attend the U.N. Special Session on Disarmament.

Perhaps they could then set aside the time required to have a full dis-

cussion of the Middle East which would not merely be a part of discus-

sions of other problems.

Gromyko said that while he did not want to repeat himself, he did

want to draw the Secretary’s attention to the fact that when our two

countries had adopted the Joint Statement last year, the chances for

convening the Geneva Conference were better than at any other time

except the time when it had actually been first convened. The question

of a Pan-Arab Delegation had indeed been discussed between various

Arab countries, and the Soviet Union had also discussed it with a

number of Arab countries, coming out in favor of that solution as facili-

tating overall resolution of the Middle East problem. The Arabs were at

one time inclined to accept such a solution; he would not say all the

Arabs, but the overwhelming majority. Then a strange situation had

developed: if Syria took one position, Egypt immediately took an oppo-

site position, and that had gone on and on. After a relatively short time

had come Sadat’s trip to Jerusalem. Then it became quite clear why

Egypt had been acting in that manner. In words Sadat was for recon-

vening the Geneva Conference, but in actual fact he was against it. The

United States, too, had not been too much in favor of reconvening the

Conference once it found out what was going on, not to mention Israel.

Thus he would suggest that it was not necessary retroactively to belittle

the chances existing last fall for reconvening the Geneva Conference.

The Secretary said that was not true.

Gromyko asked what had happened to the Joint Statement of last

year. Was it still alive?

The Secretary said it was alive, and he had said so publicly. He had

to take exception to what Gromyko had said about U.S. attitudes. We

had really been trying hard to get the Conference going, but the Arabs

could not themselves agree on the necessary framework.

Gromyko said that the U.S. did, however, know what Sadat had

done. He suggested that he and the Secretary find the necessary time to

discuss this subject from a practical point of view and in a businesslike

manner. The Secretary agreed.

MBFR

Gromyko said that just a few days ago the Soviets had received the

new proposal of the Western Powers at the Vienna negotiations. That

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

proposal contained some new elements and was currently under study

here. Once the Soviet position had been determined, the United States

and others would be informed accordingly. The only thing he could say

in this regard today was that the Soviet side was getting the impression

that these new proposals, too, were not free of a one-sided approach.

That was all he was going to say at this time.

The Secretary wanted to say briefly that he had been glad to see the

question of data exchange settled. It was essential for forward move-

ment. That having been done, the Western Powers had taken their new

initiative. He would like the Soviet side to give that proposal serious

consideration, and was confident that it would do so.

SSOD

Gromyko noted that the U.N. Special Session on Disarmament

would be convened shortly. He did not know how the Secretary

viewed it, and what he thought the prospects were for a successful out-

come. If the Secretary had any ideas on this score, he would be pleased

to hear them. The Soviet side regarded the SSOD as a broad worldwide

forum, and would, of course, set forth its views on disarmament in that

forum. It would be very good if the countries of the West as well as the

East approached the SSOD in a serious and businesslike manner and

adopted positive decisions on the questions involved. The important

thing, of course, was not just to adopt decisions but also to implement

them. The U.N. adopts quite a few good decisions, but subsequently,

when the Secretary General circulates them to member governments,

all too often they pile up on desks in various government offices and

nothing much happens. He was not trying to reproach anyone in this

regard, but simply would not like to see this happen in the case of the

SSOD. As he had said, the Soviet side attached great importance to the

SSOD and believed that it should in no way be used to belittle a subse-

quent World Disarmement Conference.

The Secretary said that he felt very strongly that the SSOD was of

great importance. We very much hoped that somehow positive and

concrete decisions can come out of the SSOD and that it not simply end

up in general statements that had no flesh and bone. Some other un-

named countries have submitted proposals that could not be under-

stood. However, he believed it possible to make real progress at that

conference. Ambassador Leonard3 would be coming to Moscow on the

27th of this month in order to talk to Gromyko’s people about the

SSOD. At the United Nations he is working on our preparations for the

Special Session.

January–June 1978

Gromyko said that Soviet representatives would be prepared to

discuss the various issues with Ambassador Leonard.

Press Reports

Gromyko wanted to touch on a matter he believed to be important.

The Secretary would soon return to the United States and the press will

be speculating about the success or non-success or half success, or even

one-quarter success, of the present talks. He thought the Secretary him-

self could not determine now just how the press would describe what

had been done here in Moscow. He sincerely hoped that the situation at

these talks would be presented in an objective light. The Secretary was

surely aware that a number of questions here had been discussed in

complex, i.e., in combination with certain others; this was true, for ex-

ample, of the question of providing an exemption for one new type of

missile, which was discussed in the context of the levels and sublevels

for MIRVed missiles. The main thing was that no one should present

the situation in such a way as to say that one issue had been settled

while the other remained unagreed, when both sides clearly knew that

the two issues were linked. After all, they had not been able to reach

agreement on providing an exemption for a new missile with a single

reentry vehicle; therefore it should not be said that the other elements,

i.e., the levels, were agreed. He would hope that no such imprecision

would be permitted. Should such inaccuracies appear, however, partic-

ularly concerning major issues, the Soviet side would be forced to re-

store the truth and accordingly inform its own public opinion and the

public opinion of other countries. He hoped that the Secretary had un-

derstood him correctly, because such a way of proceeding was con-

sistent with our mutual interests.

The Secretary said he understood exactly what Gromyko had said.

He would himself describe the current talks as having been helpful and

useful. He would say that we have made some progress without going

into detail of what had been done on the various issues. It will be better

to say simply that as a whole the talks had been helpful.

Gromyko agreed this was the best way to proceed.

103.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Vance/Brezhnev Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

Secretary of State Vance

General Secretary Brezhnev

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Foreign Minister Gromyko

William D. Krimer (Interpreter)

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov

V.M. Sukhodrev (Interpreter)

General Secretary Brezhnev opened by saying he had been in-

formed that Secretary Vance and Gromyko had held some hard discus-

sions. This is natural because the subject was very serious indeed—nu-

clear weapons. It was not important whether one talked of reduction or

limitation or shortening or shrinking weapons. The important thing

was that they were nuclear weapons and that in the absence of a treaty

on this matter, war was not precluded. He thought the Secretary would

understand why people throughout the world were demanding that

nuclear war be made impossible.

Brezhnev apologized for having started in this way and said first

of all he was pleased to welcome the Secretary in Moscow. Quite a few

things had happened since the Secretary’s last visit, in the life of our

two countries and throughout the world. He would speak with the

same frankness with which he had set forth his thoughts last year. The

past year had not given us any cause for joy as concerns Soviet-U.S. re-

lations. They were developing rather unevenly and, on the whole, their

present state did not correspond to the wishes of either of our countries

as they had been expressed in the past.

Digressing from his typed notes, Brezhnev recalled that when

President Nixon had first come to visit Moscow, he had come to

Brezhnev’s office directly from the airport and just the two of them,

plus one interpreter, had held their first conversation. President Nixon

had pointed out that both our countries had amassed so many nuclear

January–June 1978

weapons that they were able to destroy each other seven times over.

These were his very words, every comma. He was recalling this not in

order to defend Nixon, but to emphasize that due to actions of the

United States the arms race had escalated even further since that time.

Each of us now had larger quantities of weapons and each could de-

stroy the other ten times over. In a very short period of time the two of

them had succeeded in concluding and signing an agreement on nu-

clear weapons that was still in effect today (Brezhnev first said the

agreement expired in October, but corrected himself after prompting

by Gromyko).

Brezhnev said that it was no accident that he referred to the com-

plexity of our negotiations. There was so much talk in the world today

about nuclear weapons, about war, about the neutron bomb. It was

even difficult to tell sometimes where the truth was to be found.

Referring to his notes again, Brezhnev said there is no doubt that

the main obstacle in the way of developing better Soviet/American re-

lations is the continuing arms race. Unless the arms race is stopped and,

indeed, reversed, neither of our two peoples would be able to sleep

quietly. He was deeply convinced that nothing would contribute as

much to better relations between us and to a more peaceful world than

conclusion of a new agreement between the United States and the So-

viet Union on limitation of strategic offensive arms. He would say quite

frankly that preparation of that agreement had somehow been dragged

out “to an ungodly extent”. He had been informed by Gromyko and

Marshal Ogarkov that in the course of the present talks it had proved

possible to reach agreement on one (he emphasized: “only one”) basic

outstanding issue, while some headway had been made toward resolu-

tion of others. The one question that had been resolved was the under-

standing on the text of the treaty article on non-circumvention, which

would read as follows:

“In order to ensure the viability and effectiveness of this Treaty,

each Party undertakes not to circumvent the provisions of this Treaty

through any other state or states, or in any other manner.”

Secondly, he understood that the U.S. side had agreed in principle

that the treaty would provide for the right of each side to test and de-

ploy one new type of ICBM, on the understanding that the aggregate

number of ballistic missiles equipped with MIRVs would be limited to

1200. However, the Soviet side had always spoken of a new type of

ICBM with a single reentry vehicle, while the U.S. side now wanted to

have the opportunity to develop a new ICBM with MIRVs. The Soviet

side could in no way agree to such a solution because, after all, these

were qualitatively different categories of missiles, notably from the

standpoint of their impact upon strategic stability.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Third, Brezhnev noted that the positions of the two sides had come

closer together on the scope of possible reductions in the aggregate

level of SNDVs. The Soviet side had agreed to reduction of that level

riod beginning December 1980. As for the time period for completion of

reductions, which had been proposed by the U.S. side—12 months be-

ginning January 1980—it was completely unrealistic for the reasons re-

peatedly explained to the Secretary by the Soviet representatives.

Brezhnev had also been informed that an understanding had been

reached on how to resolve the remaining differences in the text of the

Joint Statement of Principles. It was now necessary for the two delega-

tions in Geneva to complete that work as quickly as possible, thereby

putting another question to rest.

Brezhnev said he would not address the question of the so-called

Backfire bomber. Gromyko had set forth the Soviet position repeatedly;

it was that the Backfire was completely unrelated to the treaty under

negotiation, and Brezhnev had nothing to add to Gromyko’s statement.

It was important now to apply strenuous efforts on both sides to

find mutually acceptable solutions for those issues which still remained

unagreed or not completely agreed. He would hope that the U.S. side

would display the necessary realism, just as the Soviet side was doing,

and that this would at last make it possible to complete work on the

treaty.

Brezhnev said it would also be of great importance if our two

countries could join efforts in other directions as well, particularly in

putting an end to the arms race. The Soviet Union regretted that the

United States had not agreed to the Soviet proposal for mutual, com-

plete and unconditional renunciation of the production of neutron

weapons. In advancing that proposal, the Soviet side had not pro-

ceeded and was not proceeding from unilateral interests but with the

sole objective of ridding mankind of still another weapon of mass an-

nihilation, a particularly inhumane weapon, and of preventing a new

spiral in the arms race. Recent statements by President Carter con-

cerning deferral of a final decision regarding the production of neutron

weapons3 could not, of course, be regarded as settling this matter. Nev-

ertheless, taking into account President Carter’s statement, the Soviet

Union was now weighing the possibility of refraining from producing

neutron weapons unless the United States began to produce them first.

He was informing the Secretary of this in a strictly confidential manner,

but the Soviet Union would probably soon announce its decision on

this score.

January–June 1978

Brezhnev said he would not address the other specific matters the

Secretary had discussed with Gromyko. He merely wanted to empha-

size the most important factors needed to ensure a positive trend in the

relations between our two countries: reciprocity in taking into account

the legitimate interests of the other side, strict observance of the prin-

ciple of equality and mutual benefit, and non-interference in each

other’s internal affairs. Without that, it would not be possible to ad-

vance our bilateral relations or to achieve satisfactory solutions to

major international problems.

In conclusion, Brezhnev wanted to touch on one more matter. Rep-

resentatives of the United States side and President Carter personally

had stressed the desirability of a meeting between him and President

Carter. As for the Soviet side and himself personally, he would wel-

come such a meeting; there should be no doubt whatsoever on this

score. In this connection, they were only concerned that a meeting

might be held without producing the kind of results that people

throughout the world had every right to expect from the meeting of the

heads of two such countries as the United States and the Soviet Union.

In other words, such a meeting should be well prepared and produc-

tive. He would be pleased if the Secretary could convey this to Presi-

dent Carter.

Departing from his text, Brezhnev said that those who wrote ar-

ticles, delivered speeches and traveled a great deal should never forget

that if only one bomb should go off, there would as a consequence be

nothing left on the face of the earth. The leaders themselves might

perhaps find a safe place to hide, but what about nations, peoples, cities

and industrial plants? And yet, people keep on writing reports, paper

after paper, and each author probably congratulates himself for having

found a happy phrase. Brezhnev was fully prepared to meet President

Carter for the purpose of declaring that both are against war, against

nuclear weapons, and for disarmament. They could sign a paper to that

effect, a document that could be exhibited to the whole world. That

would represent true courage and genuine action.

The Secretary said that the President had asked him to convey his

warm personal regards to Brezhnev, and to express his strong determi-

nation to do everything in his power that this meeting should be as pro-

ductive as possible.

Brezhnev interrupted, thanking him for the President’s good

wishes and said he welcomed the statement that we are all human. He

noted the President’s public statements to the effect that he was for de-

veloping good relations with the Soviet Union, that he would seek to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

improve them, and that he was against the arms race. Nevertheless, a

couple of days later at some university the President had delivered an-

other speech. The Soviet leadership had read both statements and was

asking itself: Where is the truth?

The Secretary said that President Carter shared Brezhnev’s con-

cerns and views about the danger of a world overloaded with nuclear

weapons. As Brezhnev had pointed out, each of us had many times

more weapons than either of us wished to have.

Brezhnev (interrupting) said the trouble was that when it came to

nuclear weapons, including silo launchers and MIRVs, the important

thing was not just to look at their numbers, whether such numbers

were 2400 or 2250. He would ask what would happen if just one bomb

were to be dropped on a major city, for example a bomb with a yield of

3 million tons. There would be nothing left of that city, and yet here we

were talking about 2400 or 2250.

The Secretary continued that President Carter believed that this

meeting could be an important step toward the realization of the for-

eign policy objectives to which he is committed: namely, a more

peaceful world based on the reduction and control of arms; a deeper

understanding with the Soviet Union; a resolution of regional conflicts;

and restraint on the part of the major powers. President Carter shared

the general views Brezhnev had expressed a moment ago, the views

Brezhnev had said he would like to see stated in a joint paper.

The Secretary said that the President shared Brezhnev’s vision of a

world without nuclear weapons. In his Inaugural Address, President

Carter had emphasized his commitment to working for a world

without nuclear weapons. The President believed deeply that a SALT

II agreement should be completed and signed as soon as feasible.

The Secretary said that with respect to the SALT II issues he agreed

generally with Brezhnev’s summary of the positions discussed. He

pointed out that there was another important issue that had to be re-

solved—it was necessary to agree first on the definition of new types of

January–June 1978

missiles. However, he believed that the two delegations in Geneva

should be able to work on this matter and resolve it promptly. Of

course, there were also other matters which had to be resolved by the

two delegations in Geneva, such as the bomber counting rule, the defi-

nition of cruise missile range, etc. Some of these were technical matters

and the delegations should be instructed to resolve them promptly.

The Secretary said that President Carter had asked him to present a

broad review of the present state of relations between our two coun-

tries, and to express to Brezhnev frankly those issues which were the

source of deep concern to him and to the American public at large. He

had asked the Secretary to stress that the United States seeks a detente

that is increasingly comprehensive and genuinely reciprocal. Unless

we can move in this direction, some of the central factors in the rela-

tionship, including the successful ratification of SALT, would be ad-

versely affected by the consequent deterioration in the political envi-

ronment. Therefore, he wished to stress that mutual restraint lies at the

core of a detente relationship. We regard the US-Soviet relationship as

central to world peace and global stability. This relationship must,

therefore, be one of mutual restraint, in accordance with the Basic Prin-

ciples of Relations signed between our two countries in May 1972. If

these principles are not observed, it will lead to an unregulated and in-

creasingly dangerous competition.

Brezhnev interrupted to ask what sort of restraint the Secretary had

in mind.

The Secretary said he would come to that, but in that connection

wished to have a clarification of Soviet objectives in Africa, and in par-

ticular southern Africa. This is needed in order to provide a positive

political framework for pursuing other issues of importance to both our

countries. We would regard it as a matter of importance that the Soviet

Union not be drawn into an effort to resolve the Eritrean issue by force.

It is clear that the continued presence of Soviet military and Cuban

combat personnel in the Horn of Africa will provoke a reaction from

Ethiopia’s neighbors that could only lead to further tension and con-

flict. We strongly believe that the early withdrawal of all external forces

from Ethiopia would avert the dangerous trends now building up in

Africa. We would hope that the Soviet Union would use its influence to

this end. While we had no objection to Soviet cooperation with the Pa-

triotic Front and the Front Line countries in southern Africa, the Secre-

tary wished to make it clear beyond any doubt that intrusion of ex-

ternal forces into southern Africa will jeopardize detente as a whole,

and seriously fray the relationship between our two countries.

Brezhnev interrupted to say that he would respond.

The Secretary said it might be helpful if he were to outline our objec-

tives in southern Africa, particularly in Rhodesia and Namibia. We had

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

been working together with the British trying to bring about a situation

in which there would be a peaceful transition to majority rule in the

near future, hopefully before the end of this current year, a transition

that would result in an independent Zimbabwe. We know that for this

to be successful, for a lasting peace to be established there, the Patriotic

Front must play a role in the transition process, and be given the oppor-

tunity along with others to put their candidacy before the people of

Zimbabwe. We believe that in a free election Joshua Nkomo would

probably be elected President of Zimbabwe. We recognize that Bishop

Muzorewa7 enjoyed considerable support, but believe that Nkomo had

a stronger political base and, therefore, would win in a free election. In

short, with reference to Zimbabwe, we recognize that the people there

had to make their own choice, and what we were trying to do was to

help see to it that there be a peaceful transition and that the people of

Zimbabwe be free to express their will in an election before the end of

this year.

Brezhnev, interrupting, said that is correct.

The Secretary continued that as for Namibia, here, too, our only ob-

jective is for the people of Namibia to decide their own future and

choose their own leaders. The Secretary believed, and he understood

that the Soviet side also believed, that free elections must be held in ac-

cordance with UN Resolution 385. We oppose a so-called internal so-

lution in Namibia, and believe that the transition period and the elec-

tion must be under the supervision of the United Nations, to make sure

that it would be fair and free. The Secretary wanted to conclude this

point by saying that there could not be a lasting solution to the Nami-

bian problem unless SWAPO played a full part in the political process.

He had recently talked with Nujoma9 about his concerns and how they

could be met. The Secretary concluded by saying that he had made this

digression to explain our views with regard to southern Africa, and he

hoped that this would help give the Soviet Union a better under-

standing of our objectives in that area.

Brezhnev stated his belief that African affairs and the relations of

the Soviet Union with African countries had no bearing on relations be-

tween the United States and the Soviet Union, no more bearing than,

for example, the relations of the United States with Chile or Iran or any

other country. Attempts to create an artificial linkage could only inter-

fere with the development of good relations between our two coun-

January–June 1978

tries. If such an intention did indeed exist, then, of course, one could

link anything with anything else. But, in general, the Soviet leadership

did not understand how anyone could discern a cause for alarm in the

relations between the Soviet Union and African countries, nor why all

sorts of pernicious plans were ascribed to the Soviet Union for the sole

reason that at the request of friendly Ethiopia the Soviet Union had

helped that country defend itself against the aggression to which it had

been subjected. From the point of view of international law and from

the point of view of morality, the Soviet actions there had been fully

justified. No Soviet military forces had been in that area, and none were

there now. The Soviet Union did not want to get something for itself

there. As for the Cubans, Cuba and Ethiopia were sovereign states. The

Soviet leadership could not speak for them and did not want to do so.

He would only say that he saw nothing threatening anyone in the ac-

tions of the Cubans in Africa. In the United States, things had pro-

gressed so far that all sorts of apprehensions were now being voiced, to

the effect that the Cubans and the Russians would penetrate even coun-

tries like Rhodesia and Namibia in order there to concoct some sort of

intrigue against the Western powers. He would say that this was totally

in the realm of fantasy. In the meanwhile, he would also note that it was

not Gromyko or Ustinov who were traveling to these countries, but

Secretary Vance and the British Foreign Secretary. He would suggest,

therefore, that there was no need to pile up artificial difficulties in the

path of developing our bilateral relations. There were so many complex

questions involved in them already that God’s help would be needed to

cope with the real problems we had.

The Secretary said it was the view of the President and himself that

the depth of our feeling concerning developments in Africa derived not

only from our national interests but from our entire national experi-

ence. Any efforts that resulted in fanning the flames of a major racial

war in southern Africa would only provoke the most profound and ad-

verse reaction on the part of the American people. It was for this reason

that we believe the relationship between our two countries is at a

watershed. We are willing and ready to try to improve our relations, to

widen the scope of cooperation to other areas, and to work together on

the widest possible range of issues; but progress in this direction was

more difficult, if not impossible, by a selective detente.

Brezhnev interrupted to say that most-favored-nation treatment

had not yet been accorded the Soviet Union. The Soviet Government

had heard promises and words, but nothing had been done. Senators

like Jackson (Brezhnev forgot the name and had to be prompted by Do-

brynin) were visiting China and praising China to the skies. They were

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

saying that the United States must cooperate with China and must be

on China’s side. That was the business of the United States and the So-

viet Union would not interfere. But, it would express its own views on

these matters. He had not wanted to say that, but it seemed to him that

eventually the United States would turn over Taiwan to the Chinese. It

would turn over its own allies, sell them down the river. Well, there is

nothing eternal under the moon.

The Secretary said we had made it very clear that the security of the

people of Taiwan was of critical importance to the United States. We

had told this to the Chinese so they would have no illusions on this

score. In fact, it was the Secretary’s frankness in discussing this and

making our position clear to the Chinese that had made his visit to

China a few months ago difficult.

The Secretary wanted to say one more word regarding the African

situation. It was true that he had traveled to Rhodesia and Namibia, but

the purpose of his trip had been to bring about peaceful transition and

free elections. Not a single US soldier was involved in that area.

Brezhnev said that lots of questions remained unanswered, never-

theless. There were no US soldiers there, the people there were trying

to settle their own affairs, and yet the American Secretary of State was

traveling to that region for reasons no one could understand. Since he

was traveling there, that meant that he was interfering in some way in

internal matters; the Secretary would know best what these matters

were.

The Secretary replied that President Brezhnev would know that he

had gone to Rhodesia at the invitation of the Front Line states after their

consultations with the Patriotic Front. He had been asked to help in

bringing about a peaceful transition and free elections.

Brezhnev said that might very well be so, but he would advise the

Secretary to focus his attention first of all on the question of nuclear

weapons, on banning the production of all types of new weapons. He

would advise him not just to travel around the various countries, but to

focus his attention on questions of paramount importance. Otherwise,

they could simply have a pleasant talk here, drink some tea, but what

would the Secretary be leaving with; and, for that matter, what had he

brought with him?

Brezhnev said he had been given a piece of paper which was the

draft announcement concerning the meeting today. It mentioned Secre-

tary Vance being received by Brezhnev and not much more. Not much

more could be said because the Secretary had not brought enough with

him. Day in and day out the Soviet leadership read statements made by

various US officials, sometimes by Brzezinski and sometimes by others,

and many of these were contradictory. He would ask the Secretary to

tell President Carter the terms on which Brezhnev would be prepared

January–June 1978

to meet with the President. If President Carter really wants to preserve

mankind from the threat of nuclear war, Brezhnev would be prepared

to meet with him anywhere—in Washington, Moscow, or Geneva, or

even Minsk. They could work out a joint statement along the lines of re-

nouncing nuclear war and nuclear weapons, and publish it immedi-

ately for all the world to read. That would really contribute to good re-

lations between our two countries. Otherwise, with the arms race going

on and Senator Jackson walking about yelling his head off on all sorts

of subjects, nothing much would result. Brezhnev did not want to talk

about petty matters in his talk with Secretary Vance. He wanted to talk

on a broad scale. He was convinced that the Secretary thought just as he

did in this respect.

The Secretary said he did agree that it was necessary for us to focus

on the major issues. He was sure that President Carter would welcome

a meeting with Brezhnev. It was not clear to him, however, whether

Brezhnev was suggesting that such a meeting be held before conclusion

of a SALT agreement, if the general kind of agreement Brezhnev had

referred to could be the result of such a meeting.

Brezhnev hesitated, turned to Gromyko, and then said he believed

the meeting should be held in connection with signing of the SALT

agreement.

The Secretary wanted to offer some further comments on another

matter involving nuclear weapons. He wanted to stress the importance

we attached to concluding an agreement on a comprehensive test ban.

Early next month we would resume negotiations on this subject in Ge-

neva. The Secretary would hope that progress could be achieved, since

it would enable us to reach a durable and comprehensive test ban.

Brezhnev said that the Soviet Union wanted to achieve the same

thing.

The Secretary said that the United States would like the comprehen-

sive test ban negotiations to be completed as soon as possible. If com-

pleted, perhaps it could be signed by President Carter and by Brezhnev

at the same time as the SALT agreement.

Gromyko interjected that two agreements were better than one.

The Secretary turned to the important question of European secu-

rity. He wanted to express the hope that the recent Western initiatives

in the Vienna negotiations on mutual and balanced force reductions

would be met by a commensurate response from the Warsaw Pact side.

He hoped that the recent Western initiative, which he had discussed

with Gromyko yesterday, would be seriously studied by the Soviet

Union and the Warsaw Pact countries, and it was his understanding

that this was now being done and that a response would be provided as

soon as possible.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Reading from a paper, Brezhnev replied that the NATO countries

had recently tabled an updated proposal which was now being care-

fully studied and would be answered in due time. The first impression

of the Soviet side was that this proposal of the Western countries con-

tained some elements which took into account certain considerations of

the socialist states, although it clearly retained the overall nature of a

onesided approach, and still manifested a desire to use the Vienna talks

not so much to lower the overall level of the opposing military forces,

as to change the ratio between them in favor of the Western countries,

to the detriment of the socialist countries. They would certainly con-

tinue to work and do all within their power, within reasonable limits, to

reach an understanding and to reduce military tensions in Europe.

Brezhnev said that all that was left to do now was to convey his best

wishes to President Carter, to express his hope for detente and for im-

provement of the relations between our two countries. This was cer-

tainly feasible and he was certain it would be supported by the people

of the United States.

Brezhnev had his interpreter read the text of a unilateral statement

he proposed to release to the press.

The Secretary said it sounded all right to him. He would add a few

words, realising that the hour was late. (Brezhnev was beginning vis-

ibly to tire.) The Secretary said we realized the importance the Soviet

Union attached to the question of an exception in the new missile cate-

gory. We have discussed this issue at length and have made some

progress in the direction of a solution to this issue. We had also re-

solved the non-circumvention question, and had thus laid the basis for

agreement on the text of the Joint Statement of Principles. He would

point out that we had come here with serious intent, had made some

progress, and now faced the task of completing work on the remaining

issues.

With reference to SALT, the Secretary wanted to stress that SALT

did not exist in a vacuum. The ratification process in Congress was

bound to be affected by the general political atmosphere and by public

opinion in the United States. These would be affected by Soviet actions.

(Brezhnev appeared to be getting tired and his attention began to

wander.)

The Secretary said he wanted to make another point. In place of an

unrestrained political and military competition, the United States

would prefer and would welcome closer cooperation with the Soviet

Union in dealing with the many global problems that confront man-

104.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 28, 1978

SUBJECT

Secretary’s Meeting with Amb. Dobrynin

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Secretary

Amb. Anatoly Dobrynin

Marshall D. Shulman

Ambassador Dobrynin came to the Department at the Secretary’s

invitation on April 28 for a follow-up on a number of points regarding

SALT and the Moscow visit. There was also a discussion of the South

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

African nuclear question and of Namibia. A non paper on the Law of

the Sea was transmitted.

I. Moscow Meeting Follow-Up

1. Tentatively, the following dates were discussed for a possible

Gromyko visit to Washington, prior to his appearance at the SSOD: ar-

would check Moscow and confirm. He believed Gromyko was sched-

uled to speak at the SSOD May 25.

2. The Secretary expressed appreciation for the hospitality and

courtesies extended to him and to his party in Moscow.

3. Dobrynin said that Brezhnev’s speech to the Komsomols was in-

tended to register a positive reaction to the Moscow meetings; he said

there was surprise in Moscow that the only comment made by the Pres-

ident at his press conference3 was so sharply negative. The Secretary

explained that the only question asked of the President concerned

Brezhnev’s position on ERW, and he did not have an opportunity to re-

spond to other aspects of the Brezhnev speech. These were covered, he

said, in the response to questions by the State Department spokesman

on April 26, the transcript of which was given to Dobrynin.

4. The Secretary reminded Dobrynin that Gromyko had offered to

supply the flight profile of the Backfire. Dobrynin said he would follow

up the matter.

5. The Secretary asked if Dobrynin had further information on

Gromyko’s suggestion that preliminary steps could be taken to make

missiles inoperable prior to complete dismantling, and in particular

whether such steps would be subject to verification. Dobrynin said he

thought the steps could be verifiable, but that he would try to get addi-

tional information.

6. The Secretary said, with reference to New Types, that although

the US preferred position was to have no exceptions, it had made an ef-

fort to take account of the Soviet desire by offering to accept one excep-

tion for each side; if this were to be accepted, he stressed, each side

would have to be free to make the exception MIRVed or SRV, according

to its own preference. Dobrynin indicated some resistance to this point,

on the ground that a MIRVed exception would be more destabilizing,

but did not say that this was a final Soviet position.

January–June 1978

II. South African Nuclear Question

The Secretary said that Ambassador Gerard Smith would be going

to South Africa in the near future, to discuss its adherence to the NPT

and acceptance of interim safeguards on the Valindaba enrichment

plant. He expressed the conviction that diplomatic negotiations could

be more effective than public pressures at this point, and hoped that the

Soviet Union would not support action of discussion by the UN Secu-

rity Council at the present time. He said we did not have information

that indicated another test site was under construction, and that we

would welcome any supporting evidence on this point the Soviet

Union would provide. He also said that the US appreciated the serious

treatment with which this issue was being handled, and hoped that

constructive cooperation could continue.

III. Namibia

Recalling the discussions in Moscow on African issues, the Secre-

tary reviewed with Dobrynin current negotiations on Namibia. He said

that the Contact Group proposals had now been accepted by South Af-

rica, and that acceptance by SWAPO was now the critical next step re-

quired. He asked Dobrynin to forward to Moscow our request that the

Soviet Union use its influence to bring about SWAPO acceptance of the

proposals, and said that this would open the way to a prompt and fair

transition to independence and majority rule. This result, he said,

should be a matter of common interest and cooperation between the

Soviet Union and the United States. The alternative would be bad for

everyone concerned. The Secretary reviewed in detail the major points

raised by Nujoma as conditions for his acceptance.

IV. Middle East

Dobrynin asked whether anything new had emerged from the dis-

cussions with Moshe Dayan. The Secretary replied not much and that it

appeared useful to try to get the discussion focussed now on concrete

next steps on the West Bank/Gaza and the Palestinian questions which

would lead to a declaration of principles.

V. Law of the Sea

Following the meeting with the Secretary, Shulman transmitted to

Dobrynin a non paper requesting Soviet cooperation in an effort to

remedy deficiencies in the environmental provisions of the negotiating

text before the Law of the Sea Conference. Dobrynin said he would

cable a summary of the matter immediately, and pouch the full text of

the non paper after the weekend.

105.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Moscow Trip, Soviet Jewish Emigration, Shcharanskiy Case,

Humphrey-Findley Bill

PARTICIPANTS

Eugene Gold, Chairman, National Conference on Soviet Jewry (NCSJ)

Rabbi Alexander Schindler, Chairman, Conference of Presidents of Major

American Jewish Organizations

Jerry Goodman, Executive Director, NCSJ

Marina Wallach, Washington Representative, NCSJ

Yehuda Hellman, Executive Director, Conference of Presidents

The Secretary

Patricia Derian, Assistant Secretary, HA

William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR

Melvyn Levitsky, EUR/SOV (notetaker)

The Secretary began by briefing the group on the results of his trip

to Moscow. He said the general atmosphere was somewhat better this

time. He informed Gold that during the visit we had given the Soviets

the list of hardship emigration cases which was prepared by the NCSJ.

We had received no immediate response, but the Secretary noted that

the Soviets in such cases never go beyond saying they will study the

matter. In this context, the Secretary referred to the fact that the emigra-

tion figures were substantially up from 1977. Gold said the NCSJ was

aware of this approximate 40 percent increase.

The Secretary stated that the Soviets are well aware of our con-

cerns in the Shcharanskiy case. His impression was that the Soviets are

still struggling over the question of what to do and how to proceed on

the case. He was convinced that it is being handled at the highest level

in Moscow. There were no new developments to report, however. He

said we would keep after the Soviets and continue to press them on the

Shcharanskiy case.

Gold asked how the Secretary saw the situation playing out.

The Secretary responded that we had done a good deal of advance

planning so that we could handle any contingency promptly. He felt

January–June 1978

the best way for the Government to act was to continue to exert pres-

sure quietly while private organizations kept up public pressure.

Gold asked for the Secretary’s opinion on possible prisoners ex-

changes involving Shcharanskiy, a subject which had appeared in the

press.

The Secretary replied that there was nothing to report with regard

to an exchange for Shcharanskiy. We had no proposals from the Soviets

on which to act. The Secretary asked Luers to comment on Gold’s ques-

tion about the potential for an exchange in the future.

Luers said we felt the Soviets were still deciding what to do on the

case and might be trying to find a way out. We continue to believe that

they will have a trial and convict Shcharanskiy but they may be

thinking of a post-trial expulsion or an exchange. Either of these could

take place, even after Shcharanskiy was imprisoned. Luers noted that

we were treating the exchange issue very delicately now, since we do

not want to close off options for the future.

In response to Gold’s and Schindler’s questions about how we

follow up on the lists we present to the Soviets, the Secretary said that

we keep track of progress on these cases here and in Moscow. Our im-

pression is that there has been some progress. Luers remarked that we

were considering, along with Ms. Derian’s office, following up with the

Soviets on CSCE matters and that emigration and family reunification

were subjects which could be covered.

Goodman said the NCSJ’s records show that the list of refused

Jewish emigrants remains about the same in size, but that the people on

it change. Some are allowed out but others receive new refusals and

take their places.

The Secretary said we felt the presentation of a list was a prodding

factor which had a positive effect in general. Gold and Schindler agreed

with this assessment.

Goodman asked the Secretary if he felt the relatively better emigra-

tion flow in recent months would continue. The Secretary said he

wanted to be cautious in making predictions, but that he guessed that

the improved situation would continue.

Gold mentioned that the NCSJ had shown some flexibility in testi-

fying on the Humphrey-Findley Bill which would exempt CCC credits

from the Jackson-Vanik restrictions. Congressman Findley had told

them that he was interested in helping American farmers, but that he

felt China was more important in this regard. He therefore said he

would be willing to consider any proposal by the NCSJ which would

exclude the Soviet Union from the Bill. Gold and Goodman pointed out

that the NCSJ had decided not to present such a proposal and that

while they did not support the Bill, neither had they tried to institute a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

massive campaign against it. They wanted to show a reasonable atti-

tude and that American Jews were not just nay-sayers. They asked the

Secretary if he thought this should be pointed out to the Soviets as a

way of encouraging them to continue their better performance in emi-

gration. Schindler felt that this should be made explicit, that the mes-

sage on the Jewish community’s flexibility should be imparted to the

Soviets directly by the Administration. Gold said this reasonable atti-

tude would be clear from the legislative history of the Humphrey-

Findley Bill and that perhaps this could be pointed out to the Soviets.

The Secretary said he thought the NCSJ’s policy of demonstrating

flexibility was a good one. Holding out a carrot and showing that posi-

tive developments in the emigration field could produce movement in

the future could be useful. While the Administration could not take too

much of a forward position on the Bill, he said we would be glad to

make the Soviets aware of the more flexible stance by American Jewish

organizations on the CCC issue if Gold and Schindler wanted us to do

so. Both felt this was a good idea and said they would stay in touch

with the Department on this.

Goodman said the NCSJ appreciated what the Administration had

done on the Shcharanskiy case and on the general Soviet Jewry issue.

He noted, however, that although the emigration figures were up, the

overall picture (i.e. harassment of Soviet Jews, arbitrary treatment, etc.)

was more troubling. The level was now about 2,000 per month. Did we

have any assurances that this would continue?

The Secretary said that he could not give such assurances. He had

a “gut feeling” that the trend would continue, but nothing more than

that. The Secretary said that if we get a SALT agreement with the So-

viets this would improve the overall atmosphere considerably. SALT

was the litmus test of the relationship. He said he thought we would

have a good agreement eventually but that he could not predict when.

January–June 1978

106.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

1. Antenna appears to be a modified 3 element Yagi (similar to So-

viet TV antennae) directed in a north easterly direction. Polarization is

vertical.

2. Antenna is located approximately at the top of the seventh floor

inside the chimney.

preamp since “12V” is clearly visible.

may be a combining network.

6. Antenna has been left in place and cables are intact. It has been

secured by lines and steel bars to preclude attempt at recovery by

opposition.

7. Chimney shaft may include multiple cables at lower levels that

appear to enter both the Embassy and Soviet building. Cables continue

down shaft and enter Soviet building at basement level.

8. We will soon enter shaft to inspect lower suspected cabling.

Matlock

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

107.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11720. Subject: Technical Penetration of U.S. Embassy Moscow.

1. We have entered the chimney and found a tunnel at the bottom.

Tunnel heads 30 feet north and then turns west. Hatch entrance ap-

pears to enter Soviet changing room in Embassy.

2. Listening post located at bottom of shaft with headset and mi-

crophone. Line box with 8 dual pin jacks also found. Headset plugged

in and appears dead.

3. We will enter tunnel at this time.

4. Still possible that opposition has not been alerted.

Matlock

108.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11770. Subject: Technical Penetration of US Embassy Moscow. Ref:

1. We have entered and explored tunnel. It heads about 25 feet due

north then makes a gradual left turn and further progress is blocked

January–June 1978

about 40 feet further on by a sheet metal barrier. Barrier appears to defi-

nitely be off the Embassy compound.

2. There are four cables exiting the chimney that head down the

tunnel. One services the antenna, two go into the back of the line box

mentioned in reftel C, and one connects to a Uher microphone with a

switch encased in a plastic bag. All four cables terminate in a jumble of

cable located about two feet in front of the sheet metal.

3. About ten feet beyond the bend three heavy black cables enter

what appears to be the basement of the Soviet apartment building.

These cables continue down the tunnel and enter the jumble in front of

the sheet metal.

4. Two heavy black cables exit the jumble and go through the roof

of the tunnel.

5. Tunnel ceiling turns from brick to sheet steel beyond point

where three cables enter building basement.

6. Small opening (two foot square) is located to the south just in

front of sheet metal barrier. This opening is blocked off by loose brick.

7. There appears to be five trip wires connected to the loose brick

fill. These wires are soldered to heavier gauge wires that either enter

the wire jumble or a plastic wrapped object about the size of a transistor

radio.

8. Two tunnel accesses are in the Soviet changing room as reported

in reftel C.

9. We are now trying to trace all cables without disturbing trip

wires.

viet workers will be denied access to changing room, we request imme-

diate Departmental guidance.

11. Once opposition is alerted, we suspect they will enter tunnel

from the far end and seal off access or remove as much cabling as

possible.

12. Photographic documentation continues.

Matlock

109.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Vance-Gromyko Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

US

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

William D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Mr. Viktor M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Minister Gromyko welcomed the Secretary at the Soviet Mission

and asked him how he wanted to proceed.

The Secretary first wanted to convey to Gromyko President

Carter’s personal regards, and tell him that the President looked for-

ward to their scheduled meeting Saturday morning. That meeting

would take about 2 hours, or however long might be necessary, and the

Secretary would suggest that after that he and Gromyko go back to

discuss the matters remaining after the meeting with the President. To-

night the Secretary planned to return to Washington and would come

out to the airport to meet Gromyko at 5 p.m. tomorrow.

Gromyko said he planned to arrive about that time unless the skies

cracked open or something else happened.

The Secretary pointed out that the meeting on Saturday was

planned for the ungodly hour of 8 a.m. in view of the President’s plans

to leave town immediately after their meeting.

Gromyko agreed and said he would plan to meet with the Presi-

dent for two hours or more and then with the Secretary. He would

want to discuss the main question between our two countries, the one

he and the Secretary had discussed in Moscow and earlier in Wash-

ington. There would not be much time to discuss other matters, al-

though he supposed that the President or the Secretary would have

some general remarks bearing on Soviet-American relations, and he

would also have a few words on that subject. He asked the Secretary

who would start off the conversation on Saturday.

January–June 1978

The Secretary replied that he had not discussed this with the Presi-

dent, but would find out after returning to Washington. Did Gromyko

have any preference?

Gromyko said he had no preference, but it should be borne in

mind that in Moscow the Secretary had spoken first. This time Gro-

myko might express a few considerations to which the President might

want to reply.

The Secretary said that would be a good way to proceed.

SALT

Gromyko said he did not want to discuss substantive matters

today, since he would get to them on Saturday. However, he did want

to tell the Secretary now in a preliminary way that unless a solution

was found to the question of one new type of missile for each side, on

the basis his government had suggested, there would be no agreement.

If the Soviet side were to accept the US proposal in this matter, the two

countries would find themselves in entirely different situations in

terms of their respective security. He was not saying this as a bar-

gaining point. It was the objective situation of the Soviet Union that

compelled his authorities persistently to advance their proposal that

each side be permitted to develop, test and deploy one new type of

ICBM with a single reentry vehicle.

As for the Backfire issue, Gromyko would have some consider-

ations to express when the two sides got down to substance in Wash-

ington, in view of the fact that in Moscow the Secretary had empha-

sized that for the United States this was a question of major

importance. He could not help noting, however, that in terms of sub-

stance this was not an issue at all. In fact, the Soviet Union had prob-

ably been wrong to engage in discussion of this subject. That had been a

mistake from the very beginning. While he did not want to discuss the

substance of this matter now, he simply wanted to put the Secretary on

notice on this score. The Soviet side had stated that the Backfire was not

a strategic weapons system, and as he had said before, this system

should not have been discussed at all. Nevertheless, he had told the

Secretary in Washington and in Moscow that the Soviet Union was pre-

pared to make a unilateral statement regarding the Backfire. After that,

Soviet authorities had thought that reason would prevail. Unfortu-

nately this had not been the case, and in the US Congress the question

had escalated and become over-emphasized. It seemed that one Con-

gressman had said something, a second one took up where the first left

off, etc., until the issue had been blown up out of proportion. Now he

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

and the Secretary would have to sit down and try to unravel this knot,

although he felt there should have been no need to do that at all.

Further, he and his authorities in Moscow had noted that the US

Government recently appeared to be of two minds about the very idea

of a new accord. Sometimes, it seemed, the US Government simply left

matters to drift, to be driven by the wind. Some sort of a passive atti-

tude was displayed toward the new agreement. At times it was difficult

to understand whether a statement by a US official spoke in favor of the

new agreement or against it. When he and the Secretary had discussed

SALT matters in Moscow, it had appeared that the United States was in

favor of concluding a new agreement, and the same had been true last

year in Washington, when President Carter had spoken in favor of

doing so. On the other hand, it was very difficult to regard recent offi-

cial statements of the US as arguing in favor of the new agreement. He

would ask the Secretary to clarify the true position of the US Govern-

ment. In this connection, he would note that Vice President Mondale’s

speech in the General Assembly yesterday5 had caused some dismay

on the Soviet side. He did not want to go into detail now, since he

would speak in the General Assembly tomorrow, and would take into

account the Vice President’s speech, but without indulging in emo-

tions, unlike yesterday’s speaker. Our two countries had interests that

were much more important than some of the issues mentioned yes-

terday. These interests had to be taken into consideration, applying

logic and reason. Surely the Secretary understood that peace could not

be built without the participation of the United States and the Soviet

Union. Gromyko’s authorities understood very well that ensuring gen-

uine world peace and security required the participation of both our

countries. As for war, neither of our nations wanted or needed a war.

Both sides realized full well what a war would mean today, taking into

account the development of modern technology. Therefore, it was quite

unnecessary to build up some sort of artificial myths and fears and then

put stock in them. What was needed was a calm, considered and

thoughtful approach, one that applied reason. He would point out,

therefore, that if yesterday’s speech had been aimed at putting pressure

on the Soviet Union, and if some other statements pursued the same

objective, nothing would come of it. Attempts had been made many

January–June 1978

times before to frighten the Soviet Union with speeches of this kind, but

they never had any effect. Nor had the Soviet Union engaged in at-

tempts to frighten anyone; the Soviet authorities did not like to pursue

their objectives by such methods. What was essential was reason, a

calm and patient approach, and complete awareness of the fact that the

kind of peace that would prevail in the world depended on our two

countries, as did the question of whether there would be peace at all.

The Secretary said he would respond very briefly. First, he wanted

to make clear that, as he had indicated in Moscow and on many other

occasions, we believed deeply that it was in the best interests of our two

nations and in the best interest of the world that a SALT TWO agree-

ment be reached as soon as possible. What we were both seeking was

an agreement that would enhance the security of each of us by limiting

and subsequently reducing the numbers of nuclear weapons, and by

putting constraints on the qualitative improvement of strategic nuclear

weapons. What we were both seeking was equal security, and we were

seeking to move toward equal security by stopping the arms spiral and

by reducing the numbers of nuclear weapons which, as President

Brezhnev had said, were now many times more than was needed to de-

stroy the whole world. Therefore, there should be no question at all that

we have the same objective: i.e. to achieve a SALT TWO agreement at

an early date and then move on to discussions on how to achieve fur-

ther reductions at SALT III negotiations. That was clearly the view of

President Carter, the Secretary himself, and the US Government. He

was sure that President Carter would make this clear to Gromyko on

Saturday.

The Secretary would agree that peace in the world was in the

hands of our two countries. We had the awesome responsibility to see

to it that we reached the kind of agreement that would ensure peace

and would give us, our children and our grandchildren prospects of a

better life in a peaceful world.

Not wishing to go into substance, the Secretary nevertheless

wanted to touch briefly on the two questions to which Gromyko had

referred. As far as the question of new missiles was concerned, as Gro-

myko knew, it had been our belief that there should be no new ICBM’s

for the period of the Protocol to the Treaty. At the same time, we recog-

nized the importance to the Soviet Union of one exemption to the ban

on new types of ICBM’s. For that reason we had indicated that we

would be willing to agree to one exemption for each side, provided it

was an exemption for the period of the Treaty and that each side could

make its own determination of whether the new missile that each

would be permitted to develop and test would have a single reentry ve-

hicle or MIRVs, depending on the needs of each side. We felt that we

had made a major move in agreeing to consider the exemption to the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ban on new types, but in so doing we felt it essential that each side have

the right to determine, if we went along that route, whether or not the

new type of missile was to be MIRVed.

Insofar as the Backfire was concerned, the Secretary would prefer

to leave that issue for the discussion on Saturday.

African Affairs

Speaking off the record and instructing his interpreter to stop

taking notes, the Secretary expressed to Gromyko the concerns felt in

the United States, among the general public and in Congress, over So-

viet and Cuban activities in Africa. He pointed out that while we recog-

nized that Soviet and Cuban assistance to Ethiopia had initially been

caused by the Somali invasion of Ogaden, once this situation no longer

existed, it was difficult for us to regard the continued presence of large

numbers of Cuban troops in Ethiopia as anything other than cause for

serious concern. Recognizing that Cuba was a sovereign state, it was

felt nevertheless that the Soviet Union was in a position to exert appro-

priate influence upon the Cubans. Failure to do so had led to the per-

ception that the involvement of the Cubans in Ethiopia was a joint un-

dertaking by the Soviet Union and Cuba.

After the Secretary’s off-the-record remarks, Gromyko suggested

they join their two SSOD Delegations for a short period of time, and

subsequently return to the issue the Secretary had raised. Gromyko,

too, had something to say on African affairs.

The Secretary and Gromyko joined their two Delegations to the

SSOD and introduced their members to each other. They then returned

to their private discussion.

Gromyko told the Secretary that, as seen from Moscow, recent

American behavior in African affairs was bringing the Soviet leader-

ship to the conclusion that the United States was getting more and

more involved in African affairs, either directly or through other states.

Speaking frankly, this was viewed by the Soviet authorities as direct in-

terference in the internal affairs of countries in that part of the world.

What he had in mind in this connection was US participation in the air-

lift of troops, certain landing operations, and certain things being done

in Zaire. At the same time, attempts were made to cast a shadow on the

Soviet Union in this connection. He would point out that the Soviet

Union did not have a single soldier or rifle in that area, and had no in-

tention of sending any there.

As for Ogaden, Gromyko would point out that the matter there

was not entirely settled. He did not know what President Siad Barre of

Somalia had told the United States. He had told the Soviet Union, how-

ever, that he had made a mistake with regard to Ogaden. The Soviets

had told him that in that case he should sit down at a negotiating table

January–June 1978

and sign an agreement to close the matter. The trouble was that he had

not done so, and did not want to do so. He had gone to China instead,

although Gromyko did not know for what purpose. The truth of the

matter was that the Soviet Government had persuaded the Ethiopians

not to invade Somalia. (The Secretary acknowledged that he was aware

of this.) In connection with the Secretary’s remarks about Cuban forces

in the area, Gromyko would say that their numbers, as reported in the

US press, had been grossly exaggerated. He repeated that the Ogaden

matter was not yet closed. For his part, he would not preclude the pos-

sibility of further bloodshed there.

As for Eritrea, he would point out that if the Soviet Union had not

restrained the Ethiopians in that regard, blood would have flowed in

veritable rivers. The Soviet Union was in favor of Eritrea receiving the

broadest possible autonomy; however, that autonomy should be

within the framework of a unified and sovereign Ethiopian state. (Gro-

myko asked the US interpreter to be sure that he had this last sentence

down verbatim.) The Soviet Government had informed Mengistu that

it favored a very broad autonomy for Eritrea, and had also accordingly

informed the Revolutionary Council headed by Mengistu. In fact, the

Soviet Government was still continuing to impress this idea upon the

Ethiopians. It would be hard to say what might have happened if the

Soviet Government had not done so. If anyone had told the Secretary

that there were Cubans in Eritrea, Gromyko could only point out that

this was pure fabrication. The Soviet leadership had talked to the

Cubans in terms of the broad autonomy of which Gromyko had just

spoken, and the Cubans had refused to get involved and had said so of-

ficially to Mengistu and the Revolutionary Council. They did not have

military forces in Eritrea and did not intend to send a single soldier

there. Such was the true situation.

Gromyko said that with regard to the African question, the Soviet

leadership was getting the impression that some artificial pretexts were

being established, perhaps not by the United States but by its Allies, to

do certain things in Africa that should not be done. With regard to Na-

mibia and Rhodesia, as he had told the Secretary earlier, there was not a

single Soviet representative in those countries, not even a news corre-

spondent. As for the fact of arms travelling, he would ask the Secretary

if he could vouch for every single machine gun or rifle that had been

sold by the United States to someone or other perhaps years ago? He

was sure that the US could not account for many of these arms, any

more than the Soviet Union could. That was an entirely different

matter, however, one that had recently been the subject of initial discus-

sions between our two countries, discussions Gromyko welcomed.

Summing up, Gromyko asked the Secretary not to link the African

situation with SALT. To do so could only degrade the general situation,

“both yours and ours.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Espionage Case

Gromyko wanted to say a couple of words regarding two of his

people held in custody in the United States. He would ask the Secre-

tary if they could be released as requested by the Soviet Government,

or did the US really intend to unleash a new kind of war between intel-

ligence services? The Soviet Union was asking the United States to re-

lease these men; they had not been caught red-handed and no one

would be in a position to charge them with anything specific. If there

were anyone wanting to throw charges at these men, Gromyko would

only point out that any country could find ways of fabricating such

charges. He hoped the Secretary would approach this from the stand-

point of good common sense, realistically and objectively, and would

not compel the Soviet Union to take measures in response, measures

that would certainly not be to the liking of the United States. The Soviet

Union had not taken such measures so far, displaying the utmost re-

straint in this matter. He asked the Secretary to inform President Carter

accordingly.

The Secretary said he would do so, and would discuss this matter

with Gromyko when they met in Washington.

110.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11786. Subject: Technical Penetration of U.S. Embassy Moscow.

1. We believe we are faced with a decision in the next few hours of

whether or not we should attempt to remove cables described in para 3

January–June 1978

of Moscow 11770. We are certain that this cable and the materials de-

2. While we do not repeat not know whether or not the Soviets are

aware of our discovery, they will certainly learn of it by tomorrow

morning (about 6 hours hence) when we deny Soviet workers the use of

their changing rooms. By then it will probably be unsafe for us to go be-

yond the Embassy’s territorial limits. If the Department believes the

materials in Soviet territory would be useful in determining the extent

and type of system, we believe we can still safely attach hooks and

ropes to the cables and equipment in Soviet territory and drag parts of

it back into U.S. territory from a position of safety. We must however,

have the Department’s instructions in the next few hours if this is to be

done.

3. Any decision to remove equipment from tunnel under Soviet

territory should of course have high-level political approval, including

that of Ambassador Toon.

Matlock

111.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

134109. Subject: Technical Penetration. Refs: Moscow 11770,

Moscow 11786.

1. Do not repeat not attempt to penetrate any barriers. We believe

risks of such attempts outweigh potential gains.

2. In order to hold detailed discussions with other agencies we

would like to leave all discovered equipment in place for additional 24

hours if post can devise means of protecting all devices which would

not further alert Soviets. This would preclude barring Soviets from

change room.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

3. If such means cannot be devised all discovered equipment on

our territory should be removed and secured with as much of the ca-

bling on our territory as possible. Before cutting cables perform tests to

detect DC voltages, audio or RF on cables as time permits before So-

viets are additionally alerted. This has been cleared at policy level in

112.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11855. Subject: Technical Penetration of United States Embassy

January–June 1978

1. Penetration appears to be limited to an antenna located in the

south wing chimney that can be lowered or raised by a pulley system at

the bottom of the chimney shaft. Listening post reported in para 2 of

reftel B appears now to be a two way communications link between the

antenna operator and monitoring site. Detailed inspection of line box

and connections will be needed to verify this hypothesis. Only the four

cables reported in reftel C, para 2, are in American territory.

2. Per para three of reftel D, voltage and audio checks were per-

formed on the four cables which service the chimney.

A. The Uher microphone was found to be passing audio. The cable

was cut at this time. DC and AC voltages were found on the mike cable.

B. The antenna cable was spliced without breaking the conductor

paths to the antenna and a DC voltmeter was applied. At 0705 hours,

plus 12 VDC and 25 VAC power was applied from the opposition end

Several frequency scans were conducted from 20–1000 megacycles

while voltage was applied and before the cable was severed.

C. Cables three and four were also checked for voltage and impe-

dence data. The smaller of the two cables registered 1000 ohms of im-

pedence for the section leading back to the chimney and an open circuit

for the oppositions cable end. The larger cable also read an open circuit

for the oppositions segment of cable and one ohm for the chimney

section.

3. Significant events in chronological order which occurred Friday:

0600–0700 — Cable voltage and impedance measurements

conducted.

— First char force personnel was refused permission

to enter south wing char force change room.

0710–0855 — B plus applied repeatedly by opposition to the an-

tenna cable.

0855–1205 — B plus remained steady.

1015–1205 — Frequency spectrum scans of antenna cable

conducted.

— Pounding sounds emanating from opposition end

of tunnel.

— Light coming from opposite end of tunnel first

observed.

— Visual sighting occurred approximately halfway

down tunnel between resident Seabee and

opposition.

— Antenna cable cut to pressure antenna electronics.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

— Watch posted by opposition at point where three

large cables enter the tunnel.

Observation post was basement area of adjoining

apartment building controlled by opposition.

— Four cables retrieved at demarcation between op-

position and Embassy grounds.

4. At 1400 hours work commenced to gain access to the second

tunnel entrance hidden under the char room subflooring. This entrance

will be enlarged to permit the materials required for a barrier wall to be

erected at the Embassy grounds boundary in the tunnel proper.

5. Once chimney and char room tunnel are secure from further

compromise work will commence on analyzing the antenna array as-

sembly. Departmental guidance is requested soonest regarding an-

tenna disassembly and/or retrieval.

Matlock

113.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

1. Subject to Ambassador Toon’s concurrence, Embassy recom-

mends strongly that vigorous protest be lodged with Soviets regarding

major physical penetration of Embassy premises, in total violation of all

principles of extra-territoriality and international agreements guaran-

teeing it. Pertinent facts which might be mentioned include:

A. Construction and maintenance of surreptitious access to Em-

bassy property.

B. Evidence of systematic and repeated violation of Embassy

premises by Soviet personnel.

C. Installation and operation of electronic devices on Embassy

property.

January–June 1978

2. Consideration might be given to delivering protest to Gromyko

during weekend meetings, particularly if he weighs in heavily on Cher-

nyayev and Enger arrest.

3. This would seem appropriate opportunity to reiterate at high

level our standing demand that microwave signals directed at Embassy

be shut off forthwith. (Although final judgment must await full tech-

nical assessment, it is quite possible that the devices we discovered are

associated with microwaves.)

Matlock

114.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11787. For Deputy Undersecretary Read from Charge. Subject:

Major Technical Penetration of Embassy Moscow.

1. Assume SY has briefed you on details of major penetration of

Embassy premises discovered today. We face urgent and critical deci-

sion whether to attempt to remove cabling and other equipment from

portion of tunnel which is outside the bounds of Embassy territory. We

consider it probable, but not absolutely certain, that the Soviets are

aware of our discovery. Nevertheless, our people are confident that

they can retrieve much of the cabling without major physical danger

(there is without question some danger involved) if they do so tonight.

2. Technicians consider it important to retrieve following from So-

viet end of tunnel to determine purpose and characteristics of surveil-

lance system:

A. Section of each of 3 cables which run from metal plate up

tunnel, and into Soviet apartment house. These are believed to be RF

cables but may conceivably be power cables.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

B. Device (probably coupler) in plastic bag where trip wires and

some cabling terminate.

C. Section of each of two cables exiting tunnel roof several feet in

front of metal barrier.

3. I am informed that the cable can be cut without danger to person

cutting. Retrieval of plastic bag would be accomplished by attaching

rope and pulling from our end when all personnel are outside tunnel,

in case the trip wire should activate explosive or gas.

4. Aside from physical risk, which is probably acceptable if re-

covery of items is considered crucial, there is of course the political risk

involved in removing objects from Soviet territory. Inasmuch as all of

this equipment appears to be a part of a system which has flagrantly vi-

olated Embassy territory, a decision to remove would probably be de-

fensible, if the Soviets should complain. However, this is a question of

sufficient gravity that I believe it should be decided at a high political

level. If it were my decision, I would give it a try.

Matlock

formation that should be sent to the Department of State. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-

tral Foreign Policy File, D780223–1015)

115.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECTS

SALT, CTB, Africa, Human Rights

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

President Jimmy Carter

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Paul C. Warnke

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. David Aaron

Mr. Reginald Bartholomew

Mr. Hamilton Jordan

Mr. Jody Powell

Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko

Ambassador V. Makarov

Minister Counselor A.A. Bessmerinykh

Mr. V.G. Komplektov

Mr. N.N. Detinov

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

[Omitted here is discussion of SALT; see Foreign Relations, 1969–

CTB

As for CTB, the President did not see any need for detailed discus-

sion here of verification and other matters. He believed that one pri-

mary issue he and Gromyko might discuss was the duration of the

agreement being negotiated. We would like to see it have a five-year

term, and then renegotiate the agreement if both sides considered it ad-

visable to enter into a new agreement. To be perfectly frank, we had

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

concerns with our own nuclear arsenal which required3 occasional

testing in order to assure us that its capabilities were intact. We be-

lieved that five years was the maximum period of time we could go

without some testing. He hoped that this would be satisfactory to the

Soviet Union. As for the details, they could be left up to the negotiating

teams.

Gromyko said that in the course of the negotiations encouraging

progress had been achieved on this issue. There were still some un-

agreed questions—not many—including the question the President

had just mentioned, i.e., the duration of a possible accord. He would

ask the President to take into consideration some of the other out-

standing matters involved in the CTB negotiations. Immediately prior

to his departure from Moscow Gromyko had looked into the status of

those negotiations and could say now that if the other issues can be re-

solved—and on some of them U.S. representatives had taken a very

hard position—he believed that a positive solution could be found to

the question of duration of the agreement.

The President asked Ambassador Warnke to touch on the other

issues involved.

Ambassador Warnke said there appeared to be agreement in prin-

ciple on the concepts of authenticated national seismic installations and

on on-site inspections. Considerable differences still existed on the ex-

tent to which specific equipment to be used would be agreed upon at

the present stage of the negotiations. There were also differences on the

question of how on-site inspection would be carried out and what

equipment would be permitted for that purpose.

The President said there was no need this morning to discuss the

technical questions involved. He believed that one political question

could be resolved, i.e., the length of the agreement. He thought that as

termination of the agreement approached, negotiations could be held

regarding extension of the agreement. His position was that five years

was a reasonable term. As termination approached, negotiations could

be resumed.

Gromyko repeated that if the other questions could be resolved in

a positive manner, if the President’s negotiators would manifest

greater flexibility, he did not think a five-year term would present any

difficulties.

January–June 1978

The President noted that there were still differences between the

United States and the Soviet Union at the SALT negotiations and at the

CTB negotiations. He believed, however, that they could be resolved.

There were two other items, however, which had now reached serious

proportions and were tearing apart the mutual trust and friendship be-

tween our two countries which he believed were necessary to assure

detente and future peace. These two items were7 different in nature,

but equally8 important.

Africa

The first of these items concerned Soviet-Cuban intrusion9 and ad-

venturism in Africa. We were refraining from having a military pres-

ence in Africa, but the Soviet presence there had increased to alarming

proportions. We knew that the Soviet Union was in a position to exert a

strong influence on the Cubans. The Soviets usually claimed that Cuba

was an independent country that made its own decisions; we knew,

however, of the enormous economic support the Soviet Union was ren-

dering Cuba and could not believe that the Cubans could put 40 or 50

or 60 thousand men into Africa without the Soviet Union’s tacit ap-

proval or encouragement. Referring to Zaire and the Katangans’ inva-

sion into that country, the President said we did not believe it to have

been possible without Cuban assistance. As for Eritrea, he hoped that

the dispute there could be resolved without Soviet or Cuban presence

or involvement. With the United Nations we were trying to resolve

the difficult questions involving Rhodesia and Namibia, and were

doing so without any support on the part of the Soviet Union. He be-

lieved that it would be to the advantage of the Soviet Union and of our

country to see all the parties involved come together in order to resolve

the Rhodesian dispute by peaceful means. In this regard we were also

consulting with Britain and other nations. If the Cubans were to refrain

from interfering and if the Soviet Union were to lend its active support

to our efforts, the Rhodesian problem could be resolved by peaceful

means. Namibia was another instance requiring peaceful resolution.

The Soviet Union did have an influence it could exert, all the way from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

public support of our efforts in Rhodesia and Namibia to exercising re-

straint in the Horn of Africa. He believed that elimination of Soviet-

Cuban involvement in Africa would be a contributing factor to the

improvement14 of Soviet-American relations. We were quite concerned

and believed the Soviet Union knew that many other nations were

equally concerned over Soviet efforts15 to increase Soviet influence in

Africa by supply of weapons and by encouragement of Cuban involve-

ment. The President wanted to express this concern to Gromyko and

ask him to report to President Brezhnev that we considered this to be

an alarming development, one that was16 still in progress.

Gromyko said that the Soviet leadership had certainly noted

some of the President’s recent statements on African matters, which,

whether the President liked18 it or not, also somewhat exacerbated and

heated up the atmosphere as regards relations between our two coun-

tries. In this connection he was now talking about the specific matters

the President had raised in connection with Africa. There was no in-

creasing Soviet presence in Africa. The Soviet Union did not have a

single soldier with a rifle in Africa and did not intend to send any to

that area. The Soviet Union had indeed sent some quantities of arms to

some African countries, as well as a very small number of experts who

were helping the Africans master the use of the arms supplied. Not a

single Soviet individual had fired a single shot in the course of the latest

clashes in Africa, and not a single Soviet individual had taken part in

any operation in that part of the world. The Soviet Union had con-

demned the Somali invasion of Ethiopia, had called it open aggression

and had said so directly to the President of Somalia during his visit to

Moscow. Later on President Siad Barre had acknowledged that he had

committed aggression. He had asked the Soviet Union to help him ex-

tricate himself from that dirty war. The Soviets had told him by way of

January–June 1978

advice to withdraw all his personnel from Ethiopia and to settle his dis-

pute with Ethiopia by peaceful means. Quite recently, virtually several

days ago, he had admitted that his invasion of Ethiopia had been a mis-

take and had asked the Soviet Union for help. The Soviet Union had

given him some good advice—to withdraw all his personnel and arms

from Ethiopian territory. Further, Gromyko had already told Secre-

tary Vance that the Soviet Union had insistently advised the Ethio-

pians, including Mengistu, to refrain24 from having Ethiopian troops

invade Somali territory. The Soviet Union had indeed supplied

weapons to Ethiopia since Ethiopia had been a victim of aggression.

Frankly speaking, he felt the United States, too, would have been fully

justified if it had helped Ethiopia, since under the U.N. Charter a victim

of aggression is entitled to receive assistance on an individual as well as

a collective basis. That would have been up to the United States, of

course, he was just mentioning this in passing.

Gromyko expressed the hope that the President was in possession

of authentic information regarding the role of the Cubans in Ethiopia.

The Ethiopians had asked Cuba for assistance just as they had asked

the Soviet Union and other countries for assistance. It was very hard in-

deed to speak of numbers, because the numbers of Cubans involved

there, as mentioned by the President, were exaggerated at least tenfold.

He believed that the Somalis were deliberately exaggerating these

numbers and that the United States was not sufficiently critical of the

information it received from the Somalis. Incidentally, the Cubans, like

the Soviets, had advised the Ethiopians not to cross the border into So-

malia. The Soviet Union was indeed consulting with Cuba from time to

time, but to speak of some sort of coordinated Cuban-Soviet25 plan, etc.,

was absolutely wrong.

As for Eritrea, Gromyko pointed out that the Soviet position was

that Eritrea should enjoy a broad autonomy within a united and sover-

eign Ethiopian state. The Soviets had said this many times to the Ethio-

pian leadership. This was not the same situation as had been the case

with Ogaden. Each of these issues had its own specific aspects which

were quite different from case to case. The Soviet Union had called

upon the Ethiopian leaders not to permit any bloodshed in Eritrea and

to settle the dispute there by peaceful means. The Soviet Union had ex-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

pressed this position to the Cubans as well, and they in turn had told

the Soviets that their position in this respect was identical. There was

not a single Cuban soldier fighting in Eritrea today. The Soviet leader-

ship had been informed that this was Fidel Castro’s firm position. As

for further developments in that area, he was not at all sure that there

would not be further bloodshed there. After all, there were certain

circles outside that area, who urged the Eritreans to resist a peaceful

settlement. What was more, Ethiopia, too, was not totally in sympathy

with arriving at a peaceful settlement. If the Ethiopians had not been re-

strained by the Soviets and by the Cubans, blood would have flowed

there long ago. Whether or not one could succeed in restraining them

over a period of time, Gromyko did not know, but the Soviet Union

was working in that direction. In Ethiopia the Soviet Union was a factor

restraining hostilities rather than a factor prodding military action. To

what extent this would be successful in the future he could not now

predict. The Soviets had learned that one could not rely on the word of

Siad Barre. If the United States had not learned that lesson yet, he was

sure it would reach that conclusion soon. At the time when the Soviet

Union had supplied weapons to Somalia, it had been done on the con-

dition that these weapons would not be used against third coun-

tries, but only for self-defense. Siad Barre had given the Soviet

Union a pledge to that effect, but everyone knew what had happened

subsequently.

As for Rhodesia, Namibia and Zaire, he could tell the President

firmly that the Soviet Union had28 no representatives in that area, not

even news correspondents, and did not intend to send any repre-

sentatives there. The Soviet Union knew absolutely nothing about the

recent actions of the so-called gendarmes of Katanga. The very word

brought back memories of the period when Tshombe had been in

charge.

Gromyko noted that the President had spoken of the influence the

Soviet Union had in Rhodesia and Namibia. If he had referred to ideo-

logical influence, he might have been right, because for many years the

Soviet Union had argued against colonialism and racism. That was no

secret. He would only point out that ideological influence knew no bar-

riers at all. As for anything else, absolutely nothing was being done. He

would guess that the President had received reports to the effect that

the Soviet Union wanted to lay its hands on the entire area; he would

tell the President, however, that the Soviet Union was doing absolutely

nothing in that area, and knew nothing of the developments there ex-

cept what was reported in the press. The Soviet Union was not sending

January–June 1978

any people to that area. He could imagine the hue and cry throughout

the world that would be raised if any Soviets or Cubans travelled to

Rhodesia or Namibia. They did not have a single representative there,

unlike the United States.

Gromyko wanted to say a few words about Zaire. Whatever he

knew about the recent invasion there, he knew from the reports of

various press agencies and the reports of the Soviet representative in

Zaire. The Soviet charge´ d’ affaires had been called in to see Mobutu re-

cently and had been informed that some Katangan gendarmes had in-

vaded the territory of Zaire from Angola. The Soviet Union had not

even known of their presence in Angola. As for the Cubans, not a single

Cuban had been caught or even seen in that invasion. Yet, for some

reason people had started to blame first the Soviet Union and then the

Cubans. He had questioned the Cubans at a very high level about this

invasion30 and had been told that Cuba had absolutely nothing to do

with the whole matter. The Soviet Union wanted to maintain good re-

lations with Zaire and the Soviet charge´ had said so to Mobutu. After

all, what would President Carter want done? If there were some ref-

ugees in Angola who subsequently crossed the border into their own

country, what should be done with them—should they be shot? They

seemed to be running from repression. So much for the situation in

Zaire. The President would note that Gromyko had said quite a few

things about all these areas. As for Namibia, the Soviet Union was not

looking for anything at all in that country and it had accordingly in-

formed the British. On the other hand, the Soviet Union was totally

against keeping the blacks in Rhodesia in bondage. 24 out of 25 people

there were black, and the Soviet Union had stated that it was in favor of

the majority of the people themselves deciding what kind of a gov-

ernment they should have. He could not agree with the thesis that for-

eigners would know best what should be done in Rhodesia. The Soviet

Union was saying this, and that was no secret. That was its position of

principle, based on its ideology. Soviet policy throughout the world

was based on the premise that people were their own best masters.

In conclusion, Gromyko wanted to thank the President for the

great patience he had displayed. Knowing how busy the President was,

Gromyko had nevertheless taken a great deal of his time, but this was

so because the questions they had discussed were very important. The

President had made some statements, as had others, reflecting on the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

state of our bilateral relations. That, too, was important and therefore

Gromyko had provided appropriate explanations. The Soviet Union

had no designs on Africa at all. The President could rest assured that

the Soviets did not want to lay their hands on Africa, the Soviet Union

had a large enough territory of its own with much to do there. He

would draw the conclusion that it was necessary for our two countries

to consult with each other more frequently, and to explain our respec-

tive views of the situation to each other. That should be done in person

rather than just by written communications.

The President said he would respond briefly. U.S. assessment of

the same situation was quite different from the assessment Gromyko

had provided. We looked at the Horn of Africa with a great deal of con-

cern. From our perspective, the Somalis had invaded Ogaden using So-

viet weapons. We understood that the Ethiopian response there had

been directed by a Soviet general. While the Soviet Union had not sent

troops to the area, the Cubans had sent more than 15,000 men. We rec-

ognized that the Soviet Union and the United States had persuaded the

Ethiopians not to cross the Somali border once the Somalis had been

pushed out of Ogaden. However, Soviet generals and Cuban officers

remained, perhaps directing combat35 against Eritrea. The Cubans

had said that they were not involved directly, that they had no troops

in combat status in Eritrea. We certainly hoped that was the case. In An-

gola the Cuban presence had recently36 increased to 20,000 troops plus

service personnel. The Katangans, to whom Gromyko had referred as

refugees, had certainly been trained and supported by the Cubans in

Angola and perhaps by some East Germans. In Zaire a major military

force had appeared, well supplied with Soviet weapons. It had de-

stroyed Kolwezi with major loss of life. The President had no doubt

that the Soviet Union could have prevented that if it had used its38 in-

fluence with the Angolans, the Cubans and the East Germans, all of

whom39 depended upon the Soviet Union to a great extent. The Presi-

dent had not claimed that the Cubans had troops in Zaire, but he did

January–June 1978

not doubt that the invaders had been encouraged and supplied by

those allies of the Soviet Union.

The President said there were also some other concerns in Africa

which he would not have time to discuss now. The Libyans, allies of

the Soviet Union, had moved into Chad. We had no interests in the area

except that we did not want to see borders violated by military action.

There was a broad pattern emerging41 of Soviet supply of military

weapons, some of which Cubans used, to train42 black troops to43 keep

military action going in many African areas. This situation had esca-

lated44 in scope and intensity, and we were very concerned about it, as

the President had said earlier. In addition to refraining from45 military

action, we would like to have the Soviet Union’s positive support for

our efforts in Rhodesia and Namibia. The President had understood

the statements Gromyko had made, and hoped that Gromyko under-

stood the seriousness with which we viewed these developments.

Human Rights

There was one more item on which the President wanted to put

great emphasis—that was the question of human rights. Trials were

underway in the Soviet Union against people who had organized to

monitor compliance with the Helsinki agreement. We did indeed look

on this as an internal matter for the Soviet Union, and recognized that

we had no authority to intercede. However, the President felt that he

had the duty to express concern47 when the people tried were given

maximum sentences, in violation48 of even Soviet laws. He was quite

concerned over future plans in the Soviet Union to repeat the circum-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

stances of the Orlov trial in the cases of Shcharansky and Ginzburg.

These were matters of intense interest in the United States. The Presi-

dent was not questioning the right of the Soviet Union to act in these

matters as it saw fit, but he did have to point out what detriment51 to

mutual trust and respect between our countries and to certain other

matters such as52 trade and scientific and cultural exchanges53 would

come as a result of these trials. The President recognized the sensitivity

of these matters for the Soviet Union, but wanted to be sure that Gro-

myko understood their sensitivity in the United States. The Soviet

Union never refrained from criticizing us when it felt that we were

acting improperly toward our own citizens. The President felt no re-

Africa

Gromyko continued his response to the President on African

matters. He called the presence of a Soviet general in Ethiopia a myth.

Had the Soviet Union been invited to send a general there, it would

have refused. There was no Soviet Napoleon in Africa. Evidently the

President was being fed completely fantastic information. As for the

Cuban presence, the Soviet Union had information that in Angola the

number of Cubans was being reduced rather than increased. The Presi-

dent’s reference to GDR personnel in connection with Kolwezi could

not be regarded as authentic. Even the U.S. press had not alleged any-

thing of the sort. As for the invasion into Zaire, the press had first re-

ported that Mobutu’s soldiers in the area were shooting blacks, then

that blacks were shooting whites, whites were shooting blacks, and had

spoken of certain rebels. The situation appeared to be totally confused,

but there was certainly no Soviet or Cuban involvement there.

January–June 1978

Human Rights

Turning to the question of human rights, Gromyko wanted to tell

the President quite frankly that no matter how close to the President’s

heart were his feelings about these matters, he would ask him to realize

that these were internal affairs of the Soviet Union, and that they would

be decided in accordance with Soviet laws. No one else could tell the

Soviet Union how to resolve these matters. Gromyko asked the Presi-

dent not to regard this statement of his as being directed at the Presi-

dent personally or at his concept of human rights. Human rights was a

general concept, while what the President had been talking about in-

volved domestic affairs. Throughout the entire world international

law, as well as the Helsinki Final Act recognized that internal matters

were resolved in each country internally, on the basis of its own do-

mestic laws. With all due respect for the President, Gromyko felt he

would be wrong if he failed to tell him this. No one in the Soviet Union

was now being condemned or would be condemned in the future for

something that he was not guilty of. That was not part of Soviet

practice.

The President thought that the exchange he and Gromyko had

today had been constructive in that he now understood the Soviet posi-

tion better, and that Gromyko understood the concerns on our side. He

knew that there were serious62 differences between us, but firmly63 be-

lieved that we had every opportunity to resolve them. Both our coun-

tries stood for peace and for reducing the level65 of66 destruction and

loss of life throughout the world. We both wanted to have better trade

relations with each other and greater friendship between our peoples.

The President’s total commitment as President was to realize these ob-

jectives. He would ask Gromyko to convey his best wishes to President

Brezhnev and express the hope that within the next few weeks we

would be able to resolve the remaining issues at SALT and perhaps

those concerning the test ban, leading to a personal meeting between

Brezhnev and the President. He wanted to express the good will of the

American people to the people of Gromyko’s country. Their hope was

116.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11950. Subject: Technical Penetration of US Embassy Moscow. Ref:

State 135571.

1. Physical barrier was erected early this morning. Barrier is brick,

reinforced concrete, and sheet steel and located approximately two feet

within Embassy property. Barrier erected at north edge of second hatch

entrance in Soviet change room. This is about 18 feet down tunnel from

chimney entrance.

2. We attempted to erect barrier at Embassy property line, but ef-

forts were thwarted by Soviet harassment (pounding on wall, erection

of trip line in tunnel, prodding into tunnel with steel bars from Soviet

basement, and verbal abuse).

change room.

4. Per para 1 of reftel we have barred all Soviets and chars from the

chancery. It would be impractical to bar chars from all areas of building

(apartments, basement, first floor) and would probably alert press.

5. Resident TSOs will survey building for other chimneys and

shafts that might possibly be used for similar installations.

6. Equipment is on site to conduct limited non-destructive tests of

antenna. We have leveled generators, calibrated dipoles, receivers,

cret; Immediate; Exdis.

January–June 1978

spectrum analyzers, and preamp power supply. First priority will be to

determine bandwidth of system.

7. Test procedures suggested in para 4 of reftel will be carried out

to extent possible.

8. Extensive photographic documentation is being maintained.

9. Per para 7 of reftel, access at seven level and Soviet change room

will be preserved.

10. MUTS monitoring continues as before. No changes in time of

activity or general spectral shape has been observed.

11. Per para 10 of reftel:

(A) General appearance of antenna indicates recent (past year or

so) installation. General appearance of machinery and electronics at

bottom of shaft indicates much older installation. Grill installed at top

of chimney also appears to be of recent vintage. Please note that close

visual inspection of antenna or grill would require disturbing antenna.

(B) Antenna can be hoisted several feet above south wing roof

level. Confirmation of this fact will require actual movement of

antenna.

(C) As very rough estimate:

(1) front element is 4 foot long.

(2) middle element is 5 foot long.

(3) end element is 6 foot long.

back.

12. When can we expect arrival of analysis group? Unless specifi-

cally directed otherwise we will undertake no task that has the slightest

chance of changing antenna position or orientation or damaging elec-

tronics. All technicians concur that we have seized a device in current

operational configuration and recommend against any measures that

would alter this configuration.

Matlock

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

117.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

135977. Subject: Technical Penetration Protest. Ref: Moscow

who said he had no information but would look into the matter. We

plan to hold off on a formal protest until you have developed informa-

tion on the scale of the penetration.

2. Ambassador Toon concurs.

Vance

cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by McCall; cleared by Shulman, Luers, Toon, Richard

Castrodale (S/S), and Victor Dikeos (A/SY); approved by Christopher.

Foreign Policy File, P890106–1035.

118.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Intelligence Cases; Jailed Soviets and Embassy Penetration; U.S.-Soviet Relations

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

Dr. Marshall D. Shulman

Minister-Counselor Alexander A.

Sherrod McCall, Acting Director,

Bessmertnykh

EUR/SOV

Bessmertnykh came in at his request on instructions from Foreign

Minister Gromyko and Ambassador Dobrynin. He opened by saying

January–June 1978

that the matters he had to discuss were potentially explosive for the re-

lationship. The fate of the two Soviet UN employees arrested and jailed

had started it, but the Secretary had then raised the matter of listening

devices in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. Firyubin3 in Moscow had

given the Soviet part of the story and view of the matter, which was

quite different from the U.S. assertion of the case.

Bessmertnykh stressed, and returned to the point several times,

that there should be no linkage of the matter in the Embassy and the

two jailed Soviets. He wanted first to discuss the Embassy matter. Gro-

myko had promised some information on U.S. acts of the same calibre

against the Soviets here in Washington, New York and San Francisco,

and Bessmertnykh was instructed to give some brief information on

that subject. Reading from a Russian language nonpaper, which he did

not hand over, Bessmertnykh said:

Begin Quote. In the last several years there were found in Soviet in-

stallations in the U.S. more than 50 various special electronic devices

which were used for listening to conversations held in buildings and

over telephones.

—1977: a special cable was discovered, and a special device, which

was connected to the internal telephone system at the country resi-

dence of the Ambassador at Pioneer Point.

—1975: in the building occupied by the Soviet Trade Mission in the

U.S., on Connecticut Avenue, several radio transmitters were discov-

ered, designed for listening to conversations in working offices, in-

cluding the office of the Trade Representative himself. Earlier, several

special preamplified microphones were found in the former trade of-

fice building at 1511 16th Street, N.W. (these were found when the So-

viets were moving out of that building).

—1973 and 1974: in the building of the Soviet Consulate General at

San Francisco, there were found several radio transmitters, preampli-

fied microphones and two cables used for listening to conversations in

the offices and living quarters.

We informed U.S. authorities and the U.S. side requested no pub-

licity. This is the same way we have proceeded in cases of agents, acting

at the specific request of the U.S. side in giving no publicity. End Quote.

Turning to the two jailed Soviets, and reiterating the hope that the

U.S. side would separate that case from the matter he had just ad-

dressed, Bessmertnykh said the Soviet side was very much concerned.

As Gromyko had said, it was potentially very dangerous for the rela-

tionship. If not handled in a mutually acceptable way, the Soviets

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

would be forced to make public what the U.S. special services were

doing in Moscow.

Bessmertnykh urged that account be taken of what Gromyko had

said. Gromyko would expect the Secretary to have a response from the

U.S. side when they met on Wednesday. Any attempt to connect the

two arrested Soviets with the matter at the U.S. Embassy was unneces-

sary and would complicate the whole thing. On May 26, Bessmertnykh

said, two U.S. personnel had been caught in a closed zone of East Ger-

many using spying devices to spy on a training activity. This was just

an illustration that we should act responsibly in matters. He hoped the

U.S. side would close the whole thing.

Dr. Shulman said that the two incidents were not linked, but sepa-

rate and only by chance of discovery had they occurred in near prox-

imity of time. We were frankly astonished by the report we had of

Firyubin’s remarks to Charge Matlock, and Shulman thought Bess-

mertnykh would be, too. Firyubin had said the Embassy’s actions vio-

lated health and fire codes affecting a neighboring Soviet building. This

was not true. The chimney was wholly within the U.S. Embassy prop-

erty and did not touch the Soviet building.

Shulman showed a copy of a Soviet drawing of the Embassy floor

plan and located the chimney for Bessmertnykh to see. Looking up

from the drawing, Bessmertnykh grinned and said he understood that,

indeed, some protective system had been located in the chimney by the

Soviet side. Nothing directed at the Ambassador’s office—something—

a protective device on the Soviet side. Gromyko had some more infor-

mation on this; it was not at all a device to listen into the U.S. building,

but maybe to follow what was going out from there.

Shulman said we had to reject what Firyubin said as being ridic-

ulous. We are taking the matter seriously and considering what to do.

The tunnel, which runs for 20 and more feet on our property, was

clearly a serious intrusion. We have not wanted to act hastily, and we

wanted to have the facts before expressing ourselves. But we would

have to express ourselves, and forcefully. We would do so at the proper

time.

Turning to the two jailed Soviets, Shulman reiterated that there

was no connection with the Embassy matter. The Secretary and the

Deputy Secretary had responded to Dobrynin’s request and had the

Grand Jury arraignment postponed until May 30. The U.S. position was

that while Soviet UN Mission personnel were immune, these two UN

Central Foreign Policy File, P890106–1028)

January–June 1978

headquarters men were not covered for activities which were not part

of their UN duties. The two were engaged in espionage, for which they

were not exempt from action under the law. The USG cannot counte-

nance this kind of use of the UN. Matters could become much worse if

the practice continued. This was the broader issue: the use of UN-based

spies could create an episode and exascerbate relations in a way neither

of us wanted, creating strong feelings.

Bessmertnykh replied that there were differences on the definition

of diplomatic immunity. Regarding use of that cover, Dobrynin had

mentioned five Americans who had used diplomatic cover in Moscow,

and Bessmertnykh believed some names could be provided. If it came

to publication, which he hoped it would not, the U.S. intelligence

services would not look so nice. He mentioned the case of a Soviet

named Ogorodnik6 which he said was very dirty. He had just seen the

file on that case and, boy, was it unpleasant. Given the current situation

in the U.S., the publication of the whole thing in that case could be very

damaging to the U.S. intelligence services.

In concluding Bessmertnykh returned to the two jailed Soviets.

They were in a difficult and worrisome position being in jail. But their

bail had been set at $2 million, which in itself was a provocation, for

which the USG was responsible. Unofficially Bessmertnykh wanted to

ask if something could be done to lower the bail. That however, was not

the key question, which was to have the two released at once and pro-

ceedings against them dropped.

Shulman said he noted what Bessmertnykh had said, and he

would pass it along and see if anything were possible. The matter was

in the hands of the court, and he could not say what the situation with

regard to posting bond might be. We were watching it closely and

would continue to watch it closely at various junctures in the

proceedings.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

119.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

136975. Subject: Technical Penetration: Protest. Ref: Moscow

1. The Charge should seek an immediate appointment at an appro-

priate level in MFA and deliver the following note. Charge is author-

ized if necessary to correct the facts if they do not accurately state the

case locally.

2. Begin text. The Embassy of the United States of America informs

the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Re-

publics that the Embassy has uncovered a secret listening post and elec-

tronic spying devices within its chancery building and an underground

tunnel extending a considerable distance through the Embassy’s prop-

erty connecting this installation with a neighboring Soviet apartment

building. Following discovery of this installation, the electronic cables

operating the post were found to be energized. Moreover, Soviet per-

sonnel have been observed to enter and occupy the tunnel from the end

connecting to the Soviet apartment building. Thus there can be abso-

lutely no doubt that this listening post has been actively operated by

the Soviet side.

The Embassy is instructed to protest this crude intrusion into its

chancery. It is totally unacceptable and runs counter to efforts to im-

prove relations between our two countries.

The Embassy demands in the strongest possible terms that the

Ministry take immediate measures to put an end to such intrusions into

the Embassy’s diplomatic premises. Responsibility for the conse-

quences of this action rest fully with the Soviet side.

The United States reserves the right to return to this matter and to

take actions it deems necessary when it has completed its investigation.

End text.

3. The Charge may state orally that this event has aroused a strong

negative reaction in Washington where Soviet espionage activities

January–June 1978

against the United States have already become a cause of increasing

concern. Charge should, in delivering the note, also present photo-

graphs of the eavesdropping equipment and related installation.

4. Charge should state orally that the Ministry’s note of May 283 is

so patently false and so absurd as to be insulting, and that he is in-

structed not to reply but to orally reject it out of hand. Charge may

make points and show documents as suggested in reftel, but should

avoid letting point of demarche appear to be reply to Soviet note. Point

should be our protest of their intrusion into and spying on our

property.

5. Ambassador Toon concurs.

Vance

120.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Vance-Gromyko Private Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

“Woodbridge Two”

Foreign Minister Gromyko asked the Secretary if he could tell him

anything regarding the small delicate matter he had raised with him

last week.

Secretary Vance said that he had looked into this matter and that

there was nothing he could do at this time regarding the two indi-

viduals in question. He was afraid that the trial would have to go for-

ward. As to the matter of reducing bail, Marshall Shulman had been in

touch with the Soviet Mission to indicate that the Mission’s lawyers

would know best how to go about getting the bail reduced.

Gromyko said that he certainly regretted this answer by the Secre-

tary. What were the prospects for the future?

The Secretary expected that the trial would have to go forward,

and then, after completion of the trial, we would see what would be

possible at that time.

Gromyko said that he would not repeat to the Secretary what he

had said when they last discussed this matter, because he did not want

to get into an argument and lose time. The Secretary would be aware of

how such a turn of events would be evaluated on the Soviet side and

the consequences that might follow.

Penetration

In the meanwhile Gromyko wanted to inform the Secretary that

his people had discovered more than 50 listening devices installed in

various Soviet premises in Washington, San Francisco and New York.

He would give the Secretary three packages of photographs, together

with a list referenced to the photographs, containing a brief description

of each. The information sheet was in Russian, but he was sure the Sec-

retary would get it translated. Of course, his people had many more

photographs of the same kind in their possession, and they might have

made them public long ago if they had wanted to. However, pro-

ceeding from a broader approach to Soviet-American relations, they

had refrained from doing so, especially since the U.S. side, too, had inti-

mated that it would not like to see matters of this kind made public.

In addition, Gromyko wanted to draw the Secretary’s attention to

the fact that Soviet nationals working in the U.N. General Secretariat

had been the targets of numerous approaches by agents of the U.S. side.

By Soviet count, at least 200 U.S. citizens in the Secretariat had links to

the special services of the United States. He repeated that the Soviet

side had many such photographs at its disposal, some of which were

January–June 1978

quite interesting and “spicy.” They would make quite an exhibit, for

which a large hall would be required. As for the two individuals they

had discussed, much would depend on the turn of events that this case

would take. He noted the Secretary’s statement to the effect that after

the trial he would be in a position to see what could be done. The Soviet

side would therefore wait and see, and then decide what response

might be appropriate.

The Secretary told Gromyko that we did not want to engage in an

intelligence war with the Soviet Union. We were, however, concerned

over the case of the two individuals referred to, particularly since they

had worked for the U.N. Secretariat. In addition, there was serious con-

cern over the recent case involving our Chancery in Moscow, a case the

Secretary had brought to Gromyko’s attention. Our investigation of

the circumstances there was continuing, and a matter of particular con-

cern to us was the Soviet tunnel which crossed our property for 20 feet

or more. This represented a gross intrusion upon the property of our

Chancery, and we were continuing to look into that matter. As he had

already indicated, he would be in touch with Gromyko about the two

individuals after their trial.

Gromyko said he would wait and see. As for the incident men-

tioned by the Secretary, he had already informed him that according to

the information Gromyko had received, things appeared in quite a dif-

ferent light. Indeed, what the Secretary had described appeared to dis-

tort the facts of the matter. He would ask the Secretary to have someone

on the U.S. side take an objective look at these things. After all, neither

side was interested in distorting that kind of information. The purposes

of the things to which the Secretary had referred were totally dif-

ferent—he would describe them as having a protective nature, among

other things aimed at fire prevention. No spying of any kind had been

involved there. It would have been primitive indeed in this day and age

of electronic equipment to try and dig a tunnel for intelligence pur-

poses. Modern technology simply made such things unnecessary. This

was not the immediate post-war period of 1945/47 when the Soviets

had discovered a western tunnel on the territory of East Berlin, which

had been dug for intelligence purposes. Gromyko concluded this sub-

ject on the note of saying he would be in touch with the Secretary and

would see what happened.

Soviet-American Relations

Now Gromyko wanted to ask the Secretary a question that went

far beyond the framework of the issues they had just finished dis-

cussing. Those issues were minor indeed in terms of their importance,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

except that unfortunately people’s freedom was involved. He wanted

to ask the Secretary how one could explain the veritable explosion of

anti-Soviet propaganda, of statements hostile to the Soviet Union, that

was now in process here in the United States. Until now the Soviet side

had believed that the U.S. Administration was not taking an active part

in this respect. While this had not been quite clear, the Soviets had

tended to emphasize the constructive aspects of statements by the Pres-

ident and by the Secretary and by other political leaders. Lately, how-

ever, they could not but note that the Administration, beginning with

the President, had indulged in vehement statements aimed at returning

to the atmosphere of the cold war or something similar. Indeed, Mr.

Brzezinski had surpassed himself in this respect. How could this be ex-

plained? While still in Washington, Gromyko had reached the conclu-

sion on the basis of his discussion of African matters with President

Carter4 that a role of prime importance in determining the nature of the

President’s statement was the fact that he had been given imprecise, in-

correct and distorted information about the situation in Africa and

about the role played by the Soviets and the Cubans there. After that

meeting Gromyko had made a public statement using the words “inac-

curate and incorrect” to characterize the information the President had

been given. If he were talking to correspondents today, he would use

much stronger words. Someone in the United States, certain circles,

were deliberately creating myths and subsequently referred to them as

proof, placing them on the President’s desk and perhaps on the Secre-

tary’s desk. Someone appeared to be doing this quite deliberately. Gro-

myko’s question was—what was the true policy of the United States?

Was it aimed at furthering the relations between us, at searching for

agreements that might possibly be concluded between our two coun-

tries on the basis of mutual respect for each other’s sovereignty and

non-interference in each other’s affairs? Or was it a policy aimed at

whipping up tensions and exacerbating relations between our two

countries? Both of them were surely well aware of the consequences of

such worsening of relations for the entire world. It was for this reason

that Gromyko was asking this question today, and he would report the

answer the Secretary might give him to his colleagues on the Politburo

and the Central Committee, and to L.I. Brezhnev himself. In this same

context he would point out just in passing that the more than 50 lis-

tening devices he had referred to earlier had been installed during the

Carter Administration, not earlier. That was his question, and he would

ask the Secretary to answer it if he could. Of course, he would proceed

from the premise that the Secretary would inform President Carter of

this conversation.

January–June 1978

The Secretary wanted to say first that he would, of course, inform

the President about this discussion in great detail. Secondly, he would

point out that he knew absolutely nothing about the 50 devices Gro-

myko had mentioned; he had no information about them and did not

know if there were any such devices. He would look at the material

Gromyko had just handed him, but did not want his silence to indicate

that he was accepting the facts as described.

The Secretary pointed out that Gromyko had actually asked him

two questions. The first was how one could explain what Gromyko saw

as an explosion of anti-Soviet propaganda in the United States. He

would respond to this question quite frankly. There were several

factors which had given rise to concern about the Soviet Union as re-

flected in articles in newspapers, magazines and on television. He

would name three principal areas of concern as he saw them, which, as

he had been able to determine, were the basis for the development Gro-

myko had mentioned. The first was the very deep concern among

many Americans and among people in other countries apart from the

United States, particularly in the West, over the fact that during the last

several years the Soviet Union had been building up its military forces,

in particular its military forces in the European area, to an extent far ex-

ceeding the needs of deterrence in that area. As people took a look at

Soviet expenditures for conventional forces, they saw a constantly

rising line, rising steeply over the past 8–10 years. At the same time, in

terms of real growth the United States and other western countries had

kept military expenditures at a stable level. This had raised genuine

concerns in the minds of many Americans with respect to the intentions

of the Soviet Union in the military area. The question was asked

whether the Soviet Union merely intended to maintain a military bal-

ance. In that case, why these massive expenditures? This also led to the

second question—whether or not these expenditures indicated aggres-

sive intent as opposed to reduction of military confrontation and mili-

tary forces. There was another point the Secretary wanted to make: to

be fair, if we looked at the strategic side, some progress had indeed

been achieved, progress in concluding the ABM Treaty and the Interim

Agreement, and progress toward a SALT TWO agreement. These were

positive developments. However, the problem of ever increasing

forces, increasing sophistication of weapons on the conventional side,

had raised great concerns in the minds of many people. The second

major area which had given rise to concern among many people was

the question of African affairs which had been discussed in great detail

with Gromyko by the President and by the Secretary. He thought that

all recognized that there were elements of competition in the relations

between us, but recently it appeared when looking at the African situa-

tion that competition had transcended normal bounds and had re-

sulted in military conflicts fueled by Soviet equipment and by Cuban

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

combat forces. The Secretary was familiar with the reasons and expla-

nations Gromyko had provided in connection with Soviet activities in

various areas in Africa. He did not want to get into detail now, but did

want to answer Gromyko’s question. The appearance of Soviet actions

as seen by many people in the United States and by people in other

countries, and not only European countries, was giving the impression

that the Soviet Union was going around and crudely lighting fires in

that area, preventing settlement by peaceful means. A third area which

the Secretary believed was one of major concern was the problem ar-

ising in connection with human rights, as recently reflected in such in-

cidents as the trial of Mr. Orlov. (Gromyko interjected, “you mean our

Mr. Orlov.”) In the Secretary’s view these were the three main areas

which gave rise to what Gromyko had called the explosion of concern

over the Soviet Union.

The Secretary now wanted to address the second big question, the

last question Gromyko had asked—what did the United States really

want? Did it want to build up good relations with the Soviet Union or

did it want a return to the period of the cold war? The Secretary could

answer this question unequivocally with clarity and simplicity. The

United States did not want to return to a period of tensions and con-

frontations. We wanted to get the relations between us back on track

again and return to better, stronger and closer ties between our two

countries. We wanted to see a reduction of tensions, and not only in the

military sphere, but in others as well. We wanted to continue building

common ground between us. In the Secretary’s view there were a

number of ways to move in that direction. Most importantly, it was

necessary to make progress on the central issue between us—SALT. He

believed that there were many other things which, if brought about,

would put both sides in a better position, i. e., if we could move to a

better common understanding of the fact that detente had to be a

two-way street. If we could find ways to move toward closer relations

in trade, in developing cultural exchanges and the like, that would be

very important from the standpoint of improving the atmosphere. This

was an area in which we had made progress in the past, but had unfor-

tunately been slipping recently. The Secretary would specify certain

steps that would be important from this standpoint: (1) progress on

SALT; (2) progress in the Vienna MBFR negotiations; (3) progress in

other arms limitations on which we were working together; (4) achieve-

ment of a better understanding that detente had to be a two-way street,

and on how to make it a two-way street; and (5) determination of what

other steps could be taken to bring about better exchanges between our

people in cultural activities, scientific activities and trade. Finally, in

terms of detente being a two-way street, the Secretary believed we

would have to come to grips with the African problems and get a better

understanding of how to deal with them in such a way as to avoid con-

January–June 1978

frontations. The Secretary concluded by saying that he had tried in

perhaps an oversimplified way to lay out some of the issues and

problems and some of the steps that might be taken to move our rela-

tions to a better level.

Gromyko said he would try very briefly to react to the Secretary’s

statement, avoiding repetition of what had already been said in his

talks with the Secretary and with the President in Washington. Natu-

rally, he perceived positively the Secretary’s statement to the effect that

the United States will seek to conduct affairs in such a way as to find

solutions to the problems before us and not to permit the development

of tensions in Soviet-American relations that could return our two

countries to the atmosphere of the cold war. In this connection he could

only say that he shared the wishes the Secretary had expressed and

knew that the entire Soviet leadership, including Brezhnev personally,

would agree with the sentiment expressed. He could say this because

he was fully aware of their views in this respect. This constituted his

reply to the first part of the Secretary’s statement, the constructive part.

It would be very good indeed if words here were accompanied by

deeds, if the U.S. Administration did indeed conduct affairs in the

manner the Secretary had described.

His second comment would deal with the thought expressed by

the Secretary that one of the reasons why there was such an upsurge of

propaganda that was hostile to the Soviet Union was that the Soviet

Union had allegedly been engaged in an intensive arms buildup over

the past several years. This, as the Secretary had said, worried the

United States and the other Western countries. Gromyko could only

say that he categorically rejected such an assertion. In fact, that had also

been most categorically rejected at the very highest level quite recently

by L.I. Brezhnev himself. This was simply not so. There was no such

arms buildup. An artificial myth had been created in the West, pur-

suing a certain objective—to cover up the expanded arms programs of

the Western powers themselves. Of course, the Soviet Union did have

competent armed forces that were adequate to ensure the peaceful life

of its people in the face of the constant buildup by NATO countries.

However, the Soviet Union was not so foolish as to spend more on arms

than was absolutely necessary to ensure the security of its people. One

might ask why, in the face of such a policy by the Soviet Union, did the

Western countries continue to build up their arsenals and military

forces? The Soviet Union had constantly emphasized the need to take

genuine steps toward disarmament, including ultimately steps aimed

all the way toward general and complete disarmament. In this connec-

tion he would mention the proposal Brezhnev had recently made in his

speech before the Komsomol, to halt the production of nuclear

weapons and to conduct a policy that would ultimately lead toward

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

complete elimination of nuclear weapons and to using nuclear energy

for peaceful purposes exclusively. The program adopted by the XXVth

Congress of the CPSU, a program the Soviet Union was constantly

striving to implement, was also aimed at disarmament and peace. In

fact, the Soviet side referred to it as the “Program of Peace.” Still, no

matter what proposal was advanced by the Soviet Union to further

these aims, these proposals were invariably rejected out of hand, in-

cluding proposals to put a halt to the arms race. Surely this policy pur-

sued by the Soviet Union was completely contrary to the allegation of

an arms buildup to which the Secretary had referred. Even in the face of

the ring of military bases surrounding the Soviet Union and aimed

against its territory the Soviet Union was ready and willing to take ap-

propriate steps toward disarmament. However, it could not agree to

unilateral disarmament. Its leadership was not so naive or myopic as to

accept the possibility of unilateral disarmament. It was necessary to en-

sure the security of all countries in an identical degree and not to harm

the security of any one of them.

Gromyko said that the Secretary had also mentioned the question

of military expenditures and budgets.

The Secretary interrupted at this point to say that no one was sug-

gesting that the Soviet Union take unilateral disarmament measures.

He thought both of them were pragmatic enough to recognize that uni-

lateral disarmament made no sense. Disarmament measures had to be

such as to benefit both sides, such as could be negotiated together. The

proof of the pudding was in the eating—if we could demonstrate by

joint deeds that we can sit down together and conclude arms control

agreements, it would prove to the world that we were setting an ex-

ample for others to follow.

Gromyko referred back to the question of military budgets. He had

to tell the Secretary categorically that the Soviet Union had numerous

times proposed reductions in military budgets, first naming specific

percentages, then altering the percentages to meet the wishes of the

Western powers, etc. The Soviet leadership was struck, however, that

there had not been a single occasion when these proposals were taken

seriously. They had always been rejected out of hand. The Soviet Union

had proposed an arms freeze in order to begin the process of arms con-

trol. That, too, had been rejected. Now, at the current U.N. Special Ses-

sion on Disarmament the Soviet Union had suggested a new method

for dealing with this problem. When it had proposed certain per-

centage reductions in the past, it had been told that since force struc-

tures were different, all this was very complicated indeed. In the Soviet

view, such responses were not sincere, because all these problems and

objections could easily be overcome. At the current SSOD the Soviet

proposal was stated not in terms of a percentage, but in absolute

January–June 1978

figures. The Soviet Union proposed that military budgets be reduced in

terms of specific figures. These would not necessarily have to be iden-

tical, but obviously should be of the same order of magnitude. The Sec-

retary would understand, of course, that it would be ridiculous for one

nation to reduce its military budget by one billion dollars, while an-

other reduced it by one million dollars. The present proposal com-

pletely eliminated the question of differences in the structure of armed

forces. He would ask the Secretary to look into the new proposal in de-

tail. (The Secretary said he would look into it.)

Gromyko continued, saying that if one listened to the statements

on the Western side, one heard that military budgets had not been in-

creased at all. In actual fact they had increased by leaps and bounds to

their present astronomical proportions.

The Secretary pointed out that they had not increased in real

terms. He was speaking of the U.S. military budget not in terms of

dollars, but, in view of inflation, of arms expenditures in real terms.

Gromyko remarked that next the Secretary would blame the Soviet

Union for not having an inflation. He was sure that Western military

budgets had increased in real terms as well.

Now Gromyko wanted to turn to the fourth item the Secretary had

mentioned African affairs. Here he had to point out that the actual situ-

ation had been grossly distorted. If he were to take a cue from the state-

ments of some of the responsible officials in the United States who

sometimes made statements bordering on insults aimed at repre-

sentatives of foreign powers, he would not use the word “distortion,”

but something much stronger. Incidentally, he would note that officials

inclined to be insulting toward representatives of foreign states should

really be sent back to school to be taught what was proper in normal

human behavior, particularly behavior toward representatives of for-

eign states. What we were witnessing here was a gross distortion of the

facts. He could not believe that the United States with its broad intelli-

gence gathering facilities was not aware of the fact that the Soviet

Union had absolutely nothing to do with the situation in Rhodesia or

Namibia or Zaire. As for Ethiopia, when Somalia had attacked that

country, the Soviet Union had come to the assistance of a victim of ag-

gression at the request of that country by supplying arms and a certain

number of experts as instructors in the use of such arms. At that time

the Soviet Union had felt that it would have been good if the United

States had supplied Ethiopia with similar assistance. The myth about a

Soviet commander in Ethiopia was pure invention. It had been surrep-

titiously fed to the President and to the Secretary. The Soviet leadership

had been dismayed by all these accusations and myths. After all, they

were not only realists, but also Marxists, and as such they wanted to get

to the bottom of things and find the reasons underlying these accusa-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tions. Looking at the situation today, they could not help but come to

the conclusion that someone evidently needed to lay down an artificial

smokescreen that would make it more difficult for people to see

through and would thereby conceal unjustified activities by those who

laid down the smokescreen. A good illustration of that was the carnage

that had been arranged in Zaire; as for who was its author, the Secre-

tary would know that better than he. Neither the Soviet Union nor

Cuba had anything to do with that carnage. This was an emphatic state-

ment Gromyko could make to President Carter and to the Secretary. If

he did not have a completely accurate knowledge of the Cuban views

in this matter, he would not be making such a categorical statement.

The Soviet Union, too, had stated its indignation at the slaughter that

took place in Zaire. Summing up, Gromyko said that not a single Soviet

representative had set foot in Rhodesia or Namibia. The only Soviets in

Zaire were the diplomatic representatives of the Soviet Union. He

would ask the Secretary to convey to President Carter that all these ac-

cusations and charges had dismayed the Soviet leadership, that they

were nothing but inventions, chemically pure inventions. Someone had

thrown out these accusations and like ball lightning they were now cir-

cling around. The Soviet Union did not intend to take responsibility for

someone else’s sins, and would categorically reject any attempt to place

such responsibility on it.

Gromyko took up another point mentioned by the Secretary—

human rights. The Secretary had mentioned Orlov. Gromyko was not

going to discuss Orlov or any other Soviet citizen because these matters

were solely within the competence of the Soviet Union.

Gromyko said it was true that occasionally the two sides had a dif-

ference between them or a different perception of a set of facts. Such

differences should be the subject of discussion and negotiation. The

trouble was that all too often the other side refused to discuss proposals

made by the Soviet Union. Sometimes, without even having the full

text of a Soviet proposal, the other side would reject it out of hand. A

good illustration of that was what had happened at the CSCE, when the

socialist countries had advanced a proposal to renounce first use of nu-

clear weapons. Literally just a few hours later, and before anyone had

received the full text of the Soviet proposal, it had been rejected out of

hand. And yet, the Soviet Union had proposed to hold a preparatory

session precisely for the purpose of discussing that proposal, where

questions could be asked about it and replies provided. The Western

countries had not wanted to do so and had rejected the proposal

without even seeing its full text. Suppose the Soviet Union were to act

in that manner, to reject a proposal out of hand right after it had been

tabled by the other side, and without careful study? Even elementary

correctness of behavior would have required an examination of that

proposal, but this had not happened.

January–June 1978

The Secretary said he would agree that there was a need to de-

velop better understanding and more extensive discussion of matters

where there were differences, to discuss them in detail and seriously

face the issues. Sometimes the sides had different perceptions of things

where further discussions could clarify the reasons for the difference in

perceptions and perhaps eliminate them if they understood how things

appeared to the other side. He suggested that both of them give

thought to finding better ways to manage the relations between our

two countries and to deal with differences. Perhaps more frequent

meetings between the two of them would be helpful in this respect,

perhaps meetings at other levels as well. He believed it very important

that something be done to change the confrontational nature of the rela-

tionship between us.

Gromyko acknowledged that this was indeed very important.

The Secretary now wanted to digress and respond to Gromyko’s

remarks about Cuban matters and the information we had received re-

garding Cuban participation in Zaire. The intelligence we had received

clearly indicated that the Cubans had indeed been involved in training

the personnel and planning the military operation for the invasion of

Zaire. [3 lines not declassified]

Gromyko with some feeling said that here was where the Secretary

and the President had become victims of disinformation. If the Soviets

were not sure of what they were telling the United States in this connec-

tion, they would not have said so, because in so doing they were as-

suming a grave responsibility. Gromyko would not repeat what he had

said.

[1½ lines not declassified] When information came to us based on

good evidence, we had no choice but to take it into account.

Gromyko asked: “Who the devil knows anything about that gen-

eral? This is the first time I have heard of him.” The United States now

had different information at its disposal and would have to sort out bad

sources from good. Gromyko felt strongly that untruth had been pre-

sented as truth and had been placed on the Secretary’s desk and on the

President’s desk. What hell did this general come from? Or, did he just

drop down from heaven like Jesus Christ in the Bible? The Secretary

would know very well that not everything should be believed and that

the human brain and human reason were quite capable of analyzing in-

formation and separating truth from untruth. In any case, he had told

the Secretary the truth, in spite of frivolous statements made by certain

highly placed officials of the United States who had referred to truth as

untruth. What he had in mind in saying this was what had been re-

ported in the U.S. press—statements by high officials made with vir-

ginal frivolity. Serious policy could not be built on the kind of informa-

tion the Secretary was being fed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Secretary said he accepted what Gromyko had said, but would

point out that when one gets what appears to be realistic information,

because it comes from a good source, one had a tendency to accept it as

valid.

Gromyko thought that the general mentioned was perhaps simply

trying to save his own skin. He would also ask what motivated him in

his actions and for whom he was working. Many questions immedi-

ately arose in that connection.

The Secretary said he did not want to argue further regarding this

matter. The problem involved in evaluating information from different

sources was not an easy one. Therefore it was important that we have

an opportunity to exchange views with the Soviet side and get a better

understanding of how it perceives the facts in any given situation.

Gromyko said the Secretary was quite correct in saying this. How-

ever, when a broad campaign was unleashed throughout the United

States, based on such information, and the U.S. Government took part

in such a campaign, that was quite another matter. He would ask the

Secretary to try and understand what situation the Soviet side now

found itself in. What conclusions could the Soviets come to? After all,

these statements were not made within four walls.

Senior Military Exchanges

The Secretary said that President Carter had asked him to check

with Gromyko to find out if he thought it might be a good idea to ex-

change visits between senior military officers.

Gromyko asked at what level such exchanges would take place

and what problems were to be dealt with.

The Secretary said that, for example, the Chairman of the Joint

Chiefs of Staff might invite his counterpart, Marshall Ogarkov, to visit

the United States.

Gromyko said: “Or vice versa?”

The Secretary replied in the affirmative, and said that they might

agree ahead of time what questions were to be discussed.

Gromyko said he would take this under advisement and consult

with the military leadership. He would let the Secretary know in due

course.

The Secretary thought it would be a good idea to exchange views

on all levels of our respective governments, thus lessening the impres-

sion that our relations were of a confrontational nature.

Non-Circumvention, Non-Transfer

The Secretary recalled that the other day Gromyko had mentioned

that Article XII of the Draft Treaty, dealing with non-circumvention,

had been discussed and settled in Moscow. The Secretary wanted to re-

January–June 1978

view this article with Gromyko in order to be sure that there was no

misunderstanding between the two sides. He had told Gromyko at the

outset of the discussion of this issue that we were not going to circum-

vent the provisions of the Treaty. The Secretary had stated that several

times. Gromyko had stated his views and had asked the Secretary if the

views of the two sides on this issue were identical. In the context of ev-

erything the Secretary had said he did believe that the views were iden-

tical, namely: (1) there would be no clause prohibiting transfers to our

allies; (2) we would undertake not to circumvent the provisions of the

Treaty through a third state or third states or in any other manner. (The

Secretary repeated and stressed the words “or in any other manner.”)

Gromyko believed that everything had been recorded in this re-

spect. He thought it was absolutely clear that the sides would not cir-

cumvent the provisions of the Treaty through a third state or states or

in any other manner, among other things by the transfer of weapons or

transfer of know-how, or in any other manner. All this was recorded

in the record of their conversations in Moscow. He recalled that the

Secretary had said that in this respect the two sides had an identical

understanding.

The Secretary wanted to make clear that, as he had said then, the

sides could transfer weapons as long as such transfer did not constitute

circumvention of the provisions of the Treaty.

Gromyko said that this seemed to be on the threshold of some sort

of mental gymnastics. He believed it to be absolutely clear that non-

transfer meant non-transfer and non-circumvention meant non-

circumvention in whatever form, not necessarily in the form of fully

produced weapons systems, but also in the form of know-how; all this,

naturally, within the framework of the Treaty. In the Soviet view

transfers would constitute circumvention if they involved types of

weapons dealt with in the Treaty in the broadest sense.

The Secretary again wanted to make clear that we had refused to

include a non-transfer clause in the Treaty, because it was clear to us

that we could transfer as long as this did not constitute circumvention

of the Treaty.

Gromyko said he did not understand. From the Soviet standpoint

non-transfer was non-circumvention, just as transfer was circumven-

tion. Thus, if the U.S. really intended to transfer weapons, that would

be circumvention of the Treaty. On the other hand, if the U.S. intended

to transfer weapons not covered by the Treaty, that would not consti-

tute circumvention thereof. But, if the transfer concerned, for example,

a missile covered by the Treaty, to a third state, would this not consti-

tute circumvention? He wanted to understand whether the two sides

were attaching different meanings to this provision, or was it simply a

matter of semantics? Should the United States, however, really intend

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

to transfer weapons covered by the Treaty, to other states, then the

whole non-circumvention clause would be deprived of all meaning

and would be simply an empty barrel.

The Secretary said it was obvious to him that matters relating to

transfers which we have made to our allies and continued to make to

our allies should not be changed by the provisions of a SALT Treaty.

Clearly, however, if we transferred something that was prohibited by

the Treaty, that would be improper. He would suggest that this matter

be further discussed between Ambassador Warnke and Minister Sem-

enov in Geneva. He wanted to be sure that there was no misunder-

standing here.

Gromyko said that right now he was not at all sure that the two

sides had an identical understanding of the non-circumvention provi-

sion. Any particular past practice of the U.S. side was not in any way

binding on the Soviet Union. If the United States had transferred stra-

tegic arms such as strategic bombers, for example, to its allies, and if

strategic bombers were now covered by the Treaty, it should be ob-

vious that they should not be transferred to other countries. To be spe-

cific, if, e.g., the U.S. was thinking of transferring a missile or a strategic

bomber that were limited by the Treaty, to Britain, for example, or any

of the other strategic arms covered by the Treaty, these transferred

arms would increase the overall number of missiles in the hands of the

Western powers. That would be a clear circumvention of the provisions

of the Treaty. There was no question in his mind that in that case the

United States would have violated the Treaty.

The Secretary by way of an example pointed out that we were pro-

hibited by the terms of the Protocol from developing or testing mobile

systems other than launchers, except for one such system. Obviously, if

we transferred a banned system to our allies, that would constitute cir-

cumvention. On the other hand, if we transferred one strategic bomber,

for example, he was not sure that this would constitute circumvention

since it would not in any way change the strategic balance.

Gromyko objected and said that that would be circumvention in

any case. Where would the boundary be set as to what did and what

did not change the strategic balance? He felt that here it was necessary

to have an identical understanding and to abide by mathematical rules,

because if the United States were to do something in one area and the

Soviet Union do something in another area, that would raise all sorts of

suspicions and doubts, and this must not be allowed to happen. He

would ask the Secretary to explain this to U.S. allies. Incidentally, the

thought had occurred to him in the course of this discussion that the

delay at the SALT negotiations might be caused by the fact that the U.S.

needed time to transfer to its allies some of the arms that would be lim-

ited by the Treaty. He believed that could only complicate matters. He

January–June 1978

added by way of an aside that he should not be blamed for that thought

occurring to him; it had occurred to him, and he simply wanted to get it

out.

The Secretary suggested that they ask Warnke and Semenov to

clarify the matter further.

Gromyko said, “Let them talk,” but wanted to repeat that the So-

viet position could not be any different. Should the two sides indulge in

chasing after mosquitoes, they might lose a whole trainload of baggage.

The Secretary said he certainly did not want to see that happen,

and wanted to make sure there would be no misunderstanding be-

tween the two sides on this score.

Next Vance-Gromyko Meeting

The Secretary suggested that he and Gromyko plan to meet again

soon, perhaps somewhere in Europe. He asked if two weeks into July

might be an appropriate time.

Gromyko agreed to such a meeting in principle, but would prefer

to leave the date open, to allow him to consult his calendar. He thought

that July might not be altogether convenient.

Replying to the Secretary’s question of whether the end of June

might be more appropriate, Gromyko said it might, but would prefer

that the specific date be agreed upon through their respective

Embassies.

The Secretary agreed and said he believed it important to hold

such a meeting in order not simply to let things drift on their own.

121.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

SALT, Cyprus

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Ambassador Paul C. Warnke

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. Reginald Bartholomew

Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Ambassador V.G. Makarov

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

SALT

The Secretary led off the conversation by addressing the issue of

new types of ICBMs and SLBMs. He said that we had reviewed the

three variants contained in the paper Gromyko had given President

Carter. None of those variants was acceptable to us. As the President

had indicated in his response, we believed that there were two valid al-

ternative proposals on the negotiating table concerning this issue, be-

tween which a choice should be made. The first alternative applied to

the Protocol which, as the President had indicated, is of relatively brief

duration. Under that proposal there would be a ban on the deployment

and testing of any new type of ICBM during that relatively brief period.

The other alternative provided for one exemption from that ban for

each side for the period of the entire Treaty through 1985, rather than

the term of the Protocol. We believed, however, that if this alternative

was followed, then it should be such that either side would have a

choice in determining whether it wanted to test and deploy a new type

of ICBM with a single reentry vehicle or with MIRVs. We believed that

these were the two alternatives between which a choice should be

made.

January–June 1978

Minister Gromyko asked if he was correct in understanding the

Secretary to say that the United States insisted on the proposal the Sec-

retary had advanced in Moscow, in its pure, unchanged form.

The Secretary replied in the affirmative.

Gromyko said that that proposal was unacceptable to the Soviet

Union. Everyone would clearly understand that a free choice between a

new type of ICBM with a single reentry vehicle and a new type of ICBM

with MIRVs would provide an advantage to one side—the side that

would choose the MIRVed missile. Superficially the U.S. position

sounded as if it was in accord with the principle of equality of rights. In

actual fact, however, under either of those alternatives the United

States would have an advantage for a long period of time. He said that

the Soviet side had emphasized this fact a number of times. Such a situ-

ation would thus be totally contrary to the principle of equality, equal

security and inadmissibility of unilateral advantage. On this basis we

cannot reach agreement. He would add that the U.S. side seemed to

have treated the Soviet-proposed variants very lightly. He would re-

mind the Secretary that three variants had been proposed.

The Secretary noted that in the third variant the Soviet side had

proposed that the flight testing and deployment of all new types of

ICBMs, without exception, whether or not they were MIRVed, be

banned for the duration of the Treaty, i. e., through 1985. Our first alter-

native suggested that this be limited for the period of the Protocol. If

time was of concern in this respect, why not accept this ban for the pe-

riod of the Protocol? The Secretary would ask Ambassador Warnke to

say a few words on this subject.

Ambassador Warnke pointed out that, as the Secretary had said,

the Soviet third variant was essentially like ours with respect to ICBMs,

except that we were suggesting that the ban last for the period of the

Protocol, and that it be determined in the course of the SALT III negoti-

ations whether it would be continued. If the Soviet side was willing to

accept a ban for the period of the Treaty, we could see no reason why it

should not also accept it for the period of the Protocol. As for our two

alternatives, we felt that they were indeed in accord with the principle

of equal security, because each recognized that our force structures

were different. Today the Soviet side felt that its force structure re-

quired it to modernize ICBMs with a single reentry vehicle. We, on the

other hand, were not interested in modernization of non-MIRVed

ICBMs. Therefore, the exception suggested by the Soviet side would

not ensure equal security.

The Secretary added that we would in any case have to operate

within the sub-level of 820 MIRVed ICBMs.

Gromyko said it was obvious that the sides would have to remain

within the 820 sub-level. That question did not arise at all.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Warnke pointed out that the actual constraint on the United States

would be greater because we would also have to operate within the

sub-ceiling of 1,200 for all ballistic missiles equipped with MIRVs,

ICBMs as well as SLBMs. Because of the fact that we would be limited

by the 1,200 ceiling and because we had more MIRVed SLBMs, we

would not be able to deploy more than 500 MIRVed ICBMs in any case.

The balance of roughly 700 would have to be applied to MIRVed

SLBMs. The Soviet Union, on the other hand, had more ICBMs than we

did, and therefore felt the need for one new type of ICBM with a single

reentry vehicle. For the above reasons the exception suggested by the

Soviet side was of no interest to us, and this was why we had suggested

the other alternative.

Gromyko said that what had just been said had added absolutely

nothing to the rationale advanced in Moscow earlier this year. The U.S.

side had evidently decided to go around in circles. Since there were no

new elements in what had just been said, he did not believe we should

go all over the detailed rationale again. The Secretary of State had set

forth all this during his visit to Moscow. He was sure that the U.S. side

realized full well that if the Soviet Union were to accept either of the

U.S.-proposed alternatives the United States would have an advantage

for a long period of time, not just months but years.

Warnke said that he could not see that at all. The different needs of

the two sides ensued from the fact that their force structures were dif-

ferent. The Soviet Union claimed that it needed a new ICBM with a

single reentry vehicle. We did not need that kind of a missile. The fact

was that the Soviet Union did not need any new MIRVed ICBMs, be-

cause it already had three types of new ICBMs—SS–17s, SS–18s and

SS–19s. The fact that the Soviet Union did not need new MIRVed

ICBMs was no reason that we should forego that option in the event

that the Soviet Union insisted on modernization of its forces.

Gromyko asked how anyone could assert that the United States

would not have an advantage, when it was certainly a fact that a

MIRVed missile was a far more threatening weapon than a missile with

a single reentry vehicle. If the U.S. side were to argue that the Soviet-

proposed exception would give the Soviet Union the possibility to de-

ploy a missile with a single reentry vehicle of such tremendous yield

that it would surpass any MIRVed missile in destructive capability,

that would be one thing. But that was out of the question in any case,

because we already had agreed criteria beyond which neither side

could go in respect of any missile. These were the criteria of throw-

weight and launch-weight as specified in the Draft Treaty. He would

ask the U.S. side not to compel the Soviet side to harden its position.

(Ambassador Warnke interjected that that alternative was open to both

of us.) Gromyko said that the United States was trying to get an advan-

January–June 1978

tage over the Soviet Union in connection with this issue for several

years. He could not in any way agree to such a possibility.

Warnke wanted to point out what the situation would be if the So-

viet proposal were accepted. The Soviet Union would still have its

were bigger than anything we were allowed to build. We, on the other

hand, would retain the same 450 Minuteman II, 550 Minuteman III and

United States could provide the Secretary with the correct answer to

this question. That answer was clear—the United States would have a

major advantage if either of its alternatives were accepted. He noted

that Warnke had mentioned SS–18 heavy missiles when talking about

various types. He certainly knew, however, that when the question of

heavy missiles had been settled, all sorts of other factors had been taken

into account in reaching agreement, factors that both sides were clearly

aware of. Quite some time ago in Geneva the Soviet side had accepted

the principle that if at least one missile of a type had been tested with

MIRVs, all missiles of that type would be considered and counted as

MIRVed. How had this Soviet move affected the situation at Der-

azhnya and Pervomaysk? The actual situation there differed from the

theoretical type rule, and that difference was not in favor of the Soviet

Union. The principle adopted in Geneva was in effect, and yet most of

the missiles at Derazhnya and Pervomaysk remained non-MIRVed.

How much time would the Soviet Union require to MIRV all the mis-

siles at Derazhnya and Pervomaysk? U.S. experts probably had made

appropriate calculations of the time required. It was clearly necessary

to take into consideration the final balance resulting from any of the

proposed alternatives or variants, and only such an approach would

provide a scientific answer to the problem. All sorts of contrived argu-

ments could not change anything in fact. The Soviet Union wanted to

conclude an honest agreement. It was not claiming the right to deploy a

new type of missile with a single reentry vehicle that would equal the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

destructive power of the SS–18 heavy missiles; nor was it claiming the

right to add to its arsenal of heavy missiles by calling some of them

new. The Soviet Union had not suggested that, because agreement had

been reached on heavy missiles, an agreement that was fair and mutu-

ally acceptable. If one were to put the advantages each side enjoyed on

a scale and compare them, the advantages enjoyed by the United States

would outweigh Soviet advantages several times over. He would sug-

gest that just one factor operating here be looked at—the geographic

factor.

The Secretary asked what bearing the geographic factor had on

this situation.

Gromyko replied: “Forward-based systems.”

Gromyko asked if the Secretary had something to say on the

second question they had talked about—the question of Soviet medium

range bombers. He was asking this not because he wanted to talk about

it, but because the U.S. side had talked about it. If the Secretary could

address this question now, Gromyko could then provide a response on

both issues.

The Secretary said that he frankly did not understand the meaning

of the words contained in the statement concerning the Backfire Gro-

myko had suggested, where reference was made to in-flight refueling.

The statement said that in this connection the Soviet side states that it

will not increase the radius of action of this aircraft in such a way as to

enable it to strike targets on the territory of the United States, and that

the Soviet side does not intend to give this aircraft such capability in

any other manner, including by means of in-flight refueling. The Secre-

tary said he did not understand the precise meaning of these words.

Gromyko said that the Secretary would surely recognize the fact

that any aircraft can be modified to take aboard larger quantities of fuel

by adding certain devices. If he recognized this, and he surely could not

but recognize it, then it can certainly be said that he understands the

meaning of these words. If an aircraft required only one or two refu-

elings to reach a certain area, that was one thing. But if it had to be refu-

eled five or six times to reach that same area, that was something else

again. Furthermore, such refuelings could certainly not be concealed.

All these facts had to be taken into account. When the Soviet side had

changed the wording of its unilateral statement, it had done so for the

purpose of accommodating the U.S. side to a greater extent by saying

that nothing would be done to give this aircraft the capability of

reaching the territory of the United States in any manner, including by

in-flight refueling. If everything Gromyko had said on this score was

nothing but “small change” in the view of the United States, he would

suggest a return to the old language. The Soviet side had acted on the

January–June 1978

basis of good intentions in wording the unilateral statement, but it

seemed that these good intentions had boomeranged against the Soviet

side, or at the very least had produced nothing at all. If that was so, the

Soviet side would simply have to revert to its original language. The

same thing applied to the question of the flight profile, the question the

Secretary had raised in Moscow toward the end of their discussion.

Furthermore, they had deleted the words to which the Secretary had

taken such great dislike—“by way of information.”

The Secretary said he would start with the assumption that the lan-

guage of the unilateral statement was intended to be helpful in terms of

resolving the Backfire issue. However, when we tried to understand

the meaning of that language, we were at a loss. When the Secretary

had been asked what it meant, he had not been able to explain it. To us

it seemed to say that no structural changes would be introduced and no

wing tanks added to enable the aircraft to take on more fuel than it

could take on now. The second thing seemed to be that there would be

no intent to refuel the aircraft more than once. He was not sure of that,

but that is what the statement seemed to be saying. However, he did

not know whether it also covered such things as not holding training

exercises involving refueling and not creating a tanker force to support

this aircraft. He was trying to understand what was included in the

statement.

Gromyko replied that training exercises and maneuvers would

have to remain at the discretion of the Soviet side. As for refueling, it

was entirely possible that the Soviet side may want to refuel it five or

six times for purposes other than intercontinental missions. The Secre-

tary had mentioned two things—wing tanks and structural changes.

But these were not the only things, they had only been cited as ex-

amples and did not exhaust all possibilities. Gromyko said that this air-

craft’s being in the air would not disturb the sleep of the Secretary or

any other American.

Gromyko now proposed that this question not be discussed any

further. He could not make any further concessions on this issue be-

cause it was impossible to do so. This was a medium range weapons

system and it was not strategic. Otherwise the Soviet side would be

compelled to table an official proposal to consider certain types of U.S.

aircraft, including Phantoms, in order to ensure that equivalent aircraft

be discussed on a par basis. The Secretary could judge for himself—

would this ease the situation? That should be explained to the U.S.

Congress and to others talking about the Backfire. Would it be to their

liking if the Soviet Union officially raised this question at the next

meeting and threw even more questions at the U.S. side about refueling

exercises, deployment, etc.? As for the Phantom, there were good

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

grounds why it was of a hundred times greater concern to the Soviet

Union than the Backfire to the United States.

Gromyko asked if the Secretary had something else to address

today. If so, he would ask him to tell Gromyko; if not, Gromyko would

propose to make a brief statement summing up the discussions. He

suggested a short recess.

The Secretary said he had nothing further at this moment.

(The discussion was recessed for a few minutes.)

After the recess Gromyko wanted to tell the Secretary very frankly

that the Soviet leadership had not at all been pleased by the fact that si-

multaneously with conducting negotiations with the Soviet Union the

U.S. side had set everything out in detail to the Chinese leadership.

This had made an exceptionally negative impression upon the Soviet

leadership. Had that been done simply to bring pressure on the Soviet

Union?

The Secretary said that we had provided general descriptions

rather

than

detailed

information

about

the

Soviet-American

negotiations.

Gromyko noted that the U.S. press had reported that China had

been given detailed information. In this connection he wanted to reg-

ister the vigorous objection of the Soviet Union against such a practice.

The Secretary said he had not seen anything about detailed

information.

Gromyko repeated that the Soviet side objected resolutely, and he

could say that quite officially.

Cyprus

Before presenting his concluding statement, Gromyko wanted to

address an entirely different subject “for the purpose of relaxation.” He

had a conversation with the President of Cyprus, and he understood

that the Secretary had also talked with him. He had told Gromyko that

his discussions with Turkey had apparently reached a dead end, and

that he would not object to the United States and the Soviet Union

taking matters into their own hands. Gromyko had replied that he did

not quite know how that could be done. He would ask the Secretary

what role the two of them could play in this respect. Should they act as

intermediaries? The Soviet Union had good relations with both sides

and would not be averse to rendering its assistance provided the

United States cooperated. He would like to learn the Secretary’s views

in this regard. He was fully prepared to consider the request of the

President of Cyprus, although he was not at all sure that this would

help matters.

The Secretary wanted to tell Gromyko what the President of

Cyprus had asked us to do. He had asked if we could arrange for him to

January–June 1978

meet with Ecevit. The Secretary had met with Ecevit this morning and

had passed on the message. Ecevit had said that he would consider the

request and then decide if he would meet with Kyprianou. Perhaps he

might prefer a meeting between Caramanlis, Kyprianou, Denktash and

himself. The Secretary would not rule out a possible meeting between

Ecevit, Kyprianou and Denktash, provided the latter two agreed. An

approach had been made to the Secretary General in these terms. That

was where matters stood now, and the Secretary would suggest to wait

and see what would happen.

Gromyko agreed and said they might return to this matter

subsequently.

SALT

Gromyko said that he had listened attentively to everything the

Secretary had said. He had to tell the Secretary directly that the U.S. po-

sition as set forth by the President and restated by the Secretary today

left him with an ambivalent impression. He would even go further and

say that now he had greater doubts than ever about the direction in

which the United States was moving with respect to the new agreement

on the limitation of strategic offensive arms. President Carter and the

Secretary had both assured the Soviet side that the United States

wanted to conclude the new agreement, and wanted this to be done at

an early date. Gromyko and the Soviet leadership had duly appreciated

these assurances and had proceeded from that premise when working

out their positions on specific matters in preparation for the current dis-

cussions. For their part they had once again displayed their readiness to

take into account the wishes of the U.S. side as far as possible, in order

to find mutually acceptable solutions to the remaining questions. He

wanted to remind the Secretary briefly what proposals he had brought

to these discussions. The Soviet side had proposed three variants for re-

solving the outstanding question of new types of ICBMs. These pro-

vided for a ban on the flight testing and deployment of new types of

ICBMs for the term of the three-year Protocol, or for the term of the

Treaty, i.e., through 1985, except that each side could flight-test and de-

ploy only one new type of ICBM equipped with only a single reentry

vehicle. Alternatively the flight testing and deployment of new types of

ICBMs could be banned for the term of the Treaty, i.e., through 1985,

without exception, i.e., the ban would apply to ICBMs with a single

reentry vehicle as well as to MIRVed ICBMs. The Soviet side had also

expressed its readiness to reach agreement on not increasing the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

number of reentry vehicles on existing types of ICBMs. He recalled that

the United States had attached exceptional importance to such a limita-

tion, and the Soviet side had accepted that. Its acceptance was contin-

gent on finding a solution to the question of new types on the basis of

one of the three variants proposed by the Soviet side. In this connec-

tion, it was also necessary, of course, to find a mutually acceptable solu-

tion to limits on the modernization of existing types of ICBMs and to

the question of limiting the number of cruise missiles which could be

installed on a heavy bomber to no more than 20. This had been empha-

sized on a number of occasions. Gromyko wanted to confirm that if a

mutually acceptable solution was found for the new types issue, the So-

viet side could agree to establish a ceiling of 1,200 instead of 1,250 for

the total number of ICBMs, SLBMs and ASBMs equipped with MIRVs.

He emphasized that the Soviet Union would agree to the 1,200 level

only in the event a mutually acceptable solution was found to the ques-

tion of new types of ballistic missiles. He pointed out that in effect he

was replying here to what Warnke had said. This was another example

of Soviet Union’s taking into account the insistent requests of the U.S.

side. Further, the Soviet Union had amplified substantially its unilat-

eral statement regarding the Soviet TU–22–M medium range bomber. It

had done so, being guided by good will and in a desire to reach agree-

ment, although this bomber had no bearing at all on the subject matter

of our negotiations.

Thus, Gromyko said, the Soviet Union once again made some new,

major and constructive proposals moving toward the position of the

U.S. side, thereby reaffirming its determination to bring the SALT II ne-

gotiations to a successful conclusion. In so doing the Soviet Union had

taken into account the firm intention expressed by the U.S. leadership

in the course of recent discussions in Moscow to act in a similar manner

in order to reach agreement. The Soviet side had been assured that the

U.S., too, believed that both sides had to undertake vigorous effort to

arrive at mutually acceptable resolution of outstanding questions. He

would ask, however, what had he found in reality? If one examined the

position taken by the U.S. side on specific issues during the current

talks, it became clear immediately that the U.S. position on any of the

issues under discussion had not changed from the position stated in

Moscow. Furthermore, on the very next day after his meeting with the

President in Washington he had been astounded to hear a high official

of the U.S. Administration state publicly that the United States had put

forward a good and balanced proposal, and now would simply wait for

the Soviet Union to accept it. It must be clear that an approach of this

kind, one that was not far away from an ultimatum, could hardly be ac-

cepted. People who talked that way in reality are not unaware of how

the U.S. side would look if the Soviet side were to make public the ac-

tual proposals it had tabled and if it were to state its views regarding

January–June 1978

the proposals made by the United States. Did the Soviet side have the

moral right to react or to respond officially to such a statement by a

high U.S. official? There was no question about it at all, it did have the

right to do so, at least to explain the true state of affairs to its own public

opinion. Such a way of proceeding could only dismay the Soviet side. It

was not at all in line with the assurances that had been given by Presi-

dent Carter and by Secretary Vance. After all, negotiations were negoti-

ations. He, too, could say: “Here are our proposals and there is no need

to discuss them. Accept them and we will have an agreement; do not

accept them and we will not have an agreement.” He found himself

compelled to state that due to such an approach the two sides had not

moved forward in preparation of the agreement.

Gromyko said that he might now talk to the Secretary about what

to say in public about what had happened here. Of course, usually the

two sides did not state the complete truth; they usually “spoke around

the truth,” softening things here and there. He was not saying that this

was wrong, but if the two sides were to tell the truth now, many people

in both our countries would be shocked indeed to find out where we

stood. And to all this another complicating factor had been added—the

information provided to the Chinese. During the negotiations between

the United States and the Soviet Union the U.S. side had decided to pro-

vide detailed information regarding these negotiations to the Chinese

leadership. He would ask: “On what grounds?” This had never been

discussed with the Soviet side, and he simply did not know how to un-

derstand such a manner of proceeding.

Furthermore, instead of engaging in businesslike discussions, at-

tempts were made to impose so-called solutions on the Soviet side, and

in so doing a knowingly incorrect interpretation of Soviet policy was

used in order to substantiate these solutions. He would say that the at-

mosphere was being charged with tension, and this becomes a heavy

burden and has a negative effect on the negotiations. He had simply

wanted to touch on this point without going into detail.

Returning to the question under discussion, i.e., SALT, he wanted

to emphasize again that the Soviet Union was prepared to move

toward rapid conclusion of the work on the new agreement so as to

sign it in the near future. The Soviets had not lost interest in concluding

an agreement, but what was required now, of course, was a similar ap-

proach by the United States. In spite of the situation that had now

emerged, he still wanted to express his hope that the U.S. side would

find it possible to take another look at the proposals he had tabled. It

would go without saying that it would be very bad indeed if at the next

meeting the same kind of an atmosphere were to prevail and the same

kind of positions were to be restated. That would be bad indeed and,

who knows, it might lead to complete loss of the opportunity of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

reaching a new accord. But, as he had said, the Soviet Union was still

determined to continue the negotiations and apply further efforts.

Displaying some emotion, Gromyko said he had been asking him-

self what interests the Chinese might be pursuing with regard to these

negotiations and what sort of advice they could give the United States

in this connection. He had come to the conclusion that the Chinese

could only advise the U.S. as follows: “To the devil with this new agree-

ment on the limitation of strategic offensive arms.”

Gromyko said that quite frequently he had heard from the Secre-

tary and from other representatives of the Administration that many

representatives in the Congress of the United States and many people

in the United States opposed conclusion of the SALT II agreement. Was

this really so surprising when the U.S. Government had not taken any

substantive steps to defend the new agreement and to speak out in its

favor? He and the Soviet leadership were struck by the timidity dis-

played by the U.S. Administration in SALT matters. Everyone in his

country knew that these negotiations were of prime importance. Virtu-

ally every statement at the Special Session of the U.N. General As-

sembly had referred to the enormous importance of this matter and he

was personally convinced that it was indeed enormously important.

But, he would ask, what about the U.S. Administration? Why does it

not speak out in a bold voice, and clearly state that this agreement is in

the interests of both our countries and in the interests of world peace?

That was a very valid question, one that he as Foreign Minister had

been asked by many people. Indeed, no such firm voice had been heard

in defense of the agreement in the United States. When he was asked

this question he could only shrug his shoulders in bewilderment. He

was genuinely astounded by the absence of a firm stand in defense of

the agreement on the part of the U.S. Administration. Voices were

heard in the Congress of the United States to the effect that it was a

risky thing to conclude an agreement with the Soviet Union, because

the Soviet Union might violate the agreement. But, he would point out,

people on his side could say the same thing about the United States. A

firm reply should be provided. It should be said that the agreement

being worked out would be based on the ability of each side to verify

compliance with complete reliability. Under those conditions it surely

must be made known to the public at large that violation of the agree-

ment was ruled out by all the verification arrangements contained

therein and by our extensive experience of implementing the SALT I

agreements. That experience had surely been most positive. Whenever

misunderstandings had arisen, they had been promptly resolved by

appropriate discussions and explanations between the two sides.

Gromyko repeated that no firm voice had been raised on the part

of the U.S. Government. For the sake of truth it should be said that the

January–June 1978

State Department had indeed provided some explanations, that Am-

bassador Warnke had publicly taken a positive stand, and that this had

had some effect. But, what he was talking about now was that it was

necessary for the U.S. Administration to speak out in a firm and deter-

mined voice to put things into the right perspective. Soft spoken state-

ments were not enough.

It was being asked: “Suppose the Soviet Union violates the Treaty?

What then?” One could not base policy on that kind of an argument.

One might just as well ask: “What if an earthquake were suddenly to

occur and everything come tumbling down?” He was reminded of a

couple of characters in one of Gogol’s4 stories called “Old World Land-

owners.” In that story there is a conversation between an old couple

where one asks the other: “What if our house should burn down?” The

other replied, “Well, in that case we shall move into the storehouse.”

The first continues, “What if the storehouse should burn down?” The

other replies, “In that case we shall move into the barn,” and so on and

so forth. It must be pointed out firmly that both sides have experience

in implementing bilateral agreements between us and are fully re-

solved to use the positive experience of SALT I to move on to SALT II.

The Secretary said that, while he would not try to respond to all the

statements Gromyko had made, he would like to say a few words. First,

it was correct that the President and the Secretary himself had said on

numerous occasions that they wanted to see an early conclusion of the

negotiations, conclusion of the new agreement, and that they were

doing all in their power to bring this about. He would stand on this

statement. Just two days ago he had made a statement to that effect in

Congress. As far as defending the ultimate agreement was concerned,

perhaps Gromyko’s information was not very good. The Secretary had

said countless times that the agreement that would be achieved would

be fair to both sides and was essential for stability not only between our

two sides, but also for general stability and peace throughout the

world. Mr. Warnke had also said so on numerous occasions, and not

just last week or two weeks ago, but on countless other occasions. After

his return from Moscow the Secretary had called on all but one of the

leaders of Congress, and had talked to each privately regarding the im-

portance of reaching agreement and his belief that the agreement that

will be achieved will be very much in the interests of the United States,

the interests of the Soviet Union and the interests of world peace. As re-

cently as last Friday, Warnke and he had testified at length in a positive

fashion before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and had ex-

pressed their hope that the negotiations would be brought to a suc-

cessful conclusion. Therefore, he simply could not accept the sugges-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tion Gromyko had made to the effect that we were not willing to speak

out about the importance of concluding the SALT II agreement at an

early date. There were indeed those in the United States who did not

want to see us reach agreement, and they did speak out. It would be im-

possible to answer every allegation made. However, he believed that

we were doing a good job of speaking in favor of the agreement. Fi-

nally, we were engaged in organizing a major effort that would be

launched soon, in which a large number of Senators and of people out-

side the Government would come out with statements speaking in

favor of the SALT agreement. As for the exact timing of that effort, that

was a delicate matter, and we would have to decide.

Coming back to our own SALT negotiations, the Secretary would

say that the suggestions we had made in Moscow had displayed flexi-

bility, had taken into account the views expressed on the Soviet side,

and were constructive. He would tell Gromyko that we had very care-

fully studied the three variants Gromyko had proposed in his discus-

sions with President Carter, and as he and Warnke had pointed out, we

did not believe that any one of them provided for equality and equal se-

curity, which were necessary if we were to reach agreement. We felt

that our proposals as outlined by the President did meet, in a fair and

equitable way, the requirements of both sides, and he would hope that

the Soviet side would continue consideration of these proposals. On the

definition of new missiles, we had taken note of what Gromyko had

said the other day and recognized that this was conditional upon a

number of matters that were now the subject of discussions. As for the

1,200 sub-level as opposed to 1,250, Gromyko had correctly stated that

this was conditioned on a number of other matters. The Secretary

wanted to point out that our agreement to the 2,250 overall aggregate

was contingent upon agreement on the definition of new missiles, as

well as agreement on the timing of the dismantling or destruction that

will be required.

On the matter of the Backfire bomber the President had outlined

our views and concerns and our position, and the Secretary had

nothing to add to that.

Having commented on those matters, the Secretary now wanted to

turn to the general proposition of where we would move from here. He

would also say that we believed that both sides should strive to achieve

a fair and equitable agreement that would be acceptable and fair to

both sides. We were ready to move in that direction and bend every ef-

fort to achieve that goal at an early date. He would agree with Gro-

myko that in any negotiations it was necessary for each side to listen to

the other and to take into account its positions. We had done so all

along and would continue to do so. Finally, on the question of our bilat-

eral relations, certain comments Gromyko had made had been dis-

January–June 1978

cussed at great length at the private meeting between himself and Gro-

myko today, and there was no need to return to that question now.

In conclusion, the Secretary wanted to say that our task now was to

see how we could move forward toward successful conclusion of the

negotiations. He believed that we had made a great deal of progress

when one looked back at the questions that had been resolved. We

would bend all efforts to resolve the remaining difficult questions be-

fore us.

The Secretary also noted that he and Gromyko had agreed to meet

again fairly soon on a mutually convenient date which would be ar-

ranged through their respective Embassies.

Gromyko agreed and thought they could now in good conscience

conclude their current meeting, having met for more than five hours.

But then again, he noted, that five hours was nothing as compared to

eternity.

122.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, June 1, 1978

SUBJECT

Weekly Report

How Not to Deal with the Russians

State learned of the “technical penetration” of our Moscow Em-

time. All that day and throughout the night until about 6: AM Friday

in Moscow, the embassy had the opportunity to pursue the cables

through the tunnel to their source on Soviet territory. The embassy

leadership took no initiative and the desk at State did not encourage

initiative and counter aggressiveness. They did not even alert Vance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

123.

Memorandum From Samuel Hoskinson of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, June 9, 1978

SUBJECT

Moscow Chimney Affairs

The Soviets are stepping up their campaign to put us on the defen-

sive in the “Moscow Chimney” affairs while continuing to physically

violate our embassy property. Yesterday the Soviets went public with

their outrageous charge in TASS that we are making unlawful alter-

ations to the heating facility of the neighboring Soviet building, charges

that we are making unfounded and provacative allegations about So-

viet electronic surveillance of the embassy, and threatening to reveal

“subversive activities” conducted from the U.S. embassy building. At

the same time, the Soviets are continuing to physically penetrate the

chimney—U.S. sovereign territory—to the extent that we have been

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

forced to erect a second barrier to keep them out. In a word, this is

“outrageous.”

State proposes to release the text of our original diplomatic protest

as a rebuttal. I believe we should go one step further and document our case,

at least on deep background, to a few responsible journalists. The basis for

this “factual” briefing would be the just completed “Preliminary Find

Report” [2 lines not declassified] Just to prove our point we could run

them through the history of this incident and show the pictures.

RECOMMENDATION: That you authorize me, working through

Jerry Schecter, to provide a few key journalists with a deep background

factual briefing on the Moscow chimney affairs.

Tab A

Preliminary Find Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

Washington, undated

TECHNICAL PENETRATION, U.S. EMBASSY MOSCOW

SUMMARY

countermeasures investigation of a 7th floor apartment on the west side

of the south wing of the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, a [text not declassi-

fied] antenna was found abutting a chimney. The antenna [4 lines not

declassified]

[3 paragraphs (13 lines) not declassified]

A wall was built in the tunnel on U.S. property and all equipment

and cables on our property have been secured.

As of this time, 7 June, on-site analysis is in progress. We do not

know the purpose of the equipment. We know that it is a receiving an-

tenna, but we do not know what it may be picking up. It offers the

threat of listening to conversations in apartments near the chimney and

in official offices of the Embassy.

January–June 1978

1. PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BUILDING

The U.S. Embassy in Moscow is composed of three connected

buildings oriented north and south. The center building is the

Chancery. The north and south buildings are primarily residential

apartments.

a. South Building: This structure has seven floors, an attic, a base-

ment and a subbasement. It is made primarily of brick. It matches

floor-to-floor the floor levels in the Chancery for the seven floors of its

height. The Chancery has 10 floors. It is a corner structure, so it has no

adjoining buildings to the south or east. To the west, it adjoins a Soviet

apartment building up to approximately the fifth floor.

b. Chimney: There is a chimney which (above the fifth floor south

wing) protrudes from the west side of the south wing. It seems to come

from the Soviet apartment roof (two floors below the south wing roof),

is attached to our south wing west wall, and terminates in a standard

chimney cap about 15 feet above the south wing roof (on the west

edge). The outside dimensions of this chimney are roughly five feet

square. The inside dimensions are roughly four feet square (as will be

seen below).

c. Soviet Apartment Complex: This exists to the west of our south

wing complex described above. There are five stories plus an attic.

Their fifth story, however, does not seem to correspond directly to

ours. The attic peak seems to come to our fifth or sixth floor level. Their

first floor (or basement?) is slightly below ground level. The windows

are much smaller (like what you would have in the basement of some

American homes). We have never noticed any lights on in these

windows at night.

d. Below the fifth floor, the chimney structure is inside our

building. There is a small room approximately six by fifteen feet in each

apartment that abuts the chimney on the six foot side (to the south) and

the Soviet apartment on the fifteen foot side (to the west). On the

ground floor of the south wing is the charwomen’s changing room.

the chimney in apartment 7A. (Numbers in brackets are keyed to at-

tached photographs.) [7 lines not declassified]

[4 pages (30 paragraphs) not declassified]

17. We are continuing tests of the antenna.

[1 paragraph (19 lines) not declassified]

19. ANTENNA DIMENSIONS ARE:

[1 page (8 paragraphs) not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

124.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, June 10, 1978

SUBJECT

Counterintelligence: Embassy Moscow

Sam Hoskinson asked me to set down some points on Embassy

Moscow for the SCC agenda2 on counterintelligence.

The Problem

The embassy in Moscow has traditionally been neglected and

made an easy target for the Soviets. Moreover, its potential as a training

and reporting outpost has been woefully unexploited, a point made by

George Kennan in his recent book. The general management policy

and the budget level for that embassy are not greatly different from

those for our embassies in other countries. That means hiring of as

many local nationals as possible. It means very little in the way of selec-

tive recruiting for assignment to Moscow. And it does not allow the rig-

orous interagency indoctrination for new staff personnel before they

depart the U.S. for Moscow. As a consequence, we look and act very

amateurishly as an embassy in Moscow. Even the best professionals on

the staff have no option but to go along because the resources are not

available for changing the situation.

[1 paragraph (3 lines) not declassified]

Toward a Solution

We are now in the early stages of building a new embassy in

Moscow. That is the occasion for rectifying the situation if we choose to

exploit it. To do so would require the following:

—An SCC decision to implement an upgrading program during

the construction phase.

—An interagency backstopping group (CIA, State, DOD, and

NSC) for providing the coordination and the level of emphasis neces-

sary to break the old habits and policies, [1 line not declassified]

January–June 1978

—An additional Congressional appropriation of funds to carry the

greater costs of construction and staffing. (Zablocki and Slack would

probably be very cooperative on this.)

—[1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (3½ lines) not declassified]

Benefits and Consequences

—[1 paragraph (2½ lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (13 lines) not declassified]

—[1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified]

—We would give the impression to other countries, not least the

125.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

149573. Subject: Chernyayev and Enger Cases: Soviet Nonpaper.

Following is text of nonpaper given to the Secretary by Dobrynin

June 5.

Begin quote. We are concerned about the situation around Cher-

nyaev and Enger in connection with the so called “case” when they are

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

charged with espionage. Their indictment in the court of Newark has

shown that we deal here with a judicial farce the outcome of which is

predetermined. Charges against them are unfounded and the facts

cited in the indictment cannot serve even as circumstantial evidence of

their guilt. Some facts given in the indictment, which under certain cir-

cumstances could be regarded as evidence, are obviously invented.

The US side should, in particular, be well aware of the facts that on

May 20 Ziniakin3 did not receive any materials from anybody. The as-

sertion itself that a damage was caused to the security of the United

States cannot stand any criticism because according to American press

reports actions of the so called “naval officer” were directed by the FBI.

The fact should be also noted that the US press is fanning anti-Soviet

campaign around this “case,” thus exerting influence on its outcome.

These and other circumstances give reason to state that in this case

the trial is being staged for political motives. In this connection atten-

tion should be drawn to the attacks on the Soviet Embassy and the Am-

bassador personally which the judge permitted himself during the

hearing of the case on June 6.

Besides, in spite of the promises from the Department of State to

try to obtain the reduction of the bail the judge confirmed the unprece-

dented amount of 4 million dollars set earlier.

The Soviet side continues to insist on a significant reduction of the

bail, the release of Chernyaev and Enger on bail with the subsequent

termination of the prosecution against them. Otherwise the Soviet side

will be compelled to take appropriate measures in response. End quote.

Christopher

126.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

14313. CINCEUR for ECJ3 to be passed urgently to Amb Toon

only. Urgent eyes only for Ambassador Toon scheduled to be at

EURCOM flight operations. Subject: Technical Penetration—Opposi-

tion Activities.

1. At approximately 1000 this morning, jack-hammer type noises

were heard which emanated from behind the walls at the base of the

chimney shaft in the Soviet change room. It was suspected that the op-

position was attempting to break into the shaft from the basement of

the building which adjoins the Embassy’s south wing. Consequently, a

partial demolition of the north wall of the shaft from within the change

room was conducted in an effort to determine what the opposition was

attempting to do. No technical penetration was discovered as a result of

this demo.

2. Below the floor of the change room along the west wall which

adjoins the Soviet building, there is located an approximate 12” × 12”

light concrete ventilation shaft which runs in a north-south direction.

We broke into this shaft and discovered a penetration from the base-

ment of the apartment building which measures approximately 18”

square. This penetration is not the location from where the original

jack-hammer noises came from. Once the opposition learned that we

were aware of their activities all jack-hammering ceased. [2½ lines not

declassified] We are maintaining surveillance in the change room.

3. At 1445 the Charge and counselor for administration were called

into UPDK (the diplomatic service agency). The results of this meeting

and post’s recommendations are being transmitted by septel.

Matlock

cret; Niact Immediate; Exdis; Handle as Nodis. Sent to CINCEUR in Vaihingen,

Germany.

demanded that the chimney be restored to its original condition. (National Archives, RG

127.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

158602. Subject: Technical Penetration Protest. Ref: Moscow 14311,

1. Secretary raised latest chimney developments with Dobrynin

June 21 (septel). Embassy should seek immediate appointment at ap-

propriate high level in MFA and state that Embassy is under instruc-

tions to protest what can only be viewed here as a serious provocation

against the Embassy. In addition to reiterating the facts about the loca-

tion of the chimney, Embassy should point out the absurdity of any at-

tempt to assert that the chimney and tunnel have had in recent times a

function, heating, ventilation, or whatever, other than as a penetration

of our Embassy.

2. Embassy should say that the U.S. is totally unable to compre-

hend what the Soviet side has in mind and hopes to accomplish. But if

this provocation continues it can only add further strain to relations.

The U.S. has no desire to see this happen. But if the provocation con-

tinues, and those responsible for it on the Soviet side are not restrained,

then responsibility for the consequences shall rest fully with the Soviet

side.

Vance

cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to the White House. Drafted by

McCall; cleared by Shulman in substance and by Thomas Martin (S/S–O); approved by

Luers.

test to Dobrynin regarding the Soviet penetration of the Embassy’s chimney. Dobrynin

denied any knowledge of the events. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy

File, P840163–0075)

January–June 1978

128.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

1. Charge delivered protest, as outlined in reftel, to First Deputy

Foreign Minister Korniyenko afternoon of June 22. In addition to

making points suggested in reftel, Charge referred to his June 21

meeting with Ambassador Kuznetsov3 on same subject, and also

showed Korniyenko official copy of Soviet ground plan of Embassy

building which clearly included chimney as part of Embassy property.

2. Korniyenko responded along familiar lines, “most decisively”

rejecting assertion that USSR was involved in any sort of provocation

against Embassy, and arguing that chimney had no connection to Em-

bassy and indeed was an “essential part” of the heating system of the

neighboring building. The occupants of that building demand restora-

tion of damage caused by Embassy, and if Embassy does not comply

they have the right to repair the damage themselves. Perhaps the

heating system had not been used for a while, but the chimney had to

be useable in case the furnace were fired up.

3. Charge said he could only reiterate the Embassy’s protest, stress

that the facts were clear and our position was firm, and express his

hope that the Soviet Government would take note of U.S. position and

avoid further exacerbation of situation.

4. As reported septel, there has been no discernible Soviet activity

around chimney today.

Matlock

cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to the White House.

July–December 1978

129.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

5415. For the Secretary from Ambassador. Subject: Message for

Foreign Minister Gromyko. Ref: State 167936.

2. Gromyko, accompanied by First Deputy Foreign Minister Korni-

yenko, clearly had been given advance warning by Dobrynin of a pos-

sible demarche on the correspondents. After Gromyko read the letter, I

added that this case was causing a storm in the US and that it would be

useful if the case could be removed from the books. Gromyko re-

sponded firmly that this was “impossible,” that the trial would take

place. But, he added, it could be delayed. Now scheduled for July 7, it

could be postponed until Monday, July 17.

3. I said that would be helpful, but it would be much better if the

case could be dropped. I also briefly explained our understanding of

the substance of the case, noting in particular that Piper and Whitney

themselves did not say that the TV confession of Gamsakhurdia3 was

fake. They only quoted sources to this effect; and the stories did not ap-

pear in the USSR.

4. Gromyko reiterated that it would be impossible to eliminate the

case. It made no difference where the stories appeared. Korniyenko

added that Piper and Whitney had after all spread lies about the Soviet

130.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Anatoliy Dobrynin

1. Dobrynin brought up the question of the Woodbridge Two. He

asked if there is any way in which the issue could be terminated and the

two men released. I made it clear that we regard the use of spies

without diplomatic immunity as not covered by previous rules of the

game. Thus we cannot release them without some quid pro quo. Do-

brynin asked what kind of a quid pro quo could be arranged, and I told

them that we would submit some names to the Soviets.

2. I suggested also that both sides might find it useful to have an

informal understanding regarding the restriction of intelligence ac-

tivity to personnel covered by diplomatic immunity. Dobrynin ex-

pressed an interest in exploring this matter further.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

3. Dobrynin expressed an explicit preference for dealing on such

matters with the White House.

4. Dobrynin and I discussed ways in which the Carter-Brezhnev

dialogue could be resumed even before the Summit. Dobrynin indi-

cated he would discuss this matter with Brezhnev and he expressed the

view that resumption in direct contact would be beneficial. He also

asked if the President might have any oral message4 for Brezhnev for

Dobrynin to communicate. Dobrynin is leaving Monday night.

5. We also discussed the African situation, and I pointed out to Do-

brynin that Soviet insensitivity to our concerns has contributed to the

present deterioration in the atmosphere of our relationships. Dobrynin

countered by claiming that our human rights campaign also contrib-

uted to this situation, though he conceded perhaps the Soviets did un-

derestimate the depth of our concern over Soviet/Cuban activity in Af-

rica. I stressed to him the need for both sides to develop better

understanding of the “rules of the game” in the Third World, along the

lines of the reciprocal restraint that has developed over the years in Eu-

rope and regarding strategic issues.

131.

Message From the President’s Assistant for National Security

Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance

Washington, July 11, 1978

The President has approved the following oral message to

132.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 8019/10615. Subject: Vance-Gromyko Meeting Morning Ses-

sion July 12.

Secretary Vance made a formal presentation on SALT at the

opening session, the text of which follows below. Gromyko asked for a

recess until 3: this afternoon to consider the new U.S. proposal. We

will meet with the Soviet delegation again at that time. Quote.

This morning I propose that we focus on one of the most important

issues remaining to be resolved in the agreement: limitations on the in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

troduction of new types of strategic missiles and on modernization of

existing types of strategic missiles.

I would first like to review where we stand on the issues of new

types of ICBMs and SLBMs and of modernization of existing types.

In previous discussions we have proposed a ban on testing and de-

ployment of new types of ICBMs in the protocol. This would prohibit

introduction of new types of ICBMs through 1980 while we discuss

how to deal with this issue in SALT III.

We have also indicated that we could accept a ban on testing and

deployment of new types of ICBMs through 1985, except that either

side could test and deploy one new ICBM, MIRVed, or non-MIRVed.

This would permit you to go ahead with the new, single RV ICBM,

which fits your force structure, and would permit us to proceed with a

new MIRVed ICBM, which would fit into our force structure. This

would provide for equality and equal security on both sides.

Either of these proposals would represent a satisfactory solution of

the ICBM new types issue.

In the context of a protocol ban on new types of ICBMs, we could

agree to a ban on new types of SLBMs, allowing for continued testing

and deployment of Trident I and for the SS–N–18.

In the context of a ban on new types of ICBMs through 1985 with

one exemption, MIRVed or non-MIRVed, for each side, we could agree

to a ban on new types of SLBMs for the same period, with one exemp-

tion. In our case this would be the Trident II, and in your case this

would be the Typhoon (RSM–52). Under this proposal, Trident I and

the SS–N–18 would be considered existing types.

You have proposed a ban on new types of ICBMs for the protocol

period, except that each side would be permitted to test and deploy one

new type of ICBM with a single reentry vehicle. This proposal would

prevent us from testing any new missile, while allowing you to go

ahead with a new single RV ICBM for which we have no program and

no need. This is inequitable and unacceptable to us.

You have also proposed a ban on new types through 1985, with the

same exemption for a new single RV ICBM. This is even more

one-sided:

—The U.S. would have no new ICBM for the duration of the 1985

agreement, since we have no program or requirement for a new single

RV ICBM.

—The Soviet Union would, however, be able to deploy its entirely

new type of single RV ICBM.

Finally, you have proposed a ban on the testing and deployment of

new types of ICBMs through 1985, without exception. This proposal in-

dicates that you can forego a new single RV ICBM. In that sense, it rep-

July–December 1978

resents a constructive step to which we have given consideration in our

own thinking. The logic of this proposal argues that you should be able

to accept our proposal for a protocol ban on all new types, which would

impose equal constraints on both sides.

As for SLBM new types, your proposal is the same for all variants:

a ban on flight testing and deployment for either the protocol or the

1985 period, with an exception for Trident I and the Typhoon. This is

not equitable. Trident I has already begun flight-testing and should be

treated the same as SS–N–18. Soviet rights to a new, untested SLBM

must be balanced by equal rights for the US. This means that Trident II

and Typhoon must be treated comparably. Either they must both be

banned or both be exempted.

There is also the question of how to define a new type of ICBM,

which is being addressed by the delegations. The US has made a major

move in the direction of the Soviet side, so we are closer to agreement

on this issue. However, significant differences remain.

I want to emphasize the importance of a prohibition on an increase

in the number of reentry vehicles on existing types of ICBMs and

SLBMs. The US side notes the Soviet inclusion in its May 1978 pro-

posal2 of the rule that in the course of modernization of an existing

type, the number of RVs on that type should not be increased. We wel-

come this indication that you agree that fractionation limits for ballistic

missiles are a valuable part of dealing meaningfully with the new types

issue.

In this connection, we believe each side should specify how many

RVs have been tested on existing types.

The US also regards as important the elements of our definition of

new types about restricting changes in individual stages and in the rel-

evant characteristics of what we call the post-boost vehicle for current

missiles.

We also believe that an exempted new type of ICBM should not

have more than 10 reentry vehicles, which is the maximum number

tested to date on an ICBM on either side. Similarly, if we agree to ex-

empt a new type of SLBM, there should be a limit on the number of

reentry vehicles at 14, the maximum number tested by either side to

date on an SLBM.

It is clearly important to limit the number of reentry vehicles on ex-

empted missiles. This provision, along with the ban on increasing the

number of reentry vehicles on existing ballistic missiles, would make a

significant contribution to the effectiveness of a new types ban and to

the stability of the strategic balance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

We have explained the rationale for the two alternatives for a ban

on new types of ICBMs we have offered, and I continue to believe that

either would lead to an equitable solution of this issue.

As I said at the beginning, the new types issue is one of the most

important political-level issues remaining to be resolved in the agree-

ment. If we are able to reach a satisfactory solution, I believe we will

have made a great stride toward a final agreement.

In recognition of the importance of the issue for the progress of

these negotiations, and in light of those constructive elements of the So-

viet May 1978 proposals, and in an effort to bridge the gap between

your proposals and ours, I am prepared to offer the following

compromise.

I want to emphasize that in our view the new types issue has sev-

eral related elements which apply to both ICBMs and SLBMs: a ban on

new types, a definition of permitted modernization of existing types

which prevents increases in the number of RVs on an existing type; and

possible exemptions for new types. Our new proposal has been de-

signed to resolve all these elements as a whole. It forms an integrated

package and cannot be broken into individual parts.

We are prepared to prohibit testing and deployment of any new

types of ICBMs through 1985, except that each side would be permitted

to flight-test one new type of ICBM, MIRVed or non-MIRVed. How-

ever, deployment of new types of ICBMs would be prohibited through

1985.

—New types of ICBMs would be determined by the definition

which we have proposed, including a ban on an increase in the max-

imum number of reentry vehicles on any existing type of missile. The

exempted ICBM could have no more than 10 reentry vehicles.

—This proposal, when considered in relation to the 820 limit on

MIRVed ICBMs, represents a meaningful arms control step. Yet it gives

both sides flexibility in deciding how to structure its mix of MIRVed

and single warhead ICBMs. We are also prepared to agree to a ban on

new types of SLBMs through 1985, except that one new type of SLBM

could be tested and deployed. The SLBM exemption would apply to

Typhoon on your side and Trident II on our side. The Trident I and the

SS–N–18 would be considered existing SLBMs.

There would be a prohibition on increases in the number of reentry

vehicles for existing types of SLBMs. The maximum number of reentry

vehicles on an exempted SLBM would be 14.

This proposal takes into account the essential elements of the ap-

proaches taken by both sides: you wanted to ban new ICBMs through

1985, and they could be banned. We have sought to obtain equality of

constraints on both sides. It is good arms control and it gives each side

flexibility to structure its own forces.

July–December 1978

In making this proposal, I want also to make it clear that the US

cannot accept a limit on the number of ALCMs carried by an aircraft

limited under the 1320 ceiling, and this new proposal is contingent on

your agreement that there be no such limits.

As I said, this new proposal is offered as an integrated package

and cannot be broken into individual parts. We offer it in an effort to

seek a fair and a prompt resolution of this issue.

I want to make two points in conclusion.

The United States has had no new ICBMs since the MM III, first de-

ployed almost a decade ago. The Soviet Union has deployed several

ICBMs in that period, most of them MIRVed and far larger than the

MM III.

I must emphasize that by making this proposal the US has made a

serious and substantial political commitment to conclude a new agree-

ment. Unquote.

Vance

133.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 8021. For the President from the Secretary. Subject: Private

Meeting With Gromyko.

I am reporting by septel on arms control discussions with Gro-

myko Wednesday. In a private meeting with him, I discussed the dissi-

dent trials and delivered your oral message. On the slander charges

against two U.S. correspondents, Gromyko thought something would

be worked out. He was less sanguine on the Crawford affair. He indi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

cated that at some future time he would wish to discuss the handling of

intelligence matters, but did not think it useful to do so now.

Vance

134.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 8022. Acting Secretary please pass to the President. Pass to

Harold Brown. Subject: Gromyko-Vance Talks: SALT.

1. At the end of this afternoon’s meeting, Gromyko came to what

he described as the “core” of his statement:

“I wish to ask a direct question—this is the core of my statement—

if the U.S. really attaches paramount importance to the solution of the

question of new types of ballistic missiles on the basis it proposes, will

it be prepared to regard as agreed all other questions (cruise missiles on

bombers, timing for reductions, Backfire, etc.) on the basis of our pro-

posals, in the event we were to consent to U.S. proposals that for the

duration of the treaty—i.e. to the end of 1985—within the limits of the

relevant aggregate levels of strategic arms and MIRVed vehicles—each

side would have the right to flight test and to deploy one new type of

ICBM which it could equip at its own discretion either with MIRVs or

with a single reentry vehicle, while there would be no limitations what-

soever on new types of SLBMs?”

2. There are a number of important ambiguities in the foregoing.

For instance: when Gromyko speaks of accepting the U.S. position on

“new types of ballistic missiles,” does he mean our full position on the

definition of new types? What does he mean by “etc.”? Do the Soviets

accept that our MIRV type rules would apply to their new single war-

head missile?

July–December 1978

3. I would intend to explore these and other ambiguities without

flatly rejecting the proposal implicit in Gromyko’s question. This

would give us a basis for further evaluation and response.

4. I do not intend to raise any new points with regard to Backfire

since the Soviets did not accept our proposal as you directed it be

made.

5. Gromyko’s “question” was proceeded by his usual colorful re-

marks. He once again urged us to be firmer in our public support for

135.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 8033. Subject: Gromyko-Vance Talks: SALT. For Acting Sec-

retary—Please pass to Secretary Brown. Bonn for Dr. Brzezinski.

1. In SALT portion of meeting, Gromyko provided the following

clarification of their proposal of yesterday.

A. The Soviet proposal related only to its actual words, i.e., that

each side could have one new ICBM type, MIRVed or not.

B. The proposal did not exclude or include fractionation or defini-

tion issues. Definition, which he described as when modernization

makes an existing type a new missile, should be handled by delega-

cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent Immediate to Bonn. The full memorandum of conversation

is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tions. He said they agree that a fractionation limit was a sound prin-

ciple and should be included, but was linked to a solution of the major

issues, i.e., their acceptance of our position on freedom to choose a

MIRVed or single RV ICBM in return for our acceptance of their posi-

tion on cruise missile fractionation, timeline of reductions and Backfire.

Limits on numbers of SLBM RVs was similarly a side question that

could be discussed by delegations.

C. The Soviet proposal for handling exceptions (one ICBM, no

limit on SLBMs) was linked only to U.S. acceptance of Soviet positions

on the three items specifically identified—Backfire, ALCM limits per

aircraft, and timing of reductions. There is, as he put it, “no etcetera.”

He said the Soviets could not retreat on Backfire—ALCM numbers, but

sounded a little more flexible on timing of reductions. On Backfire,

however, he repeated that while they “could not add one comma, they

could make it more compact” eliminating some matters, if that was

what we wanted.

what he called the “secondary issues” i.e., those not listed, he seemed to

want to suggest that the Soviets could be flexible, saying that the other

matters were open for discussion by the delegations and all they had

said was that they should be settled “on the basis” of their proposals.

2. In side conversation, Dobrynin said that “because of China”

there could never be limits on air defenses, and suggested Soviets had

come to Geneva with their proposal and had not considered our new

proposal in great detail.

3. On CTB, the discussion was general. Gromyko said the Agree-

ment should be “comprehensive,” without going into details. On dura-

tion, he suggested that there might be arguments for a five-year dura-

tion, to which Warnke countered that he was beginning to find the

arguments for three years more convincing. Gromyko seemed to re-

treat from the Soviet acceptance of the concept of National Seismic Sta-

tions, saying that national technical means should suffice. His remarks

were, however, somewhat inconsistent with the comments of Petro-

syants, chairman of the Soviet CTB delegation. Petrosyants, said that

verification could be “divided”, with initial reliance on NTM and then

phasing in of National Seismic Stations. Warnke will clarify this issue

with Petrosyants, stressing that we will discuss the number, location

and timing but will insist on the principle of NSS.

Vance

136.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 8036. White House for President and Dr. Brzezinski. Depart-

ment pass other posts as appropriate. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With

Gromyko: Final Session July 13 on Middle East.

1. Summary: The final session, devoted to the Middle East, pro-

duced no surprises. The Secretary briefed Gromyko on preparations

leading to the London meeting2 and our hopes for a favorable outcome.

Gromyko made no special promise to intervene with the Palestinians

on Lebanon. The Secretary said we would inform the Soviets of the out-

come of the London sessions. End summary.

2. The Secretary led off by reviewing the present situation. He

noted that both Israel and Egypt had put forth proposals on the West

Bank and Gaza which over time might lead to a Declaration of Prin-

ciples. This, in turn, could set a framework for a new Geneva Confer-

ence. The Secretary outlined the positions of Israel and Egypt, noting

four basic areas of agreement and their basic differences over what

would happen at the end of the five-year period.

3. At the upcoming London meeting, the Secretary said we ex-

pected the parties to explain their respective proposals in detail. He

hoped this would make it possible during the two days of discussion to

find common ground between them, or at least to clear up ambiguities.

He added our further hope that this would start a process of resumed

negotiations between Egypt and Israel in the Middle East.

4. Turning briefly to the Lebanon situation, the Secretary said that,

according to our best information, some progress had been made

during the last two or three days toward improvement. Syrian and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Christian forces had been pulled back somewhat. A serious problem re-

mained, however, in the lack of leadership at the top of the Lebanese

Government. It was unclear to us if Sarkis would resign, but contin-

gency arrangements were being considered for rapid election of a suc-

cessor to avoid a vacuum. The Secretary noted we had asked the Is-

raelis to urge restraint on the Christians. We had also cautioned the

Israelis over the danger of introducing their own armed forces again.

He pointed to the particularly dangerous situation posed by the 20 UN

forces troops captured by the Palestinians. At this point, the Secretary

urged Gromyko to use Soviet good offices with the Palestinians

through Arafat to seek his influence in working toward resolution of

the situation.

5. Gromyko asked two questions: first, what would happen to the

Sinai Territory in the event of an Israeli-Egyptian settlement? Secondly,

he asked what voice the Syrians would have and, in particular, what

would be done about the Golan Heights. The Secretary said that the

Syrians had indicated they did not want to be involved as long as only

Israel and Egypt were taking part. Sadat’s view was that, if the Declara-

tion of Principles could be established as a framework for a comprehen-

sive settlement, then Jordan and Syria would join in the negotiations.

As for the Sinai, the Secretary said Sadat would not commit himself to

withdrawal until the questions of the West Bank, Gaza, and the Decla-

ration of Principles were solved. He noted, however, that Israeli and

Egyptian Defense Ministers had discussed the situation in the Sinai and

had a preliminary agreement on a number of questions which would

be involved in a peace treaty.

6. Gromyko said he had listened attentively and would give only a

brief reply. He said the Soviets did not have much hope for the Israeli

and Egyptian talks since the two countries involved were only a small

part of the Middle East. He added the Soviets strongly favored a com-

plete, general and radical settlement with the participation of all

parties, including the Palestinians. The most appropriate path to such a

settlement was another Geneva Conference. He reviewed the difficulty

in organizing a second Geneva Conference, but said he believed it

could be realized. He recalled the U.S.-Soviet joint statement on the

Middle East4 and complained that it had not been implemented, al-

leging that we knew the reasons why.

7. At this point, Gromyko said that the Secretary had not men-

tioned the Geneva Conference in his remarks. The Secretary rebutted

this, calling Gromyko’s attention to his earlier statement that the results

of the London meetings could produce a Declaration of Principles,

July–December 1978

forming a framework leading to a Geneva Conference. Gromyko said

that a preliminary accord between Egypt and Israel would not help

possibilities for a Geneva Conference. It wouldn’t even help if theoret-

ically Egypt and Israel became allies. There were too many Arab coun-

tries which opposed Israel and the Israeli occupation. He said the So-

viets would not assist in any partial deals which he felt would not

permit a settlement but rather sowed the seeds of future conflict.

8. Referring to the Secretary’s suggestion that the Soviets seek to

influence the Palestinians, Gromyko said that the Soviets had exerted

such influence in the past and continued to do so through Arafat. How-

ever, there were various factions in the Palestinian movement which

complicated things. Furthermore, what Israel and Egypt were doing

now limited Soviet possibilities. This did not mean the Soviets would

remain passive however. Indeed they could not, if only for reasons of

geography. Gromyko said that if the U.S. and the Soviets pursued a

common line, pointing to the Geneva Conference as the means for set-

tlement, peace could be assured. He complained about Israel’s defama-

tory statements against a Geneva Conference. He said, however, that

the USSR supported Israel’s right to existence no less fervently than the

United States did.

9. Gromyko alleged that the United States considered Israel to be

strong because of its arms deliveries. This course, however, was unreli-

able. Looking back over the past 20 to 25 years, he claimed that we were

now pleased that Sadat had come to us, but if the Soviets had given him

two or three times more arms, the situation would be different. Con-

cluding, Gromyko said the Soviets would hold to their position of prin-

ciple and would continue to oppose separate deals, conferences, and

meetings except for a Geneva Conference with full participation. How-

ever, he recognized that both the U.S. and USSR were interested in the

situation and hoped that it would be possible to continue exchanging

information from time to time in the future. In particular, if we saw fit,

he would appreciate information on the London meetings. He thought

that information exchanges should take place not only in formal

meetings but in working contacts as well.

10. The Secretary promised to keep the Soviets informed on the

London meetings. He agreed that security would arrive in the Middle

East only with a real peace. However, if the Declaration of Principles

could be agreed, it would set the framework for another Geneva Con-

ference. The Secretary noted he had said many times that only at such a

conference could all the pieces of the Middle East puzzle be fit together

so as to lead to lasting peace.

11. Gromyko asked what the Secretary felt chances were for

success in London. The Secretary replied perhaps 1 in 100. Gromyko

seemed rather relieved by this but the Secretary pointed out that even if

137.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Vance-Gromyko Private Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

USSR

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Mr. William D. Krimer,

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Interpreter

Minister Gromyko said that just before the UN Special Session on

Disarmament, during that session, and particularly after that session

he and the Soviet authorities had noted a veritable explosion of hostile

propaganda against the Soviet Union in the United States, and not just

propaganda but a concerted hostile campaign against the Soviet Union.

Some U.S. policy makers had been involved in that campaign. Did this

represent a change in U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union? It was true

that in recent days some statements on U.S.-Soviet relations had been

July–December 1978

made in the U.S., to the effect that our two countries ought to seek pos-

sible understanding on some questions. However, he would tell the

Secretary quite frankly that the Soviet authorities had the impression

that such positive comments had been uttered almost incidentally, as it

were. The Soviets would like to hear such statement made as an expres-

sion of the official policy of the United States toward the Soviet Union.

The Soviet authorities wanted to believe that what they had witnessed

was a merely temporary phenomenon, and would ask for reassurance

that it did not represent the revised policy of the new U.S. Administra-

tion. (Gromyko interjected that the Administration was no longer all

that new.) This had been the subject of a number of discussions with

L.I. Brezhnev. The policy of the Soviet Union toward the United States

remained unchanged. Soviet leaders said so many times, and Brezhnev

personally had spoken on that subject.

Not so long ago an editorial had appeared in Pravda which pre-

sented an assessment of U.S.-Soviet relations as seen from Moscow. He

could confirm that this represented a realistic appraisal of U.S. policy

by the Soviet leadership. At the last session of the Supreme Soviet Gro-

myko had also presented a report which confirmed this as the view of

the Soviet leadership. He would note that Soviet newspapers, Pravda,

Izvestiya and others, published articles almost daily, favoring good re-

lations with the United States, speaking out in favor of strict compli-

ance by both sides with all the obligations of the treaties and agree-

ments between our two countries; articles in favor of detente, peace and

furtherance of relations between us.

Gromyko would ask the Secretary to take a look at the question of

disarmament on which our two countries diverged. The Soviet Union

favored genuine disarmament, and not only in the area of strategic

arms. Indeed, the difference between us appeared to be enormous. For

example, what was going on in Washington at the same time that the

Special Session on Disarmament was meeting in New York? Was all

that some sort of a revenge for the Soviet policy of peace, of developing

good relations with the United States, based on mutual respect and rec-

ognition of our mutual responsibility for peace, while strictly observing

the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of each other’s

country? Gromyko would be very pleased if the Secretary could tell

him something that he could report to L.I. Brezhnev personally and to

the Soviet leadership as a whole. He would add that the Soviet Union’s

policy of peace was one that was pursued not only toward the United

States, but also throughout the world. He would appreciate the Secre-

tary’s informing President Carter to that effect.

The Secretary said he would be happy to respond to Gromyko’s

question and would welcome the opportunity of saying what he was

going to say.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Our policy toward the Soviet Union had not changed and does not

reflect any change in U.S. attitudes toward the Soviet Union. We were

seeking to establish better relations between our two countries. We

wanted to see things get back on an even keel. We wanted to see more

and closer exchanges on a whole variety of matters. He believed that

our two countries bore a special responsibility in view of their political,

military and economic power and influence. In our judgement it was in

the best interests of both our nations to establish closer and deeper rela-

tions between us, both from a practical and a political standpoint, as

well as because over many years there had been deep and close friend-

ships between many of our citizens and between our two countries.

There was a bad time for both of us during the Cold War, but fortu-

nately there then came a period when we decided to put that behind us

and improve relations between us. We made progress in that direction.

However, during the past year several factors had divided us and

made relations between us more difficult. One such factor was the dif-

ferent views we held with respect to Africa and the situation on the Af-

rican continent. Another was the different views we held on matters in-

volving human rights and civil rights. Still another were our different

views with respect to the current situation and the trials currently

going on in the Soviet Union. Events of this kind have exacerbated rela-

tions between us, and had unfortunately led to a gap between our two

countries on a number of issues. He would point out, however, that we

had been trying to find common ground and build upon it in the hope

that in the future we can increase the area of that common ground and

get us back on track again. Both the President and the Secretary hoped

very deeply that this can be done. Gromyko would note that in his re-

cent press conference President Carter had spoken about Soviet-

American relations and had stated his deep desire to have good rela-

tions between our two countries. Another important area where we

had common objectives was that of arms limitations, objectives on

which we can build. The Secretary expressed his hope that we would

remember and abide by the Principles of Relations which were signed

by the United States and the Soviet Union when Nixon was President

of the United States.

Gromyko remarked that that was a good document.

The Secretary believed it was now necessary to turn the corner and

enter upon a new path, take into account each other’s concerns and see

if we can build stronger relations between us in the future. Certainly

that was our desire.

The Secretary had one final word. He had read with great care the

article in Pravda which Gromyko had mentioned. He had decided not

July–December 1978

to respond to certain parts of that article, to which he took exception,

because he believed that this would merely continue a strident dia-

logue between us. He thought that we should be judged by our actions,

for it was actions that reflected the direction in which we were moving.

Gromyko said he had carefully listened to what the Secretary had

said now and at the outset of their current talks. He would not repeat

what he had said in briefly setting forth his assessment of U.S. policy

and in explaining the basis for Soviet policy. There was only one aspect

that he would mention, since the Secretary had raised it. He had al-

ready said a few words on that subject in their previous private talk.

The Soviet Union would not allow anyone to interfere in its internal af-

fairs. Here he could only repeat what he had said yesterday. In this re-

spect the Soviets would stand firm as a rock. The trials in question dealt

with observance of the internal laws of the Soviet Union, and were en-

tirely within the scope of the Soviet Union’s competence. He would ask

the Secretary to explain this to President Carter and to others in the U.S.

Administration to the extent he could.

Gromyko concluded by saying that it would be good if the rela-

tions between our two countries could be kept on a realistic track. That

was the policy of the Soviet Union, and if U.S. policy was like that, too,

both our nations could look forward to the future with optimism.

Gromyko asked the Secretary to convey his best wishes to Presi-

dent Carter.

The Secretary assured him he would do so and asked him to

convey his best wishes to President Brezhnev.

138.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

203927. For the Ambassador. Subject: Message to Gromyko.

1. Please deliver the following message to the Foreign Minister.

2. Quote

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

139.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

19273. For the Secretary from the Ambassador. Subject: Message to

Gromyko. Ref: State 203927.

July–December 1978

1. In absence of Gromyko, who is vacationing outside of Moscow, I

delivered your letter to Acting Foreign Minister Korniyenko morning

of August 14.

2. After reading the letter, and undertaking to transmit it to Gro-

myko, Korniyenko commented that your hope that the Soviet Union

would support the Camp David summit meeting was unfounded. The

Soviet side considers the path of Egypt-Israeli talks to be a blind alley

which can cause “dangerous complications” in the Middle East. Noting

that in my view the Soviet position was wrong, I told Korniyenko that

as a careful reader of the Soviet press I was not surprised at his

response.

3. Regarding a possible Warnke visit to the Soviet Union, I asked

Korniyenko if he could clarify Gromyko’s vacation plans. Korniyenko

replied that Gromyko was presently on vacation outside of the capital.

He said the Soviet side would not want Warnke to postpone his trip,

however. Korniyenko himself would go on vacation shortly (tomorrow

in fact, but only for 10 days) in Moscow and therefore he would be

available to meet Warnke at any time. In response to my hypothetical

question, Korniyenko indicated that it might be possible for Warnke to

meet with Gromyko outside of Moscow, although Korniyenko would

of course have to discuss this with Gromyko should Warnke wish to ar-

range such a meeting.

Toon

140.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Soviet Jewry and Related Events

PARTICIPANTS

Eugene Gold, Chairman, National Conference on Soviet Jewry (NCSJ)

Jerry Goodman, Executive Director, NCSJ

Marina Wallach, Washington Representative, NCSJ

Rabbi Alexander Schindler, President, Union of American Jewish Organizations

Yehuda Hellman, Executive Director, Conference of Presidents

Charlotte Jacobson, Vice President, Zionist Organization of America

Jacqueline Levine, Vice Chairman, American Jewish Congress

Joseph Smukler, Vice Chairman, NCSJ

Sol Goldstein, Officer, NSCJ

Mr. Levine, Conservative Movement

The Secretary

Dr. Marshall Shulman, Special Adviser to the Secretary for Soviet Affairs

Edward Sanders, Senior Advisor

William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR

Robert W. Farrand, EUR/SOV (Bilateral) (Notetaker)

Gold expressed thanks for the opportunity to meet with the Secre-

tary and for his frank and open comments on earlier occasions. Gold

said he and his colleagues felt comfortable talking to the Secretary

about what was happening to Jews in the Soviet Union. He noted that

there seemed to be a marked increase recently in the signs of pressure

being exerted by the Soviets on their Jewish citizenry. The internal situ-

ation was being exacerbated, Gold said, by pointed reports of Jewish

criminal activity in the Soviet press. The media play was having its in-

evitable effect on the Soviet populace. Anti-Semitism in the USSR

seemed definitely on the rise with the seeds already planted in fertile

soil.

From Gold’s and his colleagues’ vantage point, the rumors of

anti-Semitic activity in the USSR were spreading rapidly and the pic-

ture seemed to be “crystallizing” in an ugly way. For example, Gold

said the day may not be far distant when the Soviets move to shut

down emigration of Jewish persons altogether.

July–December 1978

The Shcharanskiy case was also a particular problem about which

something concrete needed to be done. Shcharanskiy was now among

the many “Prisoners of Zion” in the USSR. Gold commended the Secre-

tary for his and the President’s statements in the wake of Shcharan-

skiy’s trial. But, frankly, there was concern among the US Jewish com-

munity that these statements were meant to be the “fundamental

response” on this unfortunate case. The President’s decision to reject

the license application for sale of a computer to TASS (the Soviet News

Agency) was fine but Gold questioned whether enough spade work

had been done before the Dresser (drill bit) plant decision had been

taken. First the President had said the entire license was under review,

then “bang” it was approved. Gold understood that there was still

some controversy within the Government about the Dresser decision

and wondered whether it could still be held up.

The Secretary told Gold that the letter authorizing Dresser to sell

the equipment in question to the Soviets had already been transmitted.

Gold asked the Secretary what he could say about the present situ-

ation in the USSR. He was specifically interested in the “replists” (Note:

These are lists containing names of Soviet Jews and others who have

been trying unsuccessfully to emigrate from the USSR over long pe-

riods of time. The representation lists are compiled by the State Depart-

ment and presented periodically to the Soviets by high level US

officials.)

The Secretary asked about the ground rules for the meeting. He

said that he could be much more open and frank off-the-record and

would prefer it that way. Gold and his colleagues agreed and the con-

versation went off the record.

The Secretary said that he shared his visitors’ concern about where

Soviet Jewry was headed. He said that there was certainly enough hap-

pening to justify their fears. He was not sure, however, that these fears

would necessarily materialize in the manner or with the speed that

Gold had indicated.

As regarded Shcharanskiy, the Secretary said that in addition to

both his and the President’s speaking out on the matter, there had also

been a large number of times when the case had been raised with the

Soviets in other ways. The point was that Shcharanskiy had not been

forgotten. The Secretary did not want—even off the record—to say

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

more about what was being done now on Shcharanskiy’s behalf. He

had, however, met with Mrs. (Avital) Shcharanskiy in Geneva recently

and she had been helpful in advising the Secretary on her husband’s

situation.

On the “refusenik” question, the Secretary told Gold we had been

presenting the replists to the Soviets on every suitable occasion and will

continue to do so.

As regarded Mr. Gold’s comments to the effect that there had been

little affirmative action on all of these matters recently, the Secretary

said he would have to disagree with that assessment. The President

and he had talked about Shcharanskiy to other heads of government

after the recent Bonn Summit. Unfortunately, it had not then been pos-

sible to agree on a common statement. They simply had been unable to

do it. Some governments had their own problems with the Soviets

which precluded their taking a strong public position on the Shcharan-

skiy trial. For example, the Germans had finally been successful after

many years in convincing the Soviets to permit thousands of German-

speaking people to emigrate from the USSR. The German Government

was thus chary about joining in a common statement condemning the

Shcharanskiy trial for fear that the Soviets might retaliate by shutting

off the flow of German emigrants. And different countries had different

problems with the idea of a common statement because of their own re-

lationships with the USSR.

Insofar as the future was concerned, the Secretary said that he con-

tinued to watch the figures on emigration of Jews from the Soviet

Union. In these he had detected a strange pattern in recent months. He

noted that thus far this year the number of Soviet Jews allowed to emi-

grate has been higher than in any year since 1972–73.

With respect to the dissidents, it seemed as though the Soviet Gov-

ernment had decided to run right down the list and hit each dissident

hard. The Secretary asked Ambassador Shulman to give his views on

the dissident trials. The Ambassador said that the Soviets apparently

made a decision at the beginning of this year to clean up the dissident

movement. By sending some of the leading dissidents out of the

country, an act which left the rest in disarray, the Soviets seemingly

hoped to clear out the nests of dissidence and put a stop to the problem

once and for all. They probably also took a look at the first quarter

(1978) trade statistics with the US which were off notably from the same

period a year ago, and decided they had nothing to lose in trade by

moving against the dissidents at this time.

July–December 1978

The Secretary stated that we had three different sets of trials in the

USSR to be concerned about. These were: 1) the trials of Soviet dissi-

dents, 2) the slander charges against two American journalists, Piper

and Whitney (of the Baltimore Sun and New York Times, respectively),4

and 3) the upcoming trial of a US businessman (Francis J. Crawford) of

International Harvester Corporation. As to why these cases were all

occurring right now, Ambassador Shulman added to his remarks about

the dissident trials and noted that the Soviet Government seemed to

have miscalculated that the negative impact in the West would soon

dissipate, based on their experience with the invasion of Czechoslo-

vakia ten years ago. Communists in Western Europe and elsewhere

outside of the USSR and Eastern Europe had also reacted negatively to

the dissident trials just as they had over Soviet actions in Czechoslo-

vakia. The trials merely helped to feed the line about the dictatorial as-

pects of Soviet communism. This, in the Ambassador’s view, would be

a continuing problem for the Soviets. Our problem, however, was how

to move along in our relations with them by providing a balance of in-

centives and disincentives so as to influence their behavior. With re-

spect to the dissidents, we hoped to be able to manipulate the situation

so that other elements of the Soviet Government would begin to hurt

and eventually move to restrain the KGB.

The Secretary added that it was apparent from the charges against

Whitney and Piper that the Soviets hoped to cut off the access of

Western journalists to the dissident community, but it clearly hadn’t

worked.

Gold asked about the Helsinki Final Act and the review session in

Belgrade. Did these not have a role to play in our efforts to bring pres-

sure on the Soviets? Ambassador Shulman responded that in the case

of Belgrade the Soviets saw it as an unmitigated disaster from the

outset and refused to go along with most of the major initiatives there.

Gold wondered about the rest of the “baskets” (apparently in addition

to Basket III) and whether there was not more utility in talking about

the Final Act as a whole when discussing it with the Soviets.

The Secretary said that in Belgrade we gave more emphasis to

Basket III, while the Soviets concentrated their attention on Baskets I

and II. We held throughout the Belgrade session that all Baskets should

be included in the discussion as a connected whole. Views, even among

trial, see E. Barrett Prettyman, Jr., “An Arrest in Moscow: What’s at Stake for U.S.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

our own delegation, however, differed on whether we gave too much

emphasis to Basket III at the expense of the others.

Dr. Shulman stated that we wanted to encourage the Soviets to

keep the numbers of Soviet Jews being allowed to emigrate going up.

What, he asked, could the U.S. Jewish Community do or suggest to

keep those numbers rising? Gold responded that he did not think there

was much more the U.S. Jewish community could do than it was al-

ready doing. The Secretary agreed with Gold that little more could be

expected from the U.S. Jewish community by way of action on this

issue.

Hellman asked whether we might not be able to use trade as a

better carrot in our attempts at influencing the Soviets. The Secretary

replied that the problem was that other countries had the same carrot.

In the case of the Dresser license, for example, some thought that

Dresser was the sole source of (drill bit) technology, but that was

simply not true. Others could sell this (drill bit) technology to the So-

viets as well.

Hellman then raised the subject of credits. He noted that they were

perhaps a useful avenue for applying leverage on the Soviets.

Mr. Levine (Conservative Movement) said that he saw a contradic-

tion in what was being said on the subject of “carrots.” Clearly, in his

view, we had none. He questioned whether we should try to buy the

Soviets with concessions, anyway. Would it not be more effective and

true to our principles to strive to become a bastion of human liberty? It

seemed to him that that would be the simplest and best approach. He

also wondered why we had lumped the dissidents in with the “refuse-

niks.” Did not that needlessly complicate matters, especially since we

were dealing with two different approaches to the problems of Soviet

Jews?

Ambassador Shulman replied that Shcharanskiy was both a dissi-

dent and a “refusenik” and thus a connection between the two groups.

We even had difficulty differentiating between Jews and non-Jews in

many instances. In any case, the problem we faced was much more

than a Jewish question alone. The Secretary said he agreed with Dr.

Shulman. The Secretary said that we ought to act on behalf of, defend

and argue for each group and sub-group which was having trouble ei-

ther living in or leaving the Soviet Union. The Secretary wondered

what one gained by making clear demarcations between these groups.

To this Mr. Gold replied that the Germans had apparently done very

well at it. Gold conceded that by making a clear demarcation between

groups we risked doing less well overall, but perhaps certain

sub-groups would do even better than they otherwise might were they

lumped in to the whole. Gold thought that it was important to speak

out toughly for each group.

141.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, August 29, 1978

SUBJECT

The Dresser Case

The Dresser case has again erupted into controversy, and is be-

coming politically messy. Following Jim Schlesinger’s reclama, it was

agreed by all the parties that we would obtain an assessment from the

Defense Science Board4 in order to provide a solid basis either for a neg-

ative or a positive decision. My hope had been that an authoritative

DSB assessment would permit us to reach a unanimous and final deci-

sion, thus putting the matter to rest without your involvement.

However, though the State/Commerce decision was clearly hasty,

both agencies are unwilling to reconsider their positions in spite of the

clear-cut character of the DSB assessment, and are insisting that you

now make the final decision.

The principal conclusions of the DSB report are as follows:

1. Deep-well drilling technology is a critical technology, which is

wholly concentrated in the U.S.

2. Rock drill bit manufacture is high volume and its supporting de-

sign and application technology are critical technologies. These tech-

nologies are concentrated in the U.S.

July–December 1978

3. Electron beam welding has military significance when computer

controlled:

It is easily diverted

It is not foreign-sourced; the numerical control technology is li-

censed from U.S.

4. Tungsten carbide has military significance:

It is easily diverted

It is not foreign-sourced, at this scale of manufacture.

With regard to substance, I am quite impressed by these three

paragraphs from the letter of transmittal by J. Fred Bucy (president of

Texas Instruments and a member of the DSB):

“My conclusions are that this technology is very significant to na-

tional security in the broadest terms. It is critical to significant develop-

ment of major energy resources throughout the world in the 1980’s.

“There must be a few times within a decade that a subtle decision

can change the course of history. My sincere belief is that a decision re-

garding the export of a turnkey factory for the manufacturing of drill

bits for the exploration of oil is one of those.

“This transfer of technology emphasizes that the whole is greater

than the sum of the parts: that each individual piece may be all right,

but when put together, the whole equals something that is very

significant.”

To ignore the DSB assessment and proceed as if nothing has hap-

pened would be to play into Senator Jackson’s hands, in addition to

perhaps generally hurting our national security.

However, to revoke the licenses would be preemptory and would

now send an excessively negative signal to the Soviet Union. Therefore,

on balance I recommend a suspension on both national security and

foreign policy grounds. Some might say that this is another zigzag; but

the DSB report represents a new factor and a review will preempt pres-

sure for revocation on national security grounds.

Moreover, there are also broader foreign policy considerations in-

volved in the transfer of oil technology to the Soviet Union. In essence,

as the DSB assessment suggests, “it would allow the Soviets to enter the

natural oil and gas fields throughout the world with advanced drilling

technical competence, presenting increased opportunities for them to

exert their policy influence.”

I attach a decision memorandum, in which the positions of the dif-

ferent agencies are stated in their own words.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Before you make your final decision, you may wish to check with

Frank Moore and Ham Jordan, because I believe that this issue is going

to become increasingly sensitive domestically. Moreover, I would rec-

ommend a prompt decision; the press is already entering into the fray,

stimulating competitive and increasingly damaging leaks, and there

are pressures for the release of the DSB report (which is unclassified).

Attachments: Decision Memorandum

Tab A: DSB Report

Tab B: New Letter from Senator Jackson

Tab C: Proposed PRM

142.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, September 2, 1978

143.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

21551. Dept please pass White House and Defense. Subject: SALT

Meeting With Gromyko 8 Sept 78.

1. In 8 September meeting, Gromyko reviewed all points in U.S.

package presented yesterday without changing substance of Soviet po-

sitions and objections. He characterized the talks as to a certain extent

useful and as allowing clarification but stated Soviet initial view that

cret; Immediate; Nodis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

we had not yet given an adequate response to Gromyko’s July

question.

2. On specific issues:

A. New Types. Gromyko reemphasized that Soviet agreement to

U.S. proposal for one new ICBM type, MIRVed or not, was part of a

package, warning against thinking we had it “in our pocket.” He

stressed, however, that their proposal was not a “take it or leave it”

proposition; they proposed only that the other issues be settled “on the

basis” of Soviet proposals. They were prepared to discuss the re-

maining issues.

B. Cruise missiles. Gromyko repeated familiar Soviet positions on

need for a limit of 20 ALCM’s per heavy bomber, no conversion of

transport AFT to carry ALCM’s, no distinction between convention-

ally- and nuclear-armed CM’s (“no external features can help”), and

CM ranges. He made no direct comment on our ALCM numbers capa-

bility statement.

C. Backfire. Gromyko said issue can only be resolved on the basis

of the unilateral statement the Soviets made in Washington.

D. Timing issues. Gromyko repeated the Soviet claim that comple-

tion of reductions before Dec. 30, 1981 was physically impossible. After

repeating Soviet protocol duration position, he said it was impossible

to discuss a fixed date for expiration of protocol before the sides knew

when the Agreement would be signed, much less when it would come

into force. This may have been a signal of receptivity to eventual

agreeing to expiration three years from date of signature.

E. Fractionation: Gromyko said a mutually acceptable solution

could be sought to the issue, repeating usual linkage to limiting

number of ALCM’s per bomber and agreeing on new types definition.

F. Depressed SLBM trajectory: Gromyko said it was difficult to re-

spond substantively without a detailed U.S. proposal. Delegations

could discuss the idea but he expressed concern that raising a new issue

could delay reaching agreement.

3. Overall, Gromyko’s tone was moderate. Gromyko’s central view

of the meetings was carefully balanced: the meeting had been “to a cer-

tain extent useful” in clarifying points, but the Soviet side had to say

that they did not feel that the U.S. side had adequately responded to the

Soviet “question” posed in Geneva in July, and they hoped this was not

our last word. Gromyko hoped for instructions for the U.S. delegation

in Geneva to move faster, and he briefly repeated his July complaints

that the U.S. administration did not give “sufficient rebuff” to domestic

criticisms of SALT.

4. Warnke responded by stating that we hoped Gromyko’s com-

ments were not the last word on the U.S. proposals either, and by re-

144.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, September 17, 1978

Dear President Brezhnev:

I am pleased to inform you that President Sadat and Prime Min-

ister Begin signed today two documents which were drafted in the

course of intensive, thirteen-day long negotiations which I conducted

with them at Camp David. One is titled “A Framework for Peace in the

Middle East,” and it defines principles that may apply to the negotia-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tion of peace treaties between Israel and all its neighbors. The other

document is titled “A Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty

between Egypt and Israel.” Our Ambassador will transmit these docu-

ments to you. Together, they provide a constructive framework for the

resolution of the tragic and difficult conflict between Israel and her

Arab neighbors. I believe that a historic step toward peace in the

Middle East has thus been taken.

Because the Palestinian issue has been so central to the Middle East

dispute, the first document concentrates on developing an agreed basis

which will permit the progressive resolution of that issue over the next

five years. The parties to the Camp David meeting agreed on the need

for a five-year transitional period during which the inhabitants of the

West Bank and Gaza will establish a self-governing authority with full

autonomy to replace the Israeli military government. Israel will retain a

military presence only in specified locations for security purposes. To

negotiate the details of the transitional arrangements, Jordan will be in-

vited to join the negotiations. There is a provision in the agreement for a

Jordanian role in the maintenance of security, if Jordan so desires.

During the five-year transitional period, the Palestinians will also

participate in negotiations with Egypt, Israel, and Jordan (if Jordan

agrees to participate) on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza. The

Palestinians have a right to join the negotiations on a peace treaty be-

tween Jordan and Israel. These negotiations will be based on all the

provisions and principles of United Nations Security Council Resolu-

tion 242. There will be no new Israeli settlements in the West Bank and

Gaza during the negotiations to establish the self-government in this

area.

These arrangements recognize the legitimate rights of the Pales-

tinian people and will permit them to participate in the determination

of their own future. The Palestinians will decide how they shall govern

themselves, their representatives will take part directly in the negotia-

tions affecting their future, and their elected representatives will vote

on the agreement on the final status of the West Bank and Gaza.

This document also provides for security arrangements and com-

mitments to peace which should be part of a comprehensive settlement

between Israel and each of her neighbors.

The second agreement, “A Framework for the Conclusion of a

Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel,” affirms both Israel’s will-

ingness to restore to Egypt the full exercise of its sovereignty in Sinai

and Egypt’s willingness to make peace and to establish normal rela-

tions with Israel. In the course of the Camp David negotiations, agree-

July–December 1978

ment was reached on the establishment of three security zones, on the

limitation of forces and armaments, on the phased withdrawal of Is-

raeli forces from all of Sinai, and on the return of the Sinai airfields to

Egyptian civilian control.

The first major Israeli withdrawal from Sinai will take place be-

tween three and nine months after the signing of the peace treaty,

which itself should be signed within three months of this framework

agreement. At the completion of this interim withdrawal, normal rela-

tions will be established between Egypt and Israel. The final Israeli

withdrawal will take place between two and three years after the signa-

ture of the peace treaty.

There is one major issue on which agreement has not been reached.

Egypt states that agreement to remove Israeli settlements from Egyp-

tian territory is a prerequisite to a peace treaty. Israel states that the

issue of the Israeli settlements should be resolved during the peace ne-

gotiations. Within two weeks the Knesset will decide on the issue of the

settlements.

Obviously, not all of the problems in the Middle East conflict could

be resolved by these Camp David agreements on a framework for

peace. But with patience and good will, I believe that this achievement

will generate the momentum necessary to resolve justly and construc-

tively the remaining issues.

Because the Middle East issue is of such significance for relations

between our two countries, I know that you share with us the convic-

tion that peace in that region will contribute to a reduction of tensions

between our two countries. I very much hope you can use your influ-

ence in the Middle East to bring about the comprehensive settlement

that the United States and the Soviet Union both desire.

With my best wishes,

Sincerely,

Jimmy Carter

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

145.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

237880. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With Dobrynin, 19 September.

1. The Secretary met Dobrynin 19 September and covered the fol-

lowing points:

2. Climate in Moscow: Reporting on his stay in the Soviet Union,

Dobrynin said Soviets were hopeful that US-Soviet relations could now

begin to improve, and that it might be possible to wrap up SALT

during Gromyko’s present visit. Secretary said we shared this hope.

3. Middle East: Secretary summarized the developments at Camp

146.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Dobrynin came in to “renew our friendly discus-

sions” after a prolonged absence. He asked me for my prognosis for

147.

Memorandum From Jessica Tuchman Mathews of the

National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant

for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, September 20, 1978

SUBJECT

Human Rights and The Olympics

In winning their bid to hold the Olympics in Moscow the Soviets

scored a great potential coup for both their foreign exchange earnings

and international prestige and propaganda interests. However it is also

a big risk, for the spotlight could easily shift from the Games to the

human rights issue. I believe we should be looking at ways to exploit

that risk, and to exact the highest possible price in terms of advancing

our own human rights interests.

—There are already rumors in the USSR that Jewish emigration

will be cut off some time before the Games. Some believe that the high

current rate of emigration is designed to ease the tension before the

Games (though visas are being granted only to first time requesters and

not to any refuseniks or to any prominent dissidents). Are there ways

to exploit this situation: Can we accelerate emigration between now

and 1980? Should we suggest to the Soviets that they grant visas to a

particular list of individuals who are of concern to us, with the quiet

implication that otherwise these individuals will be a focus of attention

at the Games? Are there other ways to reach the same end?

—What about access to Russian citizens by press and athletes

during the Games? Should we be pushing for maximum access in the

true Olympic spirit? What are the terms of the NBC contract? After

paying through the nose (a record high price) for the broadcast rights

has NBC insisted on anything in the way of freedom of coverage or will

they only be allowed to film designated glories of Soviet culture? If you

watched any of the last several Olympics you will remember all the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

“color” stories—scenes in Munich beer halls, the quaint beauties of

Innsbruck, Canadian folk dancing, etc., etc. There will be an even

greater incentive to do such coverage of a country that is of such great

interest to Americans about which they know so little. Should we be of-

fering NBC any help in these negotiations and in their subsequent plan-

ning? For example, if they do a piece on Soviet ballet, should they also

have film (taped in advance) on the stories of Nureyev, the Panovs,3

etc.? The same with music, science, etc.

—What will be our policy if RFE/RL are denied press credentials?

What about other individual press? Should we quietly encourage the

media to send a few of their Soviet experts—perhaps including indi-

viduals who were earlier asked to leave the USSR? What about denials

of visas to individual spectators? In short, should we push the USSR to

the maximum extent to live up to the spirit in which the Games are sup-

posed to be held and to the promises they must have made to the Inter-

national Olympic Committee, or should we just accept the fact that

these Olympics will be different from those held in the West? I think we

should push.

—What will be our policy if the Israeli team or the South African

team is banned from the Games—especially if the Soviets announce the

decision at the last minute?

—What will we do during the Games if an American or other par-

ticipant gets into trouble of some kind that relates to human rights (e.g.,

press interview with a forbidden dissident) and gets deported? If we

can develop an answer should we inform the Soviets in advance so that

they will have no doubt as to how we would react?

—Should we do anything in the way of informing American par-

ticipants about this issue—perhaps briefings made available to those

who are interested? Or perhaps that is going too far.

—[1 paragraph (5½ lines) not declassified]

148.

Editorial Note

Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Secretary of State

Cyrus Vance met in New York to discuss the Strategic Arms Limitation

Talks (SALT) during Gromyko’s annual trip to the United States for the

United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). Their initial meeting took

place on September 27, 1978, in the Soviet Mission in New York. At that

meeting, both men reaffirmed their commitment to approve and sign

SALT II. The memorandum of conversation from the plenary session

focused on Gromyko’s presentation of the Soviet view on SALT. He

agreed that each side had the right to test and deploy one new intercon-

tinental ballistic missile (ICBM) during the term of the Treaty. He also

reaffirmed the Soviet proposal to limit to 20 the number of long-range

cruise missiles that each bomber could carry. Gromyko reiterated that

the Soviets were tired of the new and unrelated U.S. proposals, which

were put forth at each meeting. (Department of State, Office of the

Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet

Gromyko/Vance Meeting, 9/78)

The two men continued their talks at the U.S. Mission the fol-

lowing morning. According to the memorandum of conversation,

Vance began by responding to Gromyko’s statement of the previous

day and reiterating the U.S. proposal. With regard to new types of

ICBMs, the Americans and the Soviets were in agreement on one new

missile. However, Vance reiterated that two differences remained be-

tween the two sides: one, the duration of the protocol, and two, the

timing of the reduction of each side to the agreed upon 2,250 limit on

delivery vehicles. Additionally, he noted that the definitions of cruise

missiles and cruise missile range were still under negotiation. Gro-

myko followed up by restating the Soviet proposal, agreeing that a date

for dismantling and destruction still remained to be determined. The

meeting concluded with a brief discussion on the Middle East, during

which Gromyko wanted to know how Syria, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan

had responded to the Camp David Accords and to Secretary Vance’s

recent trip. Vance discussed these countries’ concerns with Gromyko.

(Ibid.) For the Camp David Accords, see footnotes 2 and 3 to Document

144. For the schedule of the Vance trip to the Middle East, September

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

149.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Carter-Gromyko Private Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Foreign Minister Gromyko said that he had a message for the Pres-

ident from L.I. Brezhnev in response to the brief message the President

had sent Brezhnev. Inasmuch as Gromyko was coming to the United

States in any case, Brezhnev had asked him to hand this message to the

President personally. Gromyko handed the President the Russian text

of that message together with a “working” English translation.

The President asked Gromyko if he should read the message now,

and Gromyko replied in the affirmative.

150.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Carter-Gromyko Plenary Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary Cyrus R. Vance

Secretary Harold Brown

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Warnke

Ambassador Toon

Mr. David Aaron

Mr. Reginald Bartholomew

Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

First Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Mr. V.G. Makarov

Mr. V.G. Komplektov

Mr. A.A. Bessmertnykh

Mr. N.N. Detinov

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

The President first wanted to tell the Minister that he was glad to

have him come back to Washington for this meeting. He was happy to

note that relations between our two countries appeared to be rapidly

improving. He believed that a matter of first priority for our two states

was successful completion of the work on the SALT Agreement. As far

as we were concerned, this could be accomplished this morning. The

President also wanted Gromyko to know that a comprehensive detente

remained a major aim and keystone of our policy. We wanted our rela-

tions with the Soviet Union to be based on mutual respect and mutual

advantage. There had been mention of competition as well as coopera-

tion between us. The President wanted to put major emphasis on

cooperation.

The President noted that there were a number of differences be-

tween us which had resulted from competition. He proposed to men-

tion them briefly.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Middle East

The President believed that both our countries wanted to pursue

peace in that region. Each of us had close relations with the countries

involved in the Middle East dispute. We felt that the Camp David dis-

cussion2 had produced a viable mechanism for working out a peace

treaty between Egypt and Israel, the main combatants in that area. He

expressed the hope that the Soviet Union could help to move this

process along, and that within the bounds of its own foreign policy it

would support the Camp David agreements. We did not have any mili-

tary forces in that area and, in fact, our observers in the Sinai might be

removed once that peace treaty went into effect.

MBFR Negotiations in Vienna

The President said he was discouraged by the lack of progress at

the Vienna negotiations. The same was true of some of our allies; some

of them, in fact, wanted to end the talks. The main difference between

us concerned our present assessment of the Warsaw Pact forces, and

we would like to see this difference resolved. One possibility, which the

President had discussed with the leaders of Western countries when he

was at the Bonn economic meeting, was to work out an appropriate

definition of military forces to be counted. The present difference of

180,000 between our assessment and the number provided by the

Warsaw Pact countries was possibly caused by a different definition of

which troops were to be counted. The President repeated that he would

like to see it resolved.

US–PRC Relations

Another matter of concern which President Brezhnev had ex-

pressed to President Carter and to Senator Kennedy3 was our future re-

lations with the People’s Republic of China. We had nothing to conceal

in this respect, and the Shanghai communique4 showed that all we had

in mind was to establish peaceful relations with the PRC. It would be a

mistake for us to use our relations with the PRC against the Soviet

Union. We have no thought of doing that. We did want to have

peaceful relations with China, but would not permit anyone to drive a

wedge between us and the Soviet Union.

July–December 1978

Trade and Science

The President expressed his hope that we would be able to in-

crease our trade with the Soviet Union. As Gromyko knew, he had re-

cently approved US investment in a plant to produce oil-drilling equip-

ment in the Soviet Union. As for science, he had instructed his Science

Advisor, Dr. Frank Press, to proceed with scientific exchanges.

CTB

The President said he would like to see us move rapidly to conclu-

sion of a complete test ban treaty.

Africa

He had one general comment with regard to Africa. The most se-

rious threat to good relations between us and the Soviet Union in the

future, in his view, resulted from Soviet activities in Africa. In the Horn

of Africa the circumstances were now more stable and had improved

since he and Gromyko had met the last time. We were trying with en-

thusiasm in the United Nations to bring about agreement on the Nami-

bian problem, but even more threatening was the dispute concerning

Rhodesia. We had noted the large contribution in the form of advice,

instructors and weapons which the Soviet Union was giving the Patri-

otic Front forces. We were engaged in trying to bring about a peaceful

solution for the conflict between the government of Rhodesia and the

Patriotic Front. We would welcome the cooperation of the Soviet Union

in bringing about that peaceful solution. If there were any Soviet mili-

tary involvement in the area, that could have very serious conse-

quences. We hoped that the Soviets would cooperate with us in

bringing the parties together to decide on their future leaders. We had

no preference among them, except to ensure that they were acceptable

to the people of Zimbabwe and Rhodesia.

That completed the President’s brief review of overall relations be-

tween our two countries. He would be glad to hear Gromyko’s re-

sponse and any other comments he might want to offer.

Gromyko noted that he and the President had agreed that they

would discuss SALT II matters separately. At this time he wanted to

say a few words about the relations between our countries, expressing

views on behalf of the Soviet leadership and President Brezhnev

personally.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Overall Soviet-US Relations

Gromyko had to tell the President quite frankly that over the re-

cent period our relations had worsened. It was true, of course, that he

did discern a somewhat more positive note in recent statements by the

President’s representatives, in the President’s comments today and in

some press articles, indicating that in the most recent period, during

the past month perhaps, there had been somewhat of a turning point

for the better. That might be so, but he had to say that he had not dis-

cerned anything truly substantive to indicate an improvement in our

relations. The fact that our relations had become worse as compared to

the past was known to the whole world, and this could not fail to con-

cern and perplex the Soviet Union. He wanted to convey this to the

President in all frankness. He had taken note of the President’s pro-

nouncement, contained in his message to Brezhnev, where the Presi-

dent had used words to the effect that we should not try to place the

blame for the worsening of relations between us, but should look

ahead. This was quite understandable, but he would point out that the

Soviet Union was not prepared to assume any blame for the worsening

of relations and he wanted the President to know that.

Gromyko noted that in those matters where our respective views

did not fully coincide, or did not coincide at all, affairs could be con-

ducted in a number of different ways. Differences could be discussed

without crossing a certain line, throwing back the relations between us.

These relations had been laboriously built up between the Soviet Union

and the United States and the process had not been easy. Quite the con-

trary, it had been an arduous and difficult road. On the one hand, rela-

tions between us could be conducted with the use of fine instruments,

seeking ways to bridge gaps and to come to mutual understanding. On

the other hand, one could also use an axe, raising and dropping it re-

peatedly to sever the threads that existed between us. Again, speaking

quite frankly, he would point out that in his view the latter method was

the one used by the United States quite frequently in the recent past. Of

course, such a situation could not but have a negative impact on the

delicate process called international detente. He would hope that in all

assessments of each other’s policy neither side would fail to observe a

certain sense of proportion and not go beyond a certain limit. As seen

by many people, one or two statements by the leaders of one of our

countries were quite enough to derail detente. Of course, it would not

be much of a detente if that were really true. He regarded detente as a

process that goes much deeper, one that was based on the hearts and

minds of literally hundreds of millions of people. He did believe that if

one plotted detente as a curve on a graph, on the whole that curve was

pointing upward. There were ups and downs, to be sure, but on the

whole if one felt the pulse of hundreds and hundreds of millions of

July–December 1978

people all over the world, detente was on an upward track. It was a

process that needed to be developed and was developing, but the

greater the effort applied in that direction the better and stronger it

would be. For its part, the Soviet Union was fully prepared to do all in

its power to promote everything that furthered detente, and to pre-

serve in our mutual relations everything that had been achieved in the

past, and boldly go further.

Gromyko wanted to assure the President that in all its actions the

Soviet Union was not trying to undercut relations between the United

States and third countries so long as these relations were not directed

against the Soviet Union. He and the Soviet leadership felt that condi-

tions were now ripe for going ahead, improving and strengthening our

relations.

Gromyko noted that in his statement today the President had not

referred to one thought which he had repeatedly expressed in the past.

Perhaps that was only an oversight, but it was an axiom of foreign

policy that the nature of relations between the Soviet Union and the

United States to an enormous extent determined the general world sit-

uation, the state of detente, the state of East-West relations and the in-

ternational atmosphere as a whole. That was indisputable, and it was

an idea the President had put forward in the past and one with which

the Soviet Union agreed wholeheartedly.

The President wanted to repeat that, as he had said earlier, good

relations with the Soviet Union were a keystone of our foreign policy.

Gromyko said that was one aspect of the matter, the other being

that these relations determined the general situation throughout the

world. That was not necessarily to everyone’s liking, and he was aware

of the many epithets being directed at each of us, but particularly at the

Soviet Union, referring to superpowers, to attempts at exercising he-

gemony, etc. He felt that neither of our countries was to blame in that

respect, for neither of us had elected ourselves as superpowers. That

had resulted from the objective process of historical development.

Gromyko wanted to speak briefly on some specific aspects the

President had touched upon.

Middle East

With regard to the Middle East situation he had to say that the So-

viet Union took a different approach to the actual state of affairs in that

area. He would note that both sides agreed that the situation there was

complex and dangerous. As for methods to resolve Middle East

problems and the specific political steps necessary to ensure a settle-

ment of the Middle East problems, our respective standpoints were en-

tirely different. Regarding the Camp David meetings, of course the

President would know that the Soviet Union did not share his views

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

concerning the results achieved and would not associate itself with the

process and methods used. The Soviets were against separate “deals.”

Gromyko would say that the United States had acted rudely toward the

Soviet Union despite the common understanding achieved last year, to

the effect that we would take concerted action with respect to the

Middle East. He noted that the United States had gone a separate way,

demonstratively disregarding the previous understanding with the So-

viet Union.

As for Camp David, if anything was accomplished there, it was

that Israel had obtained what it had been striving for from the very be-

ginning, while Sadat had received nothing and had in fact lost every-

thing he had. At the same time Syria and Jordan and the Palestinians

had been completely circumvented, producing great disarray in the

ranks of the Arabs. Was this really the path to peace and calm in the

Middle East? The Soviets did not believe so, and no one could convert

them to the views of the United States or Sadat or Begin on this score.

They had their own assessment and views. That the Soviet Union

wanted peace in the Middle East was well known throughout the

world. It wanted to see the states in the Middle East live in peace as in-

dependent sovereign states, and this, of course, included Israel. The So-

viet Union had stated this hundreds of times for all the world to hear,

and its position was well known. It was equally well known that the So-

viet Union wanted to do all in its power to safeguard the legitimate

rights of the Palestinians. Now he could only say that they would have

to wait and see how events developed in the future.

Gromyko asked the President not to consider him a pessimist. The

Soviets were optimists and firmly believed that eventually all the

problems would be resolved for the people of the Middle East. The So-

viets had never had any idea of pushing Israel into the sea. On the con-

trary, they had upheld Israel many times in the international arena, cer-

tainly to a much greater extent than the Israelis themselves were doing

by their ill-considered extremist statements. Gromyko concluded his

discussion of the Middle East by saying he supposed each of us would

retain our own concepts with regard to the Middle East.

MBFR—Negotiations in Vienna

Gromyko said that, of course, he, too, was disappointed that no

real progress had been achieved in Vienna so far, although he would

point out that when these negotiations first began, he had not thought

that agreement was just around the corner. He thought that these nego-

tiations would be lengthy, because the matters dealt with were impor-

tant and sensitive for both sides.

Gromyko wanted to draw the President’s attention to one partic-

ular aspect of this entire subject. Statements were being made to the ef-

July–December 1978

fect that the Socialist countries must reduce their armed forces and ar-

maments in greater proportion than Western countries. The Soviet

view was that reduction of levels must be accomplished in such a way

as not to alter the existing correlation of forces between East and West.

The Soviets felt that this was the only real road that could lead to agree-

ment. He repeated the words “without altering the correlation of

forces.” Surely this could not have a negative effect on any of the coun-

tries involved, because if the reductions were accomplished in this

manner, the degree of security enjoyed by both sides would remain un-

changed. In passing, he would point out that almost four months had

elapsed since the last proposal by the Eastern countries, but the

Western powers still had not responded.

China

Gromyko wanted to state at the outset that the Soviet Union was

not all opposed to normal relations between the United States and

China, just as it was not opposed to normal relations between any two

or more countries. However, the Soviets were resolutely against any

country, including the United States, developing relations with China

in order to use them to the detriment of the Soviet Union. The President

would probably not agree with this, but the Soviets were gaining the

impression that the United States was trying to “play the Chinese card”

to the detriment of Soviet interests. It was entirely possible that up to

now this process had not gone beyond the framework of stated policy.

However, the Soviets did see certain phenomena that were perplexing.

In this connection, he would particularly mention the conclusion of a

treaty between Japan and China. He could not believe that Japan had

proceeded to conclude that treaty without some form of consultation

with the United States and advice from the US Government. If this had

indeed taken place, it would seem to him that the action taken was ex-

cessively hasty. This was not the road that should be taken in relations

with China. In addition, he had noted reports appearing from time to

time in the press to the effect that China intended or had already begun

to purchase large quantities of arms from various countries, perhaps

from some of the US allies and perhaps from the United States as well.

He could not assert that he had a mountain of information on this sub-

ject, but such was the impression of the Soviet leadership. In this con-

nection he could only say that if something like this was indeed taking

place, it would be a very major problem that could seriously impact the

relations between our two countries.

Trade

Gromyko said it was a fact and a truism that trade played an im-

portant role in the relations between our countries. Both sides had said

so repeatedly. Unfortunately he had to note that trade between us,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

which had been not too highly developed in the past, had regressed

still further. He felt that this was detrimental to both countries and be-

lieved it to be a mistake. Of course, he was aware of and appreciative of

some of the actions the President had taken to correct that situation.

But, what was needed here was to open the gates to that volume of

trade between us that would be worthy of our two nations. When he

spoke of trade, he meant trade of mutual advantage with full recogni-

tion of the significance it had for overall relations between us.

Africa

Gromyko said that the Soviets could not understand the origin of

the fears current in the United States with regard to the actions of the

Soviet Union in Africa. He asked rhetorically what had been so terrible

about what the Soviet Union had done in Africa. He answered that the

Soviet Union had done nothing, it did not have a single base on the Af-

rican continent, nor a single military detachment. As for Southern Af-

rica, the Soviets had not dispatched a single individual to that area, not

even diplomats. As for the influence of Soviet ideology, was not the

United States spreading its own ideology every day, every hour and

every minute? The Soviets could not be expected to erect barriers

against ideology, and certainly no one could stop them from being

what they were. However, they were not interfering in anyone’s affairs.

With respect to Rhodesia, Gromyko pointed out that the Soviets

did not have a single individual in the area. The President had spoken

of the Soviets instructing the national liberation movement there. He

would ask: “Whoever saw a Soviet soldier or instructor in Rhodesia?”

No one could even produce a single white man who could be falsely ac-

cused of being a Soviet soldier or instructor. Regarding the various fac-

tions in Rhodesia, when Mugabe and Nkomo6 had met, Gromyko had

expressed satisfaction, hoping that something would come out of their

meeting. A few days later he had heard that they had been unable to

reach agreement. In principle, the Soviet Union would like to see the

local people take power into their own hands. He thought he had men-

tioned to the President during their last meeting that 24 out of 25

people in Rhodesia being black, that made it very easy to decide in

whose hands power should rest—obviously not in the hands of the

one, but in the hands of the 24. The Soviet Union resolutely opposed

any attempt to tie the hands of the local people in order to preserve the

colonial racist regime in Rhodesia. He was certain that the United

States would only gain in prestige if it were to take a position in favor of

the vast majority in Rhodesia and would come out against the pitiful

above “Mugabe.”

July–December 1978

handful of racists there who were trying to drown in blood the national

liberation movement in Rhodesia. Of course it was up to the United

States to act as it saw fit, but time in any case was working against the

racists. He believed the President would appear in a very good light if

he took a stand in support of the local people in that area. That would

be a major noble act on his part.

As for Namibia, Gromyko believed the situation there to be some-

what similar. At long last he had seen a representative of Namibia in

the United Nations, whereas he still did not know what a Rhodesian

looked like. In Namibia the racist South African regime was trying to

crush the liberation movement by staging farce elections. What was the

purpose of all that? It was clearly flouting the will of the United Na-

tions and yet, the countries friendly to South Africa kept silent. Re-

garding Namibia, too, Soviet policy was the same as with regard to

Rhodesia—not to interfere in any way other than to make Soviet views

known publicly in the United Nations or from Moscow. He thought

that if the Soviet Union and the United States could act together, all

these problems in Rhodesia and Namibia could be resolved promptly.

The whole world would only thank us, and the only ones displeased

would be the small groups of local racists in both these countries, who

were engaged in exploiting the local population.

CTB

Gromyko noted that the CTB negotiations were indeed moving

forward, but rather slowly. The main thing he would want to point out

was that whenever the situation at these negotiations appeared to im-

prove, US representatives would introduce new proposals that threw

cold water on the whole process. There was a time when the United

States had argued in favor of a five-year term for a CTB treaty. At that

time the Soviet Union was more in favor of a three-year term, although

it did not oppose five-years. It simply thought that it was easier to work

out a three-year treaty. Then, quite suddenly, in the United States

various officials began to assert that five years was too long, that such

duration would interfere with certain national plans for testing nuclear

weapons, while a three-year term would not. That position was hardly

convincing. The Soviet Union had finally expressed agreement to the

five-year term, but then the United States changed to three. All these

zigzags were most perplexing and difficult to understand. The Soviet

Union would take this into account in the future. For their part, the So-

viets could also talk about national plans, but they stand on a different

position. Things would be very difficult indeed were they to reply in

kind. Nevertheless, since the United States had changed its position,

obviously the Soviets would have to take this into account, because

there were two other parties to the negotiations. Basically, they would

like to see this agreement completed. It would be a limited agreement,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

of course, because apart from the three particular powers, other nuclear

powers would not be signatories to the agreement. Nevertheless, it

would have a positive impact on the international situation.

In conclusion, Gromyko said that these were the specific consider-

ations he had wanted to convey to the President, and in general wanted

to tell the President on behalf of the Soviet leadership and L.I. Brezhnev

personally that the Soviet Union’s policy was aimed at good relations

with the United States and remained as set out and formulated in

Brezhnev’s message to the President. The Soviet Union would do all in

its power to maintain and develop good relations with the United

States.

The President noted that the time at our disposal was limited and

he would prefer to let Secretary Vance and Ambassador Toon respond

in detail to what Gromyko had said. He would say a few sentences,

however, so there would be no misunderstanding.

First, the President would tell Gromyko that we recognized the

greatness of the Soviet Union and its profound influence throughout

the world. We also recognized that whenever we could work together

to alleviate conflict, this produced important results. We were dealing

with other nations with a respect for their independence, and this was

true of our relations with China, Israel, Egypt and others. We had no

wish to impose our will on any nation. The President had already men-

tioned that in some instances the Soviets and we wanted the same

thing, for example peace and autonomy in the Middle East. But, we ap-

proached these goals from a different perspective, doing so openly and

without attempting to mislead anyone.

MBFR

The President noted that the MBFR negotiations had now dragged

on for five years. What was needed was an agreed data base, on the

basis of which progress could be achieved. We agreed that the forces of

East and West should be equivalent, but we disagreed on the numbers

the East had put forward. This difference should be resolved, and one

possible way of resolving it would be to define what troops should be

counted. The President had already said that he had discussed this pos-

sibility with Western leaders during his visit to Bonn.

China

The President thought it desirable to reemphasize that we were not

planning to play the Chinese card against the Soviet Union. This would

be furthest away from our plans, would be deeply resented by China as

well as the Soviet Union, and the US people would not permit that. He

would make one other point in this connection: the Chinese had never

attempted to obtain arms from us. What other nations in Europe did

July–December 1978

was of course their concern, but we had done nothing to encourage

such arms sales.

Africa

The President believed that our purpose in Africa was the same as

that of the Soviets, that is to ensure majority rule. We preferred to do

this peacefully, while the Soviet Union did so by supplying weapons.

We had noted large sales of weapons to Zambia and Mozambique, and

this concerned us. As Gromyko knew, Cuba had 40,000 persons in Af-

rica. Cuba was heavily influenced by the Soviet Union. The Soviets

were making large payments to Cuba, exceeding five million dollars a

day. The Cuban presence was also of concern to us.

CTB

In this connection the President said that a three-year term for the

treaty would suit us better. He hoped we were in harmony on this and

would proceed to conclude the treaty without delay. He did not, how-

ever, want to conclude it before concluding a SALT Agreement. It

would be better if he submitted a CTB Treaty to Congress together with

a SALT Treaty. We believed that there should be no testing other than

laboratory testing, and that there should be adequate verification.

[Omitted here is discussion of SALT; see Foreign Relations, 1969–

151.

Message From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, undated

Dear Mr. President:

I am communicating with regard to the critical situation in and

around Beirut, which has become so dangerous and intractable that I

believe urgent measures must be taken by the international commu-

nity, following on the October 4 appeal by the President of the Security

Council and the Secretary General of the United Nations.

I firmly hope that our governments can agree on the need to bring

the present violence in Lebanon to an immediate halt, in order both to

stop the tragic loss of life and to prevent a possible widening of the con-

flict. If the violence can be stopped, it should then be possible to begin

to seek solutions to the problems which have beset Lebanon.

I believe that the international community, which has a legitimate

concern over the future of Lebanon, must be directly involved in a per-

manent resolution of Lebanon’s problems, as well as in immediate

steps to stop the violence.

I hope that the parties involved in the present fighting will agree to

an immediate ceasefire, as a first step. My Government is prepared to

support steps, including a Security Council resolution, which would

call for a ceasefire, a separation of forces and humanitarian measures.

We hope this would allow at least a beginning to be made in achieving

a political reconciliation. I urge that your Government will support

such steps.

I have also supported the efforts of the President of France4 to find

a way out of the present crisis in Lebanon. Similarly, my Government

July–December 1978

has taken a positive attitude toward the efforts of Arab states, as ex-

pressed in the Arab Deterrent Force; we would welcome additional ef-

forts by these states to bring about a real and lasting ceasefire leading to

peace in Lebanon. I believe, however, that regional efforts must be cou-

pled with involvement of the wider international community.

I have sent my views on the present Lebanese situation to Presi-

dent Assad. My Government has also urged Israel to exercise restraint

and to counsel their contacts in Lebanon to comply with a ceasefire.

I assume that you will be discussing the Lebanese situation with

President Assad during his current visit. For humanitarian reasons, to

forestall a drift toward wider hostilities in the region and to create a sit-

uation which will allow the process of reconciliation to begin, I ask that

you use your influence with President Assad to support the objectives

advanced by France and to do so publicly.

I assure you, Mr. President, of my desire to work with you on this

important matter. I stress the urgency of acting immediately on this

matter to stop the bloodshed which increases hourly.

Sincerely,

J. Carter

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

152.

Message From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

Honorable Mr. President,

In answer to your communication of October 5, I must report that

the developments of events in Lebanon in recent days causes us great

concern too.

We agree that an immediate ceasefire of all of the parties involved

in the conflict must be implemented.

Second, I would like to especially stress: You undoubtedly have

great capabilities in restraining Israel from any sort of action which

may lead only to an even greater exacerbation of the situation in

Lebanon.

153.

Message From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter

WH81377. CommCen Camp David: Deliver immediately to Phil

Wise for the President. Note: A memorandum from David Aaron to the

President will be forthcoming. Exclusively for the President from Secre-

tary Vance. Subject: Meeting With Gromyko.

1. We (Paul [Warnke], Mac [Toon] and I, plus interpreter) met for

two-and-a-half hours with Gromyko, Korniyenko, Dobrynin and inter-

preter. After some sparring around Gromyko agreed in principle to ac-

cept the concept of averaging for ALCM’s on heavy bombers.

2. He recessed for a consultation with higher authority and came

up with the following proposed package: a) an average of 25 ALCM’s

per carrier; b) no multiple independently targetable warheads on

ALCM’s through 1985; c) all ALCM cruise missile limits to be in the

treaty/agreement; d) the maximum number of warheads on existing

types of ICBM’s not to exceed 10 through the period of the treaty/

agreement.

3. I said I would be prepared to recommend to you for your consid-

eration an average of 30 ALCM’s per aircraft. As to the other items I

said I would have to study them but that my initial reaction was: that 10

was too high, 25 was too low, and that any provisions concerning mul-

tiple independently targetable warheads should be in a statement as

you had stated in Washington, and not in a treaty.

4. Gromyko then came back with the statement that inasmuch as

you had stated in Washington that we would not equip air launched

cruise missile with MIRV’s for the term of the agreement through 1985

154.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State and the White House

Secto 12111. Dept. please pass NSC JCS and DOD. Pass NSC for

Dr. Brzezinski. SecDef for Secretary Brown. JCS for Gen Jones. Subject:

SALT First Plenary With Gromyko on 22 October 1978. Ref: Secto

cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent to Carter at Camp David in telegram WH81378, October 23.

Vance recalled this meeting in his memoirs: “In late October, I went to Moscow. I told

Gromyko bluntly that the Soviets had missed an opportunity to conclude a SALT Treaty.

I said that the Russians did not seem to understand that Carter had made a serious at-

tempt at the last meeting in Washington to make an agreement possible, particularly with

our movement on cruise missiles. Cruise missile limits were politically and militarily dif-

ficult for us, but we had tried to meet Soviet concerns and had gone as far as we could,

consistent with our security interests and those of our NATO allies. The Soviets should

have understood the importance of this move, as well as our proposal of a comprehen-

sive negotiating package.” (Hard Choices, p. 107). The full memorandum of conversation

for this meeting is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Ad-

Foreign Policy File, P840153–1530.

July–December 1978

Summary: Gromyko’s presentation was generally tough. This has

been standard fare at each initial meeting we have had over the past 20

months. He made constructive proposals on heavy mobiles, depressed

trajectories and advance notice of launches and may have implicitly ac-

cepted averaging concept for ALCM numbers limits, but strongly re-

jected the number of 35. He repeated Soviet positions on new types

linkage to ALCM numbers issue (without referring to the 10/6 issue)

and cruise missile definition. He rejected the concept of irreversible in-

operability, but said that reductions would take place throughout the

period. He rejected any fixed date for protocol expiration. He rejected

the U.S. draft of the Backfire statement, agreeing only to omission of the

flight profile and radius, and said that there would be no Soviet confir-

mation of the production rate number or anything else. On telemetry

encryption, he was confused, saying there is no necessity for agreement

and nothing will come of attempts to reach agreement. End summary.

1. Expressing recognition that there were some positive elements

in the proposals made by the President 30 September, and the hope

that our meetings would be marked by “a major step forward,” Gro-

myko also said the obstacles to progress lie in the unrealistic nature of

some U.S. positions, unreasonable linkages, and the raising of new

questions. On substance, his presentation was generally tough, espe-

cially on Backfire, cruise missile definition, protocol expiration, and te-

lemetry encryption. Septel reports his agreement on heavy mobiles,

etc., and his proposals on advance ICBM launch notice and to defer de-

pressed SLBM trajectory issue to SALT III along with other measures to

reduce danger of surprise attacks.

2. After repeating familiar point that Soviet agreement to

non-increase in RV’s on existing ICBM’s is linked to U.S. agreement on

ALCM numbers limits, he rejected our first alternative, the unilateral

U.S. statement, as unacceptably linking limits on strategic arms to the

non-strategic issue of air defenses. As to the second U.S. alternative, the

averaging approach, he said the fixing of the obligation to limit ALCM

numbers in the treaty text was a positive step but the specific figure

proposed is unacceptable because it would make it possible almost to

double the number of 20 per aircraft. Comment: This seems a clear

signal that the averaging concept is acceptable with only the number in

dispute.

3. Gromyko in his brief discussion of new types did not refer to ei-

ther definition issues or to the 10/6 question.

4. Gromyko strongly rejected the U.S. cruise missile definition po-

sition, saying that no argument would change their minds, because it

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

was impossible to verify the distinction. The U.S. offer of distinctions

by externally observable design features he rejected as no more than

word of honor.

5. Noting a positive shift in the U.S. position on timing for reduc-

tions, he rejected the requirement of irreversible inoperability by June

30, 1981. He observed that the Soviet reductions would take place

throughout the period, but emphasized that this did not mean they

would necessarily take place at a steady rate. He repeated Soviet condi-

tion that Treaty must enter into force by March 31, 1979 for Soviets to be

willing to complete reductions by December 30, 1981.

6. He rejected a fixed date for protocol expiration other than three

years from entry into force, but repeated earlier formulation that it was

impossible to consider protocol expiration when we do not know when

Treaty will be signed, much less when it will enter into force, which

may suggest they have in mind three years from date of signature as

the result.

7. Backfire. Gromyko rejected the text Warnke had given Do-

brynin, saying that since what was involved was a unilateral Soviet

statement, they would decide what went in it. He said his discussions

with the President had established that the issue would be resolved on

the basis of the text previously given, but with omission of the radius

information and flight profile. He read the following text, which, al-

though he did not mention it, also admits the “good will gesture” point:

Begin text. The Soviet side informs the U.S. side that the Soviet

TU–22–M aircraft, called Backfire in the United States is a medium-

range bomber and that the Soviet side does not intend to give this air-

plane the capability of operating at intercontinental distances. In this

connection, the Soviet side states that it will not increase the radius of

action of this aircraft in such a way as to enable it to strike targets on the

territory of the United States. It does not intend to give it such capa-

bility in any other manner, including aerial refueling at the same time,

the Soviet side states that it will not increase the production rates of this

airplane as compared to the present rates. End text. This statement

would, he said, be handed to the U.S. side at the time of signing the

Agreement and giving it must completely exhaust the issue. There

could be no changes in the text; it was, for example, essential that it

state that the Backfire is a medium-range bomber. Nor would the So-

viet side agree to confirm in any way any statement by the U.S. side

that arbitrarily interprets the Soviet statement and introduces concrete

numbers. His only reference to the U.S. intention to send the statement

to Congress along with the Agreement as part of the ratification process

was to say that the Soviet side had no objection to the U.S. desire to

present the matter in the best possible light, but we could not do that at

the expense of the USSR.

July–December 1978

8. I began my reply by saying that I was sorry to have to state that I

felt that the Soviet side had not taken appropriate account of the very

substantial moves made by the President in the meetings in Wash-

ington. In my statement, I reviewed those efforts, noting that they dealt

with almost every major outstanding concern of the USSR and, in our

view, represent a major effort to reach a fair and mutually beneficial

agreement. I then summarized the U.S. positions and the areas of

agreement and disagreement on the issues. It may be significant that,

although he interrupted at a number of other points where he claimed I

had not correctly summarized agreed points on Soviet views, Gromyko

did not challenge my statement that the Soviet proposal to drop the

2,500 km range limits applied to both testing and deployment and

meant that there would be no range limits for cruise missiles in either

the protocol or the full agreement, except the 600 km limits.

9. Telemetry encryption. When, in the course of my statement, I

said that the exchange between Warnke and Semenov indicated agree-

ment that the already-agreed ban on deliberate concealment applies to

deliberate denial of telemetric information, such as by encryption and

that telemetric information can be important for verification purposes,

Semenov interrupted to say that was not an accurate report of their

conversation. Gromyko later said that nothing would come of attempts

to reach agreement on telemetry, that there was no necessity for agree-

ment, and that both sides will be in the same situation in the absence of

agreement.

10. We will of course discuss the telemetry issue again with them. I

don’t think Gromyko understands the issue and rather than dealing

with the underlying concept is concerned that we are charging them

with a current violation of the Interim Agreement. I believe this issue

will be satisfactorily resolved.

11. Now that we have gotten through the usual opening ex-

changes, we will be able to get down to real business in the talks among

the smaller groups, that is, Vance, Warnke, and Toon opposite Gro-

myko, Korniyenko and Dobrynin.

Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

155.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

White House

25594. Exclusively for the President from Secretary Vance. Subject:

Meeting With Gromyko October 23, 1978.

1. We met again this morning for three hours with Messrs. Gro-

myko, Korniyenko, and Dobrynin. I spent about 30 minutes alone with

Gromyko.

fundamental new ground was broken, as we reviewed the yet unre-

solved issues. Gromyko did state categorically that so far as our state-

ment on Backfire was concerned we of course could state whatever we

chose to say. I hit him hard on the need for confirmation pointing out

that the problem was not merely our problem but also theirs if they

wanted ratification to be voted. We have agreed with Soviets to call the

talks “useful and constructive” and point out that some issues remain

unresolved. We will not go into any detail with the press on which

issues are unresolved or what specific progress has been made. I sug-

gest no statements be made back home until I have a chance to report to

you tomorrow.

Paul and Mac will accompany me.

4. Gromyko gave a luncheon for us this noon from which we have

just returned. At lunch, Korniyenko suggested to Paul that our position

on telemetry encryption was not accurately stated in our proposed

common understanding. Without commitment, he asked if it would

not be more correct to state that the parties agree that methods of trans-

mitting telemetric information are not limited, including encryption,

unless there is deliberate concealment that impedes verification. Also

without commitment, Paul invited them to make this counterproposal

in Geneva.

Vance

July–December 1978

156.

Message From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter

WH81396. This is a retransmittal of Moscow 25640. Exclusively for

the President. Subject: My Meeting With Brezhnev.

1. We just had a meeting of one and one-half hours with President

Brezhnev, Foreign Minister Gromyko, Marshal Ogarkov, Ambassador

157.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

282569. Subject: Response to Soviet Non-paper on Woodbridge

1. At Secretary’s request, Shulman called in Dobrynin on No-

vember 6 and responded to Soviet non-paper of November 33 con-

cerning Chernyayev and Enger espionage case.

2. Following is text of US non-paper which Shulman gave to

158.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

November 17, 1978

Dear Mr. President,

I consider it necessary to use the channel of our private corres-

pondence to draw your attention to the question that causes our

growing concern.

The question is of the events in Iran2 and, to be more precise, that

according to numerous reports actions are being taken on the part of

the United States to influence events in that country. This is confirmed

by information from various sources. Information is also coming in

about even a possibility of a military interference by the US in Iran. We

would not want to believe it. But, unfortunately, it is difficult for us to

judge real intentions of the United States, the more so that no denials

followed press reports to that effect.

Therefore it is important that there should be no ambiguities in this

matter.

159.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

In reference to the telephone proposal conveyed by Ambassador

Dobrynin on November 16, I indicated to him that we would be pre-

pared to proceed on the basis of his proposal, recognizing that the

Filatov case3 in principle is an internal Soviet affair and would be re-

solved by the Soviet side separately; however, how the Filatov case is

resolved would affect U.S.-Soviet atmospherics and hence we could not

be entirely indifferent to this matter. Therefore, if the Soviet side in the

meantime and on its own resolves the Filatov case by commutation, we

would be ready to proceed immediately with the proposed exchange.

If the Soviet side were to carry out the execution, it would doubt-

less have some effect on the atmosphere of our relations and we

would have to reassess the proposed exchange in the light of the

circumstances.

Dobrynin responded, at least initially, with some heat. He asserted

that the Soviet side has gone a long way to accommodate American de-

mands. It has given us Ginzburg, it has conceded simultaneity of the

releases, and that we were nonetheless insisting on linking the Filatov

case, making the exchange conditional on its resolution. He went on to

say that in his view the Soviet side would not be prepared to accept this

and the whole arrangement could become unstuck.

I responded by saying that I hope Dobrynin will convey to his

principals not only our response but also the genuinely conciliatory

spirit in which it is being conveyed. I added that our main concern is to

eliminate extraneous sources of irritation, and that it seems to me in-

July–December 1978

conceivable that he did not understand that the execution of someone

for allegedly spying for the United States would convey a negative

message regarding the state of our relations. Moreover, the Soviet side

itself injected the Filatov case by forwarding to the President a letter

from Filatov which asserted that the President is morally responsible

for whether Filatov lives or dies. Such a letter was obviously trans-

mitted with the cooperation of the Soviet authorities, and hence I do

not understand how now the Soviet side can insist that we can be en-

tirely indifferent to what happens to Filatov.

Finally, I stressed that we, too, have made significant concessions,

the most important of which was to omit Shcharanskiy from the ex-

change, a fact for which we will doubtless take some political heat. As

the discussion unfolded, Dobrynin became increasingly conciliatory

and started asking me questions as to how I would envisage the “en-

tirely separate and independent” resolution of the Filatov case. For ex-

ample, would we be satisfied if the Soviets informed us privately that

Filatov would not be executed; would we take public credit for it;

would we leak it?

In response I assured Dobrynin that we would not link or make

any claims regarding the Filatov case in the event that his life was

spared, and that we would see the exchange as involving purely and

only the other individuals. I could not guarantee that leaks would not

occur, and I added the hope that in some fashion the Soviet side could

make it known more publicly that Filatov was not being executed, since

that doubtless would contribute also to better atmospherics.

Finally, I again asked Dobrynin to convey to the Soviet side not

only the substance of our position but our genuine desire for a con-

structive resolution of these matters, with both sides necessarily

making some concessions. I got the distinct impression toward the end

of the discussion that something along the above lines might be con-

trived, even if the initial Soviet response is negative.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

160.

Backchannel Message From the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Ambassador to

the Soviet Union (Toon)

WH81548. For immediate delivery to Ambassador Toon.

At the President’s direction, please transmit the following message

for President Brezhnev to Minister Gromyko or as appropriate. Secre-

tary Vance concurs.

Begin text:

Dear Mr. President:

I have given your private communication of November 17 on

events in Iran2 my most careful and thorough attention.

As you know, my government issued a statement Sunday3 which

reiterated my firm support for the Shah in his efforts to restore do-

mestic tranquility in Iran, our confidence that Iran can solve its own

problems, and the United States’ intention to preserve and pursue with

Iran our strong bilateral political, economic, and security relationship.

The United States remains fully committed to the independence and in-

tegrity of Iran.

The statement also made clear that the United States does not in-

tend to interfere in the internal affairs of any country, and that reports

to the contrary are totally without foundation. The statement expressed

my expectation that other countries would conduct themselves in sim-

ilar fashion. In this connection, I took note of your statement in the

Pravda interview that the Soviet Union will not interfere in the affairs

of Iran and will respect its territorial integrity, sovereignty, and

independence.

In this connection, some aspects of your letter are troubling to me. I

trust it was not your intention to suggest that the incorrect reports to

which you refer might be used to justify Soviet interference in Iranian

affairs. I am sure you appreciate that any such interference would be a

matter of the utmost gravity to us.

It is important that our two countries have made our positions

clear and explicit. My views in this letter and in our public statement

July–December 1978

represent a clear and unambiguous expression of the position of the

United States.

Sincerely,

Jimmy Carter

End text

161.

Message From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, December 14, 1978

Washington time, I will announce the normalization of relations be-

tween the Government of the United States and the People’s Republic

of China. This is an historic moment in the relations between the Amer-

ican people and the Chinese people. This step has no other purpose but

to promote the cause of world peace. It is a step which I believe has

been long overdue and which will redound to the benefit of all nations.

Let me also take this opportunity to express my appreciation for

the reception accorded Secretaries Blumenthal and Kreps in Moscow.

They have reported fully to me on their conversations with you. I am

gratified that we share a similar commitment to the prompt conclusion

of a Strategic Arms Accord, to the expansion of trade and other rela-

tions. I hope that the meeting between our two Foreign Ministers later

this month can make important progress in this direction and pave the

way for a personal meeting between the two of us. There is no greater

priority in my government than the strengthening of relations between

our two countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

162.

Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 18, 1978

SUBJECT

CIA Report on Results of Stepped-up Publishing and Distribution Effort to USSR

& Eastern Europe

Stan Turner has sent a good summary report on the results of

CIA’s effort, which we approved a year ago last summer, to publish

and send more indigenous-language material into Eastern Europe and

the Soviet Union. The results are impressive. They are typical of what

can be done when long-established, professionally run programs are

given the opportunity to expand and the best judgment of the people

who are running them is taken as the basis of judgment for what can be

done.

This expansion is projected to continue further during the coming

years ago. Its effectiveness is likely to be greater than it was then since

the material available to be used is better and the receptivity in the

target countries greater.

Attachment

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, December 15, 1978

SUBJECT

Progress Report on Publishing and Distributing Literature to the Soviet Union

and Eastern Europe

July–December 1978

REFERENCES

A. My Memorandum of 13 March 78; Subject: Support for Russian Emigre

Publishing House

B. Your Memorandum of 18 March 78; Subject: Support for Russian and East

European Book Publishing

than 1 line not declassified] earmarked specifically for an increase in book

publishing and distribution to the USSR and Eastern Europe.

2. The [less than 1 line not declassified] funds were made available to

our major book distribution mechanism in February 1978. While all the

funds were obligated prior to 1 October 1978, the full impact on actual

distribution cannot be measured accurately until well into FY 79, as

some of the books purchased are still in the distribution pipeline. Since

our operational mechanism was largely in place, it was possible to uti-

lize [dollar amount not declassified] directly for the purchase and distribu-

tion of books. Two preliminary indicators of the effectiveness of the ef-

with a total of 175,000 for the same period the previous year—an in-

declassified]

we provided the first subsidy [dollar amount not declassified] to a promi-

nent Russian-language publishing house [place not declassified] With

these funds it was possible for them both to keep in business and to

plan the publication of approximately 12 titles of philosophical works

much in demand in the Soviet Union. [dollar amount not declassified]

4. Increased funding has allowed an increase in publication of

Russian-language books to provide a wider choice of materials avail-

able for infiltration into the Soviet Union. Two major works have now

appeared, and four additional titles are in the process of being pub-

lished. Three or four more titles will appear by the end of the year, in-

cluding the initial volume of what is to be a major historical series. At

the same time, in order to exploit more fully increased political ac-

tivism in Poland, eight additional titles are in various stages of publica-

tion in the Polish language. Five volumes have already appeared and

have been distributed. The demand for written materials in Poland is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

high, [2 lines not declassified] Russian and Polish editions of works of

current importance in Western thought are now being given active con-

sideration. [dollar amount not declassified]

5. Although tighter controls exist in Czechoslovakia than in Poland

(especially during the tenth anniversary of the invasion) many manu-

scripts have been smuggled out of Czechoslovakia. The additional

funds were used to publish more of these materials in a Czech-

language journal and to publish an additional issue of this journal. Part

of the funds were also used in an effort to increase internal distribution.

[dollar amount not declassified]

6. [4 lines not declassified] We have received repeated verification

[1 line not declassified] that our literature is distributed widely in both

East Europe and the USSR.

7. The preparation of this report was delayed because of the need

to collate information [2 lines not declassified] All portions of this docu-

ment are SECRET.

Stansfield Turner

163.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the

President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski) and the Soviet Ambassador (Dobrynin)

PARTICIPANTS

Anatoliy Dobrynin

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Brzezinski: I stepped out of the meeting because I was told you

would be leaving in one half hour.

Dobrynin: Right. I am leaving for Moscow. I have an oral message

from President to President. I will read it and then send it to you.

July–December 1978

which you informed of the forthcoming establishment of diplomatic re-

lations between the United States of America and the People’s Republic

of China.

In this connection, I want to say the following: The establishment

of normal relations between two sovereign states is of course a natural

thing. The Soviet Union has always been and continues to be precisely

for such relations between countries. Another question is on what basis

the normalization is taking place. What aims are being set by the sides.

164.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 15005. Department pass SecDef for Secretary Brown. Depart-

ment for Christopher. Subject: Meetings With Gromyko Dec. 21.

1. At morning plenary session I briefly reviewed major out-

standing issues and Gromyko made similar statement in which he inter

alia:

(A) proposed cruise missile definition should apply not only to nu-

clear and conventionally armed cruise missiles, but also to unarmed

cruise missiles;

(B) suggested ban on cruise missiles with multiple warheads could

be treaty article or agreed statement;

(C) confirmed Soviet willingness to accept U.S. ICBM fractionation

proposals conditional on cruise missile resolution;

(D) indicated willingness to amend Soviet telemetry proposal to

provide that encryption permissible provided repeat provided it does

not deliberately hinder or impede verification of compliance with pro-

visions of agreement;

(E) renewed issue of Minuteman II/III (including shelters).

2. At three hour afternoon restricted meeting we discussed telem-

etry, Minuteman II/III and shelters, cruise missile definition (including

unarmed cruise missiles) and multiple warhead cruise missiles.

(A) In course of lengthy discussion Gromyko made concrete pro-

posal “whereby sides would agree on principle” as described this

July–December 1978

morning and have thorough consultation between delegation experts

on examples of telemetry encryption, which would constitute delib-

erate concealment measures. I rejected proposal for discussion of ex-

amples, and Gromyko accepted my rejection. He asked if we could not

agree on the principle. I told him I would defer answer until tomorrow.

(B) On Minuteman distinguishability and shelters, Gromyko said

he would put issue aside if we were to remove shelters. However, for

the record, he reserved right to return to issue if problem of distin-

guishability still existed after shelter removal and described his earlier

position as a “warning.” He made clear that Soviets could not distin-

guish between Minuteman II/III while shelters are in place. I reaf-

firmed that we are prepared to remove shelters.

(C) I told Gromyko that we would be willing to accept Soviet defi-

nition of cruise missiles provided that it was clear that it related only to

long-range ALCMs in treaty after expiration of protocol. I spelled out in

detail difference between ALCMs on the one hand and SLCMs and

GLCMs on the other and emphasized that SLCM and GLCM limita-

tions would expire with the protocol unless otherwise agreed. Gro-

myko said he would reflect on issue and return to it tomorrow.

(D) On unarmed cruise missiles Gromyko argued that armed/

unarmed distinction was no more verifiable than conventional/nuclear

distinction, and I made clear that we differed on this issue.

(E) He confirmed that the Soviet proposal to ban cruise missiles

with multiple warheads for treaty applied only to those that are inde-

pendently targetable.

(F) We discussed numbers of long-range ALCMs on heavy

bombers and narrowed figure to between 25 and 30. We will return to

this tomorrow.

Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

165.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 15012. Department for Christopher. Department pass DOD

1. In two-hour meeting this morning we made continued progress

on several issues, referring a few points to heads of SALT delegations

to work out possible resolutions and report back to Gromyko and me

this afternoon.

2. On cruise missile definition, Gromyko reaffirmed that GL/

166.

Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department

of State

Secto 15013. Department for Christopher. Department pass DOD

for Sec. Brown. Subject: Second Vance-Gromyko Meeting, Dec. 22,

1. This message will summarize my meeting this afternoon and

offer my recommendations:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

2. On cruise missile definition, Soviets agreed to separate defini-

tions in treaty and protocol. Treaty definition would cover only those

air-launched CMs limited by treaty; protocol definition would cover

GL/SLCMs and would expire with protocol. Gromyko several times

underscored that everything in the protocol expires at the end of the

protocol. He said this three times. Language is to be worked out by

delegations.

3. On multiple warhead cruise missiles, Gromyko recognized that

“since the circumstances had changed since the time when they pro-

posed a universal definition,” it would be appropriate to deal with

multiple warhead cruise missiles only for the protocol period. How-

ever, (perhaps since the Politburo had approved the instructions on

this point) he would have to seek approval from Moscow for any

change in position. My assessment is that they will agree to include the

ban on multiple independently-targetable warhead cruise missiles in

the protocol only, and I would recommend acceptance of such a provi-

sion in the protocol.

4. On the definition of new types, Gromyko raised a new point, ac-

knowledging as he did so that it was “not on the agenda, but very im-

portant.” The new point was a proposal that the definition of new types

should ban increases of five percent in the limited categories, but

permit decreases of up to twenty percent. (The Soviet position recently

tabled permits only five percent increases, but unlimited decreases.)

Presumably this is intended to accommodate some Soviet program. In

this connection, I observed that the delegations should be given in-

structions to resolve remaining issues forthwith.

5. On telemetry encryption, I began by reaffirming our view that

access to information transmitted telemetrically is relevant to verifica-

tion. Gromyko did not disagree; nor did he respond affirmatively. I

think it significant that for the first time in the course of our discussions

of this issue, he, by silence, did not dissent from my assertion of the rel-

evance of telemetry to verification. Following that, he offered to recom-

mend to Moscow new language to deal with the issue, which con-

formed to the “non-proposal” Ambassador Earle had given the Soviet

side a few hours earlier, with the addition of three words, provided I

would provide the language he proposed to Washington for consider-

ation. The language, with his insertions, follows:

“The sides agree that the negotiating record reflects the common

understanding that each party is free to use various methods of trans-

mitting telemetric information during testing, including its encryption,

except that, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 3 of Article

XV, neither party shall engage in deliberate denial of telemetric infor-

mation, such as through the use of telemetry encryption, whenever

such denial impedes verification of compliance with the provisions of

July–December 1978

the treaty.” (The three added Soviet words are “including its

encryption.”)

6. Finally, on the issue of unarmed, pilotless aircraft (PRVs), I

noted that we had proposed a type rule that appears to meet what we

understood to be our mutual concerns. I indicated that we hope for a

prompt, affirmative answer, adding that I thought we should be able to

settle this tomorrow. I expect Gromyko will be able to settle on the basis

of a type rule, and I suspect that the only reason he could not agree on

the spot is the need for Politburo approval of a change in a Politburo-

approved position.

7. In private conversation, he confirmed an annual production rate

of 30 for Backfire, and said he would recommend that Brezhnev con-

firm the same number, expressing his view that it was not certain that

this could be done.

8. There was no further discussion of the ALCM average number

or agreement to limit the number of ALCMs deployed on existing

bombers (B–52, Bear, Bison) to 20.

9. My recommendations on these issues are as follows:

A. Telemetry encryption: Earle “non-paper” language preserves

all essential elements of US position. Only Soviet addition is “including

its encryption.” Gromyko commented that additional words are al-

ready “buried” in “methods” and are countered by Soviet acceptance

of “such as” and “denial.” Recommend that I be authorized to accept

our revised formulation with non-substantive Soviet addition. This

should be taken in context of Gromyko’s not disputing my assertion of

relevance of telemetry to verification.

B. Cruise missile definition: Also recommend that Earle be author-

ized to pursue separate definitions applicable to all cruise missiles in

protocol and ALCMs only in treaty. In this context, I would plan to

state that the inclusion of conventionally-armed cruise missiles in the

definition of ground- and sea-launched cruise missiles does not consti-

tute a precedent for the scope of any limits on ground- and sea-

launched cruise missiles that might be agreed in the future.

C. RPVs: Authorize Earle to pursue solutions to unarmed RPV/

cruise missile problem on basis of type rule.

D. New types definition: Authorize Earle to use 20 percent down-

side rule as leverage for Soviet agreement to most important parts of

US new types definition. Washington should forthwith define prior-

ities in this area, including any areas in which 20 percent reduction not

acceptable.

10. I intend to table language along the following lines for an ex-

change of letters on the number of cruise missiles on existing heavy

bombers:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

“The US side informs the Soviet side that during the term of the

treaty the maximum number of cruise missiles capable of a range in

excess of 600 km for which the United States of America will equip any

existing heavy bomber for one operational mission is 20.”

This language parallels Backfire letter. The Soviets would provide

an identical letter, dealing with Bison and Bear.

Vance

167.

Message From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter

WH81701. The following was just received from Secretary Vance.

Subject: December 23 Morning Meeting With Gromyko.

1. In three hour meeting, mostly one-on-one without interpreters,

the atmosphere was soured compared to yesterday, and we made little

progress. Gromyko, however, did not contradict my statement that the

launched, ARPVs.

4. On protocol, he was fixed on three years from entry into force.

5. On cruise missile definition, he agreed with my statement that

we had agreed on separate definition. I did not use the precedent state-

July–December 1978

ment, judging that it should not be used in the difficult atmosphere that

had developed.

6. I handed over draft statement on not deploying more than, 20

ALCMs on existing B–52 bombers. Soviets raised issue of omission of

B–1 from list. Gromyko suggested that he believed that US would agree

not to deploy more than 20 ALCMs on any aircraft. I said that was

clearly wrong, that the only aircraft at issue were existing ones, and

that the idea of a maximum of 20 on all aircraft, including those built

subsequently was inconsistent with the concept of averaging.

7. Gromyko agreed to 10 RVs being permitted on ASBMs.

Vance

168.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, December 27, 1978

SUBJECT

Oral Message from Brezhnev

The enclosed oral message from Brezhnev is designed to induce

you to influence the Western Europeans not to sell any arms to the Chi-

nese (the translation is by the Soviet Embassy; am asking Cy for an of-

ficial US translation of the Russian text). In addition to sending a copy

to Cy, should I send a copy to Harold?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

My initial reactions are as follows:

1) If we accommodate the Soviets, both we and NATO will have

bowed—for the first time—to Soviet pressure.

2) We would be engaging in a blockade of China to the benefit of

the Soviet Union, and this would destroy the chances of any collabora-

tive US-Chinese relationship.

3) It is noteworthy that the Soviet Union armed China when China

was hostile to the US, and it has ignored all your expressions of concern

regarding Cuban and Soviet arms in Africa as well as elsewhere.

4) The Soviet Union also rejected any linkage between its conduct

in Africa and SALT, but it is hinting at linkage between our relations

with China and SALT.

5) In the light of the above, I recommend that you ask Cy, Harold,

and me to draft an ambiguous response, suggesting that this matter, as

well as others, is something that can be discussed at the Summit, in the

context of reciprocal efforts to improve US-Soviet relations, and without

prejudice to the right of every state to acquire purely defensive

weaponry.

Attachment

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

December 27, 1978

Dear Mr. President,

Availing myself of our established practice of confidential ex-

change of views on urgent problems of international life and bilateral

relations, I would like to touch upon one important question related to

China. We have already had an opportunity to express our viewpoint

concerning the forthcoming establishment of diplomatic relations be-

tween the US and the PRC. This time I shall speak of a different thing,

namely, of the plans of some Western states to supply China with

weapons, military equipment and technology which is intended for

military purposes or can be used for those purposes.

This question is not a new one. Recently it has been a subject of dis-

cussion in various NATO bodies, at other forums of Western countries

July–December 1978

and it may be dwelt upon at your forthcoming meetings with the

leaders of some Western states. On our part, we have already drawn

the attention of a number of states allied to the US to the acuteness of

the question of arming China. So far they are slow about giving official

replies which is evidently not coincidental. Meanwhile the time runs

and the things move in the direction of concluding concrete deals for

deliveries of weapons to China, including the transfer of sensitive

technology.

It should be obviously clear to you that intentions of the US allies

to sell weapons and military equipment to China cannot but make us

consider possibilities of appropriate reaction on our part. Indeed, the

question here is of arming a country with the biggest ground forces, a

country whose leaders proclaim for all to hear the inevitability of a new

world war and are driving in practice at unleashing such a war.

It would seem that the US, which along with the USSR share spe-

cial responsibility for the maintenance on international peace and secu-

rity, should neither bypass facts and trends of such kind. It is the more

true that international relations are now, so to say, at a crossing of roads

leading to peace, stability and cooperation and roads leading to con-

frontation and increased threat of a war pernicious in its consequences.

So, the promoting of the armament of China in whatever form and

under whatever pretext as a cover, predetermines objectively the devel-

opment of international situation in a direction dangerous for the cause

of universal peace.

To all appearances, some people yield to the temptation “to play

up” to such orientation of Peking’s foreign policy course which is hos-

tile to neighboring countries and increases the threat to international

security. I will say straight, this is a game dangerous for all. It is built on

a very shaky ground—on momentary political considerations. Not too

distant lessons of history, both in Europe and in the Pacific, do not

allow to forget that such plans bring results which in no way conform

to the calculations of those who embark on the road of arming a big

country which in the end decides for itself in what direction to turn its

military might.

Sometimes one hears that the sales of weapons and transfer of

technology to China promise some commercial, although rather prob-

lematic so far, advantages. I must say with all conviction that the con-

siderations of a responsible policy, concern for broad interests of the

world not only of today but also of tomorrow outweigh many times ref-

erences to such commercial considerations.

Of course, we take note of the statement by the US side that the

United States will not sell weapons to China and does not intend to en-

courage other countries to do so.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

But even in the light of these statements, which we would like to

take seriously, we have a number of questions. Indeed, a number of US

allies are preparing—and this is an open secret—deals for deliveries of

arms and transfer of technology to Peking. For us it is not so important

who exactly signs this or that contract. Much more important is another

thing: a state pursuing a policy hostile to the interests of peace gets

modern weapons, made under US licenses for that matter, which in-

clude many components and systems of American manufacture, and

such modern technology that can be used for the up-building of mili-

tary strategic potential. Therefore, to call things by their own names,

one has to conclude that the US is by no means standing away from

promoting the cause of arming China.

One also can hardly avoid the impression that in this question

there exists a certain coordination of efforts of the NATO countries.

And it is well known that the US has not the least role to play in the

NATO and its voice is closely heeded by the other partners.

In view of the aforesaid you, Mr. President, may well understand

that a question arises before the Soviet Union, how should we react to

the policy of arming China with the help of the US and other Western

countries.

The armament of the neighboring country pursuing openly hostile

course against us places us in a position where the necessity arises to

undertake what we shall consider required so that plans and actions di-

rected against us do not take even more dangerous turn, and to take

due care of our defense with ensuing consequences. Our duty before

our people demands it.

You evidently realize that all this could not but affect further steps

in the area of limiting the arms race and of disarmament with regard to

which both the Soviet Union and the United States as well as a number

of other countries are exerting efforts, known to you, with the obvious

advance to agreement. And indeed, a certain level of trust is needed for

the solution of these problems which would make it possible to relieve

the burden of armaments weighing on the peoples. There can hardly

remain any doubts that contributing to the armament of China does not

strengthen but, on the contrary, erodes trust in our relations which is

being built with such difficulty.

In view of the all said you may well understand that in the condi-

tions where concrete steps are being taken for levelling off the Soviet-

US relations, for giving them a new positive impetus the present posi-

tion of the United States with respect to deliveries of weapons and

transfer of technology to China causes quite definite alertness on our

part and desire to see this position more circumspect and weighed.

I hope that you, Mr. President, will appreciate my frankness and

will take most seriously the questions raised by me both in determining

July–December 1978

further course of your country and in your contacts with the leaders of

countries allied to you.

Sincerely,

L. Brezhnev

January–June 1979

169.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, January 17, 1979

170.

Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, January 30, 1979

THE SOVIET DISSIDENT SCENE

SINCE MID-1978

The Soviet regime’s behavior toward dissidents since the highly publi-

cized trials last July2 has been a mixture of selective repression and guarded

tolerance. The regime apparently continues to view the various dissident

groups as a serious political problem. But rather than incurring the costs of

draconian policies to root out all dissenters, the regime has adopted a strategy

to contain the dissent. The latter entails on the one hand harassment and at

times severe punishment of leading activists and on the other hand enhanced

emigration of Soviet Jews and a cautious flexibility toward other religious and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ethnic minorities. The regime’s approach has been successful, but only up to a

point. While dissident groups remain generally isolated from one another, they

have maintained contact with sympathizers in the West, and the spectrum of

dissent is somewhat broader than it was six months ago. [handling restriction

not declassified]

Morale among most dissident activists and religious groups

dropped in the wake of the trials last July. The branches of the Helsinki

Monitoring Group have been particularly affected. Two of the dissi-

dents sentenced in July, Anatoliy Shcharanskiy and Aleksandr Ginz-

burg, were members of the Moscow branch. That group’s specialist on

governmental psychiatric abuses, Aleksandr Podrabinek, was sen-

tenced to five years of domestic exile in August. At a press conference

in September, the Moscow branch’s spokesmen told of threats received

by persons friendly to the group. They reaffirmed their intention to re-

main active even though only six of the group’s active members re-

mained free at that time. Branches of the organization in Armenia and

Georgia fared no better: Robert Nazaryan, a member of the Armenian

branch, was sentenced to seven years total confinement and exile for

anti-Soviet activities, and Avandil Imnadze, an associate of a member

of the Georgian branch, received nine years for distributing anti-Soviet

literature. Last November various members of the Helsinki Monitoring

Group circulated a protest against a new Soviet law, which makes it rel-

atively simple for the regime to deny citizenship in dissident cases; but

in general the Group has been relatively inactive. [handling restriction

not declassified]

Government treatment of Soviet Jews is the one clear illustration of

the regime’s willingness to grant limited concessions to dissidents. The

total number of Jews permitted to emigrate in 1978 exceeded 30,000

and may average 5,000 a month for at least the first part of 1979. The

backlog of Jews in Odessa applying for exit permits reportedly caused

the government to open a large, new office to handle it. In explaining

the higher emigration figures, Soviet Jews themselves point to the

Jackson-Vanik amendment, to the larger number of applicants, and, in-

creasingly of late, to a desire by the regime to get rid of “malcontents”

before the 1980 Olympics. [handling restriction not declassified]

The status of the Jewish “refuseniks” (those previously refused

exit permits) may also be improving. According to Refusenik sources in

Moscow and Kiev, some persons formerly denied emigration because

they once held security clearances will now be permitted to leave. In

addition, refusenik scientists held an international scientific conference

in December. Authorities seized some of the conference documents

from the residence of one of the organizers and denied visas to five US

scientists who wanted to attend the event. The conference was held,

January–June 1979

however, with three US scientists present. [handling restriction not

declassified]

The regime’s attitude toward various Protestant groups appears to

be somewhat ambiguous. The All-Union Council of Evangelical Chris-

tian Baptists was given permission to import 25,000 Russian Bibles; the

last time a Soviet government permitted a significant influx of Bibles

was in 1947 when 10,000 copies were imported. On the other hand,

Soviet media continue to inveigh against “Bible smugglers”, terming

them “paid agents of Western intelligence.” [handling restriction not

declassified]

There are several reports of harassment and persecution of un-

registered Pentecostal congregations in Belorussia and the Ukraine. A

religious activist from a town near Moscow received a year in prison

for organizing a seminar on the “defense of rights of believers in the

USSR.” In the Kirgiz SSR two citizens were each sentenced to three

years in a labor camp for conducting a children’s Sunday school. An

84-year old member of the Seventh Day Adventists was slated to go on

trial this month in Tashkent for illegal religious activity—he wrote an

eight volume treatise condemning the “dictatorship of state atheism.”

The spectrum of dissent seems to be broadening once again. In Oc-

tober, an independent “trade union” surfaced in Moscow. Calling itself

the Free Inter-Professional Union of Workers, the group focuses on

genuine worker grievances. Reports indicate that the organization

lacks internal cohesion and is plagued by diverse interests. On those

rare occasions in the past when dissidents have tried to organize Soviet

workers Moscow has reacted quickly and sternly. Several members of

this group already have been arrested and one of its leaders has been

confined to a state psychiatric hospital, but it has not yet been dis-

banded. [handling restriction not declassified]

On another front, a new journal called Metropol appeared this

month. The avowed intention of its publishers is “literary excellence”

rather than political debate. The first issue, however contained articles

critical of Soviet literary restrictions. [handling restriction not declassified]

Other forms of protest simmer along. Last August Crimean Tartars

sent two petitions to Brezhnev requesting permission to return from

Central Asia to their ancestral homeland. The government, as usual,

made no direct response; one report claims authorities in the Crimea

have bulldozed the houses of illegal returnees and deliberately stirred

up local antipathy toward the Tartars. At Leningrad University, the

“Left Opposition” was broken up in October—for the second time. A

student leader was charged with anti-Soviet agitation and two other

members of the group were charged with “hooliganism.” Students at

other Soviet institutions for the moment are quiescent. [handling restric-

tion not declassified]

171.

Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State

Vance in Mexico and the Embassies in Afghanistan and the

Soviet Union

Tosec 10016/38921. Subject: (S) Death of Ambassador Dubs:

Acting Secretary’s Meeting With Dobrynin. Ref: Kabul 1098.

1. (S-entire text)

January–June 1979

and, noting that he had been in touch with the Secretary, made the fol-

lowing points:

A. I want to express to you in the strongest possible terms our

shock over the role played by Soviet advisers to the Kabul police in

the events which led to the assassination of our Ambassador to

Afghanistan.

B. We have reports from highly reliable eyewitnesses that Soviet

advisers were intimately involved in the carrying out of the ill-advised

assault which resulted in Ambassador Dubs’ death. For example, a U.S.

Embassy officer on the scene saw a Soviet adviser helping arm an Af-

ghan policeman with full knowledge that the assault was to follow

momentarily, and despite repeated pleas from U.S. Embassy repre-

sentatives that no such assault be launched. We also have a highly reli-

able report that a Soviet adviser was present in the room in the Afghan

Interior Ministry in which the assault was planned.

C. I am not accusing the Soviet advisers of responsibility for Am-

bassador Dubs’ death. I am charging them with failure to heed re-

peated requests by our personnel that the assault not be undertaken.

D. The refusal of consultation by the Soviet advisers on the spot is

impossible to justify, given the fact that the life of the American Ambas-

sador was in jeopardy.

E. I ask you to furnish us with a full report of the actions taken by

the Soviet advisers involved in this tragedy. We have already protested

to the Afghan authorities.

F. I wish to stress to you that this incident may well cause serious

damage to our relations. We are already receiving press queries about

the role that the Soviet advisers to the Afghan police may have played

in the incident. I strongly advise you to recommend that your author-

ities respond immediately and fully to the presentation I have made.

3. On a personal basis the Acting Secretary noted that he had had a

number of calls during the day from Capitol Hill and that the depth of

concern there was significant. He added that when the fact of Soviet

participation came out publicly it could have a devastating effect.

4. Dobrynin asked for clarification on several points, for which the

Acting Secretary read passages directly from reftel. He assured Do-

brynin that the eyewitnesses involved were US Embassy officials.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

When Dobrynin asked for names of the Soviet security advisers the

Acting Secretary mentioned Sergey Bakhturin.

5. Dobrynin said he had no details on the matter, only what he had

heard on the radio. He promised to report the demarche immediately

to Moscow. He expressed his deep condolences not only as a fellow

ambassador but as someone who had known Ambassador Dubs per-

sonally, especially when he was office director for Soviet Affairs and

Charge in Moscow. He said he was sure the Ministry echoed these sen-

timents. The Acting Secretary replied that this made the matter all the

more perplexing to us.

6. For Moscow: You should not make any further representations

to the Soviets on this matter for now. We will be advising you further.

Christopher

172.

Message From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, February 17, 1979

173.

Backchannel Message From the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, February 18, 1979

WH90292. Hold for the President’s return.

Memorandum for: The President

From: Zbigniew Brzezinski

Attached is the final translation of the message Brezhnev sent you

this morning.

His Excellency

James E. Carter

President of the United States of America

Honorable Mr. President,

I feel it necessary to express the following with regard to your mes-

sage of 17 February2.

174.

Message From the Soviet Leadership

undated

On January 5, 1979, eavesdropping equipment, installed by the US

special services, was found in the premises of the Soviet Consulate

General in San Francisco. Photographs of the removed electronic de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

vices may be produced at the wish of the Secretary of State. In this con-

nection we consider it necessary to state the following.

In the recent years the US special services have sharply intensified

their activities aimed at technical penetration into the Soviet offices in

the United States. For these purposes eavesdropping means, developed

on the basis of advanced achievements of science and technology, are

being used.

In the past we already drew attention of the US side to the inad-

missibility of such actions which are directed to damage the Soviet-US

relations. However, as the facts show, no appropriate conclusions have

been made from these communications of ours.

The Soviet side states its strong protest in connection with the

above-mentioned subversive actions of the US special services against

the Soviet offices in the United States and demands that effective meas-

ures be taken to stop such activities.

Being guided by broad interests of the Soviet-US relations and ex-

pecting that our position will be duly appreciated by the US side we do

not intend at present to make public the above facts concerning the ac-

tivities of the US special services. However, in case of failure to take

measures to discontinue such activities the Soviet side reserves the

right to revert to this subject.

175.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

China and Vietnam

PARTICIPANTS

United States

USSR

Acting Secretary Christopher

Ambassador Dobrynin

Ambassador Shulman

Mr. Curtis Kamman (notetaker)

January–June 1979

Summary: The Acting Secretary called Dobrynin in to hand him an

oral note on the situation in Indochina (text attached) which empha-

sized the importance of continued restraint in the area and pointed out

the potential adverse effect on our relations of a protracted Soviet mili-

tary presence in the area. Dobrynin recalled that this subject had been

raised several times; he suggested that we were trying to tie the hands

of the Soviet Union to act under its treaty with Hanoi. He could not ex-

clude the possibility that if the Chinese continued to advance in Viet-

nam, the Soviet Union would have to respond to a Vietnamese request

for assistance. He asserted that the Soviet Union had already displayed

considerable restraint, and he urged us to press the Chinese harder.

The Acting Secretary sketched out his forthcoming trip to South

Asia in response to Dobrynin’s questions. Both he and Dobrynin ex-

pressed concern about the possibility that Pakistan might proceed with

Bhutto’s2 execution.

Turning to the purpose of the meeting, the Acting Secretary

handed Dobrynin an oral note (text attached) which Dobrynin read

carefully for about five minutes.

The Acting Secretary said he would be meeting the Chinese Am-

bassador later in the afternoon. He also thought Dobrynin might appre-

ciate a full text of the U.S. statement in the Security Council on Viet-

nam, a copy of which he handed Dobrynin. He pointed out that the

statement reflected our approach of dealing with the situation in a bal-

anced way.

Dobrynin asked what would be said to the Chinese Ambassador.

The Acting Secretary said we would urge restraint and ask them to

withdraw from Vietnam.

Dobrynin said he would report our views to Moscow; meanwhile,

he would offer a preliminary reaction based on what he anticipated the

reaction would be in Moscow.

He expressed surprise at U.S. persistence in making the statement

in the last paragraph of the oral note—it seemed as though the U.S.

were trying to tell the Soviet Union to refrain from doing things it was

not in fact doing. The USSR was not attacking anyone. Vietnam had a

sovereign right to decide how to deal with a threat on its own territory,

and this could only be a bilateral matter between Vietnam and the

USSR. The U.S. has continually pressed the Soviet Union “not to be

there.” The USSR has shown no interest in “being there.” If the Chinese

would withdraw, the problem would go away.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Dobrynin reacted to the statement in the note about Soviet propa-

ganda on American complicity in the Chinese decision to attack, a view

he said was not just propaganda but reflected real questioning in

Moscow about the U.S. attitude. He recalled Deng’s statements about

Chinese plans during his U.S. visit, and there had been no U.S. re-

sponse to these statements. It was not only the Soviet Union that had

doubts about this matter—many in the Washington diplomatic corps

held the same opinion.

Dobrynin said he understood what we were saying about Cam-

bodia, but this wasn’t the issue now. The issue was an attack by a larger

power on a small country that had suffered for over 30 years. Why

would such a country as Vietnam have any reason to provoke China?

Dobrynin added that persistent U.S. warnings about possible So-

viet involvement in Vietnam made him wonder about our motives. If

the Chinese continued their advance, he would not completely exclude

the possibility that the Soviets would have to respond to a Vietnamese

request for assistance under their treaty. The Chinese currently had

penetrated 20 miles into Vietnam, and there had been no stronger U.S.

statement than mere expressions of concern.

Dobrynin welcomed the idea that the U.S. and USSR should con-

sult, but he wondered if we were prepared to do this as two major

powers. The Soviet Union was already displaying restraint.

The Acting Secretary responded by reiterating that our policy was

even-handed. The origin of the problem went back thousands of years,

but the immediate cause was that Vietnam had overrun Cambodia.

This was the first step. We had brought the matter to the UN and had

tried to prevent this outcome, but we were blocked in the Security

Council. The second step was the Chinese attack on Vietnam. We had

opposed this action from the very first moment. Moscow may doubt

this, but Dobrynin should know that we urged the Chinese against this

course.

Subsequently, we had brought both conflicts back into the UN.

Some countries did not want to discuss both, but we felt this was

essential.

With regard to the note, the Acting Secretary said we must be con-

cerned about the future. The actions we were calling to the Soviets’ at-

tention would have a deep effect on our relations if they occurred.

Dobrynin said the Chinese attack had already had an effect on our

relations—a rather bad one. He urged us to address the Chinese. The

Acting Secretary said this was the purpose of his meeting with the Chi-

nese Ambassador.

Dobrynin assured the Acting Secretary he would send our note to

Moscow verbatim. He worried that we might give Moscow ideas if we

January–June 1979

continued to warn against doing one thing or another. He said the So-

viet leaders were responsible people, but the persistence of the theme

contained in the note has a bad impact in the Soviet Union. The threat

in Asia is China and the risk that it will advance further—and yet, the

U.S. advises the USSR not to do anything. Dobrynin thought the Viet-

namese would block the Chinese advance, but nevertheless Hanoi

could ask the Soviet Union publicly to take action. So far Hanoi had not

done so, but it must be remembered that the fighting is taking place on

Vietnamese soil.

The Acting Secretary interjected that the first attack had occurred

on Cambodian soil. The Vietnamese had overrun the entire country.

Dobrynin reiterated that Cambodia was not the problem. He felt

the debate in the Security Council simply heightened emotions and

would not necessarily lead to a solution.

The Acting Secretary said he had a higher regard for the UN than

Dobrynin. Dobrynin recalled his own assignment in New York, and he

advised the U.S. to be more impartial.

Dobrynin said the Soviet Union had shown restraint, had not al-

lowed itself to be provoked into a major conflict. The Acting Secretary

said we should not allow the situation to spiral into greater conflict. Do-

brynin said the U.S. was asking the Soviet Union not to aid the victim.

Shulman urged Dobrynin to look closely at the language of our

note. We were not saying the USSR should refrain from any assistance

whatsoever. The point was to urge Moscow to consider the larger con-

sequences of the form of its response to events in Indochina.

Dobrynin said he thought Moscow had understood what we were

saying, since it had been raised three or four times. He argued that the

U.S. has forces in the Philippines, a sovereign country, and the USSR

raised no objections to this. Vietnam was also a sovereign country. Did

the U.S. maintain that it had rights which the Soviet Union did not

have?

Shulman reiterated that we were trying to anticipate future

sources of strain on our relations, and that the Soviets should look

closely at the language of our note.

Dobrynin nevertheless thought the U.S. was trying to constrain So-

viet options to act under the treaty with Vietnam.

The Acting Secretary said we had a responsibility to avoid future

hazards; this was the purpose of our approach.

Dobrynin asked rhetorically whether the U.S. preferred that the

Soviet Union attack China, since it wished to take away the option of

coming to Vietnam’s assistance. The Acting Secretary said he wanted it

to be clear for the record that the U.S. was not in any way encouraging

the Soviet Union to attack China.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The conversation ended with Dobrynin recommending as he de-

parted that we look at the statement by Senator Mathias3 about U.S.

policy in Indochina and its relationship to U.S.-Soviet relations.

Attachment

Oral Message From the U.S. Leadership to the Soviet

Leadership

undated

The United States continues to view the situation in Indochina

with the utmost concern and, as emphasized in President Carter’s mes-

sage to Chairman Brezhnev, we believe that both of our countries must

act responsibly and effectively in bringing an end to the conflict in In-

dochina and in dampening the high tensions there.

As Ambassador Young said at the UN and as we have said to you

here and in Moscow, we cannot accept the Vietnamese invasion of

Cambodia.

While it has been our consistent desire to treat the dangerous situa-

tion in Indochina in such a way as to minimize the risk of heightened

tensions, in all frankness this approach is made more difficult for us by

the steady outpouring of official Soviet propaganda seeking to impli-

cate the United States in some way in the Chinese decision to use mili-

tary force against Vietnam.

As the Soviet Union knows, we strongly counseled China to exer-

cise restraint and not to attack Vietnam. We are today making another

appeal to China in this regard, and Secretary Blumenthal in Peking will

personally and on behalf of the President urge that China withdraw its

forces.

Continuation of the conflict in Indochina can only lead to the ex-

pansion of region-wide tensions and instabilities. Such concern is

shared by other countries in the area, and has been reflected in public

statements by the Governments of Japan, Australia, New Zealand, as

well as the ASEAN Foreign Ministers in their statement of February 20,

1979.

We believe some constructive proposals for defusing this dan-

gerous situation are emerging from the Security Council discussion

—As you know from the President’s message to Chairman

Brezhnev and from Mr. Vance’s previous discussions with you, the

United States would be seriously concerned if there were to be pro-

tracted use of Vietnamese facilities by Soviet naval vessels or Soviet air-

craft, or if there were to be a presence of organized Soviet military units

in Vietnam. This would oblige us to review our security relationship

with all the affected nations in the area.

176.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Secretary Vance

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Dobrynin

The President: I want to talk to you briefly and seriously. There is

no more important relationship than maintaining peace between our

two countries. I am concerned about the state of that relationship. We

have missed an opportunity when we first proposed annual consulta-

tive meetings. I understand President Brezhnev’s preference to link the

summit with SALT, but as a result we have not had a summit.

177.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Liaison Office

in Saudi Arabia and the Embassy in the Soviet Union

47704. Subject: (S) De´marche to Soviets on YAR/PDRY Border

Hostilities.

1. (S-entire text)

2. During a call by Ambassador Dobrynin February 27, the Secre-

tary raised the present border conflict between the Yemen Arab Re-

public and the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen.

3. The Secretary made the following points:

—We are concerned about the recent incursion by PDRY forces

into the territory of the YAR.

—We realize there is a long history of border unrest between the

two countries and it is difficult to determine which side has provoked

specific incidents.

—Nevertheless, we are disturbed by the recent escalation of the

conflict which has caused a significant increase in tensions.

—We have urged restraint on the leaders of the YAR. We hope the

Soviet Government will similarly urge restraint on the PDRY.

—We believe it is in the interest of both the YAR and the PDRY to

exercise restraint and to use diplomatic means and not force to resolve

their differences. We also believe it is in the interest of the United States

and the Soviet Union to work together to prevent the conflict from de-

veloping further.

178.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

50197. Subject: (S) Soviet response to Feb. 24 US Demarche on Situ-

ation in Indochina. Ref: State 46398.

1. (S-entire text)

2. Following is text of Soviet oral note on situation in Indochina,

transmitted by Dobrynin on March 1, which responds to Acting Secre-

tary’s demarche to Dobrynin of Feb. 24 (reftel).

Begin text.

Moscow has carefully studied the communication of the US side

transmitted by the Acting Secretary of State Christopher to the Soviet

Ambassador in Washington on February 24.

We note the concern expressed by the US side in the communica-

tion about the prevailing situation in Indochina and its intention to act

“in such a way as to minimize the risk of heightened tensions.” At the

same time we do not see how the practical line of the US Government

with regard to Chinese actions against Vietnam conforms to these

statements.

No less than puzzling is the persistent desire of the US side to

avoid a clear characterization and condemnation of the direct aggres-

sion by China against Vietnam. Instead of demanding immediate ces-

sation of the aggression and unconditional withdrawal of the Chinese

troops from Vietnam the United States continues to link the actions of

Peking to the events of a completely different nature. Such a policy,

under whatever disguise, is in fact aimed at absolving the aggressor, at

helping the Peking leaders to get out of the unseemly situation in which

they found themselves, having committed the criminal attack on

Vietnam.

References by the US side to the fact that it appeals to China as well

for restraint, in particular through the US Treasury Secretary who is

now in Peking, do not change the substance of the matter. One cannot

see results of those appeals. It is clear to us, and not only to us, for what

US Ministers visit China.

January–June 1979

Indeed, now it is another thing that matters. China expands the

scope of its invasion, resorting to the most barbarous methods, killing

civil population—women, old people, children—in the parts of Viet-

namese territory seized by it.

The more irrelevant and unacceptable to us is the raising by the US

side of questions which are within the exclusive competence of two

sovereign states—the Soviet Union and the Socialist Republic of Viet-

nam which are bound by the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation. It

is only they themselves who can and will determine, with due regard

for the development of the situation, the nature and the scope of the

assistance rendered by the Soviet Union to Vietnam in repelling the

Chinese aggression.

The Soviet Union acts in the prevailing situation with full respon-

sibility. And we expect that all who are really concerned about the con-

sequences of the present aggression by Peking for the cause of peace

will also act with full and clear sense of their responsibility.

We would like to hope that the US side would weigh all the cir-

cumstances with regard to the continuation and escalation of the Chi-

nese aggression against Vietnam and would draw right conclusions.

Only immediate cessation of the aggression by Peking and withdrawal

of the Chinese troops from the Vietnamese territories can lead to the

restoration of peace in that region.

End text.

Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

179.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in

the Soviet Union and Saudi Arabia

54819. White House—Pass Dr. Brzezinski on aircraft. Subject: Sec-

retary’s Meeting With Dobrynin. Ref: Moscow 5258.

1. Secretary Vance met with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin March

5. Dobrynin requested meeting to provide Soviet response to our de-

marche on Yemen situation February 27. The Ambassador’s instruc-

tions were to express satisfaction that Soviet urgings of restraint had re-

sulted in a ceasefire; he was also to raise the question of U.S. arms

shipments to the YAR. The Secretary told him the ceasefire had not

held, and that the fighting had expanded, pointing out that Soviet lo-

gistical support and shipments of military equipment, including artil-

lery and anti-tank rockets, had contributed to the present situation.

2. The Secretary impressed on Dobrynin the urgency of getting the

PDRY forces back across the border from their deep penetration into

the YAR and the importance of restoring the ceasefire. He indicated

that we had obligations to Saudi Arabia and we would honor those

obligations. The Soviet Union should understand that its actions in

Yemen bear on our vital interests in the region.

180.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, March 7, 1979

181.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President

Carter

March 11, 1979

Dear Mr. President,

I received your letter of March 7. Like you, I feel satisfied with the

fact that we are on the threshold of completing the preparation of the

strategic arms limitation agreement. I am confident that our compro-

mise proposals, including those transmitted recently through Secretary

January–June 1979

Vance, on the few outstanding issues make it possible to complete this

work really in the nearest future.

As for the question of telemetric information which you raised in

your letter, frankly, I am surprised that you return to this issue once

again since it has been considered already closed by mutual agreement

of the sides.

I must say it straight that from the very beginning the US side in-

troduced into the question of telemetric information many far-fetched

things that are not related to the agreement being worked out.

182.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

March 19, 1979

Dear Mr. President,

I consider it necessary to write to you on the question of the situa-

tion in the Middle East. In the past I set forth more than once my con-

siderations on this matter. What makes me return once again to this

question is the situation emerging now in connection with the steps

taken by the United States to push forward a separate agreement be-

tween Israel and Egypt.

Our principled attitude to attempts to solve the Middle East

problem on the road of separate deals is known to you. We have ex-

pressed this assessment of ours both through diplomatic channels and

publicly, in particular in connection with the US-Israeli-Egyptian

meeting in Camp David last year.

So far we do not know yet all the details of the agreement being

prepared, and the fact that they are kept secret is symptomatic in itself.

But whatever these specific details might be, the main thing is already

clear.

This agreement is not designed for and cannot lead to a just and

thus a lasting peace in the Middle East. No matter what statements are

made, what explanations are given we are deeply convinced that the

prepared separate deal is advantageous only to Israel. Not only does it

fail to resolve fundamental issues underlying the Arab-Israeli conflict

but it does not even bring us closer to their solution.

I will tell you with all frankness, Mr. President: what is said in your

oral message of March 14, has by no means shaken that conviction of

ours, rather on the contrary.

Let us face the truth. All what is happening now means an actual

departure from a solution of the Palestinian problem. It was simply

drowned in various political manoeuvres which may appear subtle to

someone but in fact are not in any way tied—neither from political nor

from humane viewpoints—to the legitimate demands of the Arab

people of Palestine. What kind of peace is that if more than three mil-

lion people who have the inalienable right to have a roof over their

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

heads, to have their own even a small state, are deprived of that right.

This fact alone shows how shaky is the ground on which the separate

agreement between Israel and Egypt being imposed by the United

States is built.

They want to convince us that since the achievement of an overall

settlement in the Middle East would not come out now, one should

start, they say, with an agreement between Israel and Egypt and only

afterwards to try and seek a comprehensive settlement.

We are of a different opinion. What is being done now may suit the

Israeli and Egyptian leadership but it by no means suits the Arab

peoples. We think that Syria, Jordan and other Arab countries as well as

the Palestinians have equal rights and are equally interested in these

rights being ensured. Indeed, the present agreement itself has been

achieved entirely at the expense of the Egyptian side. But let the Egyp-

tian leadership answer itself for this before its own people, before the

other Arab peoples. It is clear, however, that in connection with a pos-

sible conclusion of the separate deal the number of acute issues will not

diminish but will increase.

Besides, there is a desire, behind all this, which one even hardly at-

tempts to conceal, to solve questions on the sly, bypassing the Soviet

Union. In this connection one cannot help wondering what is more

here, naivety or deliberate disregard of the legitimate rights of the So-

viet Union particularly in view of the closeness of that region to our

borders.

But the position of the USSR in the world cannot be changed at

someone’s wish. And we do not need at all someone’s authorization to

take interest in the development of the situation in the Middle East. No

one can shake our interest in establishing a lasting and just peace in the

Middle East.

Strange, to say the least, is an approach when despite earlier agree-

ments the US evades joint efforts with the USSR to ensure a compre-

hensive settlement in the Middle East and then we are even asked to

support separate deals.

And indeed, the fact is that provisions of principle regarding fu-

ture course of action in the Middle East were agreed between the USSR

and the US already when you, Mr. President, were in office. A Joint

Soviet-US statement on this score was worked out and published on

dropped by the US side. This not only dealt a blow at the efforts aimed

at achieving a Middle East settlement but in general was indicative of

how Washington sometimes treats achieved agreements.

January–June 1979

In the light of the present US position a situation emerges where

we follow completely different roads in the Middle East and it would

be more than unjustified to count on our support of what is schemed

with regard to that region. Now we do not see how the positions of the

USSR and the US can be bridged. We tried to do it more than once but

each time the US side destroyed those bridges. Such are the facts.

In this connection I wish also to tell you beforehand that we shall

strongly object to having now the UN Security Council or the General

Assembly—which, by the way, is not competent at all to decide such

questions—involved in all that business in order to sanctify, so to say,

the separate deal between Israel and Egypt by the authority of these in-

ternational bodies.

Finally, I wish to draw your attention, Mr. President, to one more

question fraught with very serious consequences. According to the in-

coming information, attributed also to US officials, efforts are now

made to establish a new system of military relationship in the Middle

East under the US auspices, to introduce in fact permanent military

presence of the United States there. I must say that if the question really

were of the presence of the US armed forces in the Middle East region it

would only further complicate the situation. And in general the in-

crease of the US military presence in that and adjacent areas would seri-

ously destabilize the international situation on the whole.

I express these considerations in all candor, Mr. President, being

guided by both the interests of ensuring really lasting and just peace in

the Middle East and the interests of the Soviet-US relations in a broad

sense. I had more than one occasion to give my views on the questions

of Soviet-US relations. Now I would like only to note that there is a

number of issues the solution of which requires our joint efforts. On our

part we are ready—and we prove it in practice—to seek mutually ac-

ceptable solutions to these problems.

One of these problems is a Middle East settlement. In our deep

conviction the policy of the Soviet Union on this issue meets the in-

terests of not only the Arab but also of other states including the US if,

of course, one is to proceed from the real interests of peace and not from

some considerations of momentary nature.

In conclusion I wish to stress the following. Whatever direction the

course of events in the Middle East may take the Soviet Union’s reso-

lute position was and is that there should be no war there, that a lasting

and just peace be established, that the possibility be really ensured for

all the Arab peoples, including Palestinians, as well as for the people of

Israel to exist and develop as sovereign states. This is our unswerving

policy and we intend to follow it in future.

At the same time we would like to count on the restoration—and

on our part we are ready for that—of active cooperation between the

183.

Memorandum From Jerry Funk of the National Security

Council Staff to Paul Henze of the National Security Council

Staff

Washington, March 22, 1979

SUBJECT

Strategy for the Horn

This is in response to Zbig’s request for ideas on strengthening our

position on the Horn.

Our first problem is to get State to agree in unequivocal terms that

the Horn is vital to our national interests, and therefore worth the price

of an active positive program to reassert our interest. This may require a

PRC, and a good bit more to gain acceptance of the notion that pas-

sivity is not the way to peace and stability.

Flowing from this basic premise, we must gain a clear under-

standing that if the Horn is key to our interests in both the NE and Af-

rica, then Ethiopia is the key to the Horn. Therefore, we must either try

to regain our influence in Ethiopia, or retreat into a more difficult, dan-

gerous and costly position of trying to “contain” an Ethiopia which

serves as a base for Soviet/Cuban expansion.

Once this major (and minor) premise is understood and accepted,

we can turn our attention to the individual countries. Again, we have to

gain acceptance of our active program to reassert our strength with

each nation.

January–June 1979

Sudan. I have the sense that we are headed in the right direction

with Sudan—a combination of military and economic assistance. But

the vital importance of the success of this program must be reempha-

sized, and we should be more attentive to helping Nimieri with his

growing Ethiopia refugee problem, and his increasing requirements for

security along his lengthy border with Ethiopia.

Kenya. I feel that State in general, and our Embassy in particular,

does not fully appreciate the present vital (to us) role being played by

Kenya, as our one solid, reliable friend in old East Africa. Nor is there a

real understanding of the pressures on Kenya—the Somali threat, the

problem of the probable installation of a government in Uganda which

will be greatly influenced by Nyrere, the worry of the Soviet/Cuban

force on their northern border.

We should: (1) continue to be more responsive to Kenya’s need for

both economic and military assistance; (2) reassure Kenya of our deter-

mination to restrain the Somalis; (3) actively assist GOK in its internal

security function, with special attention to possible Soviet/Cuban ac-

tivity; (4) encourage Kenya to exert some influence on the Ugandan

war, so as to gain an IOU from Nyrere; and (5) encourage Nyrere to co-

operate with GOK in establishing a new order in Uganda acceptable to

both Kenya and Tanzania.

Somalia. We must gain clear acceptance of the notion that Somalia

is a threat to regional stability for so long as Siad (or successor) con-

tinues active support of Ogaden expansion, and that to support him in

the name of Soviet containment is counter productive.

We must continue to make it unmistakably clear to Siad that we

will not arm him until he renounces Somali claims on Kenya and

Ethiopia.

Yemen. Our stand with North Yemen is right on, certainly as far as

sending some badly needed signals to the Horn and indeed to the rest

of Africa.

Ethiopia. I am firmly convinced that we can and will regain a large

measure of influence in Ethiopia at the expense of the Soviets, and I feel

we can and should actively hasten the day.

As a basis for such a program, we need to do all we can to main-

tain as large and as active a mission as possible, including an AID

component.

There remains in all walks of Ethiopian life significant and impor-

tant friendship, and proclivity for things American and Western. The

Soviets (and to a lesser extent) the Cubans have certainly not won the

hearts and minds of the people, and the veneer of Marxism-Socialism is

very thin. (This does not mean that the reforms of the revolution would

or could be rescinded.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Mengistu was confirmed in power by the Soviets, and the Soviets

must realize that they will be asked to stay only for so long as Mengistu

needs them to keep him in power. Therefore, if the Soviets want to use

Ethiopia as a base for exporting their influence around Africa, it is in

their interest to maintain a low-level, static instability in and around the

Horn—along the Sudan/Ethiopian border, low-level Eritrean and So-

mali threats, and economic difficulties.

Thus, the Horn can look forward to instability for so long as the

Mengistu/Soviet alliance remains.

Mengistu (or more properly, the Mengistu clique which must rely

on Soviet support), is vulnerable on two grounds—the emotional “fer-

enji” issue, and the economic issue. [2 lines not declassified]

[3 paragraphs (21 lines) not declassified]

Conclusion. I am fully aware that these ideas are not presently pop-

ular, in many quarters, and specifically at State, and in parts of the Hill.

But I sense that they may be becoming less unacceptable, and that we

should try to float them once again—as the most reasonable way to try

to regain our influence in the Horn, and to strengthen our position in

Africa as a whole.

Note. I have discussed these ideas on Ethiopia in general with

[2 names not declassified] The capability is there, as is the will. What is

needed is a directive to start planning, and then to move.

184.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, March 27, 1979

185.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

91597. Subject: Secretary’s Demarche to Dobrynin on Afghanistan.

Ref:.

1. (S-Entire text)

2. During a meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin April 11, the Sec-

retary made the following demarche concerning Soviet accusations of

U.S. support for the insurgency in Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

3. The Secretary made the following points:

—The United States is not interfering in the internal affairs of Af-

ghanistan and is in no way responsible for the current unrest in that

country. This was made clear to the Soviet Government in repeated US

public statements2 and in a private demarche delivered by our Em-

bassy to the Foreign Ministry in Moscow.

—At the same time, the United States has made clear that we cate-

gorically reject the baseless allegations made by Soviet media of US in-

volvement in Afghanistan’s internal affairs.

—Despite this, accusations continue to appear in Soviet media.

Given similar statements by high Soviet officials we assume these

media reports are inspired by the Soviet Government.

—One particularly objectionable example was the April 10 Pravda

article by one A. Petrov. This article makes unfounded allegations

against Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher and purports to give the

names of “US experts in subversive activity.”

—These reports that the United States is responsible for anti-

government activity by various Afghan groups are completely false

and do not serve the interests of US-Soviet relations or stability in an

unsettled area of the world.

—Our two countries can surely agree that the present period is

characterized by various tensions and instability in South Asia and the

Persian Gulf. Our respective interests should be directed toward in-

suring peace and stability in these troubled regions, and we believe that

an important step in this direction is the avoidance of provocative re-

criminations and unfounded allegations of outside interference.

—Continued untrue accusations of involvement of the United

States can affect the safety of American citizens in Afghanistan. More-

over, steps which inflame regional tensions can lead governments of

the region to call for greater involvement of both our countries, a devel-

opment which would make the instability of the area more dangerous

to international peace and security.

Vance

cerpts from the March 23 Department press briefing on this subject. (National Archives,

viet media accusations that the United States was responsible for the insurgency in Af-

ghanistan. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,

January–June 1979

186.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President

Carter

April 13, 1979

187.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, April 20, 1979

188.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Dobrynin indicated that the Soviet authorities have

considered the question of mitigating Filatov’s sentence. “Capital pun-

ishment will be replaced by long-term imprisonment.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

With the above item satisfying the issues raised by me on No-

viet Union would be prepared by May 1 to expel from the Soviet Union

Vins, Moroz, Kuznetsov, Dymshitz, and Ginzburg; together with those

members of their immediate families who may want to accompany

them (though perhaps some family members may have to follow later,

if arrangements for their departure cannot be immediately concluded).

189.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

April 25, 1979

Dear Mr. President:

After receiving your letter of April 11, 1979, in which you suggest

that we already determine and fix the date of our meeting, I thought a

great deal about it.

Since we have reached a firm mutual understanding that such a

meeting can take place only when the Treaty on Limitation of Strategic

Weapons is ready for signature, your suggestion on setting a date for

the meeting can be understood as reflecting your confidence that we

are in fact close to completion of work on this Treaty. This could only be

welcomed.

Unfortunately, however, the line of conduct of U.S. representatives

at the negotiations on this question, both in Washington and in Geneva,

does not instill in us such confidence. Instead of concentrating on a

search for mutually acceptable solutions to the few questions which

were not fully agreed upon at the meeting between A.A. Gromyko and

C. Vance in December of last year, the American side is ever raising

new questions primarily of a technical nature. It is sufficient to point

out, for example, that on April 11, that is on the date of your letter, Mr.

President, the American delegation in Geneva introduced a whole

series of new proposals of that nature (that the weight of one RV on the

new type of ICBM should not comprise less than 4% of the missile’s

throw-weight; the 10% spread for changes in parameters of the new

missile during the course of the last ten flight tests, etc.).

All of these limitations, as was the case with the earlier proposal

limiting procedures for testing the release of RVs, make no practical

sense from the point of view of the tasks of the Treaty being worked

out, if one takes into account already agreed limitations. In addition, an

impression is created that these American proposals aimed at regu-

lating certain technical decisions proceed from the unilateral interests

of the United States, ignoring the fact that each side has formed over a

period of years its own practice in the resolution of technical questions

of one sort or another.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

In this connection the legitimate question cannot help but arise of

why the American side is creating ever new problems at the negotia-

tions. And whether this is being done with your knowledge, Mr. Presi-

dent, is of course more apparent to you.

We expressed our attitude toward such tactics to Secretary C.

Vance through the Soviet Ambassador on April 19, along with a

presentation of concrete considerations on earlier remaining questions.

We have not yet received a reaction to what we said to Mr. C. Vance.

Meanwhile, the American delegation at the negotiations in Geneva

continues to hold to the same essential line which is aimed at delay.

In these conditions I will say frankly the firm desire of the Amer-

ican side to set a date quickly for the meeting is not entirely clear. After

all, it would hardly serve the interests of the matter if the dates of our

meeting were to be determined and announced, and if it then turned

out that it was not possible to complete work on the Treaty by that time.

What would we do in such a situation? Cancel the meeting, or come to

it without confidence in positive results? Either option at first glance

appears politically unsuitable.

In this connection I would like to touch on still another question in

the interest of avoiding any surprises which could complicate comple-

tion of a Treaty on Limiting Strategic Weapons, or perhaps even de-

stroy [lit. “explode”] it. What I mean is that, according to reports that

have been received, several variants of a possible deployment in the

next few years of a new ICBM, MX, are being discussed in the U.S. Gov-

ernment, and a decision on this question may be announced sometime

in the middle of May.

I would like to remind you that back in August of last year we laid

out to the American side our principled position concerning the inac-

ceptability of deploying mobile ICBMs in a manner which provides for

the construction of a multitude of new silos, in each of which an ICBM

could be placed. We noted at that time, and we emphasize again, that

the construction of additional silos for launching ICBMs would be ab-

solutely incompatible with the corresponding provision of the draft

treaty already agreed to, to say nothing of the fact that even were such

construction allowed each additional silo intended for launching

ICBMs would have to be counted as a unit in the agreed aggregate

levels of strategic weapons.

There must be absolute clarity on this question. It would be a pro-

found delusion if, in case of a decision by the American side—on the

eve of signature of the Treaty or thereafter—to carry out the above-

January–June 1979

mentioned entirely illegal method of deployment of the MX missile,

someone were to count on the Soviet Union not objecting against this in

the interest of saving the Treaty.

Yes, we are interested in the quickest possible completion of the

Treaty on Strategic Weapons Limitation. But the U.S. as well should be

no less interested in it. Only in that case will the Treaty make real sense.

Consequently, both sides should also act accordingly, proceeding from

the principle of equality and equal security.

I would like, Mr. President, to receive your clarifications on the

questions I have touched upon. I also hope that the line taken by the

American representatives at the negotiations will allow completion of

work on the Treaty. After this has been done, the dates for the meeting

can be fixed with little difficulty. It goes without saying that in prin-

ciple I welcome your desire to have our meeting as soon as possible. Its

results, in our opinion, can exert great positive influence on the entire

international situation.

Respectfully,

L. Brezhnev

190.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

107269. Subject: Meeting With Dobrynin on Jackson-Vanik.

1. Confidential-entire text.

2. The Secretary met with Ambassador Dobrynin on April 27 and

handed him an oral note containing talking points, approved at the

highest level, which could form the basis for movement on the Jackson-

Vanik issue. Treasury Secretary Blumenthal was also present at the

meeting.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

3. Dobrynin stated that he would transmit the approach to

Moscow.

4. There follows the full text of the talking points handed over to

191.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

10906. Subject: (C) Leadership Update: Brezhnev’s Health, Other

Recent Observations and Rumors. Ref: Moscow 10711.

1. (C-entire text)

2. Brezhnev’s health. Recent observations suggest that Brezhnev is

becoming increasingly feeble and that greater efforts are being made by

the Soviet media to hide this fact. We have reported separately on

Brezhnev’s performance during the Franco-Soviet summit (reftel). The

French found his condition markedly deteriorated from two years ago,

when he last met Giscard. At the moment, Brezhnev is still able, though

perhaps with increasing difficulty, to rally himself sufficiently to get

through major appearances and meetings. How long he can do so will

depend on whether the gradual deterioration in his condition can be

arrested.

3. Brezhnev on TV. We have frequently noted that film of Leonid

Il’ich is edited to show him in the best possible light. A recent example

was the “Vremya” coverage of his speaking performance at the Su-

preme Soviet session, in which the awkward moments were elimi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

nated. The same thing happened in coverage of Giscard’s arrival in

Moscow. In live coverage, Brezhnev was seen taking very slow, small

steps as he moved through the arrival ceremony, and at one point he

did not seem to know where to go. The “Vremya” film eliminated all of

this. During “Vremya” coverage of the Giscard/Brezhnev document

signing ceremony, the camera, which until recently would have fo-

cused all but exclusively on the top leaders, stayed on Brezhnev for no

more than a few seconds at a time and repeatedly panned across the

other Soviet leaders and French delegation members who were wit-

nessing the signing.

4. Coverage of the May day ceremonies was also altered this year.

On past such occasions, the cameras have zeroed in on the leaders as

soon as they arrived, and before they mounted the steps of Lenin’s

Mausoleum. This year, there were no close-ups until well after

Brezhnev had reached the reviewing platform. During the concluding

ceremonies of the demonstration, the leadership was not shown at all.

5. Brezhnev at hockey matches. As earlier reported, he was at the

rink almost every night during the World Hockey Championships,

usually accompanied by Chernenko and Ustinov. On some nights,

however, only his personal physician has been with him, according to

the FRG Ambassador, who met Brezhnev’s doctor when Leonid Il’ich

visited the FRG last year. Brezhnev, Suslov, Ustinov and Chernenko at-

tended the USSR-Sweden game and sat through the entire thing, but

we understand that Brezhnev’s box was empty for the final game of the

championships, between the USSR and Czechoslovakia (the Soviet

team had already won the championship).

6. Views of Roy Medvedev. According to U.S. correspondent Fred

Coleman (protect), who saw Medvedev after the recent Supreme Soviet

meeting, Medvedev said:

—Ryabov was ousted from the Secretariat, Medvedev had heard,

because of “disagreement with elders;” he would not elaborate;

—he had “solid information” that Brezhnev fell seriously ill just

before the Giscard visit was postponed; Brezhnev was given a “mas-

sive” dose of antibiotics;

—contingency plans were made within the senior leadership;

Medvedev is convinced that it was agreed Kosygin should replace

Brezhnev as Chairman of the SS Presidium, so that Kosygin could sign

SALT II; this even though Kosygin would just as soon retire;

—Medvedev had heard other rumors, but was not sure of them;

namely: Ustinov would become Chairman of the Council of Ministers

and Andropov would become General Secretary (this as part of the

contingency planning); alternatively, that Ustinov would become Gen-

eral Secretary and Ryabov might eventually become Chairman of the

Council of Ministers;

192.

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to the

President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, May 14, 1979

I am increasingly concerned over the complex of issues sur-

rounding the Soviet military buildup in the Caribbean, the upgrading

of Cuban offensive military capabilities and the need for more detailed

planning concerning our response to these developments. These issues

were highlighted by CINCLANT recently and comparable concerns

have been expressed by the Joint Staff.

The forthcoming summit provides a natural and timely opportu-

nity to address these concerns with Brezhnev, and we need to settle on

our approach. Accordingly, I recommend that an SCC meeting be con-

vened at an early date to determine our course of action on this matter.

My staff will send your staff a background paper2 which might serve as

a point of departure for the discussion.

Harold Brown

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

193.

Oral Note From the Soviet Leadership

undated

Moscow has carefully examined the points made by the Secretary

of State concerning questions of trade and economic relations between

our countries.

Naturally, one can only welcome the fact that the US Government

recognizes the highly abnormal situation that has arisen in this sphere

through the fault of the American side, and is demonstrating a desire to

correct it. This question is long overdue. It is, of course, up to the Presi-

dent to decide what specific steps he considers it possible to adopt

toward these ends. And we do not intend to give advice here. What is

important is that artificially created discriminatory restrictions be

eliminated.

Our position of principle is well known to the American side. It has

been frequently set forth and it remains unchanged. We proceed from

the premise that trade between our countries—like that between any

other countries—can and must be carried out only on an equal and mu-

tually advantageous basis without being linked with other, unrelated

questions. So it is, of course, completely unacceptable in this that there

should be any efforts to interfere in the internal affairs of one another.

And yet this is precisely the aim of existing American legislation cov-

ering the conduct of trade and economic matters with the USSR. Only

by rejecting such an approach can one anticipate that Soviet-American

trade and economic ties will achieve the necessary scale for the mutual

benefit of both countries and will contribute to the positive develop-

ment of our relations as a whole.

If one examines the procedure that is now being proposed on the

basis of this principled viewpoint, the question legitimately arises of

what actually would change in substance. For what is referred to is not

fundamental change, nor is it change in the existing legislation. To be

sure, we are told that in the present instance it is not formally de-

manded of the Soviet side, as it were, to offer any assurances con-

cerning its policy on the exit of Soviet citizens for permanent residence

abroad. However, there is here the qualification that the President

January–June 1979

would nevertheless have to report to the Congress with respect to some

sort of “relevant discussions.” Moreover, we are expected to provide

some kind of “tacit confirmation” of the way the American side under-

stands Soviet policy and practice in matters of emigration. Thus, when

one proceeds to decipher this concept, it appears that in essence it does

not differ from what is required under the provisions of existing Amer-

ican legislation; i.e., it pursues the same aims of interference in our

purely internal affairs.

It is hard to conceive that the American side could seriously expect

that our principled position on this can undergo any changes. The

question arises, therefore, as to what point there is in putting forward

proposals which create only the superficial appearance of willingness

to resolve this major question in our relations. We would not wish to

think, but it is difficult to avoid the impression, that behind this there

lies an effort in fact to avoid a real solution to this problem and at the

same time to remove certain limitations on US foreign policy in some

other quarters.

It appears to us that this is an inappropriate method of handling

matters, especially at the present stage when we have the task on a

practical level of exerting joint efforts toward smoothing out and fully

developing relations between our countries. It is precisely because of

this that we have considered it necessary to set forth our views with

such frankness, in order that there not be any misunderstanding be-

tween us. We would like to hope that this is not the last word of the

American side and that it will take genuinely effective measures for re-

solving the questions of trade and economic relations between our

countries on a principled basis.

194.

Background Paper Prepared in the Office of the Assistant

Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Washington, undated

REAPPRAISAL OF U.S./CUBA RELATIONS

Summary and Conclusions

Recent Cuban arms modernization, including MIG–23s, naval base

construction and the acquisition of submarines, together with Cuban

activities in the Caribbean and in Africa all pose serious security policy

questions for the U.S.

—The rapid buildup of Soviet-furnished conventional offensive

weapons since early 1976 and the increased Soviet navy presence in the

Caribbean increase Soviet-Cuban military capabilities in this hemis-

phere. The acquisition of MIG–23/Flogger aircraft, the Foxtrot and

Whiskey submarines and the development of the naval facility in Cien-

fuegos exemplify this trend, which could be taking place without viola-

tion of existing agreements with the USSR.

—Based on the potential capacity of the new naval facilities and

submarine/minelayer capability, Cuba could establish within 1½ to 2

years a capability to interdict our non-Arab petroleum supplies (Ni-

geria, Venezuela, potentially Mexico), our bauxite supplies (Jamaica,

Surinam, Guyana) and ocean-to-ocean transit (Panama Canal).

—Therefore, in the event of contingencies in a NATO scenario,

CINCLANT would be obligated to provide forces to protect our

southern flank against Cuba. Both CINCLANT and the Joint Staff have

indicated that the U.S. forces required to neutralize an increasingly

modernized hostile Cuba could cause an important reduction in U.S.

forces available to NATO.

—Cuba has been an influential communist regime and in some

cases directly supported Soviet objectives by providing troops and di-

rect aid to revolutionary movements elsewhere. Cuba’s revolutionary

small country mystique gives it entree into liberation struggles more

easily than the USSR.

—The successes of these efforts and Cuba’s continuing role in Af-

rica encourage those antagonistic to us even in countries where Cuba

has not actually sent troops. Recent developments in Central America

after Summit. Secret. Sent under a March 16 covering memorandum from Carl Smith, the

Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, to Robert Gates, the Special Assistant to the

President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs.

January–June 1979

and the Eastern Caribbean (Grenada, Jamaica, Guyana) are providing

Cuba with new targets of opportunity in the Western Hemisphere

which she has demonstrated a willingness to pursue.

—In sum, Cuba provides the USSR a cheap proxy to carry out So-

viet policy objectives with little direct Soviet commitment.

In the face of these problems our policy is drifting. We have neither

developed carrots nor sticks with which to deal with Castro. The em-

bargo is an irritant to Cuba but has not brought them to revise their pol-

icies, and it does reinforce their dependence on the Soviets. Our efforts

toward normalization of relations and other partial efforts to solve our

problems have not paid off. Cuban initiatives in Angola and Ethiopia

have not evoked a forceful response from the U.S. nor have they

deterred the establishment of a new Cuban presence in South Yemen,

and Mozambique. We have mounted a political challenge in the NAM

through friends but this has not really undercut the Cubans and our ef-

forts are flagging. We have not conveyed clear signals regarding the

Cuban activities in Africa, the Cuban military buildup, or on Central

American or Caribbean issues.

In short, the Cubans have many irons in the fire and may believe

they are free to expand their activities at will. Therefore, a reappraisal

of our relations with both Cuba and the USSR is in order and we need

to redefine the agreement or “understanding” under which the place-

ment of nuclear and/or offensive weapons in Cuba is precluded.

Obviously actions we take vis-a-vis Cuba will have a Soviet di-

mension and could impinge adversely on U.S./USSR relations. The

purpose of this paper is to stimulate discussion of the joint Cuban-

USSR strategy as we see it, to describe comprehensively the pattern of

Cuban action, and to catalog possible U.S. responses.

Disturbing Trends in Cuban Actions

—Continued buildup of Cuban military, civilian advisory and

training personnel abroad in unprecedented numbers. (Some 39,000

military personnel and 11,000 civilian advisors in 20 countries.) No-

table deployments include:

Military

Civilian Advisory

—Angola

20,000

—Ethiopia

13,000

—Mozambique

—Iraq

UNK

—S. Yemen

—Vietnam

UNK

—Laos

UNK

—Grenada

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Note: The trends have been upward in each of the countries cited

above in recent years. Increases in civilian advisory personnel are antic-

ipated in each of these countries and a presence in Afghanistan may be

expected this year.

—Continued acquisition of sophisticated offensive military weap-

ons systems which represent an increase of potential threat to the U.S.

(MIG–23s, Foxtrot submarine and Whiskey trainer, with Cienfuegos

base construction, and possibility of additional submarines and missile

patrol boats are examples.)

—Increased military capability has increased Cuban options for

possible military action against the U.S., especially in a global U.S.–

USSR conflict or in support of destabilizing the Caribbean as a surro-

gate force for the Soviets. These actions generally support Soviet for-

eign policies, but could also support independent Cuban objectives—a

fact that suggests that we may need to deal with Cuba as well as the So-

viet Union in forestalling problems.

—Strenuous efforts to control the NAM Summit and establish

firmly Castro’s leadership. (In 1970 Cuba had diplomatic relations with

NAM nations.)

—Conclusion recently of long term economic arrangements with

the USSR, keeping Cuba in the Soviet camp for years to come.

Note: Though Moscow is trying to reduce the burden in 1981–1986,

they will find it difficult to hold aid to Cuba below $3 billion per year.

With such a subsidy constituting 20–30% of Cuban GNP, intensifica-

tion of Cuban-Soviet planning for 1981–86 period cannot but have an

effect on Cuban policy. The largest subsidies are paid by the Soviets on

sugar, nickel and petroleum.

—A record of unbroken success has given Cuban leaders greater

confidence in overseas expeditionary forces as evidenced by their in-

creased presence in the Middle East (S. Yemen), Southeast Asia (Viet-

nam, Laos), potentially in Afghanistan and now in the Eastern Carib-

bean (Grenada).

—More sophisticated ability to influence events by indirect

methods—infiltration, organization and training in Cuba, advice, and

funds—rather than direct intervention with personnel and arms.

(Witness their behind the scenes approach in Central America. Also

their sophisticated marshalling of support for radical movements in

Puerto Rico and attempts to make Puerto Rican independence a major

—Continued revolutionary and terrorism training in Cuba and in

some cases (Jamaican trainees) encouraging them to immigrate to the

U.S. to foment revolution.

January–June 1979

[Omitted here are the sections entitled “Cuban Objectives,” “U.S.

Policy Dilemma,” “Desirable U.S. Policy Objectives,” “Actions To

Achieve Our Policy Objectives,” and “Actions To Neutralize Cuban

Activities on the Spot.”]

Actions To Take With The Soviets

Approach the Soviets at the highest level and review the entire sit-

uation of the influx of offensive weapons to Cuba and the joint Cuban/

Soviet involvement overseas.

—We should be prepared to tie the approach to major U.S./USSR

issues, including economic steps as well as political and military

moves.

—Redefine the agreements and understandings which precluded

the introduction of nuclear and offensive weapons into Cuba.

—Point out where the use of Cuban forces overseas are contrib-

uting to deterioration of our relations and outline steps we feel might

alleviate the situation and steps we may be forced to take to counter

such actions if they continue.

[Omitted here are the sections entitled “Actions To Take Regard-

ing the NAM,” “Economic Actions,” and “Longer Term Actions.”]

Why These Courses of Action?

We believe that our current efforts toward normalization with

Cuba, while achieving limited domestic benefits, have damaged our

long term strategic interests. If our intelligence is correct, the Cubans

now do not expect significant improvement in U.S./Cuban relations

over the next few years. Therefore, they feel they have much to gain

and nothing to lose by continuing their present course on issues of con-

cern to the U.S. In order to make them moderate their actions, this per-

ception must be reversed. Strong, across-the-board but progressively

measured actions as outlined above will lay the groundwork for the

United States to respond to disturbances in the Third World fomented

by the Cubans and Soviets. Keeping the Cubans and Soviets “honest,”

even at a short term cost to normalization, would be preferable to the

unopposed activism of the Cubans and Soviets. It might well advance

us more toward normalization with Cuba in the long term. It would in-

crease U.S. prestige and credibility worldwide. And it would, most im-

portantly, force reconsideration of what appears to be a joint Cuban/

Russian attempt to project force in this hemisphere, i.e., introduction of

offensive weapons, construction of bases.

Implications for U.S.–USSR Relations

If we depart from the premise that Cuba’s actions are motivated

both by Castro’s “revolutionary” zeal and the level of support received

from the USSR, then we need to either decrease the level of USSR sup-

195.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, May 24, 1979

SUBJECT

Aftermath of the Prisoner Exchange—Treatment of the Families (S)

The US-Soviet agreement on the prisoner exchange specified that

members of the five prisoners’ immediate families would be allowed to

leave the Soviet Union “without obstacle or delay”. The definition of

“members of the immediate family” was not specified. (S)

While it seems likely that all members of the families who wish to

leave will be allowed to do so (with the possible exception of the Ginz-

burg’s “adopted” son) the Soviets have made every step of the process

as difficult and unpleasant as possible. Numerous obstacles have been

thrown in the path of the families’ orderly departure. (S)

Both Mrs. Ginzburg and Mrs. Vins have been subjected to heavy

surveillance in their homes, and whenever they venture out. Both have

January–June 1979

also been treated with varying degrees of rudeness, reaching to out-

right intimidation, by local officials. Mrs. Vins’ first attempt to meet

with US officials about her departure was aborted when she was

snatched into a car outside the US office. She was taken to a local police

station and held for several hours. Despite numerous efforts, Mrs.

Ginzburg has been unable to convince the authorities to turn her tele-

phone back on so that she can cope with the job of disposing of three

apartments, arranging her papers, settling her possessions, etc. (S)

Friends of the families who have tried to help out (collecting or

selling possessions, help with photographs and documents, etc.) have

been regularly harassed. Friends of Mrs. Ginzburg who drove to Ta-

rusa to get some of her husband’s belongings from his home there were

stopped and thoroughly searched on their way back to Moscow. (S)

As happens so often in the USSR, the families often find them-

selves trapped in a Catch-22 situation. Mrs. Vins has been told that the

power of attorney sent to her by her husband cannot be recognized be-

cause he is no longer a Soviet citizen. Mrs. Ginzburg is having trouble

selling her husband’s home in Tarusa because her power of attorney

was taken from her by a bureaucrat who now refuses to give it back. (S)

There has also been the problem of false deadlines. On Friday, May

4, Mrs. Vins was informed by local officials that she would have to be

she was told, the Soviet government would inform the US Embassy in

Moscow that she declined to emigrate. Several other false deadlines

have been set for Mrs. Vins and for the others. (S)

Two “members” of the families who wish to leave have so far been

denied permission to do so. The Ginzburgs have an “adopted” son who

has lived with them for eight years, though he was never formally

adopted. He is currently serving his military tour and, as of today, the

Soviet position is that he will have to complete it before he can leave.

Pastor Vins has a niece who is very close to the family and who wishes

to leave with them. So far she has been denied permission. Mrs. Vins

has said that she will not leave without her, and the case is still being

debated. (S)

In most of these cases, US protests—from Washington or

Moscow—have corrected the problem. It is likely that many of the

problems simply reflect the natural inclination of lower level Soviet bu-

reaucrats in their dealings with any dissident. On the other hand, the

number and extent of the obstacles indicate, at the very least, that gov-

ernment officials did not go out of their way to insure that the letter and

spirit of the agreement be met. (S)

196.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, May 24, 1979

SUBJECT

Decisions on Summit Objectives

Much of what we do at the Summit must be prepared beforehand.

Accordingly, we need your guidance on the particular objectives we

should pursue on the major Summit agenda topics. As we discuss these

with the Soviets, we will come back to you for further guidance.

I will also shortly give you an agenda paper for your use at the

Summit, with suggested points keyed to the topics and our objectives.

I have divided the objectives into two categories (following the

order of the agenda in each):

A. Agreements/Understandings: Specific outcomes that would be

agreed between you and Brezhnev.

B. Positions. Areas where specific outcomes are not attainable or

appropriate, but where we want to use the Summit to register/advance

our positions and increase mutual understanding.

You will see that there are no regional issues under Agreements/

Understandings and that all come under Positions. As I describe in my

strategy memorandum, specific outcomes are unlikely at the Summit.

This said, it will be critically important to convey our perspectives and

positions clearly and firmly to the Soviets so they know where we (and

they) stand. This may, at a minimum, heighten their sensitivity to our

concerns and possible actions and reduce the chances of miscalcula-

tion. Opportunity to go further and reach some understandings could

conceivably develop before and during the Summit. We will position

ourselves to capitalize on it in the unlikely event that it does.

A. AGREEMENTS/UNDERSTANDINGS

• Communique vs. Declaration. The Soviets have hinted interest in a

broad declaration of principles on the relationship, picking up on the

January–June 1979

—Backfire: Brezhnev acknowledgment that will not exceed 30 per

year to 1985 and that will not significantly increase range/payload ca-

pability. (Previously approved by you.)

Yes

Other

—Telemetry: Brezhnev confirmation of agreement based on your

March 14 letter. (Previously approved by you.) Perhaps even a ban, but

that’s a long shot.

Yes

Other

—Standstill: Agreement not to take any actions inconsistent with

the Treaty between signature and entry into force.

Yes

Other

• SALT III. Agreement to reduce to 1800 as SALT III goal.

Yes

Other

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

• TNF. Communique reference that “any future arms control limi-

tations on the theater nuclear systems of the two sides should be “mu-

tual” (but no formal commitment to negotiate to avoid preempting Al-

lied TNF deployment and arms control decisions).

Yes

Other

• ASAT. Sign initial agreement. If not ready, announce progress or

agreement in principle with target date for completion set after SALT

ratification (so as not to complicate the process).

Yes

Other

• Non-proliferation. Communique reference to South Asia problem

or maybe a separate joint statement.

Yes

Other

• CTB. Soviet agreement to negotiate actively on NSS (details will

take several months) without prejudice to differences on size of UK

NSS network, and some public acknowledgment in the communique of

the progress already made.

Yes

Other

• MBFR. Agreement on framework for a US-Soviet Phase I agree-

ment to be negotiated by Vienna MBFR delegations (looks doubtful at

this point). At a minimum, Soviet public acknowledgment of impor-

tance of associated measures for verification, stability, and confidence

in any reduction agreements; stress importance of data.

Yes

Other

• RW. Agreement on a joint-initiative to be submitted to summer

session of Committee on Disarmament in Geneva.

Yes

Other

• Economic (Jackson-Vanik, etc.). Private mutual understandings

regarding “assurances” strategy for waiver, and a public statement by

you later.

Yes

Other

January–June 1979

• Bilateral Exchange Agreements. Soviet commitment in commu-

nique to more access and freer flow of information and people in ex-

change programs (we have problems).

Yes

Other

Agreement to renew the Cultural Agreement (if can be renegoti-

ated in time to take care of problem of balance, restrictions, etc.—other-

wise only general communique endorsement).

Yes

Other

Media and Commercial Representation. Soviet agreement to greater

equality and reciprocity in access, treatment, etc.

Yes

Other

B. POSITIONS

• Exchange on the Overall Relationship. Put your view of US-Soviet

relations on the record so the Soviets are clear about what we want and

do not want.

• SALT II. Stress need for Soviet restraint during ratification. Give

Brezhnev your assessment of ratification process and, in that context,

turn Soviets off if they raise non-circumvention or MPS.

Yes

Other

• SALT III. Stress commitment to prompt start of SALT III after ra-

tification. Explore our general SALT III approach.

Yes

Other

• TNF. Make clear our concern with Soviet TNF (SS–20) and

Western intent to respond. Convey interest in exploring arms control

possibilities without commitment to negotiations (Allied problem).

Yes

Other

• CTB. Affirm high priority and intent to move expeditiously, but

avoid impression that CTB can/will be finalized in next few months.

Yes

Other

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

• Indian Ocean. Register our concern that Soviet activities in the re-

gion burden the prospects for arms control. Agree to explore in regular

diplomatic channels with Soviets the basis on which the negotiations

might be resumed. (More would be counter-productive, given the need

to maintain US military presence in the area.)

Yes

Other

• CAT. Stress need to focus on practical regions—Latin America

and Africa—if talks to move ahead. Suggest heads of delegations meet

to settle mutually agreeable agenda, including regions, for Round V of

talks.

Yes

Other

• Middle East. Press Soviets not to oppose UNEF Sinai role.

Yes

Other

• Southern Africa. Press Soviets to reduce Soviet/Cuban military

involvement in Rhodesia. Make clear that deeper involvement will

damage overall relations, force freeze on various fronts, including

economic.

Yes

Other

• Persian Gulf and Arabian Peninsula. Make clear we have vital in-

terests at stake and will act firmly and expeditiously to protect them.

We will counter Soviet or Soviet-supported attempts (Yemen) to desta-

bilize region.

Yes

Other

Iran. Stress respect for independence and territorial integrity and

non-interference in international affairs. Warn Soviets of mutual

dangers of turmoil and instability and effect of Soviet media accusa-

tions of US plotting against new regime.

Yes

Other

January–June 1979

Afghanistan. Press Soviets to show restraint and urge DRA restraint

on relations with Pakistan and Iran; press acceptance of Durand Line as

international boundary between Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Yes

Other

• Horn of Africa. Press reduction in Cuban troops and Soviet arms

transfers (see also Cuba).

Yes

Other

• Cuba. Press Soviets to exert restraining influence on Cuban for-

eign involvement, noting that if it continues, increased pressure on

Cuba rather than an easing of tensions will result. Stress that Soviet in-

troduction of new and sophisticated weapons (MIG–23, attack subma-

rines) and construction of new bases (Cienfuegos) to support them—in

effect, the creation of a unique offensive capability—is inconsistent

with the spirit of the 1962 Understanding and the demands of stability

and our security. Make clear that it will result in expanded US military

presence and activities in area, increased pressures on Cuba, strains in

overall US-Soviet relationship, and it would relieve the US of the obli-

gation we undertook to exercise self-restraint.

Yes

Other

• Southeast Asia. Stress that Soviet operational military use/pres-

ence involving Vietnamese facilities will be met with stepped-up US se-

curity presence in area and cooperation with Japan, ASEAN—China.

Yes

Other

Urge Soviets to cooperate in resolving SEA conflict on terms ac-

ceptable to all parties.

Yes

Other

• China. Only if the Soviets raise the subject, assure Soviets that

China opening means no diminution in importance we attach to good

relations with Soviets. Hint that development of US–PRC security rela-

tionship will be influenced by Soviet actions (e.g., Vietnam). Encourage

continued Soviet restraint vis-a-vis PRC.

Yes

Other

• Global Social and Economic Development. Press Soviets to cooperate

on global issues (LOS, WARC, space, grains) and to increase aid to

poorer LDCs.

Yes

Other

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

• Economic. Make clear that the political climate will not permit

credits and will hinder trade, and that this climate depends on the

overall relationship.

Yes

Other

• Human Rights. Register our concern regarding non-compliance

with Helsinki (I will be back to you with specifics).

Yes

Other

Three sets of consultations are necessary concerning the Summit:

1. With the Soviets before the Summit, as indicated above. Talking to

Dobrynin may suffice. But I still think a mission to Moscow is best.

Your views?14

2. With the Allies before and after. Personal letters from you to major

leaders (Schmidt visit) and Cy Vance’s May 30 NATO meetings will do

the job before. I suggest that David Aaron stop in Europe to debrief after

the Summit.

Yes

Other

3. With the PRC before and after. This is important so that the PRC

does not misperceive the Summit as a slide into a US-Soviet condo-

minium. I suggest you authorize me to brief Chai before, and that

during the Tokyo Economic Summit (whose rules do not provide for

my attendance) I spend two days in Peking to debrief my dear and per-

sonal friends (including Deng, whom I consider to be an international

treasure!).

Yes

Other

197.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, May 29, 1979

SUBJECT

Summit Strategy

The memorandum that follows provides a framework for your ap-

proach to the summit by reviewing what we have learned from pre-

vious summits; by outlining the central objectives of the two sides; by

identifying the key messages and accomplishments; and by describing

the scenario and strategy for these negotiations.

Moreover, we attach at Tab A a more detailed statement of our tan-

gible and intangible maximum objectives for the entire summit; Tab B

contains the Soviet text of the proposed joint communique; and Tab C

contains a memorandum previously prepared by Bill Hyland on the ex-

perience of past summits.

History and Setting

Some months ago, you read Hyland’s memorandum, and I would

urge you to reread it (Tab C). In brief, it points out that some summits

created unreal expectations and, hence, generated disillusionment (e.g.,

the first Nixon-Brezhnev Summit of 1972). Some were outright failures,

notably Paris in 1960 (Khrushchev walked out over the U–2 incident),

and Vienna in 1961 (Kennedy was browbeaten and assessed to be a

weak leader). Despite its relatively low key, Glassboro was a rather un-

usual success in that it helped bring the USSR to recognize the need for

a comprehensive strategic arms control process, despite the then-

blazing Vietnam conflict.

You will be meeting Leonid Brezhnev in a setting of unusual un-

certainty and difficulty. Never has the mixed character of the relation-

ship of cooperation and competion been more in evidence. Despite the

successful completion of SALT II, U.S.-Soviet relations are clearly

strained by a number of conflicting interests. The United States is in-

creasingly skeptical of Soviet intentions because of the momentum of

its military programs and its intervention in the Third World. In the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

past, we could discount Soviet intentions because Soviet capabilities

were limited; today, even benign Soviet intentions are becoming in-

creasingly suspect because of the implications of Soviet capabilities.

A further and critical element of uncertainty is due to the fact that

the Soviet Union is already undergoing the trauma of a succession

crisis. We do not know when Brezhnev will be replaced nor by whom.

However, at Vienna you will be communicating through Brezhnev

with the whole collective leadership, and—hopefully—through it

perhaps also with the next generation of Soviet leaders as well. In some

ways this may diminish the importance of whatever personal rapport

you can develop with Brezhnev, but it enhances the importance of the

signals and messages that you will want to transmit.

The U.S. side is also an uncertain quantity to the Soviet side. The

firm centerpiece of the relationship now is SALT but the fate of SALT II

in the Senate is unsure. The sensitivity of the United States to assertive

Soviet behavior in the developing world, combined with our reluctance

to get involved, makes it difficult for the Soviets to predict our reactions

and can create the possibility of dangerous miscalculations.

Soviet Objectives

The Soviets have ample reason to invest in the relationship. They

do not want our economic and technological might mobilized against

them. They do not want us to move closer to China. They want to re-

duce the chances that security issues in conflict between us boil up to

confrontation, yet they are unlikely to yield their positions in Africa,

the Middle East or anywhere else.

While you would like to accomplish as much as possible—in-

cluding strengthening SALT II reductions, agreeing on a number of

other arms control measures and reconciling differences in the Third

World—the Soviets have made it clear to us that they would be satis-

fied with signing SALT and having a positive atmosphere. We have

their draft communique (Tab B). It is down to earth and businesslike. It

has the usual Soviet boiler plate but is surprisingly moderate and

breaks little new ground. They want to minimize consideration of con-

tentious security and regional issues. They are prepared to reach fur-

ther agreement on ASAT and MBFR but we don’t know whether they

are willing to make the needed concessions. They say little about eco-

nomic relations, obviously seeking to avoid being a supplicant.

In effect, the Soviet objective is to create the impression of a U.S.-

Soviet partnership in the management of world affairs; to downplay

January–June 1979

the importance of the U.S.-Chinese relationship; to improve the atmos-

pherics and some tangibles of the U.S.-Soviet bilateral relationship; but

not to limit in any way Soviet freedom of action in regards either to Eu-

rope or some of the Third World areas of turbulence.

In addition, the schedule proposed by the Soviet side minimizes

public exposure and thus diminishes their usual penchant for public

camaraderie. Above all, we are getting one message—no surprises.

Their approach is one of extreme caution. What they appear to fear

most is the picture of a young U.S. President making dramatic initia-

tives (a la March 1977) without careful preparation in advance to en-

sure their acceptability to the Soviet leadership.

Tone and Style

Given the character of Soviet objectives, atmosphere will be a par-

ticularly important7 aspect of this summit. Every indication is that both

sides seek a positive atmosphere. We should understand, however,

that the Soviets have more to gain and less to lose than you do from

pumping up the atmospherics. A glowing summit gives the Soviet

leadership a boost at home and abroad, because they face no public

comparison between pretense and actual results.

In managing the atmosphere and the substance of the summit, a

number of points deserve being kept in mind:

1. There is little to be gained by philosophical discourse or ideolog-

ical debate with the Soviet leaders; they are not psychologically confi-

dent enough to engage at the philosophical level as the Chinese do; in

particular, trying to debate rules of conduct becomes frustrating be-

cause of the gap in perceptions;8

2. Concrete issues, however, are more easily resolved but only if

they have been well prepared9 and the Soviets do not have to contend

with surprises that have not been aired by the collective leadership;

3. Soviet leaders are quite sensitive to their personal treatment;10

they are particularly concerned over any slights reflecting the inferi-

ority of the USSR. This will be a particularly important issue at this

summit with Brezhnev’s ill health. It is not in our interest to exploit his

infirmities.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

4. Meeting the “people” is of little interest to the Soviets. Their pre-

occupation is with those who have the power of decision. As a conces-

sion to us, they have reluctantly agreed on a joint call by the two Presi-

dents on Austrian President Kirchschlager.

5. There is no basis for “personal trust”; the Soviet system breeds

power struggles; it is unlikely they would trust foreigners if they do not

trust their own colleagues; expecting Western leaders to act against

their class or national interest would subject a Soviet leader to ridicule,

if not worse, in the Politburo;

6. Talks, that is conversation, mean little12 compared to the reas-

surance found in written documents and precise obligations; that is one

reason why communiques and joint principles and treaties have more

importance in the USSR than in other diplomatic exchanges; but the

“spirit” of a document is virtually non-existent;

7. The main value to you may be simply to get some feel for the

mind set of the Soviets and their mode of reasoning. The top Soviet

leaders do in fact have extraordinary power and will make decisions.

But they have no great incentive to make concessions and thereby ex-

pose themselves politically. Negotiations therefore take place within

a pre-defined framework, and on any issue it is important for the So-

viets to point to the precise concession they extracted in the bargaining.

Scenario

We originally wanted at least four days of talks. The Soviets have

reduced the time available for discussion by making the first and fourth

days largely ceremonial and by insisting that your private meeting

with Brezhnev be on the last day. At this point we have agreed to a

minimum of seven hours of talks with the possibility of two more on

the final day before signing the SALT Treaty.

This will put a premium on the conversations at the two dinners.

Accordingly we have in mind making them as small as possible—you,

Cy, Harold, me and Dave Jones on our side and Brezhnev, Gromyko,

Alexandrov, Ustinov and Ogarkov on theirs. Soviet attendance how-

ever is not yet set.

Equally important is the sequence of substantive issues. The first

working day (Saturday, June 16) will be devoted to SALT and other

arms control issues. This will be an upbeat day and we will be the hosts

for the talks and the dinner. The next day will be hosted by the Soviets

and will involve more contentious arms control, security and regional

issues.

January–June 1979

This will be the most important meeting from the standpoint of

conveying firmness and determination to defend our interests. It will

inevitably be more downbeat, with the atmosphere more filled with

conflict and tension. The last day will see a private meeting and the

SALT and other document signing and this should provide a positive

conclusion to the summit.

In effect we have something of a drama—at first things are good,

then they turn tense, then finally there is a positive resolution. The

toasts and your remarks at the signing ceremony will be the key indi-

cators of what is transpiring and they must be carefully crafted with

that in mind. At the outset of the talks we must be careful to moderate

expectations. The theme of SALT plus serious consultations, as we

agreed previously, is the best note to strike before the summit begins.

U.S. Strategy and Objectives

This wary and uncertain setting makes it important that we con-

centrate on those objectives that have the greatest potential for longer

term impact on the U.S.-Soviet relationship. I would define the central

strategic objectives of the Vienna Summit in the following terms:

1. To consummate SALT II and to initiate SALT III;

2. To give additional impetus to further U.S.-Soviet arms control

measures (such as ASAT, MBFR, CTB, CAT, etc.);

3. To make not only Brezhnev but also the Soviet leaders who

stayed at home more aware that the U.S. sees the Soviet Union as insen-

sitive to our vital interests or concerns in such regions as the Middle

East, Southern Africa, Cuba, and Vietnam.

In effect, your objective is to demonstrate that the United States

can successfully manage the contradictory positive and negative tend-

encies in our relationship. To do that, you must articulate a conception

of a reciprocal and realistic detente, based not only on the common in-

terest in avoiding nuclear war, but also on genuine respect for each

side’s security concerns. This requires that you be candid with the So-

viet leaders about our deep dissatisfaction with Soviet performance on

a whole range of security-related issues. They must be made to under-

stand that to move in a constructive direction now, U.S.-Soviet relations

must involve positive Soviet behavior on key security issues of para-

mount U.S. concern.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

At the same time, Soviet leaders must be convinced that our com-

plaints do not derive from a desire for bad U.S.-Soviet relations, or from

the desire to gain a one-sided advantage—but that we genuinely wish

those relations to improve.

To this end, it is essential that all key members of your delegation

be explicitly instructed to deliberately and repeatedly emphasize cer-

tain key and simple themes to their Soviet counterparts. Only a delega-

tion that speaks with a united voice, that keeps repeating the same key

themes is likely to convey the message that needs to be heard back in

the Kremlin.

Accordingly, I would recommend that you instruct everyone

going to Vienna to make the following points to every Soviet that they

encounter:

1. The United States wishes to join the Soviet Union in containing

the nuclear arms race through further cuts in SALT II and more ambi-

tious cuts in SALT III, as well as through other arms control measures;18

2. The United States wishes to see the Soviet Union as a partner in

dealing with many emerging global problems, the solution of which

need not be the object of ideological disputes (food, development, en-

3. The United States cannot be indifferent to Soviet insensitivity to

our concerns in such areas as the Middle East, Southern Africa, Viet-

nam, or Cuba—and such insensitivity will produce strong American

reactions, particularly on matters which are of concern to the Soviet

Union (e.g., China);20

4. Soviet military buildup, both strategic and conventional, has

gone beyond the point of legitimate defense needs, and is generating a

genuine threat to the United States and its principal Allies—and unless

the Soviet side shows restraint, the West, with the United States in the

lead, will undertake major, comprehensive, and matching efforts.

If we succeed in communicating these messages effectively, we

will have achieved our basic objectives. SALT II ratification will get a

boost. Our Allies will maintain confidence in our leadership. You will

have set a clear framework for a constructive U.S.-Soviet relationship

regardless of who succeeds Brezhnev.

January–June 1979

Next Steps

The final impression of the meeting will be shaped by the commu-

nique issued jointly by the two parties. It must be prepared well in ad-

vance. We need your guidance, therefore, on how to proceed on the full

range of issues that are candidates for discussion.

In response to your admonition that we not be timid in our goals

for the Summit, Tab A contains a statement of our maximum objectives

organized around the agenda as it now stands. However, realism dic-

tates the conclusion that not all these objectives will be attained at the

Summit itself. The Soviets have also stressed to us that they desire “no

surprises.” It follows therefore that these objectives need to be priori-

tized and prepared in advance with the Soviets.

Accordingly, I would welcome your guidance as to which of the

items at Tab A you want us to pursue with particular vigor. Once I

know your priorities, and with your permission, I will ask Dobrynin to

join me and Christopher for a preliminary review of those items which

ought to be discussed with the Soviets in advance of the Vienna

Summit. In this manner, we will enhance the prospects of attaining not

only our broad strategic objectives, but also the more concrete goals

listed in Tab A.

198.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 6, 1979

SUBJECT

Emigration; Trade

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

Secretary Vance

Ambassador Dobrynin

Secretary Blumenthal

Marshall Shulman

Secretary Vance handed Dobrynin an oral note, text of which was

as follows:

“In your message of May 16, you indicated that you hoped our

earlier message on emigration matters is not our last word on the sub-

ject. This note responds to that hope.

“We would like to propose that, at the Summit, President Carter

raise the general subject of emigration with President Brezhnev. This

discussion of emigration would be quite separate from any discussion

at Vienna of other matters.

“President Carter would express the satisfaction of the American

people with the existing trends in emigration from the Soviet Union in

accordance with Soviet law, and he would say that he would like to be

able to tell the American people that such trends can be expected to

continue.

“We would hope that President Brezhnev would respond posi-

tively to President Carter’s interest in this area. We would be prepared

to deal with any questions the Soviet side might raise regarding U.S.

immigration law and policy.”

It was made clear to Dobrynin, who undertook to inform Moscow,

that the questions to which the President would wish to have a positive

response included whether any changes were contemplated in Soviet

law or policy, whether the circumstances of applicants for emigration

would be improved, whether the efficiency of emigration processing

would be enhanced, and whether the criteria for refusal would be

regularized.

January–June 1979

Secretary Blumenthal, taking up a separate subject, outlined to Do-

brynin the importance we attach to trade with the USSR. We had pro-

posed communique language emphasizing this interest.

He told Dobrynin that we wished to break the impasse on MFN.

The President is prepared to move, but there is no realistic possibility of

changing the law. Our intention would be, at an appropriate time after

the Summit, to initiate the procedure for granting MFN to the USSR

under existing law.

Secretary Blumenthal indicated that in this process the President

would make no explicit reference to any conversations at the Summit.

Cabinet members in their Congressional testimony would confine

themselves to statements that our action was based on enunciation of

Soviet policies by responsible Soviet officials, including explanations

given to Members of Congress visiting Moscow.

He noted that we were under pressure to grant MFN to China, and

the Chinese are willing to give us assurances. It would not serve our

mutual interests for US-China trade to be normalized without a parallel

step in US-Soviet trade.

For the time being, we would propose to grant MFN without

changing the provision of law which requires the President to recom-

mend continuation each year, and gives Congress the opportunity to

disapprove. Dobrynin asked whether this meant a year-by-year situa-

tion. Secretary Blumenthal responded that the agreement would be for

three years, but it would be necessary to recommend a continuation

each year.

Secretary Blumenthal expressed our view that this approach

would be a significant step forward. He said we did not exclude the

possibility that there might be some change in the law at some future

time.

199.

Memorandum of Conversation

Carter-Brezhnev Meeting with President Kirchschlaeger

and Chancellor Kreisky

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Ambassador Wolf

Hamilton Jordan

Interpreters: Krimer and Obst

President Brezhnev

U.S.S.R. Ambassador to Vienna

Two interpreters

Austria

President Kirchschlaeger

Chancellor Kreisky

Two interpreters

After some initial banter and welcoming remarks by President

Kirchschlaeger, President Brezhnev asked if Kirchschlaeger could not

make a speech so he could reply with a speech of his own, pulling out

some prepared written remarks.

Kirchschlaeger replied that Austria was just a small country, there-

fore his speech would be very short, but he would be happy to accom-

modate Mr. Brezhnev. He hoped that Vienna would furnish a climate

conducive to successful completion of the talks. Austria very much

wished this visit to be a good one. Traditionally Austria had tried to

January–June 1979

serve as a bridge between East and West and was willing to continue

with that role.

Brezhnev started to read his statement haltingly and laboriously.

He started by thanking the Austrian government for their hospitality

and for having provided the opportunity for him to talk with President

Carter. Twenty-five years ago the U.S.S.R. and the United States had

been signatories of the state treaty guaranteeing Austrian neutrality in

perpetuity. Since that time contacts in many fields and cooperation be-

tween the Soviet Union and Austria had steadily improved. The treaty

had provided the foundation for Austria to make a significant contribu-

tion to cooperation between other countries.

The motive of furthering international understanding which was

the foundation for coming to Vienna and talks with President Carter

was the same motive underlying the treatment of Austria by the

The central purpose of the Vienna summit was to try and find

means to slow the arms race and to try to debate and possibly resolve

other matters. The most important purpose, of course, as he had al-

ready indicated yesterday, was to sign the SALT TWO accord. He felt

sure that all the people of the world, including the Austrian people,

would welcome this agreement.

He was sorry that this visit would give him little time to see any-

thing of Austria, but he was glad to be able to get a glimpse of Vienna.

He would like to take this opportunity to officially and formally invite

President Kirchschlaeger to pay a visit to the Soviet Union. He wanted

him to not only see Moscow, but also visit other Russian cities.

Kirchschlaeger thanked Brezhnev for his remarks and for his invita-

tion to come to the Soviet Union, which he was gladly accepting.

Would President Carter also like to make a few remarks?

The President stated that that he felt that this meeting with Presi-

dent Brezhnev had long been overdue. It had taken two and a half

years to reach the point where the two great powers could meet in

Vienna. He felt sure that there would be considerably less delay in con-

vening the next summit meeting between the two countries.

He felt certain that both the United States and the Soviet Union

had come to Vienna determined to make this summit meeting a

success. Brezhnev had a strenuous schedule ahead of him with four

hours of negotiations each day plus having to go to the opera this eve-

Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States, eliminated four-power occupation,

established Austria’s sovereignty, and guaranteed its neutrality. See Foreign Relations,

Documents 74 and 76.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ning. He was sure (said somewhat teasingly) that Brezhnev’s vigor

would measure up to the schedule.

His meeting with Brezhnev would offer an opportunity to discuss

in depth not only SALT and disarmament, but also other matters of in-

terest to the two countries and to the entire world.

He was struck by the beauty of Austria and by the genuine hospi-

tality of the Austrian people. He was personally gratified that the

Vienna Opera, of which he would get a first sample tonight, had agreed

to come to the United States in the fall. The American people were

looking forward to this event with great excitement. This was but an-

other demonstration of the many ties of friendship existing between the

Austrian and the American peoples.

Kirchschlaeger thanked President Carter for his remarks. Turning to

Brezhnev, he repeated one more time that he was happy to accept the

Soviet invitation to visit the Soviet Union. He was struck by the fact that

President Carter in his arrival statement and President Brezhnev in his

remarks just made had voiced very similar views on the importance of

the state treaty of 1955 and of maintaining the neutrality status of the

Republic of Austria. One could therefore conclude that the leaders of

the United States and the Soviet Union had already come to their first

agreement during their Vienna summit meeting. (After Brezhnev

began to understand the significance of this remark after two transla-

tions, he laughed heartily and turning to President Carter, said,

“good!”) Would the Chairman come to the opera tonight?

Brezhnev said that he was rather tired.

The President interjected he should really not go if he was feeling

tired.

Brezhnev (turning to Carter) said, “Will you go?”

The President: “Yes, I and my wife will go. We have an advantage

over you, as we have had one night’s rest in Vienna.”

Brezhnev (haltingly and after some deliberation): “then Brezhnev

probably will go, too, at least for the first act.”

Kirchschlaeger interjected that one did not need to sit through all

operas until the bitter end.

The President (to Brezhnev): “As I told you before, I came here one

day earlier and have had more rest than you. But if you could come just

for the first act, that would be very nice. It would give us an opportu-

nity to be together and shake hands.”

200.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

First Plenary Meeting between President Carter and President Brezhnev

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

General David Jones

Mr. Hamilton Jordan

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Dr. Joseph Powell

Mr. Reginald Bartholomew

Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter

President Leonid I. Brezhnev

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Marshal Dimitriy F. Ustinov

Mr. Konstantin U. Chernenko

First Deputy Foreign Minister Georgiy M. Korniyenko

Ambassador Anatoliy A. Dobrynin

Marshal Nikolay Ogarkov

Mr. Andrey M. Aleksandrov-Agentov

Mr. Leonid M. Zamyatin

Mr. Vavilov

Mr. Viktor Sukhodrev, Interpreter

The President welcomed President Brezhnev and said that ac-

cording to the lot that was cast, he would speak first at this meeting.

Brezhnev nonetheless said he would speak first and proceeded to

read his prepared statement.

Brezhnev said that he was happy to meet President Carter and get

personally acquainted with him. Naturally, without ever having seen

each other in person, they had already known each other for a long

time. Nevertheless, such knowledge can never replace personal contact

between the leaders of states, particularly such large states as the Soviet

Union and the United States.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Brezhnev noted that the attention of people throughout the world

was riveted on this meeting. Naturally, not everybody would wish

them success. There were some people in the world who thought of

nothing but what they could do to worsen Soviet-American relations,

to frustrate detente and intensify international tensions. Fortunately,

most people throughout the world had pinned their hopes on this

meeting, believing that it would reduce the risk of war and consolidate

peace.

Brezhnev was firmly convinced that it was his and the President’s

duty to do all in their power to justify those hopes. The SALT Treaty

which he and the President were to sign will, of course, be the major

outcome of this meeting. Along with this, however, they will also be in

a position to discuss a number of other problems that were far from

simple.

Brezhnev said that it had been agreed to start the discussion by ad-

dressing fundamental problems of Soviet-American relations. After all,

if one had complete knowledge of the fundamental premises on which

each side based its policy, it would become much easier to get to the

bottom of the problems and resolve them. Brezhnev expressed the

hope that the discussion between them would be frank and construc-

tive. Of course, it would not be possible to accomplish everything all at

once. But, by getting a better understanding of the position of each side,

they could engage in an attempt to bring the positions of the sides

closer together, to come to mutual understanding on some problems

and to resolve them. Brezhnev felt that it was his and the President’s

duty to accomplish that and he expressed his trust that the President

would agree with him in this respect. In view of their economic and

military power and their broad international activities, the Soviet

Union and the United States bore a special responsibility for the destiny

of peace. In essence, the matter could be put as follows: “If we have

good relations and mutual understanding between our countries, there

will be peace, there will be no nuclear war, for jointly we will always be

able to prevent that. And that we must do, I want to repeat and empha-

size—we must.” In Brezhnev’s view, this alone should promptly move

our two countries toward putting the relations between them in order,

so as jointly to move toward peace and not aggravate relations between

them. This is by no means simply a kind wish. Soviet-American rela-

tions began to develop not just yesterday. They are based on a certain

foundation and long experience, in some cases negative, in some others

positive. Brezhnev could recall a time when our two countries were

allies in the fight against a common enemy—Hitlerlite Germany. That

was followed by the long and fruitless period of the Cold War with all

the crises it produced, which was detrimental to the interests of both

our countries and poisoned the political atmosphere in the entire

January–June 1979

world. It had not been a simple thing to start restructuring Soviet-

American relations which had been burdened by the inertia of the Cold

War. The efforts of both sides were required for this; the leaders of the

United States and the Soviet Union met each other several times and

eventually a turn in the relations between the two countries was

achieved. It led to normal contacts and in some cases even to mutually

advantageous cooperation. There is no doubt at all that this has been a

major achievement. It is true that there are some people in various parts

of the world, including some in the United States, who are not at all

pleased by that turn of events. They began to allege, for example, that

detente is a one-way street, that it was of greater benefit to the Soviet

Union than to the United States. In substance, these people looked at

things from the standpoint of who derived greater benefit from peace.

But, Brezhnev would ask, is there any instrument that could measure

who stands to gain more from peace? For his part, he and his people be-

lieved that peace was equally necessary for all the people of all the

countries on earth. He would repeat and stress “all the people.”

Brezhnev said that in thinking of Soviet-American relations he had

always proceeded from the principle of peaceful co-existence between

states with different social and economic systems. Indeed, there were

fundamental differences between the economic and social structures of

our two countries. But, he would ask, did that mean that it was neces-

sary to exacerbate relations between us, thereby creating the risk of nu-

clear war? After all, neither country would be in a position to wipe the

other off the face of the earth, nor will either country be able to restruc-

ture the other. He believed that in recognizing such differences, it was

important to proceed in a peaceful manner and to resolve disputes in a

peaceful way. It was necessary to respect the right of each people. . .

(Pointing across the table, at Cy Vance Brezhnev said: “He is the only

one who does not want that”. Brezhnev noted that everybody had

smiled at this comment of his, so it must be true. In any case, he heard

no rebuttals.)

A turn for the better in the relations between our two countries had

become possible precisely because the leadership of the two states had

agreed to structure the relations between them on the principle of com-

plete equality, equal security, respect for each other’s legitimate in-

terests, and non-interference in each other’s affairs; in brief—the prin-

ciple of peaceful coexistence. That understanding had been sealed by

signatures at the very highest level. On that basis it had become pos-

sible to conclude the first agreement on the limitation of arms, above

all, strategic arms; it had also become possible to sign a joint document

of profound fundamental importance—the Agreement on the Preven-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tion of Nuclear War. It had also become possible to cooperate on a

number of international problems. On that basis a whole network of bi-

lateral agreements had been established which made up the living

tissue of the ties and contacts between our two states. Of course, a

steady development of relations between states becomes possible only

if each partner observes continuity in pursuing his policy. Without that,

agreements between states would not be worth very much.

Brezhnev noted that at this meeting President Carter and he would

be discussing a number of serious issues and adopt important decisions

with regard to these issues. What would happen, however, if subse-

quently one of the sides, for reasons of its own, were to start revising

those decisions or begin acting as if they did not exist at all? Would the

time and effort expended on these negotiations have been worthwhile?

The answer, of course, was—hardly. As far as the Soviet Union was

concerned, it pursued a consistent policy. The Soviet state and party

leadership, and the entire Soviet people believed that Soviet-American

relations should be peaceful and should provide for broad cooperation

over the long term. Brezhnev said that on more than one occasion he

had said just that, and he was prepared to reiterate this now: the Soviet

Union did not have any hostile intentions with respect to the United

States. It did not seek any advantages or benefits at the expense of the

United States anywhere in the world. He referred to the so-called “So-

viet threat” that was so frequently cited. Any attempt to ascribe any

bellicose intentions or designs to the Soviet Union were based on sheer

fabrications and could only play into the hands of those who wanted to

sow enmity between the Soviet Union and the United States and even

set the two powers against each other. Of course, the Soviet Union, like

the United States, is a state with broad global interests and has certain

principles on which its policy was based, principles it could not give

up. The Soviet Union has allies and friends, it has treaties providing for

certain obligations with respect to these allies and friends, with whom

it has interests in common that would be safeguarded against any en-

croachment. The Soviet Union had declared its solidarity with people

who were struggling for independence and social progress, because it

believed this to be just. It was by no means by Soviet efforts that a

number of rotting regimes had collapsed and that a number of coun-

tries had asserted their independence. That process was governed by

its own inexorable laws. Revolutionary changes occur as a result of

conditions within a national territory, and it would only be self-

deception to ascribe such changes to “Moscow intrigues”. The Soviet

Union was opposed in principle to the export of revolution, just as it

Documents 122 and 129.

January–June 1979

was opposed to the export of counter-revolution. That had been said a

long time ago by Lenin.

If one were to read a number of articles in the U.S. press or certain

statements by certain politicians, it would appear that the only thing

the Soviet leadership was thinking of was how to organize a coup

d’etat in one part of the world or another. Sometimes attempts are

made to base practical political action on such false premises. In

Brezhnev’s view, this was nothing but a dangerous self-delusion. He

would stress over and over again that the Soviet Union did not have

any hostile designs against the United States, that it was not in any way

striving to prejudice legitimate American interests. On the other hand,

the Soviet Union was entitled to expect a reciprocal attitude on the part

of the United States. Brezhnev repeated and emphasized that thought.

Regretfully, he had to state that in recent years the development of rela-

tions between the Soviet Union and the United States had been uneven.

In a number of directions these relations had evidently been thrown

back. He was deeply convinced that this was not in accord with the

fundamental interests of either country.

Brezhnev told the President that the Soviet leadership had noted

with great satisfaction those statements the President had made which

favored good relations between our two countries and spoke of ridding

mankind of the threat of war. But, speaking frankly, he would ask

what, then, was the purpose of those ever increasing military outlays

and the persistent buildup of military forces? Was it to achieve superi-

ority over the Soviet Union? For its part, the Soviet Union was not

seeking superiority over the United States, but could not, of course,

allow such superiority to be acquired by the United States. What, then,

was the sense in whipping up an arms race? Experience clearly showed

that an arms race did not result in greater security or peace, but rather

the opposite. The true path toward strengthening security was to lower

levels of military confrontation, reduce existing stocks of arms, nuclear

as well as conventional. Of course, this would only be possible if there

were no attempt to upset the obtaining balance of forces, if there were

no attempt to violate the basic principle of equal security. Whether or

not the United States will take that path would depend above all on

what general policy the United States intended to follow with respect

to the Soviet Union. Quite frequently the concept of combining compe-

tition and cooperation between our nations was voiced in the United

States. In the Soviet view, that formula rests on quicksand. It could

hardly serve as a reliable reference point for policy. In the United States

the U.S.S.R. was frequently referred to as an adversary. By competition

or rivalry our two countries would not be able to resolve a single

problem of bilateral or international relations. Quite frequently the un-

favorable atmosphere deliberately generated in the United States with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

respect to Soviet-American relations was explained to the Soviet lead-

ership by references to the stand taken by the mass media or by senti-

ment of certain Congressmen. That, the Soviet side was told, was be-

yond government control. He had to note, however, that sentiment was

necessarily formed and influenced by the policy pursued by the gov-

ernment itself. He was mentioning this not because he wanted to start a

debate on that subject; he was saying this simply because he wanted to

eliminate whatever impeded the development of good relations be-

tween our two countries. The present meetings, in his view, should be

aimed at just that, and should serve to improve Soviet-American rela-

tions. He would therefore call on the President to overcome the present

stagnation and to continue their joint move toward peaceful and con-

structive purposes.

Brezhnev said that the main question to be clarified at the present

meeting was the following: did the United States, like the Soviet Union,

want the relations between our two countries to be truly good and

stable and continue to develop to the mutual benefit of our nations and

in the interests of universal peace? Was the United States prepared to

conduct its policy toward the Soviet Union on a basis of equality

without attempting to hide a stone under its shirt front?

For the moment Brezhnev would conclude his remarks on this

note, and would express the hope that he would have the opportunity

to hear President Carter express his own frank views on the funda-

mental aspects of the relations between the Soviet Union and the

United States.

The President thanked Brezhnev for his statement and said that he

had listened to it with great attention. As Brezhnev had said, they were

here addressing matters of great importance not only for the Soviet

Union and the United States, but also for the people of the entire world.

He and Brezhnev not only represented two great nations, perhaps the

two greatest nations on earth, but also two nations that had never been

military adversaries throughout history.

Brezhnev interrupted to say: “But our nations had been allies in

the past”.

The President said yes, it was his firm hope and highest goal to

structure our relations with the Soviet Union on a stable basis in order

to preserve peace in our common interests and in the interests of people

throughout the world.

Brezhnev interrupted to say that he certainly welcomed this.

The President noted that the first words he and Brezhnev had ex-

changed when they first met yesterday were to the effect that this

meeting was long overdue and that future meetings should not again

be delayed for so long a period of time. When the President had said

January–June 1979

yesterday that they must succeed, President Brezhnev had said that if

they failed, God would not forgive them.

Foreign Minister Gromyko added that God in His Heaven was in a

position to see all.

In the President’s view, the most important single item for their

current meeting was to conclude and sign the SALT Treaty.

Brezhnev said he fully agreed.

The President continued that in view of the rarity of meetings be-

tween them, they should also take full advantage of this opportunity to

make progress on other matters of great importance to our two nations.

He and Brezhnev represented two great and strong nations,

having different interests and different goals in some respects, but also

nations which shared the search for greater security for our respective

peoples, for peace between our nations and peace in the world and for

the development of a stable and productive relationship. Quite often

unnecessary differences arise between us as a result of lack of under-

standing and lack of adequate consultations on a regular basis.

Brezhnev had been quite right in noting in an aside that the two For-

eign Ministers had met quite frequently. Sometimes the President had

the impression that the two Foreign Ministers did not share the same

objectives.

Gromyko interrupted to say in protest: “That is a very bold

statement.”

The President noted that the top military leaders of our countries

had not met since 1946, when a meeting took place between General Ei-

senhower and Marshal Zhukov. Sometimes when our heads of state

had met—he believed it was ten times since World War II—the results

had been less than productive. He wanted to salute President Brezhnev

for initiating the concept of detente, which provided for increased sta-

bility between us. In the area of control over nuclear weapons, progress

had been steady but slow. At Glassboro the groundwork had been laid

for SALT I, primarily for the limitation of anti-ballistic systems. Now,

after seven years of negotiation, we were approaching the conclusion of

the SALT II Treaty which for the first time set ceilings on missiles and in

some instances provided for reductions, but still permitted both sides

large increases in the number of nuclear warheads. The negotiations for

SALT III will be different and very important. Because of increasing ac-

curacy our strategic missiles would become increasingly vulnerable,

and that was a destabilizing factor. It made verifiability of the terms of

the SALT agreement much more important and concealment of infor-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

mation by both sides much more serious. We needed to explore deep

cuts in nuclear arms, non-use of force, and limitation or termination of

the production of nuclear weapons. He and Brezhnev will be dis-

cussing SALT further this afternoon. It was obvious that peaceful com-

petition was inevitable and will remain, but some elements of that com-

petition are of deep concern to us and are potentially destabilizing.

Those actions of both sides which concerned the other nation should be

discussed fully so as to understand them, alleviate concerns and re-

solve difficulties. Neither nation can hope to dominate the other. Each

is too powerful to be dominated by others. At the same time, there is

enormous waste of natural and human resources, in the arms race, in

nuclear and conventional weapons. There is also waste in the develop-

ment of unnecessary capabilities, and in taking actions to prevent re-

gional hegemony by one nation which might concern the other. As the

President had heard Brezhnev say many times, the cost of miscalcula-

tion or misunderstanding that could result from the explosion of just

one atomic weapon would indeed be catastrophic and must be

avoided. Because of human nature, each country tended to exaggerate

the actions of the other. The natural desire for secrecy is counter-

productive and could lead to harmful consequences because it could

build up suspicions and induce the other country to develop counter-

measures when they may not be necessary.

Brezhnev interrupted and said he wanted to say something off the

record, requesting that no notes be taken. He noted that President

Carter had already approved a military budget for the coming year

which significantly increased by billions of dollars the sums of money

allocated to military use. Brezhnev did not know whether this was to be

believed or not. The basic issue was this: when he and President Carter

sign the SALT Treaty, that will, of course, be a major step, but they still

will not be ridding mankind of the risk of perishing in an all-out war.

Whether they believed it or not, the danger was very great indeed be-

cause just one button could set off a nuclear catastrophe that would

blow the whole world to smithereens. In his view, he and President

Carter had the duty of getting their nations used to the idea of limiting

strategic arms, and this warranted their moving forward to further

steps in SALT III. That was the main reason why he and President

Carter were signing the SALT II Treaty. He added that this was just an

off-the-record remark.

The President said he, too, would like to make an off-the-record re-

mark. He said it was our understanding that year after year in the last

fifteen years the Soviet Union had steadily increased expenditures for

weapons of all kinds, and that it had done so at a much greater rate

than the United States. He said that it was incumbent upon us to exer-

cise greater restraint.

January–June 1979

Brezhnev said: “But we look to the United States for guidance (on

military expenditures).”

The President said that he realized that we look at each other.

Brezhnev said that the Soviet Union was not spending at a faster

rate.

The President said that it was, and that is what our data show.

Brezhnev said: “In any event, we should not hide the truth from

each other.”

The President continued by saying that the fact was that the Soviet

Union is a great and powerful nation, not afraid, and very confident in

its own abilities and strength. It was also a fact that the United States

was a great and powerful nation, not afraid, and very confident in its

abilities and strength. We were looked upon by the rest of the world as

being of approximately equal strength. This was a compliment to us

both. The world also looked upon us as leaders. The President believed

that Brezhnev and he should not let other countries or leaders hold

them back if they saw clearly how to proceed in the interests of im-

proving relations and making progress together. He hoped that this

meeting would let them embark on a new and more productive course

and practical steps toward defined objectives we shared. The President

said that we should make a genuine effort to understand each other’s

concerns, the things that we do that concern each other.

Brezhnev interjected: “Yes, on the course of truth.”

The President said each generation of leaders must make a max-

imum contribution to peace and stability. As Brezhnev well knew,

elected leaders were frequently held back by committees and bureau-

cracies, but they could not always depend upon their successors to take

actions they had failed to take themselves. The President would like to

see a greater frequency of routine consultations between our two coun-

tries, particularly consultations between our military leaders. And both

countries should recognize that there can be no superiority and no

victor in nuclear war. It was critical that we exercise restraint in re-

gional political competition, that we restrict our military intervention

in trouble spots in the world, either directly or by proxy. It was impor-

tant that we take care not to deprive either of our countries or, for that

matter, any other country, of access to crucial natural resources.

In closing, the President wanted to repeat that arms control at this

present stage in our relations was the centerpiece, that verification of

agreements was of crucial importance and that we should not wait for

completion of an agreement before taking further steps, that step-by-

step progress be achieved as we reach agreement. This applied in equal

measure to the strategic arms limitation talks, to the comprehensive

test ban talks, to the negotiations concerning anti-satellite weapons, to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

conventional arms transfers, mutual and balanced force reductions in

Europe and obviously SALT III. The President was eager for progress

in all these matters without any further delay. The President was also

very eager to understand Soviet concerns about us and to explore,

while here in Vienna, every possibility for cooperation. He was eager to

lay the groundwork for resolution of present difficulties and misunder-

standings and for progress in the future.

Brezhnev said: “Lunch time.”

The President concluded by saying that he looked forward to

seeing Brezhnev this afternoon and expressed the hope that the net-

work of our bilateral relations can be strengthened.

Brezhnev said that they would sign the Treaty right after lunch.

Gromyko said: “No, two days from now.”

January–June 1979

201.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Dinner

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown

Mr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Mr. D. Arensburger, Interpreter

President L.I. Brezhnev

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Minister of Defense D.F. Ustinov

Mr. Aleksandrov-Agentov

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter (part time)

In the course of a non-substantive social conversation President

Carter said that we intended to replace Ambassador Toon in Moscow

by Mr. Tom Watson, a former president of IBM and a very distin-

guished American. This has not been announced publicly and the Pres-

ident wanted to inform President Brezhnev in advance. He handed to

202.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Vienna, June 17, 1979

Mr. President,

Strong and immediate progress on SALT III is important. I

suggest:

a) Commitment to deep cuts in weapons—below SALT II limits.

b) No encryption of telemetry plus other moves toward easier

verifiability.

c) Stop production of nuclear warheads and launchers.

d) Provide safe ocean haven areas for missile submarines to pre-

vent destabilizing ASW developments.

e) No tests of depressed trajectory submarine missile firing.

f) Conclude comprehensive test ban treaty with or without Great

Britain.

g) Pre-notification of missile tests and large strategic bomber

exercises.

h) No tests of anti-satellite systems or3 missiles.

i) Regular consultations between military leaders and between

heads of state & exchange visits.

j) Begin talks to limit and control nuclear weapons not covered

under SALT II.

k) Implement agreements as they are concluded, without neces-

sarily waiting for a final and complete SALT II agreement (for instance,

SALT II limits might be lowered annually by 5% as mutually agreed to

be advantageous).

January–June 1979

l) No nuclear fuel sales to countries not under Non-Proliferation

Treaty or IAEA safeguards.

203.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Third Plenary Meeting between President Carter and President Brezhnev

Topics: SALT III and other arms control issues

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

General David Jones

Mr. Hamilton Jordan

General G. Seignious

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. Joseph Powell

Mr. David Aaron

Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter

President L.I. Brezhnev

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Marshal D.F. Ustinov

Mr. K.U. Chernenko

Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko

Marshal N.V. Ogarkov

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov

Mr. L.M. Zamyatin

Mr. V.G. Komplektov

Mr. A.M. Vavilov

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

The President said he was grateful that a successfully completed

SALT II agreement would be signed tomorrow. For the first time, this

agreement places ceilings on nuclear arms and provides for reductions

of certain nuclear arms. However, it is obvious that SALT II does not go

far enough. It still permits a massive buildup in nuclear arms and a

buildup in warheads, and we are concerned about the future and very

eager to make progress today in deciding ways to explore how we can

have a meaningful SALT III agreement. As President Brezhnev would

know, under SALT II both nations are permitted to develop and deploy

more than 10,000 nuclear warheads. This is a waste of national re-

sources, but each nation is inclined to match the potential nuclear

strength of the other. In addition to great numbers, technological ad-

vances, which are almost inevitable, can be very destabilizing in the fu-

ture. With cruise missiles, new types of submarines with missiles, our

own MX missile, improved accuracy of warheads, air defense systems,

civil defense commitments and the very large ICBMs, like the SS–18, all

these advances can be very destabilizing in the future. So, under SALT

II, the nuclear arms race will continue, but the United States is ready to

stop the arms race. The President was sure that Brezhnev understood

the military and technical aspects of this problem. He would now like

to outline briefly some steps they might explore together as they ap-

proached the SALT III negotiations.

The President said that, first of all, there was a need to improve the

ability of both sides to verify compliance with the technical constraints

that will be necessary in the future. Hopefully, they could eliminate

all encryption of telemetric information. They might agree on pre-

notification by both nations to the other of all missile flight-tests and of

massive bomber exercises; they might find ways to improve moni-

toring stations, thereby increasing mutual trust, and perhaps might be

able to provide for on-site inspection under certain circumstances. The

President wanted to explore with Brezhnev every possible way of im-

proving the quality of verification and to establish mutual trust.

The President stressed to President Brezhnev that the United States

was ready for an agreement that would ensure large reductions in

numbers of launchers, numbers of warheads and throwweight. As a

matter of fact, the United States would be willing to explore an imme-

diate moratorium on the construction of any new nuclear launchers

and missile warheads. As a prelude to SALT III, we would be glad to

explore with the Soviet Union a step-by-step approach to reductions

even below the SALT II levels, perhaps 5% a year, provided such reduc-

January–June 1979

tions were balanced, so that the agreement is in the interest of both

sides. As far as the number of nuclear weapons which might be re-

duced, the President would like to explore with Brezhnev means by

which the remaining nuclear weapons could be made less vulnerable to

possible attack from the other country.

Marshal Ustinov interrupted to note that President Carter had men-

tioned the possibility of reducing the vulnerability of the remaining nu-

clear weapons to attack from the other side; would this not require new

weapons, and would this not be inconsistent with the first part of the

President’s statement?

The President said that only in a defensive way was he talking

about making missiles less vulnerable to pre-emptive attack. One ex-

ample of what he meant would be a safe haven or sanctuary for stra-

tegic submarines in certain areas of the ocean that could be excluded

from activities involved in anti-submarine warfare. We would also like

to explore with the Soviets the possibility of prohibiting the testing of

missiles in depressed trajectory, because such launches from subma-

rines might abbreviate the time required for the flight of attacking mis-

siles. We would also like to include further constraints on the moderni-

zation of weapons systems, a process started in the SALT II Treaty.

The President said that these were proposals that should be ex-

plored privately, perhaps between our respective military leaders.

They were not designed for propaganda advantage but were designed

to open up the prospect of real weapons control for the future. He was

sure that the Soviet Union will have similar proposals to make, which

he would be eager to explore with them.

Further, the President said we would like to proceed with a com-

prehensive nuclear test ban agreement, either with or without the par-

ticipation of Great Britain. We will do everything possible to induce

other nations, France, Great Britain and China, to join in substantial re-

ductions in nuclear weapons development and deployment. Obviously

he could not speak for them and would think that the Chinese would

be difficult to persuade. But it is obvious that for several years now the

United States and the Soviet Union had such massive nuclear inven-

tories that their predominance over the other nuclear powers is ade-

quate. Moreover, the Soviet SS–20 missiles and other medium-range

systems constituted a formidable means for dealing with these nations.

But the absence of nuclear cooperation from other countries should not

be allowed to interfere with progress on a bilateral basis toward the

SALT III agreement.

The President thought that, along with SALT III negotiations, we

should join publicly in an effort aimed at non-proliferation of nuclear

weapons and agree not to make sales of nuclear fuel or technology ex-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

cept to those nations that were under the terms of the NPT or agreed-to

IAEA safeguards.

The President said we were ready to sign a partial agreement with

the Soviet Union on anti-satellite systems, an agreement to bar any

damage or destruction of satellites and announce publicly that neither

side has plans to test anti-satellite missiles or systems.

Finally, in his opening statement, the President wanted to mention

the talks here in Vienna on mutual and balanced force reductions, ne-

gotiations which have now been carried on for more than five years.

With consultation with our allies, the United States was ready to make

progress in this effort. We would be willing to consider a first phase

step limited to just the Soviet Union and the United States, if the Soviets

agreed. This can be discussed between Secretary Brown and Marshal

Ustinov, but it would be necessary to overcome the need for agreed

data, based on a common definition of what a soldier is and who

should be included. These obstacles should be overcome if the leaders

are willing to make progress. The President added that we would have

to agree on associated measures to verify an MBFR agreement. (Mar-

shal Ustinov missed part of the translation so the President repeated his

statement on the definition of armed forces to be included in MBFR so

as to resolve the data question.) The President said that this concluded

his presentation.

Brezhnev said that both he and President Carter had given a high

assessment of the importance of the SALT II Treaty, and quite rightly

so. But it must be admitted that on the whole, very little—in fact, almost

nothing—had been done in terms of curbing the arms race. It was true

that there had never been so many ongoing negotiations on arms con-

trol measures as today. But, in most cases, these talks have been

marking time for years and going around in circles. In the meanwhile,

the arms race continues. To Brezhnev, this appeared to be a disquieting

situation. He believed it especially important to halt and reverse this

tendency. In this respect, our two countries can do a great deal and

there is every reason to take advantage of the success in SALT in order

to provide an impetus to progress on other arms limitations.

Brezhnev wanted to draw the President’s particular attention to the

Soviet Union’s proposal to halt the production of nuclear weapons and

to gradually reduce nuclear stockpiles up to and including their com-

plete elimination. In this process, the Soviet side proposed to take into

consideration the difference in levels of stockpiles so that the balance is

preserved and no harm done to the security of this or that state. He

would repeat further that it was necessary to avoid a situation in which

our two countries would be reducing their nuclear arsenals while other

countries could continue to build up theirs.

January–June 1979

Brezhnev noted that the Soviet proposal was on the negotiating

table in the Committee on Disarmament. He would like to hope that the

United States will add its word in support of that proposal. In this re-

spect, the Soviet Union would not wish to claim any monopoly. If ad-

visable, it could be presented as a joint proposal. Acting together, the

Soviet Union and the United States can achieve a great deal to the ben-

efit of all.

One of the key tasks at this time is to strengthen the regime of non-

proliferation of nuclear weapons. Where we have a common interest,

let us go on acting jointly and in parallel to attract more countries to ac-

cede to the NPT. Here we had a clearly common interest to establish

strict controls over materials, equipment and technology that can be

used for making nuclear arms. The appearance of such weapons in

areas in which there are acute conflicts, and in countries which assert

territorial claims against other countries would be particularly dan-

gerous. In this connection, it was enough just to mention the Middle

East and South Africa. Disturbing news in this respect was coming out

of Pakistan; perhaps the President had more information on that matter

than did Brezhnev. He had already drawn the President’s attention to

current plans to supply China with nuclear reactors produced under

American license. Unfortunately, he had to note that he still had not re-

ceived a satisfactory reply. But he would ask the President to take a

look at the knot that was being tied there. Both the Soviet Union and the

United States had urged Pakistan and India to accede to the Non-

Proliferation Treaty. But Pakistan was now working on the develop-

ment of its own nuclear weapons and was referring to India in this con-

text. In fact, however, this was just a pretext. The Soviet leadership be-

lieved the statement made by the leaders of India to the effect that their

country did not intend to produce nuclear weapons. This had been

reaffirmed again just recently by Prime Minister Desai. At the same

time, India was reluctant to sign the NPT at a time when the Western

countries were engaged in helping the Chinese to build up their mili-

tary might, including their nuclear potential. After all, the Chinese har-

bored territorial claims against India and were not at all averse to re-

sorting to outright aggression against neighboring countries.

Turning to another subject, Brezhnev said it would be very impor-

tant promptly to complete and sign a treaty on the general and com-

plete prohibition of nuclear weapon testing. The Soviet Union had

done a great deal in that direction, having met Western positions on a

number of important matters. Speaking frankly, he would have to say

that the CTB negotiations were being slowed and delayed, and by no

means through any fault of the Soviet Union. Brezhnev expressed the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

hope that the United States and England will change their inflexible ap-

proach, in particular, to questions of verification. If that were done, all

three partners could jointly and without further delay finalize their

agreement on this important and necessary measure.

Brezhnev turned to the negotiations on reduction of armed forces

and armaments in Central Europe. Together with its allies the USSR

had made many efforts to reach an agreement that would be fair and

equitable to all. President Carter, himself, and other leaders in Western

Europe had noted the constructive nature of the Soviet proposal tabled

in June 1978. Nonetheless, the negotiations are still marking time. Quite

recently in Washington, the Soviet side had set forth its considerations

on how to move things forward in this field by proposing that our two

countries reduce their forces and armaments in Central Europe by way

of a first step, without thereby prejudicing the fundamental positions of

the sides at the Vienna negotiations, and for the time being, to leave

aside everything that has been slowing down these negotiations. Un-

fortunately, in response, the Eastern countries had heard only the very

same unacceptable demands on which the West had insisted all along

at the Vienna talks. Brezhnev expressed the hope that this had not been

the last word of the US side. If the United States was willing to reach

agreement, the Soviet Union could take some very substantive steps in

the context of the reduction of the level of forces in the first phase.

Brezhnev asked Foreign Minister Gromyko to comment on this subject.

Gromyko noted that Brezhnev had already drawn attention to the

importance of this matter and to the difficulties the Soviet side had

come up against in Vienna. If one tried to get to the bottom of the com-

plications besetting the talks, one would have to note that the Soviet

Union was being told that it and its allies have a certain number of

forces, and actual figures have been named. However, the figures cited

exceeded by more than 150,000 the real strength of our armed forces

and that of our allies. Gromyko repeated and stressed the figure

150,000. He pointed out that the East had said that it did not have those

150,000 troops, so how could it admit to their existence? Then, the East

was told that if it did not recognize that number, it will be impossible to

reach an understanding on the other matters being discussed in

Vienna. The President interjected, “how do you suggest we reconcile

this issue?” Gromyko continued by saying, when the East asked where

that 150,000 figure came from, it received no answer. He could only

conclude that the West had unreliable sources.

Gromyko said that in order to move these negotiations forward, the

Soviets had recently made a second proposal. That proposal was a re-

sponse to the questions the West had asked. The Soviet Union had sug-

gested to circumvent the difficulties that had arisen at the negotiations

by reaching a first understanding concerning the armed forces and ar-

January–June 1979

maments of only the Soviet Union and the United States. In this con-

text, the Soviet Union had made a specific proposal, suggesting specific

numbers. But, in response, it had been confronted by the very same

conditions that had been put forward at the general talks in Vienna; i.e.,

the question of current numbers. As a result, the talks are bogged

down, and no progress is made. He would ask the President to take a

fresh look at this business, because he felt that the present delay was en-

tirely artificial. The Soviet Union felt that it would be a good thing if

agreement could be reached by way of a first step between our two

countries alone. The Soviet Union would like to see this happen and

this is what President Brezhnev had emphasized in his statement.

President Carter thought that this was something that could be re-

solved today. He would ask Secretary Brown to represent him and

meet with a Soviet representative this afternoon to engage in serious

discussion and see if this matter could be moved forward. He believed

that the suggestion of the Soviet Union that our two countries agree on

a first step of reductions was a good one. Gromyko had asked what the

difference in numbers in terms of data base consisted of. Secretary

Brown would be prepared to discuss that, as well as the Soviet pro-

posal, in an effort to move rapidly on this matter. The US side would be

prepared to begin immediately after this meeting. Secretary Brown

would represent the President and perhaps Brezhnev could choose

someone to represent him in an effort to resolve this matter—perhaps

today.

Marshal Ustinov remarked that Gromyko had somewhat underesti-

mated when he said the difference was 150,000 men. The actual differ-

ence was closer to 180,000.

Gromyko said that he had named 150,000 as a minimum figure.

Marshal Ustinov said it would still be possible that Secretary Brown

and he might fail to reach agreement, unless a decision of principle was

taken at this table on a percentage reduction or on specific numbers of

forces.

Gromyko pointed out that the Soviet side had named specific

figures; i.e., 7% or 10%, or so many divisions and warheads on the So-

viet side, and so many brigades and warheads on the US side. What

was needed now was a decision in principle.

President Carter said he would like to see if this matter could be

clarified. In his view, we did not have nearly so wide a difference as

was assumed. Soviet troop strength could be discussed between Mar-

Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory

Board, Box 75, Subject: Box 8.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

shal Ustinov and Secretary Brown, and he would agree that the first

step be confined to Soviet and US forces. Secondly, we would like to ex-

plain to the Soviet side the basis for the disparity in numbers in detail. It

might or might not be possible to agree on data. Third, we would like to

discuss actual reductions that would be acceptable to both sides. To an-

swer Gromyko’s other question, we had no choice between a proposal

to reduce specific numbers or, if preferred, to reduce by certain per-

centages. Either method was acceptable to us as a basis for discussion.

The Soviet proposal to reduce specific numbers was satisfactory to us

in principle.

Brezhnev said that an understanding on these matters would be a

first practical step by our two countries and would set a good example

for the other countries involved in the negotiations in terms of les-

sening the high concentration of forces and weapons in Central Europe.

He was certain that a step of this kind would have great political signif-

icance and would be widely applauded throughout the world.

The President said he agreed and suggested we try to resolve this

today.

Brezhnev said he would welcome that.

Turning to other disarmament issues, Brezhnev first wanted to re-

mind the President that the Soviet Union was firmly in favor of disar-

mament and in favor of a comprehensive agreement prohibiting the de-

velopment of new types of weapons of mass destruction. The Soviet

Union considered this to be a correct way of proceeding and was pre-

pared at any time to begin practical discussions of this matter. Unfortu-

nately, the United States and its NATO allies had not manifested such

willingness to date. Well, the Soviet side would have to wait until the

appropriate situation matured. But in the meanwhile, as he saw it, it

might well be possible to reach agreement on such partial measures as

prohibition of radiological weapons and prohibition of chemical

weapons, mutual renunciation of the manufacture of neutron weapons

and some other actions to reduce the scope of military competition be-

tween our countries and in the world at large. Here, again, he would

ask Gromyko to review the general state of affairs.

Gromyko noted that the Soviet Union was engaged in negotiations

with the United States on some other partial disarmament questions,

apart from mutual force reductions. The radiological weapons negotia-

tions were scheduled to begin literally three days after conclusion of

the current meeting. In general, at these negotiations, the situation was

encouraging. There were a few minor remaining differences which

could probably be eliminated quickly. He hoped that this would be so

and that both sides would make a major effort to achieve the goal of

bringing these negotiations to a successful conclusion. What was con-

January–June 1979

templated in this area was the signing of an international convention

on the prohibition of radiological weapons.

Turning to neutron weapons, Gromyko noted that the Soviet Union

had tabled a proposal at the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva,

proposing that these weapons be prohibited and that both our nations

be a party to such an agreement. The Soviet Union had stated its views

on this matter more than once and, in particular, this had been empha-

sized repeatedly by President Brezhnev. The Soviet Union believed

that the manufacture and deployment of weapons of this kind would

be a major negative step that would adversely affect relations between

our two countries and the international atmosphere as a whole. He

would therefore express the hope that President Carter personally and

the United States approach this matter seriously and that an agreement

be reached which would serve the interests of improving relations be-

tween us and the interests of detente and peace.

Turning to chemical weapons and the possibility of reaching

agreement to prohibit such weapons, Gromyko noted that the negotia-

tions on this question are proceeding badly and in an unsatisfactory

way. It would evidently be difficult to go into detail at this meeting, but

he wanted to make two points in this connection. First, we had major

differences between our views on questions relating to verification in

this connection and, secondly, for an agreement on chemical weapons

to be effective, it was important that all major powers, and certainly the

permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, join in such an

agreement. What kind of an agreement would that be without the par-

ticipation of China? Could one really agree to a situation in which the

Chinese alone would have a free hand to manufacture chemical

weapons? These were the major points to which he wanted to draw the

President’s attention.

Turning to anti-satellite systems, Gromyko said that Secretary

Vance and he had discussed this matter just two days ago. He did not

believe it necessary to repeat what he had said to Secretary Vance. The

President was well aware of the Soviet position. The difference be-

tween our respective positions was very great indeed, and he would

ask the President to take a more objective look at this matter. An agree-

ment could not possibly be one-sided, benefiting the United States

alone.

When Gromyko turned to conventional arms transfers, the Presi-

dent interjected a few comments on the anti-satellite talks. We had not

complained about the Soviet-manned Soyuz/Salyut flights, and had

not asserted that they were anti-satellite systems. Our space shuttle will

not be designed as an anti-satellite system. It was the very center of our

space effort in the future. The President hoped that this would not be al-

lowed to block progress in the talks because we are going to continue

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

developing this vehicle. This was not a departure from our overall

space effort, and if the Soviets took the position that the shuttle was

being developed as an anti-satellite system, we would only assure them

that it definitely was not.

Gromyko said that the Soviet Union was in favor of continuing

these negotiations, but it would be impossible to reach agreement on

the basis of the US position.

Returning to conventional arms transfers, Gromyko noted that the

negotiations had begun some time ago and seemed to move right

along, but then the representatives of the United States had proposed to

discuss conventional arms transfers on a regional basis. In brief, the re-

gions mentioned were those in which the United States was interested.

When Soviet representatives mentioned other areas and countries of

concern to both sides, US representatives had simply refused to discuss

them. Such a unilateral approach could not possibly be acceptable to

the Soviet side, so US representatives had simply walked out of the

talks and had returned home. Thus, the conventional arms transfers

talks were now in a state of suspense.

The President said with respect to conventional arms transfers that

our position has been that we should not begin with areas where each

country was deeply involved. We provide military assistance to South

Korea and Japan, for example. The Soviet Union provided military

assistance to Vietnam and Ethiopia. We would want to concentrate in

the beginning on areas where there was not that much controversy,

where our two countries were not involved by commitments of long

standing.

Gromyko said the Soviet Union would be prepared to resume the

conventional arms transfer negotiations.

Gromyko turned to the talks on the Indian Ocean and limitation of

military activities in that area. He noted that the talks on this subject

had begun at a lively pace, but then the U.S. had unilaterally suspended

them and no discussions were in progress at this time. He thought that

perhaps the United States might be prepared to resume the talks, but

pointed out that in the absence of these negotiations the United States

had continued its activities aimed at strengthening the Diego Garcia

base, and in general had intensified naval activities in that area. The So-

viet side was prepared to continue negotiations on this subject, but he

wanted to draw the President’s attention to the fact that it would be im-

possible to do so without a change in the position of the United States.

As for the Indian Ocean, the President said that we had never re-

nounced developing the Diego Garcia base. What had occurred was

massive Soviet arms supply to Ethiopia and before that to Somalia,

along with the presence of thousands of Cuban troops in the Horn.

Now the Soviet Union was building up arms in Afghanistan. Thus, the

January–June 1979

situation had changed. In order to bring about a stable situation there

had to be nonintervention and respect for international borders, and

the Soviet Union nor Cuba would not inject themselves into regional

military altercations. Such involvement caused us deep concern.

Brezhnev wanted to present another idea, suggesting that the two

sides take a broad look at naval affairs. At one time he had already said

that he did not think it was an ideal situation where the navies of the

great powers cruise thousands of miles from their home territory for

long periods of time, and the Soviet Union was prepared to resolve this

problem on the basis of equality. The Soviet Union had proposed that

Soviet and U.S. naval ships carrying nuclear weapons be withdrawn

from the Mediterranean. The United States had not responded to this

idea, however, but he still believed there could be an exchange of views

on a bilateral basis and then involve other maritime countries as well.

He would ask the President to consider this carefully. If that could be

agreed in principle, he and President Carter might instruct their repre-

sentatives to engage in a more detailed exchange of views.

In conclusion, Brezhnev said he recalled an idea put forward by

President Carter in their correspondence, the possibility of exchanging

advance notifications about the strategic exercises of the two countries.

He said the two sides would need to specify such a discussion, but as

for strategic forces proper, there is already a certain measure of agree-

ment. There is a special clause in the SALT II Treaty on the advance no-

tifications of test launches of missiles, but it would probably be worth-

while discussing further steps. Brezhnev said this concluded his

considerations on the entire complex of issues involved in curbing the

arms race but he wanted to say a few words regarding the Backfire.

Reading from a prepared statement, Brezhnev had the following to

say on the subject of Backfire: as agreed in advance, he had made a rele-

vant statement regarding this airplane yesterday. It would go without

saying that the Soviet Union would proceed precisely from the exact

text of that statement and cannot be bound by any unilateral interpreta-

tion of that statement.

Brezhnev then turned to a different subject. He said that, taking into

consideration yesterday’s exchange of views, he suggested including in

the Communique that each side states that it will not be the first to use

nuclear or any other weapons on the other side or the allies of the other

side.

President Carter asked that the U.S. have an opportunity to think

about that wording. The President then turned to the Backfire issue. He

said that it had been agreed before Vienna that the Soviet Union would

confirm at the highest level that the production rate of the Backfire air-

plane would be no more than thirty per year. We had not received such

204.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Fourth Plenary Meeting

International Issues

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Mr. Hamilton Jordan

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. Joseph Powell

Mr. David Aaron

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Mr. D. Arensburger, Interpreter

Gen. David Jones

President L.I. Brezhnev

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Marshal D. Ustinov

Marshal Ogarkov

Mr. G. Korniyenko

Mr. L. Zamyatin

Mr. Ye. N. Kochetkov

Mr. V. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

President Carter said that he was very gratified with the spirit of de-

tente which had originated in Europe under President Brezhnev’s lead-

ership, and with how this spirit contributed to peace. He hoped that de-

tente could spread elsewhere in the world. Brezhnev had pointed

previously to protecting the interests of our countries and our allies.

The best way to do this is to have full and frank discussions. This will

be done this afternoon. Though some of these discussions might be un-

pleasant, the President believed that it would be best to speak in a full

and frank fashion.

There were some areas in the world where the U.S. and its allies

had absolutely vital interests, for example, the Arabian peninsula and

the Persian Gulf. In areas like these, which were so sensitive, maximum

restraint on both sides was essential to avoid a serious confrontation.

In other troubled areas, peaceful solutions were always preferable.

He was referring to such areas as the Middle East, the Horn of Africa,

Southern Africa and Southeast Asia. In these areas it was important for

both of us to try to discourage armed combat and bloodshed, and to en-

courage peaceful resolution of differences.

The extensive military activities of Cuba were of deep concern to

the American people. We regarded Cuba as a proxy of the Soviet

Union, a surrogate or at least an ally, which was being supported, fi-

nanced and equipped by the Soviet Union. There were some 40,000

Cuban military personnel throughout Africa, and Cuba was becoming

increasingly active militarily in interfering in other countries, including

in the Caribbean area and in Central America.

The President said that we have been deeply concerned by the vio-

lation of international borders in Southeast Asia. Vietnam had fifteen

divisions in Kampuchea and shows no inclination to withdraw from

this incursion. We were also concerned by the violation of the Vietnam-

ese border by the People’s Republic of China. At this time the Soviet

Union was becoming more and more active in naval and military activ-

ities, using Vietnamese ports and facilities which causes us grave

concern.

January–June 1979

The President realized that in some instances our two countries

had different perspectives, but he wanted to consult with the Soviet

Union and cooperate where possible.

In Namibia, we were trying to achieve through the UN an inde-

pendent country with a government of its choice. Similarly, in

Zimbabwe-Rhodesia we were trying to resolve that conflict to the satis-

faction of the people of that area in a peaceful way. On the Middle East,

our two countries have had differences of opinion in the past and in the

present. The President had tried to bring together all parties in Geneva,

including the Soviet Union, with a view to finding a solution to the dif-

ferences in the Middle East. This was some two years ago, but Syria and

a number of other countries refused and no progress had been made.

President Sadat had taken an initiative—the President would add that

this was without consultation with us—and went to Jerusalem. Much

progress had been made by Israel and Egypt. This was consistent with

UN Resolutions 242, 338 and others, as well as the Joint Statement be-

tween the U.S. and the USSR. It was a fact that Israel was withdrawing

from the Sinai. Israel was prepared to negotiate treaties with all its

neighbors. Palestinian rights, under the Camp David accords, would be

preserved. Security of all states was to be guaranteed. The President

hoped that the Soviet Union would give its support and encourage

other states to join in this process. Total Israeli withdrawal from the

Sinai was part of a process as prescribed by the UN. UN supervision

was important. We would expect all Security Council members to ap-

prove such UN supervision by UN emergency forces. But the U.S., in

the interests of a peaceful resolution of these differences, was pledged

alternative supervision if that was necessary. However, our strong

preference was for a UN force.

The President continued that the United States had an interest in

stability throughout this entire area of the world. In the past we always

had good relations with Iran, though now they were not nearly as close

as before. We had no intention of interfering in the internal affairs of

Iran or Afghanistan, but would endorse the independence of both these

countries. It endangered U.S. lives for Soviet broadcasts to allege the

contrary. This was of concern to us.

The President, turning to the People’s Republic of China, said that

he was aware of the Soviet concerns as Brezhnev had stated on several

occasions in his letters, but we felt that after 30 years, normalization of

relations between us and the People’s Republic of China was long ov-

erdue. We believed that this new relationship would contribute to

peace and stability not only between the U.S. and PRC but in the whole

world. It was not directed against other countries of the world. We ex-

pected an increase in trade and an expansion of scientific and technical

and cultural exchanges, but this would not be done at the expense of re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

lations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union which we considered

very important. We had nothing to conceal from the Soviet Union re-

garding that relationship.

The President concluded that he hoped that an exchange based on

those views which he had given and which no doubt Brezhnev would

be presenting today, would be productive. Inevitably, we would have

differences on how to resolve some problems between us and among

other countries. But the President wanted Brezhnev to understand and

trust our intentions. He was eager to listen to Brezhnev in order to un-

derstand the Soviet concerns. He was sure that peaceful solutions of

these differences would serve better relations between the U.S. and the

USSR.

In fact, the President hoped that Brezhnev would agree with every-

thing he had said.

Brezhnev said that before setting forth his considerations on inter-

national problems, the subject of this meeting, he wanted to refer

briefly to the questions he had mentioned earlier this morning re-

garding further negotiations on SALT, that is, in addition to the con-

siderations he had already expressed in Vienna. He did not want to ad-

dress in detail all the questions raised by the President. There could be

differences of view on all of them and it was difficult to predict what

decisions will come out of the forthcoming negotiations. However, it

was impossible to escape the fact that before these talks developed into

full scale negotiations it was necessary to consider a number of ques-

tions of principle. For one thing, the follow-on agreement had to in-

volve not only the systems of the U.S. and the USSR, but also those of

other nuclear powers. Second, there must be full clarity to the effect

that the follow-on agreement must relate substantively to the forward-

based systems of the U.S. and its allies, because, as was widely known,

these systems were targeted against the Soviet Union and its allies.

Third, underlying the follow-on negotiations—and this was the holy of

holies from which the Soviet Union would not depart—must be the

principle of equality and equal security and the necessity of taking into

account all factors affecting the strategic situation. At present, it would

be abnormal to negotiate some kind of annual reductions, say by 5 per-

cent, in the levels of strategic offensive arms, independently of the

other problems involved in SALT III. In other words, it was necessary

to give further consideration to the follow-on negotiations. At this time,

we should ensure prompt entry into force of the SALT II Treaty which

has been fully approved and which we will be signing tomorrow.

January–June 1979

Brezhnev wanted to begin his discussion of international problems

by making several general observations. The Soviet Union approached

very seriously the matter of reaching some common understanding

and even a degree of cooperation with the U.S. in world affairs. The So-

viet Union attached major significance to this and was prepared to act

in the appropriate spirit. This made it all the more important to make

note of the factors which were preventing this. He already had occasion

to note that mutual understanding and, to an even greater degree, co-

operation between our two states, including cooperation in interna-

tional affairs, was greatly hampered when one of the sides was attrib-

uting changes in the world, movements for national liberation and

independence, as well as for social progress, to the malevolent will of

one of the sides. Brezhnev had been told that a rather strange theory

had gained currency in the United States, a theory known as the arc of

crisis, according to which the Soviet Union was allegedly reaching from

Western Africa to Southern Asia, seeking to surround the Middle East,

to the detriment of the United States and western countries in general.

Brezhnev wanted to say that this entire theory was an absolute fairy

tale. Given such an approach to international events, it was hardly pos-

sible to make progress in international relations, including the settle-

ment of world problems in which our two countries certainly could

cooperate. Frankly, the Soviet Union was quite amazed at how light-

heartedly some corners of the world were being declared spheres of

vital interests of the U.S. This was not only contrary to elementary

norms of international law, but also complicated the international situ-

ation even more when there were sufficient complications as it was.

Brezhnev said that the Soviet Union was sure that the U.S. and the

USSR were able to make a major contribution to present international

developments, not by sowing fear and by suspecting the intentions of

the other side, but by strengthening understanding and businesslike

cooperation. That would help to resolve pressing international

problems. In this connection, it was always necessary—not in words

but in deeds—to respect the independence and sovereign rights of

every state and not to permit a manifestation of great power politics

nor interfere in the affairs of other states. The Soviet Union wanted to

interact with the U.S. in international affairs and if relevant under-

standings were reached and carried out—without an attempt to gain at

the expense of others—Brezhnev was sure that there would be no lack

of areas of cooperation of regional and worldwide importance.

Brezhnev said that the Soviet Union attached particular importance

to European affairs. This was understandable, of course, because a

large part of the Soviet Union was located in Europe and because its

destiny was linked to Europe. Moreover, the situation in Europe has

always exerted a major, at times a decisive, influence on the situation in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the entire world. It was the chief concern of the Soviet leadership that

neither the Soviet people nor any other people in Europe ever live

through what the Soviet people had experienced in the years of World

War II as a result of the Hitlerite aggression. That was the firm resolve

of the Soviet people and the Soviet leaders. Brezhnev was able to say

with satisfaction that the political situation in Europe today was better

than ever in the past and that the normalization of relations between

our two states has played a role in that process.

Brezhnev continued that naturally, the Soviet Union, as well as the

U.S., had to take into account reality. This reality was that Europe in-

cluded neighboring countries with different social systems and that

both the Soviet Union and the U.S. had allies and friends in Europe.

Brezhnev could say for his part that the Soviet Union accepted this situ-

ation as constituting reality. Whether within the framework of the so-

cialist commonwealth or in its relations with Western countries or in

terms of its European policy in general, the Soviet Union did not

pursue an anti-American course or try to prejudice legitimate interests

of the United States. And certainly the Soviet Union was not spreading

among the public the thought that the United States was an adversary

or an enemy of the Soviet Union. Brezhnev wanted to expect a similar

approach on the part of the U.S. with respect to the Soviet Union and its

interests.

Brezhnev continued that the European situation did, of course, in-

clude elements which raised concern, such as efforts aimed at lop-

sided, Brezhnev would even say self-serving, interpretations of the

provisions of the Final Act of the European Security Conference, when

some provisions were emphasized more than others in order to use

them as part of an effort to interfere in the internal affairs of other

states. In Brezhnev’s view, it was in our mutual interest to implement

all the provisions of the Final Act and to do so in a spirit of constructive

cooperation and good will. After all, that was the very essence of the

Helsinki conference and of the document adopted at that conference. It

was in this spirit that the Soviet side planned to approach next year’s

Madrid meeting. He trusted that the U.S. would pursue a similar ap-

proach and that there would be no repetition of the negative experience

of the Belgrade meeting.

Today the climate in Europe was quite healthy, but such a climate

could hardly be imagined in the absence of military detente on the con-

tinent. The Soviet Union saw the situation as follows. There long since

has taken shape an appropriate balance of forces between the two mili-

tary groupings. The Soviet Union accepted that balance, did not upset it

and did not intend to upset it. However, of late, NATO countries have

accelerated their military preparations to such an extent that questions

arise about these military preparations. Could it be that the United

January–June 1979

States and its allies were no longer satisfied with such a balance and

that they had decided to gain military superiority? If that was the situa-

tion, what sort of cooperation, what sort of strengthening of peace was

that? That would mean a new round in military competition. The So-

viet Union, for its part, believed that the only way of ensuring security

and lasting peace in Europe was to preserve the existing balance of

forces and to reduce them on both sides without changing the existing

correlation of forces. Accordingly, the Soviet Union was in favor of mil-

itary detente.

Brezhnev continued by saying that it was his particular wish that

the States-Parties to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Eu-

rope conclude a treaty on refraining from first use of nuclear or conven-

tional arms in Europe. Was it not clear that this would create a healthier

climate in Europe and between our two countries? To be quite honest,

what objections could there be to that? In this area, in addition to the

Vienna discussions that had been discussed, the USSR and its allies

had submitted a package of specific proposals to the Western countries.

All these proposals were still on the table and an answer was being

awaited.

Brezhnev recalled that the Warsaw Pact members had recently pro-

posed holding a conference at the political level with the participation

of all the European countries, as well as the U.S. and Canada, to discuss

and agree on practical measures of military detente in Europe, in-

cluding confidence-building measures. Could a favorable reaction to

this initiative be expected from the U.S.?

In conclusion, Brezhnev wanted to note that not everything was

well with implementation of the Quadripartite Agreement regarding

West Berlin, yet that was an important element in European stability.

We had created that agreement in a spirit of cooperation and clearly it

was in our mutual interest to suppress attempts to undermine that

accord.

Turning to the Middle East, Brezhnev said that he presumed the

President was well acquainted with the Soviet position of principle in

its appraisal of the U.S. policy. Brezhnev had written to the President

about it. Now, at this personal meeting he wanted to re-emphasize it.

The fact that the October 1977 Soviet-U.S. understanding on joint action

in the Middle East was violated and supplanted by an anti-Arab policy

argued nothing good for the people of that region nor for the relations

between us. Brezhnev thought that it was clear to everyone now that

the Egyptian-Israeli treaty3 had failed to tranquilize the Middle Eastern

other things, each country’s recognition of the other, cessation of the state of war, and Is-

rael’s complete withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

situation, but it has aggravated it. He called attention to the indignation

and determination of the Arabs and noted the war which Israel,

protected by Egypt, was in effect waging in Lebanon. This could at

any time grow larger. It was necessary to prevent a resumption of

armed conflict along the lines of the 1967 war, to prevent a major

conflagration.

Therefore, unfortunately, said Brezhnev, the positions of the U.S.

and the USSR were fundamentally different at this time and not

through any fault of the Soviet Union. To be frank, the Soviet Union

would resolutely oppose any efforts to use the UN to bolster the sepa-

rate deal between Egypt and Israel, be it by using the present UN

troops in the Sinai or in any other manner.

The position of the Soviet Union with respect to the Middle East re-

mained the same as it was all along. The Soviet Union believed that

there would be no firm peace there without the complete vacating of

the Arab territory occupied in 1967 and without an opportunity for the

Palestinians to set up their own state, without ensuring the security of

all nations in that region, including Israel. As before, the Soviet Union

considered it desirable for our two countries to interact on Middle East

issues, using earlier UN resolutions as a foundation.

Brezhnev then turned to Southeast Asia saying it was again be-

coming a dangerous flashpoint of tension because of the dangerous ex-

pansionist and jingoist policy of Peking in this region. It had proved

possible to put a stop to China’s aggression against Vietnam and the

Chinese were forced to withdraw, though not from all of it, from the

Democratic Republic of Vietnam. Nevertheless, Peking once again is

threatening to teach Vietnam another lesson, evidently having failed to

learn the lesson that it itself had been taught. China has assumed the

right to teach lessons and Peking is the seat of constant military aggres-

sion. So long as there was any claim to a right to intervention, there

would remain a danger of war, especially in Southeast Asia. In fact, Pe-

king makes no secret that its goal is to involve the world in a war so

they can remain on the sidelines. This time the people of Vietnam have

heroically rebuffed the Chinese aggressors. In this instance, the Soviet

Union had manifested great restraint and had acted very responsibly in

its actions. However, there was a limit to all self-restraint. The Soviet

Union had assumed obligations with respect to Vietnam under its

treaty of friendship with that country. He was sure that if the Chinese

leaders were firmly told that methods of dictation, blackmail and

threats were inadmissible in international relations and that the world

would not tolerate Chinese aggression, there would be no need to be

concerned over the situation in Southeast Asia. Brezhnev believed that

it was on this that efforts should be focused in the first instance.

January–June 1979

Brezhnev said that as far as Soviet cooperation with Vietnam was

concerned, this was quite normal between two friendly countries, espe-

cially taking into account the military threat to Vietnam from Peking.

As for Kampuchea, it would seem that one could only be happy that

the people of that country had revolted and had finally freed them-

selves from a regime of rapists and killers imposed by Peking, a regime

which the U.S., too, has called abhorrent and inhumane. The new gov-

ernment of Kampuchea was trying to end the chaos and restore the

economy and the dignity of its people.

Brezhnev concluded by saying that their one and only concern is

that enduring peace should reign in Southeast Asia and he called upon

the United States to endorse that goal.

Brezhnev turned to Africa by saying that clarifying the situation

with respect to Africa was long overdue. The peoples of this area were

asserting national independence and overcoming the economic and po-

litical legacy of colonialism. The question is whether to promote the

process or slow it down. As for the Soviet Union, it has consistently

spoken out for full liquidation of the legacy of colonialism and racism

in Africa and it respected the rights of all the peoples of Africa, without

exception, to peace and independence. The Soviet Union did not

pursue any other goal. The President should not believe absurd tales to

the contrary. The Soviet Union did not seek economic or strategic ad-

vantages in Africa. The Soviet Union did not strive to infringe on

anyone’s interests. This applied equally to Southern Africa, but wher-

ever colonialists impose bloodshed on the African peoples, the victims

are free to take the path of armed struggle and in this they deserve the

support of the Soviet Union. But no one could accuse the Soviet Union

of being opposed to a peaceful solution, if it is a genuine transfer of

power to the Africans and welcomed by the Africans themselves. The

Soviet Union would welcome it if the Western powers would make ef-

forts to this end. But the Soviet Union opposed neocolonialism by the

former colonial and racist regimes. If this was a full implementation of

the UN resolutions regarding the Republic of South Africa, Rhodesia

and Namibia, which called for an end to the delivery of arms and to

assistance to racist countries, no one could claim that the African Conti-

nent was a center for conflict between the forces of the USSR and the

U.S. After all, in the face of acute and explosive events such as those

which occurred in Iran, our countries had succeeded in remaining calm

and sober and thereby had prevented a confrontation. Brezhnev be-

lieved that such a policy should be adhered to in the future as well.

Brezhnev went on to say that the Soviet Union’s traditional friend-

ship with Afghanistan was not aimed against any third country. In this

country the people had made a social revolution of which, as Brezhnev

had occasion to tell U.S. Senators, the Soviet leadership had first

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

learned from foreign broadcasts and from the wire services. He added,

“yes, that is the way it was.” Naturally, it was in the nature of revolu-

tions that a struggle was taking place against the forces of the old re-

gime. But this did not provide grounds for outsiders to incite or pro-

voke anti-government riots. Unfortunately, such interference was

occurring. Brezhnev wanted to hope that the United States would not

participate in such actions, that instead it would develop normal rela-

tions with Afghanistan.

Brezhnev said that again and again the U.S. was raising the matter

of Soviet relations with Cuba. He wanted to say that the Soviet Union

complied strictly with the 1962 understanding. It had done nothing nor

was doing anything that would be contrary to that understanding. This

understanding should be continued without eroding or unilaterally in-

terpreting this understanding. Here and there it was asserted that the

Soviet Union was using Cubans to interfere in other areas. Nothing

could be further from the truth. Cuba was an independent country and

as an independent country Cuba rendered assistance at the request of

legitimate governments which were threatened by aggression. This

was fully in accord with international law and the UN Charter. Perhaps

those in the U.S. who were so vociferous concerning the Cuban actions

have forgotten that during the American War of Independence the

ranks of General Washington’s army contained foreign units. On the

other hand, Brezhnev could cite genuine instances of U.S. interference in

the affairs of other countries and, of course, he could draw on them to

cause tensions in U.S.-Soviet relations. But the Soviet Union had no de-

sire to do so.

One concern that the President had spoken of today pertained to a

military buildup in Vietnam. The Soviet Union could not understand

such a concern. The Soviet Union had no bases in Vietnam and had no

intention of establishing such bases. Soviet ships entered Vietnamese

ports for business and for friendly visits. Individual Soviet aircraft

landed at Vietnamese airfields. But that was normal and generally ac-

cepted practice in international relations. It was not aimed against the

interests of the U.S. or its allies. The threat to peace came from China,

which had already carried out blatant aggression against Vietnam and

which was now openly threatening to teach Vietnam a new lesson. As

for Soviet assistance to Vietnam, it was being provided to a victim of

aggression, under the friendship treaty with that country, and was de-

signed to compel China to come to its senses and to refrain from its ex-

pansionist policy.

Brezhnev continued that there was one other destabilizing factor in

the Far East, one which did not originate with the Soviet Union. He was

referring to the major military bases in Japan, South Korea and the Phil-

ippines. Many such bases were being maintained by the U.S. near the

January–June 1979

borders of the Soviet Union. Aircraft carriers with nuclear weapons

and nuclear submarines were cruising the seas near Soviet territory and

calling at ports of other countries located near Soviet territory. He

asked who in these circumstances has cause for concern. Brezhnev said

in conclusion that these were the considerations he had wanted to ex-

press on some international problems.

The President thanked Brezhnev for his remarks. He had listened

with great attention and trusted that Brezhnev, too, had listened with

equal attention and interest to our concerns. Obviously, there were dif-

ferences of opinion on a number of issues, but the President believes

this only emphasized the importance of continued consultations in the

hope of understanding each other’s attitudes. Despite regional differ-

ences, which caused real concerns, the meeting in Vienna and the

signing of the SALT II Treaty constituted an important step toward

peace and could serve as a foundation on which further progress in our

relations can be based. The President promised to hand over to

Brezhnev after the meeting a private note, discussed this morning, out-

lining some ideas which could be pursued in future negotiations. He

hoped that we could continue our efforts and that future success in

SALT could be realized more rapidly than in the past.

205.

Joint Declaration Between the United States of America and

the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

Vienna, June 17, 1979

JOINT DECLARATION ON THE FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

AND REGULARIZATION OF CONSULTATIONS BETWEEN

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND THE UNION OF

SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS

The United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Re-

publics, expressing their recognition of the importance of promoting

greater stability, mutual confidence, and friendly relations between the

two countries,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Emphasizing their desire for cooperation in the interests of main-

taining international peace and security in accordance with the pur-

poses and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,

Reaffirming their commitment to the document entitled “Basic

Principles of Mutual Relations between the United States of America

and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,” signed by the US and

USSR on May 29, 1972,

And recognizing the importance and value of consultations be-

tween themselves and among other governments to discuss ways in

which bilateral or multilateral cooperation and restraint can prevent or

terminate war and conflict in various regions of the world and promote

peaceful solution of disputes,

Declare and agree as follows:

1. The holding of regular—in principle, annual—summit meetings

arranged in accordance with the various mutually acceptable forms of

such meetings, including the presence of correspondingly high officials

of the governing and political bodies of the two countries. President

Carter extended an invitation to President Brezhnev to visit the United

States in 1980 at a mutually convenient time and President Brezhnev

accepted the invitation in principle.

2. The holding of at least two meetings annually between the For-

eign Minister of the USSR and the Secretary of State of the US, and ad-

ditional meetings as mutually desired and as opportunities arise. The

two sides further declare that peace, stability and mutual under-

standing can be additionally enhanced by instituting periodic consulta-

tions between other officials of the US Department of State and the So-

viet Ministry of Foreign Affairs at the level of under secretaries and

assistant secretaries, and of deputy ministers and department chiefs,

respectively. It was further agreed that meetings of high-level repre-

sentatives and experts could be called by either side as necessary in re-

sponse to particular situations, including emerging regional tensions

and conflicts.

3. The two sides further declare their agreement to initiate and con-

tinue periodic informal discussions between the Secretary of Defense of

the US and the Minister of Defense of the USSR, and between the

Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the US and the Chief of the Gen-

eral Staff of the Armed Forces of the USSR, including the presence of

other senior military and naval officers of the two countries, as deemed

appropriate. A program of exchanges of lecturers from military acad-

emies was also agreed upon. The sides express their conviction that

such contacts will enhance mutual understanding and strengthen the

traditional respect of the two countries’ armed forces toward each

other, taking special account of the fact that these forces have never

been involved in a conflict between the two countries, and that the two

206.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Carter-Brezhnev Private Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter

President L.I. Brezhnev

Mr. V. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

General

President Brezhnev, reading from prepared notes, noted that the

meeting between him and President Carter was now drawing to an

end. He thought that the President and he had good reason to say to

themselves, as well as publicly, that this meeting had been necessary,

useful and productive. Apart from the document they were going to

sign today, which would be the visible and greatly important product

of this meeting, it was also of great significance that the President and

he had been able to exchange views on a broad range of issues. Of

course, it could not be said that their views on all these issues coincided

or even that they were close. However, they now had a better under-

standing of the positions and thought processes of each other, and that

was also very important.

Prevention of War

In this private meeting Brezhnev wanted to present some addi-

tional thoughts. It was his view that the most important element that

should determine the relations between the two countries, the ultimate

objective here, as it were, was to establish the kind of level of mutual

understanding and confidence that would completely rule out the pos-

sibility of war breaking out between the Soviet Union and the United

States; and, even more, to create the kind of relationship that would

bring about an understanding that in the event of attack on either of the

two countries by a third nuclear power, or in the event of the threat of

such an attack, the Soviet Union and the United States would join

forces in repelling the aggressor. Ultimately, such a situation was en-

tirely possible. If the United States and the Soviet Union had the kind of

understanding he was talking about, it would hardly be likely that any

third power would embark on such madness. Brezhnev recalled that he

had already expressed this thought to Secretary Vance, and the Secre-

tary had promised to convey it to President Carter. He would be

pleased to hear the President’s reaction.

China

Partly in this same connection, Brezhnev wanted to speak to the

President quite frankly about China, in particular, what in fact was en-

suing from what the United States referred to as “normalization of rela-

tions with China.” He would not repeat everything he had already said

on this subject in the correspondence between them. He would only say

that, as time went on, it was becoming very clear that the warnings he

had conveyed earlier had been fully justified. Rapprochement with

China, which looked at world affairs through the prism of the inevita-

bility of war, was a dangerous thing.

Brezhnev wanted the President to know that if some people in the

United States ventured to use Peking’s anti-Sovietism to their own ad-

January–June 1979

vantage, he would have to say outright that such schemes would not

bring any benefit to the United States, but could inflict a great deal of

harm. China’s very first acts after normalization of relations with the

United States and Japan, particularly its aggression against Vietnam,

have graphically confirmed that a policy of smiles and bows in the di-

rection of the Chinese was totally unproductive, as demonstrated by

events in Kampuchea and by China’s cynical aggression against Viet-

nam. These were graphic examples of China’s policy when it felt it

could act from a position of strength. The Chinese leaders are given to

taking up arms very easily, pursuing their own designs and relegating

the United States to the doubtful role of covering their rear. Even now

connivance with China is turning into aggression against neighboring

states, and it is clear that China strives for complete hegemony in Asia.

Of course, the Soviet Union was quite capable of standing up for its

own interests, but could that also be said of India, Japan or the Philip-

pines, for example? What would happen if the Chinese obtain access to

Western markets, Western materiel and Western military technology?

And yet, some allies of the United States manifest a great deal of active

interest in providing China with such access, evidently with the ap-

proval of the United States. Furthermore, it should not be forgotten that

China is not bound by any international agreement relating to the limi-

tation of nuclear arms, although even now China had many such

weapons and also had good sources of primary materials.

Brezhnev said that he would not be frank with the President if he

were not to point out that future encouragement by the United States of

China’s hostile policy toward the Soviet Union would seriously aggra-

vate Soviet-American relations, not even to mention the fact that

headway in the area of limiting and reducing arms would become quite

impossible. In brief, as he saw it, U.S. policy toward China has now

reached a threshold beyond which it could only produce a drastic dete-

rioration of the entire international situation. Brezhnev expressed the

hope that Washington would not prompt events in that direction.

Brezhnev had another point to make in this connection. The Presi-

dent was surely aware of the fact that the Soviet Union consistently

pursues a policy of peace and cooperation with all states and therefore

was certainly in favor of normalizing relations with China. As the Pres-

ident probably knew, right now the government of China, after re-

peated proposals for normalization of relations by the Soviet side over

the past several years, has expressed its willingness to engage in negoti-

ations. The Soviet Union had agreed, although its leadership was not

too convinced of China’s sincerity. The Soviet Union will try to reach

agreement with China to put their mutual relations on an honest and

correct basis of mutual respect, sovereignty of each other’s territory,

non-use of force and non-interference in internal affairs. The Soviet

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Union had always been in favor of such relations. It will simply have to

wait and see what the Chinese position will be.

Brezhnev wanted to emphasize to the President that if Soviet rela-

tions with the Chinese People’s Republic improve, the United States

and other countries will have no grounds whatsoever for concern. The

Soviet Union has never given the Chinese any opportunity to drag the

Soviet state into any anti-American adventures, and will not do so in

the future. The President could rest assured on that score.

Human Rights

Brezhnev now wanted to turn briefly to the so-called question of

human rights. He did not consider this question appropriate for discus-

sion at the official meetings between them. However, so as to leave

nothing unclear, he wanted to tell the President the following: it would

go without saying that each of them had his own views on human

rights and freedom of the individual. The Soviet leadership did not ob-

ject to these and other questions becoming the subject of ideological ar-

gument. Indeed, that was inevitable due to the different development

of the social systems of each country. It was an entirely different matter,

however, when questions of that kind were elevated to the level of offi-

cial state policy and when attempts were made to exploit them in the

relations between states. Brezhnev was far from any wish to engage in

polemics, but he would trust that the President would agree that there

could be little progress in our bilateral relations if, for example, the So-

viet Union were to link trade and other ties with the United States to

such questions as unemployment in the United States, resolution of the

racial problem in the United States or equal rights for women. Natu-

rally, the Soviet leadership could easily draw up a whole list of com-

plaints of that kind, because there was a great deal they did not like in

the social system of the United States. However, what would that lead

to? It would be much better to leave questions of this kind outside of

the framework of state affairs and to concentrate the efforts of each

country on safeguarding the right of people throughout the world to

live without war, under conditions of peace. Both countries must make

every effort to safeguard that right. President Carter himself had said in

one of his recent speeches, and quite correctly, that the most funda-

mental human right is the right to life. He would therefore call on the

President to do all in his power to prevent the outbreak of another war.

Further Meetings and Contacts

Brezhnev now wanted to turn to the question of further meetings.

As he understood it, the President favored holding such meetings on a

regular basis. Brezhnev, too, believed that meetings between Heads of

State should be held on a regular basis, but thought that they should

not attempt now to set a rigid schedule. The important thing was to

January–June 1979

agree in principle, but as for specific timing for the next meeting, that

could always be discussed and agreed upon later.

Naturally, Brezhnev would like to see the President visit the Soviet

Union, and therefore tendered him an invitation to visit the Soviet

Union whenever he considered this to be appropriate and at a time

when such a visit was convenient for both sides. As for the President’s

wish for regular contacts between the two countries at other high

levels, he could see no problem with that suggestion. The two Foreign

Ministers could continue their established practice of meetings and, if

necessary, they could meet even more frequently, depending on the ex-

istence of specific matters requiring discussion. As for the idea the Pres-

ident had expressed concerning meetings between the military leaders

of the two states, Brezhnev could state now that in principle he was not

opposed to expanding contacts along that line as well, if that would be

useful and properly reflect the development of Soviet-American rela-

tions. After all, the development of contacts of that kind was something

new, and it must be properly understood and appreciated by public

opinion in our two countries and in the world at large.

General, Further Contacts

President Carter wanted to say first of all that he had enjoyed get-

ting to know Brezhnev personally and that he believed their meeting

here in Vienna had been successful and will have great historic benefit

for the world in the future. (Upon hearing this remark, Brezhnev seized

the President’s hand and shook it vigorously.) The President noted that

Brezhnev had invited him to come to the Soviet Union, and [he?] would

like to do so, but since our President had made the last visit to the So-

viet Union, he would ask if it would be possible for Brezhnev to visit us

in the United States.

Brezhnev responded that it certainly will be possible. Whenever

conditions for such a visit were ripe, he would be pleased to hop

aboard an airplane and come to the United States. This was something

he could not refuse.

The President said that we have appreciated this almost unprece-

dented chance for our military leaders to meet. We had not attached

particularly great significance to their meeting, but thought that when

circumstances in the future dictated such meetings, they might be very

important.

China

The President now wanted to discuss the China situation. We be-

lieved that our having normal relations with China was good for us,

good for China, good for the Soviet Union and for world stability and

peace.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Brezhnev interrupted and said: “Not for the Soviet Union.”

The President believed that it was good for the Soviet Union, too,

and he would explain why. Whatever influence we have at this time or

will have in the future on the leaders of China will be used to urge

peaceful relations between China and the Soviet Union and all other

countries. We will never let relations between us and China be at the

expense of the Soviet Union, nor will we ever permit an alignment to

develop between us against the Soviet Union.

Brezhnev interrupted and asked: “Why don’t you prod them to

sign an agreement with us?”

The President said he will be pleased to do so, because we believe

that this would be good for the United States. We will keep the Soviet

Union informed about our relations with China and would appreciate

it if the Soviets keep us informed about their relations with China.

Brezhnev said they could well do that.

The President said that we had nothing to conceal from the Soviet

Union. There are some relations between the Soviet Union and the

United States that are of both symbolic and substantive significance

and are very important for us. The President had no desire to em-

barrass Brezhnev, but would like to speak frankly on these issues.

Telemetry Encryption

The President noted that all our missile test firings are over the

ocean and the Soviet Union is able without obstacles to monitor the

firings of our missiles. We do not encrypt telemetry data and until quite

recently the Soviet Union had never encrypted data from missiles cov-

ered by SALT. Only with SS–20 missiles did the Soviets formally en-

crypt telemetry data. Of course, SS–20s were not covered by SALT, but

during the last few months encryption of telemetry from strategic mis-

siles had caused us great concern. As Brezhnev knew, we have peaceful

observation stations at sea, in space, and in a few nations in his part of

the world—formerly in Iran. The Iranian stations used to verify the

SALT agreement could no longer be used. This has not been a secret op-

eration, nor was it designed to act against the Soviet Union. It was only

used to verify compliance with the very important SALT agreements.

In order partially to replace this capability we would like to fly air-

planes over Turkey on peaceful missions for the purpose of verifying

compliance with our bilateral agreements. We were not asking the So-

viet Union to approve, but only to let the Turkish government know

that the Soviet Union would not object to such flights, or let us inform

the Turkish government to that effect without the Soviet Union contra-

dicting such information.

(At this point Brezhnev was handed a typed briefing paper by his

interpreter, selected from what was evidently a stack of talking points

on various subjects.)

January–June 1979

Flights over Turkey

Reading from a typed brief, Brezhnev said he had the following to

say with regard to so-called additional measures on verification related

to SALT II. From the very beginning of the strategic arms limitation

process the two sides had agreed to adhere to the principle of verifica-

tion by national technical means. There were no grounds whatsoever to

alter that principle in any way. He would have to say objectively that

the efforts of the U.S. side appeared to be aimed at altering that prin-

ciple, when the U.S. seeks to combine verification by national technical

means with cooperative measures. This does not mean, of course, that

the Soviet Union is against such measures. In fact, some cooperative

measures are already provided for in the SALT II Treaty. They can also

be the subject of further consideration during SALT III, but they should

fit into the framework of verification by national technical means. As

for the specific question raised by President Carter, the Soviet position

regarding flights of U.S. reconnaissance aircraft over Turkish territory,

close to the borders of the Soviet Union, is well known and hardly

needs to be set out again. Brezhnev would only add that nothing in that

position would change even if the U.S. side were to propose that this

matter be resolved on the basis of reciprocal exchange, providing for

flights of Soviet airplanes from Cuban territory. Questions affecting the

sovereign rights of other states cannot be the subject of an exchange of

operations between the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.

President Carter said that this is an important matter to us. It is im-

portant in building mutual trust between our countries, and it is impor-

tant for ratification of the SALT II Treaty. Although he would not

pursue this matter further today, he would ask Brezhnev to consider

carefully the mutual benefit to be derived from a more forthcoming re-

sponse from the Soviet Union.

Brezhnev said that he could not refuse the President’s request to

consider this further. He would do so and see if some way could be

found to resolve the matter. This was as far as he could go now.

U.N. Forces in Sinai

President Carter said he had another difficult subject to raise with

Brezhnev. That involved the United Nations monitoring Israeli with-

drawal from the Sinai. We did not expect the Soviet Union to approve

the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty; we were aware of Soviet concerns in that

connection. However, the United Nations force was there now, specifi-

cally charged with monitoring Israeli withdrawal. We simply wanted

to ask that the Soviet Union not veto in the Security Council an action to

continue their present function.

(Brezhnev was handed another brief by his interpreter.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Brezhnev said that in the course of the correspondence between

him and President Carter he had not concealed that the Soviet Union

was resolutely opposed to any attempt to sanctify a separate Egyptian-

Israeli deal through the authority and prestige of the United Nations,

inter alia through involvement of the U.N. forces presently in the Sinai.

Whatever arguments are marshalled in favor of continuing the pres-

ence of U.N. troops in that area, such presence would mean complicity

of and association by the United Nations in actions which cannot lead

to lasting peace in the Middle East, but only the opposite. To expect the

Soviet Union to support such a force in this matter would be hopeless.

President Carter said he understood but disagreed with2 Brezh-

nev’s response. We will do whatever is necessary to assure that moni-

toring of the withdrawal is adequate, and will attempt to work as

closely as we can with the Soviet Union in this matter, and also con-

cerning Lebanon and other troubled areas of the Middle East.

Soviet-American Cooperation

The President said he wanted to mention three other subjects that

should not be difficult for Brezhnev. He hoped that Brezhnev and the

other members of the Politburo will examine very carefully the state-

ment the President had made yesterday regarding the trouble spots of

the world and the need for the Soviet Union and the United States to

consult closely and, whenever possible, to cooperate. Also, he hoped

that very careful consideration will be given to the written note the

President had given Brezhnev concerning the possibility of future arms

agreements. We consider this to be very important, and the President

hoped that it would be given careful consideration. He hoped that as

early as possible the two sides would provide some means to consider

these ideas together.

Brezhnev said that the Soviet approach to SALT III, based on prin-

ciple, has been set forth here, inter alia last night. As for the specific

questions President Carter had raised and included in the memo-

randum referred to, Brezhnev doubted if he could go into them today.

They require further reflection and analysis in the context of other

SALT III issues.

The President agreed and said that as he had listened to Brezh-

nev’s statement, he had seen much in common.

country. The President recognized the difficulty for the Soviet Union

posed by the human rights question. He simply wanted to let Brezhnev

know that the more liberal human rights attitude5 referred to had been

gratifying to us, once it became known that the Soviet Union had taken

the action referred to.

Reading from another typed brief, handed him by his interpreter,

Brezhnev said that the Shcharanskiy matter dealt with a man who had

been convicted by a Soviet court for espionage for the benefit of a for-

eign nation. He said that he could not do anything that would violate

Soviet laws.

General

Summing up, Brezhnev thought this morning’s discussion had

been very good.

The President acknowledged that he, too, believed they now un-

derstood each other better as a result of the Vienna meetings. There

were some things of particular importance to us and some things that

were important to the Soviet side.

Brezhnev said that he had been told a great many things about

President Carter and President Carter had probably been told as much,

if not more, about Brezhnev. Now that they had seen each other and

spoken to each other, they knew that they could speak frankly without

offending each other. If at times some question or other did not lend it-

self to immediate solution at their level, it might best be left for discus-

sion and, if possible, action by the experts of the sides.

Brezhnev presented President Carter with a few copies of the

books he had written, in the original and in English translation, each

copy autographed by himself.

207.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Fifth and Last Plenary Meeting Between President Carter and

President Brezhnev

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

The President

Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance

Secretary of Defense Harold Brown

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

General David Jones

Mr. Hamilton Jordan

General G. Seignious

Mr. Frank Moore

Ambassador Malcolm Toon

Mr. Joseph Powell

Mr. Reginald Bartholomew

Mr. Jerrold Schecter

Mr. Wm. D. Krimer, Interpreter

President L.I. Brezhnev

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Marshal D.F. Ustinov

Mr. K.U. Chernenko

Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko

Marshal N.V. Ogarkov

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov

Mr. L.M. Zamyatin

Mr. V.G. Komplektov

Mr. A.M. Vavilov

Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

President Carter said that President Brezhnev and he had agreed

between them that this meeting would be brief, to enable them to get

back on schedule and be on time for the signing ceremony.

January–June 1979

The President said he considered this conference in Vienna to have

been very satisfactory to him personally, to our nation and, he hoped,

to the Soviet Union and the world at large. The signing of the SALT II

Treaty in a few minutes will be a historic contribution to world peace.

The President expressed his gratitude to Brezhnev for his leadership

role in making this achievement possible. His own hope and belief is

that the SALT II Treaty will be a basis on which it will be possible more

expeditiously to conclude discussions leading to agreement between

our two countries on many other matters. At their private meeting this

morning3 he and President Brezhnev had agreed to increase the fre-

quency of meetings between them, and had extended mutual invita-

tions to visit their respective countries. The President looked forward

to the opportunity of exchanging visits without having to wait for a

crisis or some other momentous event, simply for the purpose of rou-

tine discussions of issues and for the purpose of understanding each

other better. The President also remarked that he and Brezhnev had

agreed that the two Presidents at such routine meetings would be in a

position to correct the mistakes that would inevitably be made by their

Foreign Ministers. (Foreign Minister Gromyko protested vigorously.)

The President said that he and Brezhnev had agreed that in the re-

lations between our nations they would never act in such a way as to

threaten peaceful relations between the peoples of the United States

and the Soviet Union. In order to avoid misunderstandings between

our countries, they will also continue their personal correspondence to

keep each other informed of questions of mutual interest. Finally, they

both greatly valued the statements each had made and had listened to

each other with great care. Both had agreed to examine each other’s

statements with additional care when they returned home. Each had in

particular remarked on the substantive conformity of and correlation

between the plans Brezhnev had suggested for future arms talks and

the ideas on arms control the President had put forward. He hoped

they would be able to build on these without further delay as they

moved toward SALT III. To summarize, the President said he was

grateful for the progress achieved and hoped to continue making

progress in their common work in the future.

Reading from a prepared statement, Brezhnev noted that he and

President Carter had the same view—that conclusion of the SALT II

Treaty should generate more favorable conditions and, he would say, a

more favorable climate for solving other problems of Soviet-American

relations. This naturally also applied to bilateral ties and contacts in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

various fields. The Soviet Union attached great importance to such ties.

Their results were perhaps not too visible from the sidelines, but these

ties and contacts did involve large numbers of people doing what was

necessary to the mutual advantage of both nations. In the final analysis,

this helped the two peoples to understand each other better and bring

them closer together. On the whole, such ties and contacts were the

most stable and steadfast element in our bilateral relations, for ex-

ample, the contacts between our respective Parliaments and between

various public and social organizations. American Senators and Con-

gressmen and Soviet Members of the Supreme Soviet were no longer

rare guests in Moscow and Washington respectively. In Brezhnev’s

view, contacts of that sort should be encouraged in the future as well,

and, speaking frankly, it was not too easy to understand why the U.S.

side sometimes took steps to impede contacts, such as for example, be-

tween Soviet and American labor unions.

Brezhnev said that one of the major and most important problems

was regularization of trade between our countries. He had the impres-

sion that trade, which should be an important element in our relations,

in the United States has been turned into a constant object of various

linkages. This had begun in 1974 with the emigration issue, a purely

internal affair of the Soviet Union; there was a linkage with economic

relations between the two countries that the Soviet Union did not and,

of course, could not recognize. As a result of the Soviet-American

increased rapidly. However, discriminatory legislation had since

brought it to a state of stagnation. He believed that such a state of eco-

nomic relations between the two countries was not in the interests of ei-

ther side. Brezhnev acknowledged that he was aware that the United

States government had recently been examining the possibilities of nor-

malizing trade relations with the U.S.S.R. He regarded this as a positive

thing, but was not in a position to offer any suggestions in that respect

because it was clearly the business of the United States. He would only

ask the President to bear in mind that there were some basic political,

legal and even moral principles which the Soviet Union could not pos-

sibly renounce. Brezhnev added that elimination of discrimination

would contribute considerably to expanding trade relations to the ben-

Document 183.

January–June 1979

efit of both sides. He would note in particular that it would then be-

come possible jointly to work out long-term programs of cooperation,

similar to those that the Soviet Union had established with the Federal

Republic of Germany, France, Canada and a number of other countries.

There was a solid and realistic basis for that. The Soviet Union had an

enormous market, and in turn could offer much that would be of in-

terest to American firms.

Brezhnev noted that unfortunately artificial obstacles had been

created that stood in the way of developing such relations as maritime

shipping, air travel and others. Ridiculous accusations had been le-

velled at the Soviet Union in terms of allegations that the Soviet Mer-

chant Marine intended to seize American shipping markets. Some civil

aviation had been suspended, too. Brezhnev asked for what purpose

this was done. To be honest, he found it hard indeed to understand the

meaning of such actions by the U.S. side.

In Brezhnev’s view, our relations in science and technology and ac-

tive cooperation between Soviet and American scientists in a wide va-

riety of fields were proceeding rather well, including such areas as en-

ergy, environment, medicine and agriculture. As he understood it,

concrete results had been achieved in many areas and the prospects for

continued cooperation were good, provided no artificial obstacles were

put in its way. Some attempts had been made to exploit scientific coop-

eration for political purposes, reducing the levels of delegations, can-

celling visas, etc. Here, too, he failed to see any sense in such artificial

obstacles.

Brezhnev asked the President not to be offended by these com-

ments. They were aimed at developing good relations with the United

States on a stable and long-term basis. He very much hoped that the

President would understand and share this view.

In conclusion, Brezhnev wanted to say that he was satisfied and

highly gratified by the opportunity to have made the President’s per-

sonal acquaintance and to have had useful and meaningful conversa-

tions with him. He was certain that this would help both of them in

their future work aimed at improving Soviet-American relations for the

sake of peace and to the benefit of our two nations.

The President noted that their time for this meeting was almost up,

and said he would not respond to each of the points made by Brezhnev.

He would, however, investigate the problems mentioned by Brezhnev

like, for example, air travel, and would respond through Secretary

Vance. He hoped that it will be possible to alleviate the obstacles

standing in the way of better cooperation between our countries. If in

the future we see any problems in the actions or policies of the Soviet

208.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Vienna, June 18, 1979

To President Brezhnev,

The signing of the SALT II Treaty a few minutes ago and also our

fruitful discussions in Vienna2 have demonstrated the importance of

better understanding and enhanced cooperation. I look forward to the

future, and especially to our next meeting, when we will be able to

build on this new foundation which we have established. I trust that we

both will make every attempt to accommodate the special concerns ex-

pressed in our private meeting today and during the plenum sessions.

Rosalynn, Amy and I appreciated the personal gifts from you.

They will be continuing reminders of the spirit of friendship and the

pleasure of our first visit together.

Sincerely yours,

Jimmy Carter

July–December 1979

209.

Memorandum From the Chairman of the Intelligence

Oversight Board (Farmer) to President Carter

Washington, July 3, 1979

SUBJECT

Use of Unwitting United States Persons in CIA Covert Action (S)

The Central Intelligence Agency has reported a question of pro-

priety concerning the unwitting involvement of United States aca-

demics and other United States persons in a CIA operated covert

system for distributing publications to the Soviet Union and Eastern

Europe. The United States persons are provided, at no cost, publica-

tions they request for the purpose of mailing or personally delivering

the publications to friends and acquaintances in the target countries.

The United States persons are not informed that the organization pro-

viding the publications is a CIA proprietary operating under commer-

cial cover. (S)

Neither the Director of Central Intelligence nor the members of the

SCC knew of the unwitting involvement of United States persons when

this covert action was reviewed and approved in June 1978. At our re-

quest, the DCI and the Chairman of the SCC have been informed. The

SCC Chairman and the DCI believe that it is not necessary to change

the modus operandi of the publication distribution proprietary. (S)

The other members of the SCC have not been informed that the co-

vert action includes the unwitting use of United States persons. Under

sider and submit to the President a recommendation on proposed co-

vert actions. The Board believes that the unwitting use of United States

persons is a fact directly relevant to the SCC’s review of the covert ac-

tion. That fact should have been brought to the attention of the SCC

when the covert action proposal was first presented in 1978. (S)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Board recommends that the matter be referred to the SCC for

full consideration at this time. (U)

210.

Letter From Senator Richard Stone to President Carter

Washington, July 24, 1979

211.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic

Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) to President Carter

Washington, August 9, 1979

212.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

212493.

Subject:

(C)

Secretary’s

Conversation

With

Avital

Shcharanskiy.

1. (Confidential-entire text)

2. Secretary called Mrs. Shcharanskiy on August 12 on returning to

the United States but could not reach her. He called again early

morning August 13 and told her that he had received her message de-

livered to him through Marshall Shulman2 and that we were raising the

issue of her husband’s health with the Soviets. Secretary told her we

would let her know as soon as we received a response. She expressed

appreciation for our help in this matter.

3. During afternoon of August 13 Marshall raised the subject with

the Soviet Charge, Vasev, expressing privately the Secretary’s concern

and that of the White House and asking whether something could be

done, in the first instance to ameliorate Shcharanskiy’s health condi-

tions and then to seek his early release. Vasev said the problem grows

more difficult when it is agitated, and expressed the opinion that if a so-

lution comes it will come only after a period of quiet.

4. We regard it as important that we not discuss this approach

publicly.

Vance

July–December 1979

213.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

1. (C) Entire text.

2. Summary. Despite U.S. insistence that Lyudmila Vlasova, wife

of Bolshoy defector Godunov be interviewed by U.S. officials before

departing the U.S., Soviets sought to spirit her out of U.S. August 24

aboard Aeroflot flight scheduled to depart at 1700 EDT. As of 2100

local, plane still being held and Soviets have not rpt not agreed to

permit Vlasova to leave aircraft for meeting with US officials to ascer-

tain whether she leaving voluntarily. End summary.

3. As reported reftel, Shinn (EUR/SOV) informed Bessmertnykh

August 23 that Godunov’s wife, Lyudmila Vlasova, must be inter-

viewed by U.S. officials before she could leave the U.S. Soviet Consul

General Kavalerov later advised Shinn Soviets understood U.S. had “a

right” to interview her.

4. Because of concern Soviets might nevertheless seek to spirit Vla-

sova out of U.S., Department sought in concert with Justice to obtain

legal means to ensure Vlasova did not depart without being inter-

viewed by U.S. officials. Early afternoon August 24 Justice issued a re-

straining order to prevent her departure. Simultaneously, Department

dispatched two officers, Hurwitz (EUR/SOV) and Smith (L/PM) to

New York to conduct meeting with Vlasova today in event that became

necessary.

reiterated U.S. position that Vlasova must not depart without interview

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

with U.S. officials. Vasev indicated he understood, implying that So-

viets would not attempt to circumvent the interview. Vasev repeated

Soviet demand to meet with Godunov and stated again that Soviets

could only consider Godunov’s request to meet with his wife at

meeting with him, and Vasev implied that requested U.S. meeting with

Vlasova would be acceptable.

6. Shortly thereafter, Department received information that Vla-

sova had boarded Aeroflot aircraft and plane was preparing to depart.

Aircraft was then denied permission to depart JFK. Following arrival of

Hurwitz and Smith at airport, INS officials repeatedly requested Vla-

sova be permitted to leave aircraft for interview, a request Soviets con-

tinued to deny. INS officials who boarded aircraft several times con-

firmed Vlasova’s presence aboard and large escort of presumed Soviet

security officials.

7. In subsequent conversation with Vasev, Goodby charged So-

viets with having violated clear U.S. instructions in seeking to spirit

Vlasova out of U.S. and demanded that she be taken off aircraft for an

interview. Goodby advised Vasev airliner would not be permitted to

depart without such an interview. Vasev responded that U.S. had not

only had opportunities to interview Vlasova but also she had been per-

mitted by U.S. customs and Immigration officials to board aircraft and

Soviets thus believed we had no objections to her departure. In subse-

quent response, Goodby pointed out to Vasev no U.S. Immigration and

Customs controls exist formally for departing passengers.

8. We are at present at an impasse. Soviets are seeking by various

means, including threat to halt tonight’s Bolshoy performance at Lin-

coln Center—to pressure U.S. to permit Vlasova to depart. Department

remains adamant that Vlasova must leave the aircraft and indicate to

us, in non-coercive surroundings, that she is voluntarily returning to

the USSR before we will permit her to do so. Soviets refuse to agree.

Thus, aircraft with passengers and crew aboard remain at Pan Am ter-

minal. Godunov himself is enroute JFK and his lawyer, Orville Schell is

already present. Makeyev of SMUN appears to be senior Soviet official

present.

9. We will keep you advised. Assume that you and we will be re-

ceiving mighty Soviet protest very soon. US position is that (a) Soviet

side acted in bad faith by reneging on its earlier indications that

meeting with Vlasova was acceptable and that (b) in light of present cir-

cumstances, U.S. side must be able to interview Vlasova in non-

coercive environment.

10. Please advise by Niact Immediate of any known arrivals of U.S.

chartered aircraft since we assume some form of retaliation is likely.

215.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

226820. Subject: Soviet Aircraft/Vlasova Case: Interview With Vla-

sova on Board Mobile Lounge, JFK Airport, New York City.

1. (C-entire text)

2. This message provides you with account of interview of Lyud-

bile lounge drawn up to Aeroflot aircraft at JFK Airport, New York

City. Account was prepared from notes taken by EUR/SOV officer

(Hurwitz) who was present during the interview.

3. Participants at meeting were as follows:

US side:

Donald McHenry, Dep. US Representative to the UN

Edward Hurwitz, Office of Soviet Union Affairs

Dr. Florence Kavaler, US Public Health Service

Jack Riccardi, INS

Orville Schell, Attorney for Aleksandr Godunov

Galina Tunik, Interpreter

Soviet side:

Lyudmila Vlasova, Bolshoi Ballet dancer

Yevgeniy Makeyev, Dep. Soviet Representative to the UN

Ivan Miroshkin, Soviet Mission to the UN

Vladimir Plechko, Soviet Consul General-designate, N.Y.

Vadim Kavalerov, Consular Section, USSR Embassy

Dr. Sargin, Soviet physician, Soviet Mission to the UN

July–December 1979

4. Account of meeting is as follows:

McHenry: (Introduces the members of the US side, describing Mr.

Orville Schell as “a lawyer hired by Mr. Godunov”) We are sorry that

this difficult situation has arisen. Our only desire is to ascertain directly

from you, in an atmosphere where you are as free as possible from any

pressures, whether you wish to remain in the United States or return to

the Soviet Union.

Vlasova: My only wish is to return to the Soviet Union.

McHenry: I understand what you are saying, but I would like to

make clear to you the possibilities before you. You are now in the

United States under US jurisdiction. Should you choose to remain in

this country both your country and mine will honor this decision.

(Note: The US interpreter translated the verb “honor” as “uchtet.”

At this, Soviet Ambassador Makeyev interjected that a better transla-

tion would be the Soviet expression “satisfy your desire.” The US side

had no objection to this version.)

Should you freely choose to return to the Soviet Union, your gov-

ernment and mine will honor this decision and satisfy this desire also.

If you wish to remain in the United States for a period of time, you

can also do this. You cannot be forced to leave this country. If you freely

choose to stay, you can go from here to another place and reflect further

before making any final decision. What do you wish to do?

Vlasova: In connection with the situation which took place with

Godunov, I expressed my desire to return home on my own.

McHenry: What do you mean “the situation which took place with

Godunov”?

Vlasova: My husband was missing for two days during which time

I had no news from him. I knew absolutely nothing about what had

happened. He had given no warning to me. That is the “situation” to

which I referred.

McHenry: I don’t know the background of what occurred. I do

know, however, that you are free to do whatever you wish, as was your

husband.

Vlasova: I agree fully that I am free to express my wishes and am

now doing so.

McHenry: I could discuss these issues further, but have agreed not

to do so. You have expressed your views, but I wanted you to know the

full range of options before you.

Vlasova: I understand. But again, I am expressing my views.

McHenry: I want you to know that you can delay any final deci-

sion and that any future decision will also be fully up to you.

Vlasova: I don’t know why we are having this conversation. I had

already expressed my wishes and made a clear announcement of my

intentions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

McHenry: The reason for the situation which has taken place grew

out of our desire to know what you genuinely desired. This situation

would not have arisen if we had not been told that you might have

other views.

Vlasova: The only way I can prove this wrong is to tell you again

that I requested to be sent to Moscow.

McHenry: I assume you are making this statement freely and

under no duress.

Vlasova: Isn’t that obvious? Do I look to you to be under duress.

McHenry: Miss Vlasova, is there anything else you wish to do? Is

there anyone you would like to see?

Vlasova: No.

McHenry: Again, let me express my sympathy for the difficulties

that have occurred in the last few days. I hope you understand that this

situation arose not from any malice on our part.

Vlasova: Well, I don’t completely understand why people were

standing near me for three days with handcuffs and arms. It was for

this reason I feared leaving the plane. If there hadn’t been this kind of

scene, I might have been willing to leave the plane. I don’t know your

ways of doing things, but I am not used to this kind of treatment.

McHenry: This would not have occurred if the “situation” to

which you referred hadn’t taken place and if we hadn’t had a reason to

believe that you might want to make other plans. I tried through Am-

bassador Makeyev to reassure you that there would be no threats to

your safety if you had left the plane. Isn’t it clear now that you see our

side that no threats are involved.

Vlasova: (smiling) Yes, that is obvious.

McHenry: I wish you a pleasant trip back to the Soviet Union. I

only regret that I was not able to get tickets to see you perform here in

New York.

Vlasova: Come to Moscow to see the Bolshoi. It is better to see us

dance in the Bolshoi Theater than here.

Comment: It was the judgment of the US participants, including

the Public Health Service physician and Mr. Godunov’s lawyer, that

Miss Vlasova was calm, relaxed, fully in control of what she was

saying, quick in her answers, and in apparent good spirits. There was

no evident reason whatsoever for doubting that she was expressing her

own wishes. The Soviet side gave no outward sign that they feared she

might say, from their standpoint, the wrong thing.

Vance

216.

Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Soviet Military Presence in Cuba (S)

PARTICIPANTS

State

JCS

David D. Newsom, Under

Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant

Secretary for Political

to the Chairman

Affairs

NSC

James E. Goodby, Deputy

Marshall Brement

Assistant Secretary for

William E. Odom

European Affairs

Madeleine Albright

Defense

Walter Slocombe, Principal

Deputy Assistant Secretary

for International Affairs

CIA

Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director

of Central Intelligence

Harry Gelman

The meeting reviewed the talking points recommended by State

for use in a demarche with the Soviet Embassy and the Cuban Govern-

ment on the presence of Soviet ground forces in Cuba. State expressed

the view that we have only a short time before the latest information,

confirming the presence of Soviet ground units in Cuba, will be leaked

to the press, creating public pressures for action. Secretary Vance,

therefore, wants to make a demarche informing both the Soviet and

Cuban Governments that we are aware of the Soviet troop disposition.

Having taken this step we will be better prepared to deal with the

Congress, public pressures, and other factors. (S)

Defense expressed serious reservations about making such a de-

marche until we know what our larger policy objective is and what

next steps we can take. (S)

CIA expressed similar concerns but acknowledged State’s legiti-

mate need to do something now. CIA also judged that the intelligence

loss, which might occur through cancellation of a scheduled Soviet bri-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

gade training activity on September 3, is marginal at this point and not

a strong reason for withholding the demarche. (S)

The NSC Staff expressed similar concerns as Defense about next

steps and our policy objectives. It was pointed out that a demarche

could easily draw a Soviet denial and the statement of a Soviet position

which would become firm and difficult to change later on. It was also

pointed out that a demarche could, on the one hand, cost us an intelli-

gence loss through the cancellation of the September 3 exercise, or on

the other hand, demonstrate disdain for our demarche by letting the ex-

ercise take place. Finally, it was explained that State has an answer to

public reactions in the event of disclosure of the confirming evidence of

the Soviet ground forces presence: we are planning to raise the issue at

a much higher level when Gromyko comes to the United States in Sep-

tember, and we have scheduled meetings of the NSC principals on the

matter in early September. Furthermore, the recent Shulman/Barry

demarche to the Soviet Embassy has already communicated the

seriousness with which we view a Soviet ground force presence in

No agreement was reached on whether or not to make a demarche.

It was decided to ask Secretary Vance to take up the issue by telephone

with Dr. Brzezinski and Acting Secretary of Defense Claytor. (S)

The wordings of the State Department draft demarches for the So-

viet Union and Cuba were edited extensively by the group to leave the

greatest latitude for policy choices later on and to reduce the possible

difficulties we might encounter with the Soviets, Congress, and Senator

Stone. There was some discussion of the advisability of including or ex-

cluding the Cubans as a recipient of the demarche and its significance

for the level of relations between our two countries. (S)

There was agreement on the revisions of the two demarches,

which were made as close to identical as possible. (S)

The President is to be made aware of the new intelligence before he

meets Senator Stone in Florida on Thursday. (S)

July–December 1979

217.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

227407. Subject: Soviet Brigade in Cuba.

1. (S-entire text)

2. We have recently received intelligence information which con-

firms the presence of a Soviet brigade-type unit in Cuba. In response to

this development, the following points will be made to Soviet Embassy,

Washington on Aug 29. You should arrange to make same demarche at

FonOff Aug 30.

—Marshall Shulman informed Bessmertnykh on July 272 that we

would regard the presence of organized Soviet combat units in Cuba

with deep concern.

—Our concern is not theoretical. We know that there are Soviet

combat forces in Cuba.

—We regard this as a serious matter which cannot help but burden

our relations.

—The Secretary sees the meeting with the Foreign Minister in New

York as an early opportunity to have comprehensive discussion on the

trends in our relationship of which this deployment is one significant

element.

3. We will be making a similar approach to the Cubans in Havana.

Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

218.

Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, August 31, 1979

SUBJECT

McHenry and The Vlasova Denouement (U)

219.

Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s

Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)

Washington, September 5, 1979

SUBJECT

Oral Message re Soviet Brigade in Cuba

Attached is a copy of the “oral message” that Vasev delivered to

Christopher at 4 o’clock this afternoon. The operational paragraph talks

about a “training center” which has existed in Cuba for 17 years and

where Cubans are trained in the use of Soviet equipment provided to

Cuba. On the whole, the message could have been much more polem-

ical than it was, which suggests that the Soviets may be looking for a

way out of this one. (S)

State will be working up a proposed reply, which will be discussed

at the 5 o’clock meeting tomorrow of the Newsom group. This will of

course be taken up during your breakfast on Friday. (S)

Since Dobrynin’s father just died, we do not know when he will be

returning to Washington. According to Shulman, Vance is leaning

toward making our reply himself directly to Vasev and as soon as

possible. (S)

Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information.

220.

Telegram From the Department of State to All American

Republic Diplomatic Posts

236643. Subject: Soviet Ground Forces Unit in Cuba.

1. (Secret-entire text)

2. Recent confirmation of a Soviet ground forces unit in Cuba

raises new concerns about Cuba’s increasingly close military and eco-

nomic ties with the Soviet Union. We would hope that all countries in

the hemisphere share our concern about the Cuban/Soviet relation-

ship. Accordingly, addressees should approach host governments to

sensitize them on this. The purpose of this demarche is to explain re-

cent events relating to the Soviet combat forces in Cuba and to begin to

encourage host governments to think about the Soviet-Cuban problem.

Posts may draw on following talking points as well as recent state-

cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information Immediate to the U.S. Interests Section in

Havana. Drafted by Ralph Braibanti (ARA/CCA); cleared by Newsom, Viron Vaky

(ARA), Mark Parris (EUR/SOV), Robert Pastor (NSC), David Smith (INR/RAR), Miles

Frechette (ARA/CCA), and Jeffrey Buczacki (S/S–O); approved by Vance.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ments by the President, the Secretary of State and the National Security

Advisor. Talking points should not be left in writing.

3. Soviet ground forces unit

—We have recently confirmed, through multiple intelligence

sources, the presence in Cuba of what appears to be a Soviet combat

unit. Rumors and fragmentary intelligence concerning such a unit have

been in circulation for some time. But this is the first time we have been

able to confirm the presence of a Soviet ground forces unit on the

island.

—Elements of the unit appear to have been there since at least the

includes motorized rifle armor, and artillery battallions, and combat

and service support elements. This is in addition to an estimated 1,500

to 2,000 Soviet military advisory and technical personnel in Cuba.

—The combat unit’s mission is as yet unclear, and we are pressing

the Soviets for an explanation. Possible missions include protecting So-

viet intelligence facilities, protecting Castro and protecting Soviet

installations.

—Ground forces per se did not figure in our bilateral under-

standing with the Soviets, which were directed toward offensive

weapons.

—Nonetheless, we are naturally concerned about the presence of

Soviet combat forces in Cuba, among other reasons because it repre-

sents the stationing in Latin America of non-advisory military forces

from outside the hemisphere, and because of recent Cuban activities in

this hemisphere.

—We have in recent months expressed to the Soviets our concern

over the Soviet/Cuban military relationship. Within the last few days,

we are making clear to the Soviets that the presence of this unit can ex-

acerbate our relationship. We have also raised this with the Cubans. We

will continue our discussion on this subject.

—What concerns us most about these troops and what should be

of concern to all the countries of the Americas is the fact that the dis-

covery of a Soviet combat force coincides with a heightened and dan-

gerous collaboration between the Soviet Union and Cuba in recent

years. This is true in military, economic, intelligence and foreign policy

activities. The ongoing attempt by Cuba to transplant the non-aligned

movement to the Soviet camp is only the most visible indication of

July–December 1979

the new and extraordinary collaboration between Cuba and the USSR.

This concerns the US, as we believe it does other countries in the

hemisphere.

4. Soviet/Cuban military ties

—Since 1975, the Soviet Union began to transform the Cuban

armed forces from a home defense force into a modern military power

with formidable offensive capabilities, larger than any in Latin America

except Brazil. It is an army of more than 160,000 men, including ready

reserve.

—Soviet arms deliveries to Cuba averaged somewhat more than

aged nearly double that figure.

—Cuba now has MIG–23’s, AN–26’s, AN F-class (diesel attack)

submarine, T–62 tanks, surface-to-air missiles and multiple rocket

launchers.

—Cuba’s Air Force includes over 200 jet fighters. Cuba is rapidly

expanding its naval base at Cienfuegos.

—Cuba maintains nearly 40,000 troops in Africa as well as military

advisors in Asia and Latin America.

—Cuba receives its military equipment at no cost and makes avail-

able to the Soviet Union military facilities as well as intelligence and

military communications installations.

5. Soviet-Cuban economic ties

—Cuban economic dependence on the Soviet Union has continued

to increase since Moscow first began supporting the Cuban economy in

the early 1960s. The increase in subsidies to Cuba has been particularly

notable since 1975, growing roughly threefold since that year to its

present level of about $3 billion per year, or roughly one fourth of the

Cuban GNP in 1978. By comparison, Soviet subsidies to Cuba during

lion. This figure does not include the increasingly large quantity of

grant military aid the Soviets have provided the Cubans.

—Nearly three-fourths of Cuban exports go to the USSR, which

supplies 60 percent of Cuba’s imports—including most foodstuffs and

a large proportion of capital goods.

—Cuba is a full member of CEMA; Cuba, Mongolia, and Vietnam

are the only non-Warsaw Pact members that participate fully in CEMA.

—Cuban dependence is so great that in the absence of Soviet eco-

nomic support, there would be an immediate drop in Cuba’s domestic

economic activity and little chance of economic growth for several

years. The bleak long-term prospects for the Cuban economy and

Cuba’s increasing military activities abroad will probably mean in-

creased economic dependence on the Soviet Union in the future.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

6. Following points should also be made in your presentation:

—Relatively small numbers of Soviets present no direct threat to

US security, but nevertheless raise important questions which Soviets

have not thus far answered.

—We are concerned about increased collaboration between Soviet

Union and Cuba and about the implied relationship to Cuba’s involve-

ment in revolutionary activities in Central America and the Caribbean.

Consequently, we are strongly pressing the Soviets on this issue.

—The Carter administration has sought to build a new relation-

ship with Latin America based on mutual respect, non-intervention,

and multilateral consultation and cooperation. We believe increased

Cuban activities threaten the countries of the hemisphere and the rela-

tionship we are trying to build. This is why we are consulting.

7. Please report reactions soonest.

8. For Managua. Do not carry out this instruction.

9. For Bridgetown. Do not carry out this instruction in Grenada.

10. For Kingston and Georgetown: use discretion in conveying

details.

Vance

221.

Summary of a Conversation Between Secretary of State

Vance and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin

September 10, 1979

222.

Summary of Meeting

Washington, September 12, 1979

1. Dobrynin read from oral message, translating as he went along.

He gave us text in Russian. (Our translation is attached.)

Main points of message:

a) SU has not violated 1962 understanding. US is now raising arti-

ficial issue, which will harm US-Soviet relations.

b) what US calls “combat unit” is a training center. Cuban ser-

vicemen are trained there to master Soviet military hardware with the

help of Soviet military personnel.

c) this training center has been functioning for 17 years, under all

the US Administrations during this period.

d) neither the numerical strength nor the function of these Soviet

military personnel have changed significantly during this period. Any

fluctuations in numbers were less than previously discussed (i.e., less

than 500)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

e) We give this explanation out of good will to help close out the

issue. This should not be interpreted as a supplement to the 1962

agreement.

f) There should be no misunderstanding of the fact that the with-

drawal of Soviet military personnel from Cuba is out of the question.

2. Dobrynin added that the Soviet Union would not mind if the US

wished to publish this information, which contradicts the US state-

ment. It hopes this will close out the issue.

3. Dobrynin then added another paragraph, reading from a text

which he did not transmit in writing:

“As for the hint in the US note4 regarding the possibility of a re-

sponse by the US by certain measures in areas where it has displayed

restraint until now: for one thing, we do not, speaking frankly, see

much restraint; and secondly, such hints are not the way we can expect

to lead to mutual understanding between our two countries.”

4. In response to questions, Dobrynin was not able to say whether

there was significance in the fact that this note referred to the training

of Cuban servicemen, while the earlier note and he in his conversation

referred to the training of Cuban officers.

5. He was also not able to say whether the unit had been continu-

ously in the same place, nor whether it had engaged in unit training, or

what kind of training had taken place. While still not confirming the ex-

istence of a brigade, he said there had been no change in structure since

1962. Asked whether the Soviet government would be willing to con-

firm publicly that the 1962 and 1970 understandings were still in force,

he said categorically yes with regard to 1962, but said re 1970 that it

would have to be clear about what had been accepted; “what we ac-

cepted then, we still do.” Will ask Moscow about public statement. No

response on question to whom the equipment now belongs.

6. CV said he would supply some questions for further clarifica-

tion. Dobrynin was given geographical locations, to avoid misunder-

standing re unit in question.

223.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 14, 1979

SUBJECT

Soviet Troops in Cuba

PARTICIPANTS

US

The Secretary

Marshall Shulman

USSR

Ambassador Dobrynin

Ambassador Dobrynin said Foreign Minister Gromyko had asked

him to convey the following information to the Secretary.

In answer to questions put orally to him at the meeting of 9/13

[12], Dobrynin transmitted an oral note in Russian (our translation—

Tab A—is attached), which makes the following main points:

a) The equipment belongs to the training center and is used there.

b) The Cuban personnel being trained are officers. This does not

exclude the possibility of some Cuban enlisted personnel being

present, as specialists or support troops.

c) The Soviet Union hopes that the clarifications which have been

supplied clear up any doubts that what the US has called “combat unit”

is in fact a training center. The Soviet Union fears that a further ex-

change of technical questions will only serve to prolong the affair

artificially.

d) The only understanding governing the situation is the one that

was reached in 1962. What was discussed in 19704 only constitutes a

mutually-agreed reconfirmation of the 1962 understanding. The Soviet

Union will continue to be guided by the 1962 understanding.

The Secretary stressed to Dobrynin that time is of the essence.

Public opinion is jelling and we need to resolve the matter quickly. We

would hope to have a full response from the Soviet Union by Sunday.

Dobrynin agreed to report our views and to request a response by

Sunday, but he thought it would be difficult to get a reaction that soon.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Secretary explained that one of the reasons the combat unit is

so sensitive for us is that people associate combat units with the mis-

siles that were present in 1962, because combat units were associated

with those offensive weapons.

Dobrynin said what the Soviets have in Cuba does not possess of-

fensive capability. He asked rhetorically whether the US wanted the

Soviet Union to declare that the troops now in Cuba are not the same as

those present in 1962. He asserted that there are no troops there to

guard missiles.

At this point, the Secretary handed Dobrynin an oral note about

the Soviet brigade in Cuba. (Oral note is attached—Tab B.)

Dobrynin’s reaction after carefully studying the note was to ex-

press somewhat emotionally the conclusion that “we have a crisis on

our hands.” If the Soviet Union presented such questions to the US

about its installations around the world, the US would tell the Soviets

to go to hell. These questions do not lead to a way out—they lead to a

deadlock. The Secretary responded that the US was open in dealing

with its troops abroad and we have no hesitation in answering ques-

tions similar to those posed to Dobrynin.

Dobrynin continued that the current publicity and the Congres-

sional hysteria are not of Soviet makings. Today it is one issue; to-

morrow they will raise other questions, based on the broadening of the

1962 understandings the US is now seeking. He said the USSR did not

want to create a new precedent.

He particularly reacted to the sentence at the outset of the ques-

tions which repeated the point that “the presence of a Soviet combat

unit in Cuba cannot be accepted,” pointing to this as an indication that

the questions are not intended to lead to a solution of the present

problem.

Dobrynin was doubtful that Moscow would supply answers to the

questions submitted. He said he may be wrong, but he thought these

questions would appear to Moscow to be a broadening of the problem.

Dobrynin then stressed the main point he had made in the paper

he handed over: the Soviet Union sees this as an effort to broaden the

1962 understanding. The US has made no claim that the 1962 under-

standing has been violated, but is creating new grounds for its objec-

tions. The US appears to be trying to create a new “1979 under-

standing,” which will be the basis for a series of additional challenges

in the future.

Dobrynin said the Soviet Union considers that it has answered the

question raised by the U.S. It has stated categorically that this is not a

July–December 1979

“combat unit” as alleged by the US, and that it is a training center. It has

already gone beyond the terms of the 1962 agreement in answering

questions previously put, in an effort to help resolve the problem.

There followed a somewhat stormy exchange between Dobrynin

and the Secretary, in which Dobrynin argued that the US was trying to

push the Soviet Union into accepting an expansion of the terms of the

1962 understanding, on the basis of which several Senators would then

make a succession of demands on other supposed violations. The Sec-

retary replied that the object of our efforts to obtain information about

the troops was to enlist Soviet cooperation in establishing the facts.

Dobrynin said he thought the Soviet Union had already been

helpful in clarifying the facts. “I may be wrong, but I don’t think they

will be willing in Moscow to go further. They believe you know the

facts.”

The Secretary indicated that the information provided so far was

clearly insufficient, and he reiterated the adverse effects of delay in re-

solving the issue.

Again assuring the Secretary that he would report our questions,

Dobrynin said he planned to meet Foreign Minister Gromyko when he

that he might receive instructions from Gromyko at that time, in which

case he would request an appointment with the Secretary on Tuesday

morning. If any response should be received from Moscow by Monday

morning, Dobrynin would not go to New York to meet Gromyko but

would bring the response to the Secretary.

224.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, September 17, 1979

SUBJECT

Soviet Combat Forces in Cuba

PARTICIPANTS

US

Secretary Vance

Marshall Shulman

USSR

Ambassador Dobrynin

Ambassador Dobrynin came in at his request to deliver to Secre-

tary Vance the Soviet answer to the U.S. oral message of September 14,2

which contained a request for further clarification on a number of

points.

Characterizing the response as “rather negative,” Dobrynin trans-

mitted the oral message in Russian, and did a sight translation for the

Secretary. (U.S. translation of the Soviet note is attached.)

The main points of the Soviet note were as follows:

1. The Soviet government felt that it had already provided clarifi-

cations on the matter, out of good will, even though it felt the issue was

artificially raised.

2. The Soviet Union found the US “questionnaire” unacceptable in

both tone and content, and saw it as an effort by U.S. intelligence to

seek information regarding Soviet relations with other sovereign states.

3. The Soviet Union sees the issue as a pretext by forces seeking to

undermine U.S.-Soviet relations. It hopes the U.S. Administration will

take steps to close out this artificially-raised question. It repeats that the

Soviet military personnel involved have been in place for 17 years, and

have not changed their numbers or function. There is no violation of

the 1962 understanding, which the Soviet Union intends to continue to

observe. There can be no question of withdrawing these personnel.

4. If the US Administration is actually interested in improving rela-

tions by implementing agreements reached through joint efforts, espe-

cially by ratifying SALT II, its actions will be met by cooperation from

the Soviet Union.

July–December 1979

The Secretary replied, saying that he regretted very much the neg-

ative character and tone of the response. He said he had hoped we

would work together to find a satisfactory solution to this problem. He

found the Soviet statement and the fact that doors seem to be closing on

this kind of cooperative effort to resolve the problem in a mutually-

satisfactory way deeply troubling.

The Secretary repeated his previously-expressed concern over the

negative effect a failure to resolve the issue would have on overall

US-Soviet relations; the consequences for the ratification of SALT were

all too obvious.

The Secretary concluded by saying he would study the text of the

Soviet note, discuss it with the President, and would be in touch with

Dobrynin. Dobrynin said he would be in New York with Gromyko, but

would come back to Washington whenever the Secretary wished.

Attachment

Attachment to the Memorandum of Conversation

September 17, 1979

There followed an off-the-record informal conversation, along fol-

lowing lines:

MDS asked whether Dobrynin had any intimation from his side-

communications with Moscow if there would be some responsiveness

to the possibility of concrete actions by the Soviet Union that would

serve to alleviate U.S. concerns.

Dobrynin replied that he did not know. He said he had not re-

ceived any suggestions from the U.S. of the kind of actions we had in

mind, and had not therefore transmitted any suggestions along these

lines to Moscow.

The Secretary then advanced some tentative illustrative sugges-

tions, saying he was thinking aloud, and was not intending this for

transmission to Moscow at this stage. He asked what Dobrynin’s per-

sonal reaction might be to suggestions that would include such matters

as, for example, the elimination of the brigade headquarters, so it could

be made amply clear that it would not function in a combat capacity,

and the removal or transfer from Soviet control of some of the major

combat equipment, such as the tanks, the armored personnel carriers,

or the artillery. These were just illustrative of the kind of actions which

225.

Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance, Secretary of

Defense Brown, and the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, undated

SUBJECT

U.S. Strategy to Cuba

In our concern with the issue of Soviet combat forces in Cuba we

should not lose sight of the longer-term issue of U.S. strategy toward

Cuba itself. After Cy’s trip to Ecuador, before we confirmed the pres-

ence of the Soviet brigade, and more recently we have discussed U.S.

strategy to Cuba. We agreed that we ought to continue to seek to con-

tain Cuba as a source of violent revolutionary change. Specifically, we

agreed that our policy should be directed at the following four

objectives:

—To reduce and eventually remove Cuban military forces sta-

tioned abroad. (S)

—To undercut Cuba’s drive for Third World leadership. (S)

—To obtain Cuban restraint on the Puerto Rican issue. (S)

—To inhibit the Soviet buildup of Cuba’s armed force. (S)

July–December 1979

To pursue these objectives we agreed to adopt a six-prong strategy

(these are longer term measures, independent of whatever we do in

connection with the Soviet brigade):

—With the Caribbean and Central America, we intend to work

with like-minded Latin American governments in an effort to compete

with the Cubans and increase the chances of peaceful and democratic

change. We intend to explore the possibility of increasing our presence

in the area. On the military side, this would include port visits and

training in order to demonstrate our concern for the region and en-

hance the security of the region. Also, the U.S. should be prepared to

provide greater amounts of economic and military assistance to gov-

ernments in the region that respect human rights and democratic

values, and also resist Cuban influence. [The drop from 2. percent (in

FY 79) to 1 percent of the FMS budget allocated to Latin America in

FMS credits will have (FY 80) to be reversed, and perhaps even in-

creased to 4–5 percent.] (S)

—With key Western allies and with selected governments in Latin

America and the Third World, we will share intelligence information

on the Soviet buildup in Cuba and on Cuban intelligence, political and

military activities abroad. (With Latin American governments, we

should seek to raise their consciousness of the Cuban problem as their

problem—not just ours—in order that they begin to seriously consider

actions to curb Cuban adventurism.) We should also hold periodic con-

sultations with these governments about measures that might be taken

individually or collectively to counter expansionist actions by Cuba.

We should encourage them to adopt an approach, which denies the

Cubans the recognition they seek and raises the costs to the Cubans

of continued intervention abroad, including the denial of credit—an

economic area where concerted action might give us considerable

leverage. (S)

—With moderate members of the NAM we should urge attention

to issues like human rights, arms restraint, non-intervention and for-

eign aid which could lead to criticism of Cuban and Soviet activities.

We should continue to encourage the moderates in the NAM to resist

strongly and publicly efforts by the Cubans to use their three-year

NAM chairmanship to impose pro-Soviet positions of the kind re-

flected in the Cuban draft declaration for the NAM Summit. (S)

—We should continue to press vigorously to preclude Cuba from

gaining a seat on the UN Security Council or from hosting the next

UNCTAD Summit. (S)

—With the USSR, we should—both in the context of the brigade

issue and otherwise—make very clear the depth of our concern about

226.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

USSR

The Secretary

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

Ambassador Marshall Shulman

First Deputy Foreign Minister

Mr. William D. Krimer,

G.M. Korniyenko

Interpreter

Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin

Mr. V. Sukhodrev

Foreign Minister Gromyko welcomed the Secretary and said he

was glad that they had a chance to have a chat. The Secretary said that

he was also glad to have this opportunity.

Gromyko said that since New York was the Secretary’s home, it

would be only logical for the Secretary to start the conversations and he

would therefore ask him if he had anything new to convey.

July–December 1979

The Secretary said he would be glad to start. As Gromyko knew,

the Secretary had met several times with Ambassador Dobrynin and

had expressed to the Ambassador his deep concern and that of his gov-

ernment and President arising out of the Cuban situation. He had very

frankly laid out the deep concern that we have as to the effect failure to

resolve this matter satisfactorily would have on the relations between

our two countries and, in addition, upon the ratification of the SALT

treaty. The Secretary had tried to be very clear, pragmatic, and accurate

in everything that he had said to the Ambassador. In addition, during

their last conversation, the Secretary had made specific suggestions as

to steps that might be taken to resolve this problem. He was sure that

Gromyko had been informed and that he now had had sufficient time

to reflect on these suggestions. The Secretary said he would appreciate

hearing Gromyko’s views and response to what he had suggested.

Gromyko said that he would start out by pointing out that the So-

viet leadership had been very much surprised by the noisy campaign

raised in the US with regard to the small training center the Soviets had

in Cuba. This has caused not only surprise but also consternation. The

statements made in the US in this connection have no basis in reality of

the true state of affairs. Therefore, the Soviet leadership was asking it-

self whether this had been done artificially and deliberately by the US

Administration; if that was so, they would ask: Why? After all, in the

course of many meetings between our two countries on various occa-

sions, statements had been made about the importance of developing

the relations between our two countries and, above all, a treaty had

been signed, a treaty of exceptional importance. After the summit

meeting in Vienna, a campaign had been launched in the US which

was totally unfounded. If that campaign had been launched on the

basis of certain information received from US intelligence agencies, he

could only tell the Secretary that the US Government, President Carter,

and the Secretary personally had been badly misled; some sort of myth

had been created, a myth that had no real basis in fact. Therefore, there

was no question at all of the Soviet Union’s having to change some-

thing in their presently existing arrangements. The Soviet Union had

not undertaken anything that would have been in violation of the well

known understanding achieved in 1962; therefore, there was nothing

that they needed to change and this question did not arise at all. In the

Soviet view, the question should not be put in those terms at all.

Gromyko was well aware of the considerations which the Secre-

tary had expressed to the Soviet Ambassador. However, the Soviet

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

leadership could only proceed from those considerations which he had

just presented to the Secretary, i.e., there was no need whatsoever to in-

troduce any kind of changes into existing arrangements, and therefore

the Soviet leadership did not intend to do so. However, the suggestions

the Secretary had made to Ambassador Dobrynin were aimed at intro-

ducing such changes.

Gromyko thought that there was a way out of this situation. He

was firmly convinced that there was an appropriate way out. In a cer-

tain sense, he could understand that the Secretary found himself in a

delicate situation as a result of certain statements made by the US Ad-

ministration. However, since the Soviet side had had no hand in

bringing about that situation, since those statements had been made by

the US side, it would be up to the US to find an appropriate way out. He

did believe that such a way out could easily be found. The US Adminis-

tration had at its disposal the official statement the Soviet Union had

made on Cuba, to the effect that there were certain Soviet facilities in

Cuba, i.e., a training center. If the Secretary deemed it useful, he could

make that Soviet statement public. He could say that some information

had been received which required verification as well as certain clarifi-

cation, that this had now been accomplished and apart from the clarifi-

cations provided, an official statement had been made by the Soviet

Union. He was deliberately saying “statement” rather than “under-

standing between the Soviet Union and the US,” because this matter

was one that concerned only the Soviet Union and Cuba. Nonetheless,

the Soviet Union had made a statement to the effect that it had a

training center in Cuba, and, further, the US Administration could state

that it had taken note of that Soviet statement. This is what the Secre-

tary could do if he was sincerely seeking a way out of the situation.

To reinforce what he had said about the noisy campaign in the US,

Gromyko cited the following data regarding the number of US military

personnel stationed in countries adjacent to the Soviet Union as of Sep-

tember 25, 1979 (Gromyko referred to a paper brought to him by Am-

bassador Makarov), he noted that in Turkey, i.e., close to the borders of

the Soviet Union, the US had stationed approximately 5,000 men. He

was in possession of the appropriate breakdown of that figure into

ground personnel, air force personnel and naval personnel. In Japan,

the US had 44,500 troops. Here, too, he had the relevant figures for

ground forces, air forces and naval forces. After all, Japan was a

neighbor of the Soviet Union, separated from Soviet territory by a

narrow strip of water, just as Cuba was separated from the US by a

narrow strip of water. In South Korea, the US had approximately 40,000

men, again broken down into the three categories. As for the overall

July–December 1979

number of US troops on foreign territory, that number was 465,000 all

told. Gromyko asked rhetorically whether the Soviet Union was raising

questions in connection with these large numbers of US forces, such as

the questions raised by the US with respect to the instruction center in

Cuba. Was the Soviet Union referring to various understandings and

making a noisy campaign out of it? The US had presented demands to

the effect that the Soviet Union must do such and such with respect to

these armed forces in a country adjacent to the US, and yet those forces

were there for training purposes only, unlike the combat forces of the

US.

If the matter were approached with minimum objectivity, the Sec-

retary would realize how the US appeared in the eyes of any objectively

thinking individual, and not only in the eyes of the highest Soviet lead-

ership or L.I. Brezhnev personally. As Gromyko had said at the outset,

the Soviet leadership could only reach one of two conclusions in this

connection. Either this whole matter had been artificially and deliber-

ately concocted by the US Administration for reasons which he could

not fathom, or the US Administration had been badly misled. Person-

ally, he would not want to ascribe any personal motives to the Presi-

dent or to the Secretary, or to assert that the US had deliberately con-

cocted these statements or allegations at some desk in the White House.

Gromyko said he was simply analyzing the questions that had arisen

without ascribing any malicious intentions to anyone specifically.

Gromyko asked the Secretary to tell President Carter (since he

would not have an opportunity of seeing the President during his cur-

rent visit) that in Moscow the Soviet leadership generally, including

L.I. Brezhnev personally, had given appropriate attention to this entire

matter. Brezhnev was surprised and perplexed as to the reasons why

all of this was being done without any foundation. Brezhnev had asked

Gromyko to convey to the President and to the Secretary that the Soviet

leadership as such, and Brezhnev personally, cannot meet the wishes

and demands made in this connection. The Soviet leadership was

firmly convinced that the United States has no grounds whatsoever to

interfere in an affair that concerned only the Soviet Union and Cuba.

Gromyko personally was convinced that there were no legitimate

grounds at all for this matter having been raised in the first place. He

was saying all this without any ill feelings toward the United States.

Quite the contrary, the Soviet leadership had taken a very positive view

of everything that had been achieved in Soviet-American relations re-

cently, and the Soviet leadership and Brezhnev personally had ex-

pected that the President of the United States and his Administration

and all other US organizations involved in foreign policy would follow

the path that had been charted in Vienna, an achievement that had been

preceded by an enormous amount of preparatory work. Now every-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

thing was viewed with a certain lackadaisical attitude, as if this was

simply a minor social or diplomatic matter. After all, if one took an ob-

jective look at everything achieved in Vienna, particularly the treaty

signed in Vienna which was of enormous importance, this present

matter would appear in true perspective as a tiny bug, moreover as a

tiny bug presented in an incorrect light.

Gromyko said he could understand that certain domestic consider-

ations might have influenced the Secretary’s actions but he would ask,

how did this concern the Soviet Union? It was a different country, after

all. The Soviet leadership preferred to view all these matters from a

statesmanlike perspective and from the perspective of the relations be-

tween the two major powers in the world. If we were to embark upon

the path of trying to adjust to each other’s domestic political squabbles,

tendencies, and trends, then both countries would lose control of for-

eign policy and the ship of Soviet-American relations would surely

flounder on the rocks. That could have gloomy and dangerous conse-

quences indeed. Why proceed in that manner? We need to keep our re-

lations on an even keel, and not seek to create entirely unnecessary

complications.

Gromyko said that just before leaving Moscow he had a conversa-

tion with Brezhnev, in the course of which Brezhnev had spelled out

very clearly and lucidly the thoughts Gromyko had just presented, and

had asked that these views be conveyed to President Carter. Gromyko

would emphasize again that the Soviet Union had no malicious inten-

tions toward the United States and would ask where any individual

could be found who was so naive or myopic as to believe that a small

training unit was a grave threat to the security of the United States. In

the Soviet Union, at least, there were no such people.

At the same time, Gromyko wanted to use this opportunity to

convey Brezhnev’s best wishes and regards to the President and to the

Secretary personally, and Gromyko would join in presenting his best

wishes and regards.

The Secretary said he would convey this message to President

Carter. He would now want to respond to the substance of Gromyko’s

remarks. First, he would explain very clearly just how we had come

upon this matter and how we had acted. He wanted to make it crystal

clear that there was no ulterior motive on our side in raising this issue.

It cannot help us in any way; it can merely hurt both of us. The Secre-

tary repeated this and stressed that it could only cause a severe deterio-

ration in the relations between our two countries, which he believed

were as important to the Soviet Union as they were to us. Secondly, in

his judgment, if we did not resolve this matter satisfactorily, it would

kill the SALT treaty. We believed, as the Soviet Union did, that the

SALT treaty was a major, historic achievement of fundamental impor-

July–December 1979

tance to world peace. As he had said in his speech at the United Na-

tions, this was a matter of great fundamental importance. Therefore, it

would be wrong, and indeed unthinkable, to say that we had dreamed

up something when it could only damage relations between us and

damage the prospects of the SALT treaty.

Now the Secretary wanted to turn to how we had come upon this

problem. Information we had received recently, during early July and

in August, tending to indicate that there was in fact a combat unit lo-

cated in Cuba, namely a Soviet combat brigade. When the information

we had received had led us to this conclusion, we had said that we

must check that conclusion, and it had led us to search further. This

was an extremely serious matter and, therefore, we had to be sure that

we were right in our conclusion before raising it with the Soviet Union.

For this reason, we took additional steps to ascertain the actual state of

affairs, and on August 20 and August 23 our conclusion had been

reached on the basis of the evidence we had, that this was indeed a

combat brigade. Further information had indicated that this unit was

not now involved in the training of Cuban forces. Consequently, we

were faced with a very serious situation. The fact that there was a

combat unit and that, from all the information we had, there was no ev-

idence that this unit was being used as a training unit with Cubans, pre-

sented us with an obvious and very difficult problem which we could

not keep secret and which then became a matter of public knowledge. It

was the characteristics of the unit stationed in Santiago de las Vegas,

which we have recently identified, that led us to conclude that it was a

combat unit.

In trying to resolve this situation, and so as to prevent a serious de-

terioration in the relations between our two countries and prevent im-

periling the SALT treaty, we had tried to see if there was a practical

way to resolve this matter that would be acceptable to both sides. We

concluded that a practical way would be to ask that the Soviet Union

take certain unilateral steps consistent with its statement that this was a

training unit to remove the elements that had led us to our conclusion.

We had spelled out the following steps:

1. Eliminate brigade headquarters organization.

2. Remove from the Soviet brigade equipment and armament

which gives a combat capability.

3. Discontinue Soviet unit field exercises, including combined

arms exercises.

The Secretary wanted to point out further that a positive Soviet re-

sponse to these suggestions would not need to be embodied in a formal

agreement between us. We would not challenge any portrayal of such

steps as unilateral actions. As long as these steps are taken and remain

in effect, we would state that these steps met our concerns and that this

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

concludes the matter. We would expect that the Soviet Union, for its

part, would not take exception to such a statement.

It seemed to the Secretary that this would be a practical way of

dealing with a difficult problem that must be resolved if we want to

achieve what he believed both countries wanted to achieve, i.e., im-

provement of the relations between us and final ratification of the

SALT treaty. We made this proposal after a great deal of thought and

had taken into account the sensitivities of the Soviet Union, as well as

the problem and sensitivities that this situation had created for our

nation.

In Vienna President Carter had indicated to President Brezhnev

the great sensitivity in the United States to Soviet forces in Cuba as well

as the broader effects in this hemisphere of what was happening in

Cuba. He emphasized how important it was that each of our countries

take into account the sensitivities of the other. Therefore, he thought

Gromyko would understand the special nature of this problem arising

out of the facts presented. He would very much hope that Gromyko

would further reflect on this situation and on what we had suggested

before rejecting what we had proposed, thereby creating a very deeply

troubling situation for all of us.

Gromyko said that from everything the Secretary had said it fol-

lowed that the US side was interested not in actually establishing the

facts and the true situation, but wanted to adapt the situation to its alle-

gations, to the myth and inventions that had been concocted. He had

carefully listened to what the Secretary had said and saw that basically

the Secretary had repeated what had been said before, even though in

different words. As for himself, he had presented the Soviet evaluation

of this matter and would once again assure the Secretary that he did not

want to leave anything unsaid or conceal anything, and that he did not

harbor any malicious thoughts or hostile plans against the United

States. It would indeed be absurd for the Soviet Union to harbor any

such plans. Yet, he would note that a great deal had been said in the

United States about the alleged danger to the security of the United

States presented by the existing Soviet training unit in Cuba. All this

was sheer fabrication and nothing else. If Gromyko were to say any-

thing further on this matter, he would simply be repeating what he had

already told the Secretary and he saw no need in doing that. He would

only add that if the US Administration failed to put an end to all

the hullabaloo and propaganda created around that issue, Soviet-

American relations would certainly be harmed. The consequences of

such deterioration would, of course, be the responsibility of the United

States and not the Soviet Union. The Soviet view was quite different. It

was that both the Soviet Union and the United States should very solici-

July–December 1979

tiously and carefully nurture everything good that had been achieved

in Soviet-American relations in recent times.

The Secretary said he would not repeat himself, but would clarify

that there was no question of our having charged that this matter was a

violation of the ’62 understandings between us. We had made it quite

clear from the outset that the Soviet brigade as such, in its present con-

figuration, posed no threat to the United States. We had tried to be

honest and had not tried to build up this matter out of all proportion.

Gromyko said that he had not yet touched on one aspect of this

matter. The training center in Cuba had now been there for 17 years,

and over all these years no one had raised any questions about it. For

this lengthy period of time everything had been regarded as normal.

Why, then, had it been necessary to raise so much noise about it now?

Why expand the importance of this matter out of all proportion? This

aspect had not failed to attract the attention of the Soviet leadership,

and it had tried to find answers and explanations, but had not suc-

ceeded. In fact, there could be no answer to this question. Why was this

being done, since it harmed the relations between us and also harmed

the prestige of the United States? That was the Soviet view of the

matter, although the Secretary might see it somewhat differently. Nev-

ertheless, this view was quite prevalent throughout the world.

The Secretary wanted to ask Gromyko a direct question. From our

analysis over the years, we cannot specifically trace this unit all the way

through. On the other hand, our information showed that during 1975

and 1976 at this location there had been an increase in construction and,

after that time, all indications of training with Cuban forces, which we

had witnessed in the past, had disappeared. It was this that had led us

in July to investigate further into this matter again, coupled with

photos of the equipment of this unit and a configuration that was used

only for a combat unit.

Gromyko said that this kind of reasoning could lead to absurdity.

For example, the United States might notice that the trousers of Soviet

soldiers had increased in width or length and would then come to the

conclusion that this, coupled with a different kind of boot worn now,

had created a new situation. Logic of this kind was absolutely uncon-

vincing. After all, what did that change? As the Secretary probably

knew, US and NATO troops had also carried out maneuvers in dif-

ferent compositions. Sometimes officers stand at a table on which a

map has been spread, and move around little symbols, each symbol

standing for a corps, or an army, or a brigade, and yet these were only

little flags or markers and did not in any way reflect the true situation

on the ground. The Secretary had said that our information had indi-

cated that in the past more Cuban troops had been involved with this

unit, and that fewer Cubans were involved now (the Secretary inter-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

rupted to say: “not fewer troops now, but none”). If Gromyko had un-

derstood him correctly, this had led to the supposition that this was

now a different unit and yet, whether 200 or 100 Cubans took part in ex-

ercises really had no bearing upon the nature of the unit. He would ask

whether American armed forces units were frozen for years or for

decades. Quite obviously they were not. In fact, using the previous

simile, the soldiers’ trousers might become narrower again without this

indicating any change in the true situation. Could the Secretary really

seriously argue that the number of Cuban troops exercising with the

Soviet unit had changed its nature? What importance could this pos-

sibly have? He would ask the Secretary to give this further reflection.

Quite possibly a US military person whose full-time job it was to ob-

serve Cuba had come to the conclusion that Cuba was the alpha and

omega of his military career. But this could not be taken as a serious ar-

gument, not even to mention the question of the accuracy of the infor-

mation obtained. The nature of the training center depended upon the

various tasks assigned to it, but what sort of problems could such a

small unit raise in terms of threatening the security of the United

States? Gromyko was sure that he was right in saying that if this matter

were viewed objectively, none of the arguments made on the US side

would stand up.

The Secretary said he had nothing further to add, except to point

out that he had not spoken of seeing fewer Cubans, but no Cubans at

all. He said that he would report this conversation to his President and

hoped Gromyko would do the same with respect to President

Brezhnev. Gromyko said that he would naturally do so.

Both the Secretary and Gromyko noted that they would meet again

227.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Soviet Brigade in Cuba

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

USSR

The Secretary

Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko

William D. Krimer, Interpreter

V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

The Secretary told Gromyko that he had been informed that Castro

was going to make a big statement tomorrow. He asked if Gromyko

knew anything about this.

Gromyko said he did not know Castro’s plans for tomorrow, but

had heard that Castro intends to make some kind of speech or state-

ment; frankly, he did not know the content of that speech or when it

would be delivered.

The Secretary said he had been told it would be sometime to-

morrow. The Cuban Interests Section had invited our press to come

and listen to a major address by Castro.

Gromyko said that was possible, of course, but he did not know,

since he did not have a direct line to Castro from here.

The Secretary said that he had listened with great care to Gro-

myko’s speech at the UN. In fact, he had clapped upon conclusion of

the speech. Some people had asked the Secretary for his views of Gro-

myko’s speech, and the Secretary had said that he had seen some posi-

tive parts as well as some other parts that he would wish to study

further.

Gromyko said he had been informed about the Secretary’s com-

ments. Now he would ask the Secretary what the world was standing

on today.

The Secretary said that he would express some of his reflections

since their last meeting on Monday.

The Secretary had reflected on what Gromyko had said at their last

meeting and, as he had indicated, he had listened carefully to what

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Gromyko had said in his speech. He understood Gromyko’s sensitiv-

ities and hoped Gromyko understood ours.

The Secretary said he would not repeat the ground they had cov-

ered earlier. We have sought to find a practical solution for this issue,

which takes account of both Soviet sensitivities and ours. Unfortu-

nately, the position Gromyko had taken does not lead to a satisfactory

resolution of the problem. Without a reasonable measure of coopera-

tion from the Soviet side, it is not possible for us to work out a resolu-

tion of the problem that would prevent a serious deterioration in our

relations, as he had indicated the other day. We had suggested action

which the Soviet Union might take to make it clear that this is not a

combat unit. We had indicated that the Soviet Union could present

these actions in any way it wishes, and we would not, for our part, rep-

resent them as the result of any agreement or as anything other than a

voluntary action on the part of the Soviet Union. Such actions would

make it possible for us to declare that our concerns had been allayed,

and to press ahead vigorously with other matters, including the ratifi-

cation of SALT.

As the Secretary had indicated the other day, Cuba, as Gromyko so

well knew, is a highly sensitive issue with our people. We have sought

to avoid confrontation with the Soviet Union on this issue, but several

times now, in less than two decades, the discovery of Soviet military ac-

tivities on the island has created the confrontations we have sought to

avoid. We accept the reaffirmation of the 1962 understanding and note

Gromyko’s statement that this unit has not changed appreciably since

1962. We accept the fact that it has no capacity at the present time to

move beyond Cuba. The possibility remains, however, that its organi-

zation might form the basis for expansion or that the Soviets might pro-

vide the airlift or sealift for its movement to other parts of the

hemisphere.

To come to the nub of the question, it is evident that Soviet/

American relations are poised at a fork in the road. If we are able to

work out a mutually satisfactory resolution of the present problem, it

will, in the Secretary’s judgment, make it more possible to do a number

of things, to complete the ratification of SALT, which we both desire, to

press for early action in MFN and to work for a broad improvement in

our relations on many significant fronts. If, however, we are not able to

work out a mutually satisfactory solution to the problem, he was con-

cerned that all the work he and Gromyko have done to try to stabilize

the strategic military competition and to bring about a more sensible, a

more stable and a more productive relationship between our two coun-

tries will be jeopardized. The President will have to consider what ac-

tions would have to be taken under the circumstances. The Secretary

was concerned that, if this is the direction in which we will be moving,

July–December 1979

then it will be difficult to preserve the proper relations between our two

countries.

The Secretary expressed the hope that Gromyko might have, on

the basis of his reflections since their last meeting, some thoughts on

practical steps that could move us in the direction of a constructive and

mutually satisfactory resolution of our problem. Steps which the So-

viets could take along the lines we have suggested would speak more

loudly than words and would be a considerable help in defusing the

issue. As he had said earlier, we would, of course, not represent such

steps as resulting from any sort of agreement between us.

That, in brief, was where the Secretary saw us at this point after re-

flecting carefully about the situation and where we stood at this

moment.

Gromyko said that, from what the Secretary had just said, he drew

the conclusion that the Secretary had nothing new to say as compared

to what he had brought with him for their previous conversation.

The Secretary acknowledged that in the way of suggestions he did

not have anything new. He had given the situation a great deal of

thought.

Gromyko said that the considerations and comments the Secretary

had made at their previous meeting had been the subject of Soviet reac-

tion at that time, and Gromyko had voiced their thoughts regarding the

Secretary’s suggestions. He did not want to repeat himself, but would

confirm what had been said then on their side.

The Soviets cannot accept any of the conditions the Secretary had

suggested. He would restate this now.

Gromyko said he had to say that the Secretary was evidently pro-

ceeding from some sort of erroneous premises. He was evidently con-

vinced that U.S. hints to the effect that certain questions might be re-

solved not in the way the Soviet side would want to see them resolved

(and here he was specifically referring to ratification of the SALT Treaty

and to MFN), that they would be decided in a different, i.e., negative

way if the Soviets adhered to their position, would lead the Soviets to

change that position. Gromyko would not recommend that such hints

be voiced. They did not make any impression on the Soviets other than

a negative impression. The Soviet side had always stressed that the

Treaty is a bilateral matter, that it was needed equally by both the So-

viet Union and the U.S., and that this matter could not be held hostage

for exerting pressure or influence on the Soviet Union. A method of

that kind was quite inappropriate and Gromyko thought that the Secre-

tary was aware this was the case. The same thing applied to the ques-

tion of MFN.

The Secretary said he wanted to speak to that. He believed that

Gromyko had not carefully listened to what the Secretary had been

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

saying. We, that is, the U.S. Administration, continued to fight for

SALT ratification because we believed that the Treaty was in our in-

terests as well as in the interests of the Soviet Union. As a practical

matter, as he had said earlier, our ability to win that fight will be made

much more difficult or impossible—not because of us, but because of

the absence of enough votes in the Senate. The Secretary had not stated

that as a threat, but simply as a description of concrete facts.

Gromyko said that to that he could only say: “Why try to rectify

the situation at the expense of Soviet interests?”

The Secretary said he would respond to that later; he did not be-

lieve that what he had suggested was against Soviet interests.

Gromyko said that the Secretary had implied that Soviet personnel

in Cuba can be used for something that should not even occur to any

individual with common sense, with respect to Latin America and else-

where. That was surely quite a fantastic speculation. The Soviet side

could only express total surprise that such thoughts could even occur

to the Secretary. If the U.S. government had advisers or experts or

anyone else who suggested such possibilities, Gromyko could only say

that they do not know the Soviets, that they do not know Soviet policy.

Consequently, they were bad advisers, indeed, bad experts. If such

ideas were shared by those who guide U.S. foreign policy in terms of

U.S./USSR relations, he could only express regret. Was it not possible

to live in Washington without constantly inventing and placing in mo-

tion something or other against the Soviet Union and its foreign policy?

At present this concerned the Soviet Union and Cuba, but Gromyko

could not recall even a brief period of time in which some legend or

other, hostile to the Soviet Union and its policy, was not current in the

United States. Why was this being done? He recalled that when they

had been in Vienna, Brezhnev, Gromyko himself, the Soviet Minister of

Defense and others, all had the impression that the fundamental

matters of both sides were prevailing, and that both sides recognized

the necessity of searching for agreed solutions leading to detente and to

safeguarding world peace. And yet, after the Vienna Summit and after

the two heads of state returned to their respective countries, there had

surfaced all sorts of hostile legends aimed against the Soviet Union.

Perhaps those who invent such legends and myths are extremely well

paid for doing so. Such was certainly not the situation in the Soviet

Union.

In essence, Gromyko wanted to emphasize that there was no need

to correct anything with respect to Soviet personnel in Cuba. The So-

viets harbor no malicious intentions against the United States and do

not undertake anything against the interests of the United States or any

other nation. They did not engage in any nefarious activities and have

no malicious plans of any kind. The Secretary could rest assured that

July–December 1979

neither the Soviet Union nor Cuba harbor any hostile intentions against

the United States. It would therefore be good if President Carter and

Secretary Vance and all others having an input into the making of for-

eign policy approach problems with a cool head, in a carefully weighed

manner and without emotions. If that were done, they would surely

agree that it was unthinkable for the Soviet Union to do anything in

Cuba to harm U.S. security. For the Soviets this was self-evident and so

elementary that even elementary school children, given the facts,

would come to that conclusion. Anything else was inconceivable, and

he thought that the Secretary understood that very well.

Gromyko noted that the Secretary kept referring to sensitivities;

but, he would ask, should not sensitivities be controlled? After all, the

human being was distinguished by reason. The Secretary had spoken

of the difficult situation in the United States and of conditions, such as

can be used to harm ratification of the Treaty and proper resolution of

the MFN issue, etc. He would have to say that considerations of that

sort appeared to be based on some sort of fatalism. Was the U.S. Ad-

ministration only in a position to register events, or could it choose to

act in one direction or another? Could it not encourage and nourish de-

sirable trends and counteract harmful and incorrect assertions by re-

storing the truth and allaying the concerns of people who were affected

by deliberate distortions? Gromyko was sure the Administration could

find a way out and put those who concocted harmful stories in their

place.

Gromyko noted that the Secretary had frequently spoken of the

sensitivities of U.S. people to this question. However, for some reason

the Secretary seemed to forget that the Soviets, too, were people, polit-

ical figures who also have their own political interests and sensitivities.

Speaking of sensitivities, if the Soviet side were to repay in kind, it

would have to refer to the deployment of American combat forces close

to the territory of the Soviet Union. This concerned several countries—

Western Europe, Turkey, France, Japan, South Korea and others. Surely

the Soviet Union would have genuine grounds, and not just concocted

grounds, to refer to sensitivities in this respect. However, he believed

that statesmen should regard issues from a broad international per-

spective and they should show understanding for each others’ posi-

tions. The Government of the United States had manifested such a

broad approach in discussing certain questions with the Soviet Union

in an appropriate context. It had done so in consideration of the inter-

national situation in the world as a whole and had considered these

matters together with the Soviet Union. Now, however, things were

presented in a distorted light and questions are being put in a way that

was completely and absolutely unacceptable both for the Soviet Union

and for Cuba. He would remind the Secretary that the United States it-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

self had troops in Cuba, that it maintained a military base on that island

against the wishes of the Cuban government. Under these conditions

the U.S. Administration had nevertheless chosen the path of upholding

a legend whose sharp edge was aimed against the interests of the So-

viet Union. Why such a legend? Who invented it? Why is all this being

done?

Gromyko said that he and his colleagues do not believe that this

was the way to increase the prestige of the United States or respect for

American foreign policy. The Secretary might believe otherwise, but

the Soviets did not, and he thought that they did know a few things

about foreign policy. Did Washington really believe that its prestige

would be boosted as a result of its current stand? He did not think so,

nor did he think that this was any way to cure any harm that had been

done to the prestige of U.S. foreign policy. He would ask the Secretary

to reflect on all this with a cool head and make an effort to free himself

of emotions, keeping in mind the fundamental interests of our respec-

tive governments, the world situation as a whole and the fundamental

interests of peace.

Gromyko recounted the numerous occasions when President

Carter and the Secretary personally had stated that everything had to

be done to prevent the outbreak of another war. Those statements had

certainly been fully in line with Soviet views. Should, then, this artifi-

cial issue be allowed to poison the international atmosphere every-

where, in the UN and here in the U.S. as well as in other parts of the

world? This was something that he could not understand and could not

accept.

Gromyko recalled that during their last conversation he had men-

tioned that there was a way out of the situation. He had tried to put

himself in the Secretary’s shoes. What would the U.S. Administration

lose if it were to say that a certain matter had come up requiring clarifi-

cation, and that after appropriate study and coupled with an appro-

priate statement by the Soviet side, which had helped to clarify the situ-

ation, the Administration had concluded that no threat of any kind

existed for the United States or any other country as a result of the pres-

ence of Soviet training personnel in Cuba who had been there many

years, that there was no question of any sort of threat to the security of

the U.S. The Administration could state that that statement by the So-

viet government, which had not been made before, had made it pos-

sible for the United States government and for President Carter to get

to the bottom of the facts and find a solution to this matter. Thus, the

solution would be based on unilateral statements by the governments

of the Soviet Union and of the United States.

Gromyko had still another consideration that he wanted to bring

to the Secretary’s attention. In his remarks the Secretary had expressed

July–December 1979

the thought that the Soviet Union ought to conduct itself in such a way

as to ensure that everything was laid open to U.S. verification. He

would ask where did such an idea come from, the idea that the Soviet

Union must open up all its facilities, open up its lockers as it were for

the U.S. to see everything? After all, the U.S. was not opening up its

lockers, not only on the territory of the U.S., but also in other countries

where it had stationed its combat forces. (The Secretary interrupted to

point out that the presence of our forces had not been concealed but

publicly announced.) Gromyko asked rhetorically if the U.S. was not

asking for too much. The Soviet Union also made announcements of

those things it believed necessary to announce. American demands

were simply much too immodest. After all, there were matters of prin-

ciple that were involved, and not that the Soviet Union wanted to con-

ceal something. In the SALT II Treaty we had embodied the concept of

verification by national technical means, and he would suggest that

each country do what it could to strengthen that principle. Had the Sec-

retary forgotten it in this instance? After all, that principle had been ap-

plied to much more serious obligations, but here the U.S. was trying to

open up everything through the back door as it were. There was some-

thing here that was impossible to understand.

The Secretary said he would respond. First, we also believed, as

both sides had stated at the meeting in Vienna, that fundamental in-

terests must prevail, that the decisions taken by both sides must be in

line not only with our own fundamental interests, but also with the in-

terests of a better, more stable and enduring relationship between us;

and we have proceeded in that fashion. We had proceeded with the

hearings on SALT ratification and, as the Secretary had indicated ear-

lier, we had appeared to make excellent progress before Cuba. Indeed,

it had then become clear that we had more than two-thirds of the votes

in the Senate in favor of the Treaty. Then, this issue arose and became a

practical, real obstacle that we cannot ignore. Gromyko had spoken of

the need to be cool-headed. Both President Carter and the Secretary

had acted in a cool-headed manner and without emotions. He believed

it ought to be clear that both sides should act on the basis of facts and

not emotions, that both sides must exercise caution to view things in

their proper perspective. The Secretary had indicated that the Soviet

unit in Cuba posed no threat to the United States. We had indicated

that at present it does not have any sealift or airlift capabilities. These

facts were not based on emotion, but on cool-headed thinking to keep

matters in a proper perspective, so as to be able to discuss issues in a

practical fashion. Another reality was that Cuban policy was seen as

detrimental to the U.S. in certain Central American and South Amer-

ican regions. This stems from the fact of extensive military assistance

received by Cuba from the Soviet Union. Moving on, the Secretary

wanted to stress that we had not suggested anything other than confir-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

mation of what Gromyko had said, i.e., that this was a training unit.

The Secretary had stated that there was a major difference between the

Soviet statement that this was not a combat unit and what our intelli-

gence information reflects; this was the problem, a real problem.

The actions we have suggested would confirm that the Soviet

troops in Cuba were not combat troops, but training troops as Gro-

myko had said. The combat nature of the unit is one of the key issues

which, if not resolved, can produce a deterioration of relations between

us. Lastly, on the question of U.S. combat troops, we do have such

troops stationed abroad, we have not tried to hide that fact, it is a

matter of public information. These troops are stationed on the territory

of other countries on the basis of their treaties and agreements with the

United States, just as the Soviets had such agreements with the Warsaw

Pact countries. Our troops in South Korea are there to safeguard the

peace and it is no secret that by agreement we had troops stationed in

Japan. Thus, these are in a different category from the kind of situation

we are dealing with in the case of Soviet troops in Cuba.

The Secretary wanted to come back to the difference between us as

to whether this was a combat unit or not, and how to get around that

problem.

Gromyko asked rhetorically who was in a better position to know

the true facts—those who fed distorted information to the Secretary or

the Soviet Union?

The Secretary said it was very hard when we saw pictures of the

equipment to ignore that fact.

Gromyko said that Americans had incorrectly read the materials

they had received. He could only regret that, but would point out that

the Soviets were in a better position to know.

Gromyko suggested that the Secretary ask himself the question of

why the Soviets would take some unit, which the Secretary had de-

scribed as allegedly existing in Cuba, to threaten U.S. security, and also

ask why the Soviets would need this, and why all this was being done.

The Secretary said that he could see one good reason for having the

unit there. Castro could have said to the Soviet Union that he had de-

ployed Cuban forces in Africa and that therefore he wanted reassur-

ances at home, and had asked the Soviet Union to send its forces there.

That would be perfectly logical.

Gromyko said that the Secretary must have read a mystery story

that was very artistic. He asked if the Secretary was addicted to mys-

tery stories.

The Secretary replied that he used to read them but lately did not

have time for them.

July–December 1979

Gromyko said there were much more serious matters our two

countries should be dealing with than the scenario or some kind of a

detective story. He said that when he returned to Moscow he would

have to tell the Soviet leadership and Brezhnev personally that some-

thing had occurred that had never been contemplated by the Soviet au-

thorities that the Secretary and the U.S. Administration were laboring

under a delusion and that he had done his best to assure the Secretary

of State that the very thought of harming the security of the United

States could not have occurred to the Soviet leadership. He was certain

that Brezhnev would tell him that he had been right in doing so. If such

a thought had indeed occurred to the Secretary, Gromyko would as-

sure him that it was groundless. It was a strange thing that many more

serious problems related to halting the arms race, questions of the

SALT Treaty—when and if it would enter in force, questions of SALT

III, European matters, NPT, CTB and other most important matters

which should have engaged the efforts of both sides, had been subordi-

nated to a matter which did not exist. All this was very difficult to

understand.

The Secretary said that he wanted to ask Gromyko one or two fur-

ther questions. Was Gromyko saying that this was not a combat unit,

that the Soviet Union did not intend to give this unit combat capabil-

ities by airlift or sealift? Was that what Gromyko had been saying?

In reply to the Secretary’s question, Gromyko said that the Soviets

have only a training center in Cuba and did not intend to change the

conditions under which that center operated. That is what he wanted to

state officially. He could not state the matter any clearer. In fact, he

could state that the Soviet Union will not change those conditions. That

was even stronger than saying that it did not intend to change

conditions.

The Secretary had said that he wanted to be clear. He wished it

were a simple matter, but it was not. Could he (Vance) assume that

what he had said does reflect the Soviet position accurately?

Gromyko repeated that the Soviets had said that they have only a

training center in Cuba, which engaged only in training functions, and

that the Soviet Union will not change that situation. It seemed to him

that he and the Secretary were talking along the same lines. It was true

that he was stating this to the Secretary unilaterally, and that he was

also stating it quite definitely.

The Secretary said that one of the important factors would be the

fact that the unit in question does not have airlift or sealift capabilities

and that the Soviet Union did not intend to change that.

Gromyko said that was correct and that the Soviets will not change

the function of the training center.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Secretary pointed out that he had spoken of a Soviet unit

which runs a training center.

Gromyko said that he had used the Soviet terminology in speaking

of a training center. The term “unit” had been used by the Secretary,

but he would prefer to use the Soviet’s own terminology. They had a

training center in Cuba and will not change its function. In saying “will

not” he was putting it stronger than if he had said “does not intend.”

Gromyko asked the Secretary if he really believed that he could be

talking here to the Foreign Minister of the USSR, representing the So-

viet Union and saying these things to the Secretary plainly on behalf of

the Soviet Union and the Soviet leadership, while at the same time the

Soviet Union planned to threaten the security of the United States? The

mildest comment he could make on any such idea was that it was en-

tirely too bold. On the other hand, if the Secretary were to say that our

two countries had some agreement between us, the Soviet Union

would be forced to refute this for reasons of principle. The Soviet Union

had provided a unilateral clarifying statement, that statement was

strictly of a unilateral nature and was made as a result of the Soviet de-

sire to allay any concerns President Carter and the Secretary might

have with respect to Soviet behavior.

The Secretary said that we had not suggested an understanding,

and had spoken only in terms of unilateral statements.

228.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

Moscow, September 27, 1979

Dear Mr. President,

I and my colleagues have familiarized ourselves with your

appeal.

229.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

October 11, 1979

Dear Mr. President,

I am sending you this letter with the aim of calling your attention

to questions of military detente and arms limitation in Europe.

I wish briefly to summarize the essence of our thoughts and pro-

posals on these questions, which were set forth in my speech in Berlin

on October 6 of this year.

First, the assertions being spread in the West to the effect that the

Soviet Union is building up its military might on the European conti-

nent on a scale not required by defense requirements have nothing in

common with reality. They can only be evaluated as intended to serve

as a screen for the development, adoption and realization of plans to

deploy in Western Europe new types of American nuclear-missile

weaponry. In other words—for the purpose of upsetting the existing

balance of forces in Europe, of trying to secure military superiority for

the NATO bloc.

One can say beforehand that it is doubtful that anything will result

from such attempts. The Soviet Union and its allies would be forced to

take the necessary additional steps to strengthen their security. No

other course will be open to them.

It is entirely clear, however, that realization of the plans indicated

by the countries of NATO would inevitably lead to aggravation of the

situation in Europe and would in many respects poison the interna-

tional atmosphere as a whole.

One would like to hope, Mr. President, that your government and

you personally will again and again consider all aspects of this problem

and will not allow steps to be taken which are insufficiently weighed.

As for the Soviet Union, I have said more than once, and wish to

repeat again to you personally: We do not strive for military superi-

ority, have not and do not intend to threaten anyone; our strategic doc-

trine has a purely defensive orientation.

Second, as I stated with all definitiveness in Berlin, during the past

ten years the number of carriers of medium range nuclear weapons has

not been increased by one rocket or by one aircraft. To the contrary, the

July–December 1979

number of launchers of medium range missiles, as well as the yield of

the nuclear charges of these missiles, have even been somewhat de-

creased. The number of medium range bombers has also been de-

creased. The Soviet Union does not at all deploy such means on the ter-

ritory of other states. For a number of years we have not increased the

number of our troops stationed in Central Europe. Such are the irrefut-

able facts, Mr. President, and I am sure that they are well known by the

appropriate organs of your country.

Moreover, we have expressed our readiness to decrease the

number of medium range means deployed in Western areas of the So-

viet Union as compared to the current level, but of course only if there

is no additional deployment of medium range nuclear means in

Western Europe.

As is known, important negotiations concerning SALT III are in

prospect. We are in favor of commencing them immediately after the

SALT II Treaty enters into force. We agree, within the framework of

these negotiations, to discuss the possibilities of limiting not only inter-

continental but also other types of arms, but with due account, of

course, for all related factors and with strict observance of the principle

of equal security of the sides.

Third, the Soviet Union, motivated by a sincere desire to break

through the impasse which has limited the efforts of many years to

achieve military detente in Europe, to provide an example of transition

from words to concrete measures, has decided, with the agreement of

the GDR and after consultations with other member-states of the

Warsaw Pact, to reduce unilaterally the number of Soviet troops in

Central Europe. During the next twelve months up to 20 thousand So-

viet servicemen, one thousand tanks, and also a certain amount of other

technical military equipment will be withdrawn from the territory of

the GDR.

We hope that this new, concrete manifestation of the peaceable-

ness and good will of the Soviet Union and its allies will be properly

evaluated by the governments of the member-states of NATO and that

they will follow our example.

Fourth, being in favor of further strengthening trust between

states, we are prepared in particular to reach agreement that notifica-

tion as to large military exercises by ground forces, provided for by the

Helsinki Final Act, be made not three weeks before the event, but rather

a month ahead, and not from the level of 25 thousand men, as is pres-

ently the case, but, let us say, from the level of 20 thousand men. We are

also prepared, on the basis of reciprocity, not to conduct military exer-

cises involving more than 40–50 thousand men. In addition, we pro-

pose that timely notification be given not only about military exercises,

230.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

The US-Soviet Relationship

PARTICIPANTS

Alexander Bessmertnykh, Minister-Counselor of the Soviet Embassy

Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member

The substantive part of the conversation began with a reference by

me to Ustinov’s October 26 article in Pravda, in which he alleged that

Secretary Brown had said that we were aiming for nuclear superiority.

Neither I nor members of Secretary Brown’s staff were aware of any

such statements, I pointed out, and I promised to send Bessmertnykh

an authoritative pronouncement by the Secretary on this subject (see at-

tached letter). (C)

Bessmertnykh replied that he was glad to have this clarification.

This was especially the case in that the Soviets regard Harold Brown as

one of the most moderate and balanced officials in the Carter Adminis-

tration. One could not always say that about an American Secretary of

Defense, he added. (C)

Bessmertnykh then said that he was thinking about the course of

US-Soviet relations over the next two years and the prospects were

deeply troubling. He had a growing feeling that many key people in

Moscow were “giving up” on the US relationship and believed there

was little or nothing which could be derived from it over the next sev-

eral years, Bessmertnykh said. This was particularly true during an

election period in the United States, when many irresponsible things

are said. The mood in Moscow is therefore somber and disturbing. (C)

I did not feel that we were facing an inevitable downward spiral in

US-Soviet relations, I replied. The ratification of SALT II would be

useful in putting the relationship on a more even keel. It was true, how-

ever, that we will soon be in the midst of an election campaign in the

US. If the Soviets played an unhelpful role in fostering or engendering

destabilizing events, the various candidates of both Parties would

probably vie with each other to condemn the USSR. But if we were en-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tering a period of relative calm and more inward orientation, then I saw

no reason why we could not build, improve, and expand on the present

relationship. The key was Soviet conduct. If Moscow demonstrated

caution and prudence in the upcoming months, that would certainly be

noted and understood by Washington. (C)

It is the concrete actions of the Carter Administration which bother

us, Bessmertnykh rejoined. How can we help but take notice of a deci-

sion to add major new weapons systems to the NATO arsenal which

can strike the territory of the Soviet Union and thereby destroy the bal-

ance which currently exists in the European theater? Furthermore, the

US reaction to the Brezhnev East Berlin speech was very disappointing

to us. The proposals put forward in that speech were intended to be

constructive and realistic. They should be taken seriously and not be re-

garded as merely a propaganda ploy. It is very important that you re-

spond to Brezhnev’s message of October 11, which elaborated on the

speech. Failure to do so would be noted in Moscow with grave disap-

pointment, Bessmertnykh said. (C)

We have read the speech and the letter very carefully, I replied.

Since this is a NATO matter, however, we obviously have to consult

with our allies before formulating a response. I pointed out that similar

texts had gone to the various NATO members and that normal consul-

tations would take some time. (C)

We should understand, Bessmertnykh said, that the proposed de-

ployment of TNF by NATO has had a very bad effect in Moscow. It will

allow NATO forces to strike against the Soviet homeland with less

warning and will require a significant military response. More than any

other recent development, this has affected the mood in Moscow. For

the first time in his recollection, Bessmertnykh asserted, serious ana-

lysts of the American scene are thinking in terms of a possible first

strike by the United States. This kind of thinking cannot help but color

the entire atmosphere, he said. (C)

The degree of alarm you describe is puzzling to me, I rejoined.

What has happened is that the Soviet Union is in the process of carrying

out a major overhaul of its theater nuclear forces, by introducing two

major weapons systems, the SS–20 and the Backfire bomber. This gives

the Soviet side a far more effective, accurate and threatening strike ca-

pability. It would not be realistic to expect NATO to accept such a situa-

tion and not respond to it. In any case, the weapons being considered

by the alliance will not be operational for several years. This will give

us ample time to formulate a sound arms control agreement to deal

with the TNF problem. (C)

July–December 1979

Furthermore, I continued, any Soviet analyst who is seriously

thinking about the possibility of a first-strike assault by the United

States has no understanding of the American scene. Historically, no

country has ever made a surprise attack on another without specific ter-

ritorial gains in mind. But a glance at a map of the US and its posses-

sions in 1919 would reveal that, unlike many other states, we have not

changed the extent of our territory by one square inch in the last 60

years. Furthermore, there is no extant political group in the United

States itself, no matter how small or insignificant, that desires any

changes in our boundaries. We have secure and firm borders, and we

have a democratic system that depends on popular support. Surprise

attack, by its very nature, requires an autocratic and highly centralized

system of government. We have therefore never in our history

launched a war, or even contemplated launching a war, with a surprise

attack. It is inconceivable, I said, that we would ever make a first-strike

attack against the USSR. Soviet analysts who seriously think of this as a

possibility simply do not know this country. (C)

(At this point, Ambassador Dobrynin joined us briefly. We chatted

for a few minutes, and he expressed the hope that our relations would

not be frozen during the coming year. His appearance was obviously

intended as a goodwill gesture.) (U)

Returning to the thread of our previous conversation, Bessmert-

nykh said that many people in Moscow have a poor understanding of

the United States. The Embassy tries to explain what is going on, but

often this is difficult. Many people, for example, had wrong ideas about

the recent dispute over the so-called Soviet combat brigade in Cuba. (C)

From remarks which various Soviet officials had made about this

matter, I said, I had the impression that this issue may indeed not be

fully understood. I pointed out that Marshall Shulman had made a de-

marche to Bessmertnykh July 27, which stated that we would be seri-

ously concerned about changes in Soviet or Cuban offensive capabil-

ities in Cuba, and which mentioned reports we have had about

organized Soviet combat units there. Had this demarche been re-

sponded to in a serious manner, the crisis atmosphere which sur-

rounded this issue could have been avoided, I said. Furthermore, the

Soviet side knew that both Secretary Vance and Secretary Brown in

mid-July had denied to the Congress that we had specific knowledge

about this brigade. This should have reinforced the seriousness of

Shulman’s demarche. Soviet experts surely must understand that key

Cabinet officers would never make such statements unless we were sat-

isfied that they were accurate. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Clear and frank communication between us is very important, I

continued. This was evident at the time of the Vlasova case. The Soviet

side should reflect on what would have happened had our authorities

not been vigilant enough to discover that Vlasova was already on an

Aeroflot plane in New York and about to depart for Moscow without

having made any statement to us. Had the Soviets gotten away with

this crude maneuver, the story in the press would have been that the

wife of a defector was forcibly spirited out of the country and sent back

to the USSR against her will. This action, in contravention of our kid-

napping laws, undertaken despite assurances to us that we would have

a chance to speak with Vlasova, would have been cited as evidence that

the Soviets cannot be trusted to keep an agreement. It would have im-

pacted very badly on US-Soviet relations and have offered real ammu-

nition to the enemies of SALT, who would have discoursed about So-

viet untrustworthiness. (C)

To my surprise, Bessmertnykh responded by stating that the Vla-

sova affair had been completely mishandled by the Soviet side. The

first thing the Embassy in Washington knew about the matter was

when Vlasova was actually on the plane, he said. The UN Mission in

New York was entirely responsible. “If I had been handling it”, Bess-

mertnykh said, “she would simply have had her interview and then left

quietly.” The one thing about the Vlasova case, which continued to

rankle, he said, is that in the letter to Brezhnev you said that you had

received assurances from the Soviet side on three separate occasions

that you would have an opportunity to talk with Vlasova. This was not

true. We never gave you any such assurances. (C)

While misunderstandings are always possible, I replied, the Soviet

side should understand that we would never make such a statement in

a letter from the President unless we were completely satisfied about

the accuracy of what we were saying.

In fact, I confessed that I was surprised when President Brezhnev

raised what was essentially a minor matter, and one which the Presi-

dent could not possibly satisfy, in correspondence with the President.

The Soviet side must realize that we are a nation of laws and that once it

appeared a reasonable assumption that a law might have been violated,

as was the case in this instance, even the President would be powerless

to stop our law enforcement officials from ascertaining the facts of the

Returning to the Cuban brigade crisis, Bessmertnykh said that one

of the results of that incident is that many analysts in Moscow in retro-

spect regarded various American statements about Cuba, which were

July–December 1979

made in the period leading up to the crisis, as part of the efforts of

anti-detente forces to manufacture an artificial state of tension and

thereby imperil SALT. (C)

This would be completely wrong and a serious misreading of what

happened, I retorted. In the first place, so-called anti-detente forces had

nothing to do with the way that the crisis developed. More important,

there is nothing at all artificial about our concern regarding Soviet and

Cuban behavior. This concern is shared by every key American policy-

maker. Conversations at the highest levels at the Summit in Vienna

should have made very clear to the Soviet side that the Soviet build-up

of the offensive capabilities of the Cuban armed forces and Cuban ad-

venturism in Africa, Yemen, the Caribbean and elsewhere are of deep

concern to us. (C)

One of the real tragedies of this decade, I continued, is that the So-

viet side chose to ship a Cuban army to Angola in 1975 to intervene in a

civil war there. This took place at a time when no client or ally of either

of us was engaged in armed conflict with the other. It irrevocably set

the whole course of US-Soviet relations on a different path. The USSR

must come to realize, I said, that what may appear like a cheap victory

in Africa or elsewhere can turn out to be enormously expensive and can

have unexpected ramifications several years after the victory has taken

place and in areas far away from the original scene. (C)

We are not the masters of the Cubans that you think we are, Bess-

mertnykh said. They are an independent force. (C)

We can never accept the idea that you have no control over Ha-

vana, I replied. It may be true that you cannot tell Castro what to do in

every case, but what is obvious is that you are in a firm position to tell

him what he cannot do. After all, he can only get from Place A to Place B

on Soviet ships and planes. Furthermore, in Ethiopia Cuban troops

were actually operating under the command of Soviet officers. (C)

We can understand that you have principles and that you want to

support those principles, I continued. Such support, it seems to us, can

legitimately take the form of economic aid, training, or occasionally

even military aid, but direct involvement in armed combat is not ac-

ceptable. Take the ouster of Idi Amin—an instance where Tanzanian

troops went into Uganda and overthrew the constituted government of

that state. This event has passed with scarcely a ripple on the center

stage of our times. The reason is that the superpowers were not directly

involved. In cases where they are involved, such as Cambodia, Afghan-

istan, Angola, Ethiopia, their involvement has a disproportionate ef-

fect. We signed an agreement in 1972 that we would not take unilateral

advantage of each other. It is this concept that must underlie detente

and be its basis. How can we interpret actual participation in armed

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

combat in third countries as anything other than taking unilateral ad-

vantage of us? (C)

I understand what you are saying, Bessmertnykh said, but you

also must grasp that detente is not the bible for us. You know what our

bible is. Certain things are more important to us than other things. Even

though we get no benefit from it—it is you, not we, who use Angolan

oil—we still have to do it. We understand that it may be costly and that

it may require sacrifice on our part, but nevertheless we must do it. (C)

In that case, I said, you must also grasp that the United States

cannot ignore your actions in areas such as Cuba, where our vital in-

terests are involved. Reciprocity has to be the basic key to sound rela-

tions between the superpowers and it should be obvious that sooner or

later we will react to Soviet insensitivity to our interests by being insen-

sitive to its interests. (C)

I understand what you are saying, Bessmertnykh repeated. We

are, of course, concerned that you do not take actions which will cause

us practical problems, but you should understand that we must sup-

port progressive forces throughout the world. We feel that it is our duty

to do so, and no action of your Government will dissuade us from ful-

filling our duty. (C)

The Soviet Union must equally understand, I rejoined, that a So-

viet three-legged policy of detente, of arming itself to the teeth, and of

adventurism in the Third World cannot be maintained indefinitely.

Something has to give. The change in climate with regard to the USSR,

both in the United States and in Western Europe, is a direct result of

policies pursued by the Soviet Government. The resurgence of what

Moscow likes to call “anti-detente forces” has been engendered by pol-

icies which Moscow itself is pursuing. (C)

You should not assume that we will change our policy, Bessmert-

nykh repeated. We have our aims in the world, and these will be car-

ried out. Militarily, we only really worry about the United States. China

is not a problem to us. The Gobi Desert is flat, he said, running his palm

across the luncheon table. We could be in Peking in two days. Western

Europe would be a matter of five minutes. (C)

It may take you two days to get to Peking, I retorted, but what

would you do after you got there? Bessmertnykh laughed and said he

had not fully thought out that matter. (C)

Realizing that he had gone farther than he intended, Bessmertnykh

quickly backtracked, and emphasized that this conversation was meant

to be frank and completely informal in nature. I replied that this was

certainly my understanding. (U)

At this point, the luncheon ended. (U)

July–December 1979

231.

Oral Note From Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin to Secretary of

State Vance

November 7, 1979

We confirm with all definitiveness our principled position that the

SALT II Treaty and the documents related to it can enter into force for

the Soviet Union only in the form in which they were signed at the

Vienna Summit.

It is known that, with respect to the specifics of some questions,

apart from the documents that were signed, the two sides by prior

agreement made certain statements relating to certain provisions of the

SALT II Treaty itself, as well as on a matter of a different nature—the

Backfire medium bomber. There was no question, nor can there be, of

“juridical” confirmation of our unilateral statement regarding “Back-

fire.” Indeed, there is no necessity for this. The Soviet side naturally

will act in precise accordance with what it stated, on this as well as on

other matters. In this respect, we of course expect that the American

side will act in just the same way regarding the statements it made,

taking into consideration the consequences which any different be-

havior by it could have.

It is also entirely obvious that the Soviet side can in no way be

bound by any “understandings” or “reservations” with respect to the

SALT II Treaty which might be adopted by the U.S. Senate. Irrespective

of the procedures employed by the sides in the process of ratifying the

treaty, any attempts unilaterally to interpret individual provisions of

the agreed documents can have no legal force for the other side.

Accordingly, we do not intend to, nor will we, comment upon,

take note of, or in any way confirm any such “interpretations.” In this

connection, there should be no misunderstanding that the absence of

our comments on one or another “interpretation” in any way signifies

our tacit agreement with it.

In saying all this, we are guided by a desire to avoid misunder-

standings, now and in the future, in such an important matter as the

SALT II Treaty.

We continue to favor the earliest entry into force of this Treaty. But

it would be a delusion to consider that the Soviet Union somehow has a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

greater interest in the SALT II Treaty than the United States, and that

therefore we would agree to reexamination of, or addition to, any pro-

vision of the Treaty—whether de facto or de jure—to bring it into force.

232.

Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary

Brezhnev

Washington, November 13, 1979

233.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

295771. Subject: Brezhnev Message to President on Nuclear Attack

False Alarm.

1. (S-entire text)

2. Dobrynin at his request called on the Secretary today to deliver

the following oral message from Brezhnev to the President expressing

concern at reports of a recent false alarm to US forces of a nuclear mis-

sile attack. The Secretary said he would pass the message to the Presi-

N790008–0693. Secret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Vest; cleared by Tarnoff;

approved by Arnold Raphel (S).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

dent and get back to Dobrynin later on this question. George Vest, who

sat in on the conversation, stressed to Dobrynin that we are still re-

viewing the incident and that we have a number of mechanisms to en-

sure that our forces are not mistakenly employed.

Quote. Reports have been received that recently, due to some erro-

neous actions, the US technical systems gave a signal of a nuclear mis-

sile attack on the United States which resulted in putting appropriate

means on alert.

Mr. President, I think it is quite understandable that the said fact

should cause a feeling of extreme anxiety in the mind of every state

leader who is responsible for the policy of his country. It is reported

that an unforseen error has occurred. Let it be so. But a false signal of

nuclear missile attack did take place. And this is fraught with a tre-

mendous danger. What kind of mechanism is it which allows a possi-

bility of such incidents? One hardly needs many words to characterize

correctly this fact.

Finally, according to reports the incident was reported neither to

you nor to the Secretary of Defence, nor to any other responsible offi-

cials. This only exacerbates the situation. It turns out that the world can

find itself on the brink of a precipice without the knowledge of the Pres-

ident or of other US leaders.

I think you will agree that there should be no errors in such

matters. They must be completely excluded—not 99, but all 100 per-

cent. Although now references are made to the fact that the error oc-

curred due to a computer fault it is clear that in the final analysis appro-

priate decisions were made by people.

I could not help, Mr. President, drawing your attention to this cir-

cumstance and expressing my judgement in a most frank manner. End

quote.

Vance

234.

Telegram From the Department of State to the U.S. Mission

to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization

307013. Subject: TNF: Soviets and the False Missile Alert. Ref: Co-

1. (S-entire text)

2. Summary/Introduction: A November 9 test tape simulating a

missile attack on the US was inadvertently transmitted outside

NORAD headquarters. All commands had unambiguously and cor-

rectly identified and confirmed the data as false in less than six

minutes. Four days later, Ambassador Dobrynin delivered to the Secre-

tary an oral note from Brezhnev3 to President Carter in which Brezhnev

noted with concern the false alert and not too subtly implied that the

USG’s procedures for controlling its forces were somewhat lacking.

End summary.

3. We are considering a response to Brezhnev’s note, but are con-

cerned that the Soviets may attempt to make use of this incident to cast

unwarranted doubt on the reliability of our nuclear control and thus in-

fluence allied attitudes on the eve of the TNF modernization/arms con-

trol ministerial meetings.

4. We believe, therefore, that it is important to inform the allies of

the facts of the false alert incident and the Brezhnev communication as

soon as possible in order to avoid damaging rumors and unnecessary

concern. We would suggest that USNATO use the talking points in

para 6 and 7 to brief the PermReps at an early opportunity, and NATO

capitals draw on the following in answering official queries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

5. You should underscore as you do so the redundant and com-

plete nature of our well-established confirmation and control mecha-

nisms which were proven to be quickly and appropriately responsive

to the situation as it developed. Emphasize that no strategic nuclear

forces were activated. Also emphasize that the system was again

shown to be responsive, to have safeguards against hasty action, and to

have a design which assures that human judgment can override inad-

vertent malfunctions. Finally, you should also emphasize the fact that

the Soviets seem to be taking advantage of any situation to dilute alli-

ance support for a December decision to modernize and deploy

NATO’s LRTNF. Therefore, as we move toward and through the minis-

terials, it is even more important to present a unified, strong image to

the East.

6. The November 9 false alert: You should use the following infor-

mation to brief the allies on the NORAD incident. (FYI: the gist of the

information in the first tic below was passed by DOD to Netherlands

Attache on 14 Nov in response to urgent request from Netherlands De-

fense Ministry who expected query in Parliament on 15 Nov. End FYI)

—A portion of a recorded test scenario was erroneously trans-

mitted outside NORAD headquarters to a number of other commands

and agencies. The entire system has a number of built-in checks and re-

dundancies. Because of these, the test data was almost immediately rec-

ognized as spurious. All command levels demonstrated entirely proper

responsibility in handling the data. No strategic nuclear units took any

steps toward advanced alert. All commands had unambiguously and

correctly identified and confirmed the data as false in less than six

minutes. Because of an alert prior to that time, a small number of air de-

fense aircraft took off from their bases to assume an alert posture. These

were recalled in a few minutes—none carried any nuclear weapons.

—The procedures used to evaluate the missile launch indication

proved to be effective, fast and correct.

7. Soviet message: Draw on following:

—On November 13 Ambassador Dobrynin delivered an oral mes-

sage from Brezhnev to President Carter expressing Soviet concern over

the incident. We are considering a response to Brezhnev’s message.

—We consider it possible that the Soviets may return to this inci-

dent publicly as December 12 approaches in a further effort to derail

TNF deployment.

—We wanted to share the facts of the event with you in advance of

any such possibility.

8. For Copenhagen: This responds to reftel.

Vance

July–December 1979

235.

Oral Message From the U.S. Leadership to the Soviet

Leadership

undated

The United States Government has received the oral message from

President Brezhnev2 concerning recent press reports of a purported

“alert” of American strategic forces. Because the oral message was

based on inaccurate and misleading information, the assertions in the

message are inaccurate and unacceptable to the United States

Government.

The level of alert of U.S. strategic offensive forces was not raised

above its usual level because the U.S. command and control system as-

sures review and control by responsible officials at all levels. It does not

serve the purposes of peace or strategic stability for the Soviet Union to

base its actions or its diplomatic exchanges on press reports or to

propagandize such matters before finding out the true facts. The

United States Government assures the Soviet Government both that its

local commanders have and will exercise the authority to put their

forces in condition to survive attack, and that control of the offensive

use of our forces is totally reliable, as was demonstrated in this case. We

would welcome similar information from the Soviet Union on its com-

mand and control procedures.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

236.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

312888. Subject: Soviet Statement on Iran.

1. (C-entire text).

2. Ambassador Dobrynin passed to Secretary Vance afternoon of

December 4 text of following Soviet Government message on situation

in Iran.

3. Begin text.

The Soviet Union holds a clear and unequivocal position in con-

nection with the conflict existing between the United States and Iran.

237.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

315754. Subject: US Reply to Soviet Communication of December 4

on Iran. Ref: State 312888.

1. (S-entire text)

2. You should seek appointment with Gromyko or highest alterna-

tive level at Foreign Ministry and deliver following US oral communi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

cation on Iran in response to that which Soviet Embassy delivered here

on December 4.

3. Begin text.

The United States takes note of the Soviet Government’s commu-

nication of December 4 reporting Soviet communications to the Iranian

leadership in support of the release of the US diplomatic personnel

being held hostage in Tehran. We regard such steps as the appropriate

and expected response to actions which constitute crude violation of in-

ternational law and the norms of international conduct.

At the same time we cannot overlook authoritative commentary

appearing in Soviet media containing allegations that can only further

inflame tensions in Iran and endanger the lives of American hostages

being held there. In particular, commentary by A. Petrov appearing in

Pravda of December 5 contains inexcusable and irresponsible state-

ments. This commentary all but justifies the seizure of American hos-

tages, by claiming that this act “should not be taken out of the general

context of American-Iranian relations” and accusing the United States

of attempts to “blackmail” Iran.

Statements such as these contradict the contention in the Soviet

Government’s communication of December 4 that its position on these

issues is “clear and unequivocal.” If the Soviet Government wishes to

contribute to the release of the hostages, as called for on three occasions

by the United Nations Security Council, it should cease inflammatory

propaganda which can only have the effect of exacerbating the situa-

tion. It should also unambiguously urge, in its public statements as

well as its private demarches, that US hostages be released immedi-

ately and unconditionally. It should also publicly oppose any efforts to

place them on trial. Such demonstrable steps would contribute to

US-Soviet relations as well as the prompt release of the hostages.

End text.

Vance

July–December 1979

238.

Telegram From Department of State to the Embassy in the

Soviet Union

Tosec 120055/321017. Subject: Message to President Brezhnev.

1. (S-entire text)

2. Following is text of message from President Carter to Brezhnev

concerning the dangerous situation which now exists on the Thai-

Kampuchean border. You should deliver as soon as possible.

3. Begin text:

239.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

323556. Subject: Soviet Military Deployments.

1. (Secret-entire text)

2. You should seek an urgent appointment with Gromyko or

highest available MFA official and ask for an explanation of the signifi-

cant continuing deployment of Soviet military units outside the

borders of the USSR into Afghanistan which has come to our attention.

You should explain that we wish to know the purpose and scope of

these deployments.

3. You should make it clear that we are making this request in the

context of the 1972 Principles of US/Soviet Relations and commitment

therein to consult so that conflict situations will not arise which would

serve to increase international tensions.

4. We will be making a similar request of the Soviet Embassy in

Washington.

5. FYI only. Indications are that these new deployments are related

to situation in Afghanistan but no firm conclusions have been drawn.

End FYI.

Vance

July–December 1979

240.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

B) Moscow 27491.

1. (S-entire text.)

2. Shulman called in Soviet Charge Vasev December 15 and made

points in reftel. Vasev agreed to transmit request for information to

241.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

328359. Subject: Soviet Response to US Demarche on Iran. Ref:

(A) State 320173; (B) State.

1. S-entire text.

2. Soviet Charge Vasev called on Marshall Shulman December 20

to deliver the following non-paper on Iran. Vasev said the paper con-

tained the Soviet Government’s response to demarches made by Acting

Secretary Christopher on December 11 and DAS Barry on December 10.

3. Begin quote:

We decisively reject the efforts of the American side to place in

doubt the clear and unambiguous position of the Soviet Union with re-

spect to the American-Iranian conflict, and in particular on the question

of American diplomatic personnel in Tehran. Allegations that the

policy of the Soviet Union is deliberately vague and ambiguous are un-

founded and unacceptable.

Although we see no sense in polemicizing on the subject of cov-

erage of the American-Iranian conflict in the Soviet press, we consider,

however, that it is necessary to point out that (Soviet press commen-

tary) has been characterized by restraint and by an objective presenta-

tion of the materials—which cannot be said about the American

media—and in any case cannot serve as a basis for distorting our de-

clared position—provided, of course, that certain particular goals are

not being pursued in this connection.

At the very least it appears strange that we are receiving from the

American side “recommendations” on how we should act. For ex-

ample, it is proposed to participate in some kind of collective demarche

as a policy of the diplomatic corps in Tehran. The Soviet side will itself

choose what form of action is appropriate for it—whether collective or

independent. The weight of the voice of the Soviet Union does not de-

pend on the form in which a given action is undertaken. In any event,

we are convinced that what is needed here is not a formal-official ap-

proach but a political one.

July–December 1979

Both publicly, including in the Security Council, and in a private

manner, we have expressed our position of principle. This remains un-

changed: expressing the hope that the conflict between the USA and

Iran will be settled to the mutual satisfaction of both sides, we firmly

declare that the USSR is in favor of the strict observance of the Vienna

Convention on Diplomatic Relations and considers that the violation of

this Convention by anyone whatsoever constitutes an act contrary to

international law.

In addition, we have approached the Iranian leadership on this ac-

count, expressing ourselves in favor of the release of the American dip-

lomats and we have confidentially informed the American side about

our demarche—that is, by our initiative we have in reality cooperated

with the United States. There is reason to suppose that the advice we

expressed did not go unnoticed in Tehran. It is, however, unclear to us

whether the American side properly appreciates our constructive step.

We repeat: our position in this whole issue is clear and unam-

biguous. Any assertions to the contrary serve no useful purpose and

can hardly correspond to the interests of the American side itself.

End quote.

4. In the conversation that followed, Shulman began by saying we

welcomed the Soviet position on release of the hostages and regarded it

as most important. He then made the following comments on points

raised in the Soviet non-paper:

—Soviet media. Shulman said Soviet media continue to contain

equivocal language which lends support to Iran’s position and

weakens the effect of Soviet support for the US on the hostage issue.

Given the important stake which both countries have in preserving the

principle of diplomatic inviolability, Shulman said we would expect

the Soviet Government’s position not to appear ambiguous or be di-

luted by the Soviet press.

—Security Council. Shulman said the President has shown utmost

restraint and had made clear our policy was to exhaust every peaceful

means to resolve the crisis. He said we were now approaching a new

stage in our efforts to find a peaceful solution and would soon ap-

proach the Security Council to see how the ruling of the International

Court of Justice could be implemented. Shulman said he hoped the So-

viet Government would recognize the importance of utilizing peaceful

methods and would support our efforts.

—US opinion. Shulman said the current crisis had a major impact

on US public attitudes. He said he feared the consequences if Soviet be-

havior in the Security Council made it appear that the USSR did not

wholeheartedly support release of the hostages.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

5. In response Vasev made the following points:

—US policy. Vasev said restraint is the only policy which a great

power could follow. Only “peaceful means” were possible and there

should be no talk of “exhausting” them because this implied an ulti-

mate resort to force which, he said, was unacceptable. If the Soviets

were dealing with a similar problem, Vasev said they would rely on

diplomatic moves, patience, and restraint. He said the US should not

expect to just “snap its fingers” and that this crisis was “a good test of

US maturity.”

—Security Council sanctions. Vasev said that “personally” he did

not think our chances were good and implied that we could not expect

Soviet support. He said he doubted whether we had “firm legal

grounds”

and,

considering

the

general

economic

ramifications,

whether we had the support of the West Europeans and the Japanese.

—“Other options.” Vasev said that talk of the US using “other

means” to resolve the crisis had raised apprehension in the Soviet

Union. He described the political situation in Iran as chaotic and said

US threats only made matters worse. Claiming that Iran could survive

a naval blockade for a year, Vasev said US military action would ac-

complish nothing and would be a calamity for US-Soviet relations. He

said military action would kill SALT and “make the world a different

place for years to come.”

6. Responding, Shulman pointed out that Vasev’s own character-

ization of the results of US military actions should convince him of the

importance of supporting US efforts in the Security Council. He said

that we would soon be making a detailed approach to the Soviets on

sanctions and would continue to hope for a positive response.

7. Finally, Vasev said he wanted to raise a matter on his own initia-

tive. After producing the text of a Jack Anderson TV commentary,

Vasev challenged Anderson’s statement that Gromyko had assured the

Iranian Ambassador that the Soviet Union would not remain neutral in

the event of a US attack and had urged the Iranians to hold the hostages

for a year. Noting that Anderson was quoting from “intelligence

sources,” Vasev said he strongly objected if the US Government was re-

sponsible for such false accounts. Shulman said he was not aware of

any such “intelligence reports” and assumed that Anderson’s informa-

tion did not come from the US Government.

Vance

July–December 1979

242.

Letter From Soviet Secretary General Brezhnev to

President Carter

December 22, 1979

Dear Mr. President,

concern over the situation in Southeast Asia and, in particular, in the

area of the border between Kampuchea and Thailand.

243.

Message From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter

WH92270. Deliver as soon as possible. Subject: Reply From

Brezhnev on Iran Sanctions.

President Brezhnev has replied to your letter2 in the message

below received via State Department channels. It is not particularly

helpful but it does not threaten a veto and the tone is quite moderate.

With a Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the offing, I do not believe

they want a struggle with us in the Security Council. They may even

July–December 1979

hope that if they take a low profile on this issue we will do the same on

Afghanistan.

Subj: Soviet Response to Presidential Message on Iran

1. (S-entire text)

(December 24). He handed me a response from Brezhnev to the Presi-

dent’s message concerning Security Council action on the Iran situa-

tion. The message in effect disagrees with the appropriateness of sanc-

tions and urges that the US continue to exercise restraint.

3. Following is an informal Embassy translation of the Brezhnev

message:

Begin text

His Excellency

Mr. Jimmy Carter

President of the United States of America

White House

Washington

Dear Mr. President:

I have carefully studied your message which was transmitted on

December 21, 1979.

As I understand it, its purpose is not simply to provide informa-

tion concerning the steps which the US intends to take with regard to

Iran, but to learn our views in this regard. Proceeding on that basis, I

also consider it possible to express to you certain of our considerations.

I would like to say at the outset that one can understand the feelings

which are experienced in the US in connection with the holding in

Tehran of the American diplomatic personnel. We have clearly and

firmly expressed our position in this regard, having categorized those

actions as violating international law. And I can definitely affirm that

such remains our position.

At the same time the Soviet Union, like many other countries,

firmly advocates that the dispute which has arisen between the United

States and Iran be settled exclusively by peaceful means to the mutual

satisfaction of the parties. We have several times emphasized the ex-

ceptional importance of restraint and equanimity in the situation which

nian oil as a potential response to the hostage crisis. Telegram 327895 to multiple posts,

December 20, transmitted the President’s message on Iran, which was delivered to heads

P840163–1578, respectively)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

has built up and the necessity of handling the matter in such a way as

not to complicate the situation further but to seek a path for lowering

the level of tension in connection with the question concerning the

American diplomatic personnel in Tehran. In our opinion, that which

the United States now proposes to undertake would change the situa-

tion for the worse.

Transferring the question to the level of any kind of sanctions, of

physical action in relationship to Iran can only bring forth a exacerba-

tion of the situation and complicate a solution of the question of the

American diplomatic personnel in Iran. For the question of sanctions

can arise, in accordance with the UN Charter, in situations in which a

threat to peace exists. We are convinced that if the United States will

not step over the bounds of reason, will show the necessary restraint as

befits a great power, then there will not be such a threat. For that reason

we do not think that there is a basis for broadening the interpretation of

the existing dispute into the framework of a serious international con-

flict. It can be said immediately that, in contrast to the broad under-

standing which the position of the United States enjoys on the specific

question of the “hostages” and the violation of diplomatic immunities,

going over to sanctions will surely produce a different attitude on the

part of many states, including during the consideration of this question

in the Security Council.

It is also necessary to take into consideration the complicated situa-

tion which exists in Iran itself. It can by no means be excluded that

posing the question of sanctions can produce there the opposite re-

sult to that which the American side is obviously counting on. This

would far from facilitate the earliest possible release of the American

diplomats.

These are the thoughts which I wanted to share with you

frankly and confidentially in connection with your message. I repeat

that we react with understanding to the concern shown by the United

States.

We are deeply convinced that it is not an escalation of pressure on

Iran through some kind of sanctions—which would inevitably be con-

nected with serious costs, including for the United States itself—but re-

straint and a measured approach which are the surest way promising

to produce a solution acceptable to both sides.

Such an approach would find understanding and support from the

side of the Soviet Union, which also intends in the future consistently to

advocate the observance by all states of the generally accepted norms of

international law and, accordingly, to act in this direction.

I hope that you will react with understanding to the considerations

I have expressed which are dictated by the wish that the American-

Iranian dispute will find the earliest possible just solution.

244.

Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the

Department of State

8592. CINCPAC & CINCEUR also for POLAD. Subj: (LOU) Mas-

sive Soviet Air Operations into Kabul Continue.

1. (C-entire text)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

2. Summary: Massive Soviet air operations into Kabul began

Christmas morning and have not stopped yet. AN–22s, heavy jets, and

AS–12s have been observed in large numbers, and the total flights may

now exceed one hundred fifty to two hundred. (Most of these aircraft

have had Soviet Air Force markings.) No information is available as yet

regarding what was on those planes, but we have not yet seen any So-

viet troops on the streets of Kabul, nor have we observed any signifi-

cant increase in the Afghan military’s alert status in the capital. End of

summary.

3. The first of three phases of intensive operations began at about

action appeared to get underway at about 1800 Christmas evening.

Heavy jet aircraft were heard arriving in fairly quick succession, but by

that hour darkness had fallen and, combined with a low ceiling, it was

impossible to determine the exact type of plane. These were definitely

heavy jets, however, possibly IL–76 or something somewhat smaller.

Again, the numbers of aircraft involved is impossible for us to deter-

mine with any certainty but we estimate that about twenty jet trans-

ports may have been operating during this second phase.

5. Finally, at about 2200 Christmas evening, operations switched to

turbo-prop aircraft (most probably AN–12s, but possibly AN–22s as

well). These seemingly unending flights continued throughout the

night and have not stopped as yet. One officer counted more than one

hundred and thirty flights between 2200 and about 0600 this morning.

Since daybreak, we have seen AN–12s and AN–22s in the skies over

Kabul.

6. We have no firm information as yet regarding what was on these

aircraft, although some credible reports contend that heavy equipment

and ammunition was on yesterday morning’s AN–22 contingent. We

have not seen anything resembling mass movements of any Soviet

troops who may have been on these planes, but there are routes leaving

the airport which the regime could use which would not be visible to

innocent observers. It strikes us that this massive sky train could easily

July–December 1979

have brought in thousands of personnel, and we will report immedi-

ately if any Soviet troops are seen in or around the capital.

7. After the above was written, a State officer arriving from New

Delhi this morning saw about 200 Soviet Army troops around some of

the planes at Kabul Airport. He also saw a group of APCs deployed at

the east end of the runway. This leads us to believe that the Soviet

troops are probably being deployed directly from the aircraft to

waiting transportation, thereby bypassing the main highway into

Kabul.

Amstutz

245.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordinating

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Summary of Conclusions: SCC Meeting on Soviet Moves in Afghanistan (S)

PARTICIPANTS

State

Central Intelligence

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Admiral Stansfield Turner,

Warren Christopher, Deputy

Director

Secretary

Frank Carlucci, Deputy Director

David Newsom, Under Secretary

Arnold Horelick, NIO for Soviet

for Political Affairs

Union

Harold Saunders, Ass’t. Secretary

[name not declassified]

for Near Eastern & South

White House

Asian Affairs

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Defense

David Aaron

W. Graham Claytor, Jr., Deputy

NSC

Secretary

Thomas Thornton

Robert W. Komer, Under

Col. William Odom

Secretary for Policy Affairs

JCS

General David Jones

Lt. General John Pustay

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The CIA briefed the SCC on Soviet military actions in Afghanistan

over the past two days. As many as 215 transports, including AN–22s,

AN–12s, and IL–76s, arrived in Afghanistan from the Soviet Union

during December 25th. Kabul airport appears to be a major reception

point. Activity at Bagram airport is not known. This size airlift, it is

speculated, could raise the Soviet combat force level in Afghanistan to

somewhere between two-thirds and one and one-half divisions. No

ground forces at Termez or Kushka have yet crossed the border into Af-

ghanistan. Thus we have an unusually large air movement but no

ground re-enforcement. There is [less than 1 line not declassified] in-

telligence indicating direct politburo supervision of parts of this

operation. (S)

246.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

28030. Subject: Soviet Military Buildup in Afghanistan. Ref: State

1. (S-entire text)

2. Per instructions reftel I called on First Deputy Minister V.F.

wide-scale introduction of Soviet military units into Afghanistan and to

ask for immediate clarification of Soviet Government’s actions and in-

tentions. Soviets had obviously anticipated our demarche and Mal’tsev

was prepared with a written statement which he said he was instructed

to convey to the USG and to President Carter personally. The statement

acknowledged that “limited” Soviet forces have gone into Afghanistan

at Afghan Government request to repel “external” aggression in

accordance with Article 51 of the UN Charter. The statement said So-

viet forces would be withdrawn when the reasons for their being sent

no longer exist. The text of the statement follows.

3. Begin text:

I am authorized to transmit confidentially for the Government of

the United States of America and personally for the President the

following:

247.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

28119. Subject: Ramifications of the Soviet Move into Afghanistan.

1. (S-entire text)

2. Summary: The Soviet action in Afghanistan appears to mark a

major watershed in Soviet policy: for the first time since World War II

the Soviet Union has intervened militarily outside the Warsaw Pact

area to install a regime of its own choice. The move against Amin ap-

parently resulted from Soviet perceptions that:

—Amin’s removal was necessary to broaden domestic political

support for the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA), but could

not be accomplished without the introduction of Soviet combat troops;

and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

—that the disadvantages of a military move into Afghanistan at

this time were minimized by the current slump in U.S.-Soviet relations,

and the deterioration of U.S. relations with Iran and, to a lesser extent,

Pakistan.

3. In my view this action marks a dangerous and unacceptable

change in Soviet policy. I trust Washington is considering a response

appropriate to the threat this Soviet action represents. End summary.

4. It is too early to undertake a definitive analysis of the Soviet ac-

tion in Afghanistan. But we offer the following preliminary thoughts.

5. The Soviets apparently decided that it was essential to replace

Amin with a leader who offered some possibility of winning broader

popular support in Afghanistan and was more amenable to Soviet di-

rection, and we assume that was the principal purpose of the rapid So-

viet military buildup.

6. It has become apparent that the Soviets hoped to broaden the

base of the Afghan regime through a political solution, which involved

plotting against Amin as the focal point of popular discontent with the

DRA. The Soviets presumably were involved in the move against Amin

in mid-September which backfired, at least in part because Afghan

troops in the capital remained loyal to Amin. Soviet coolness toward

Amin since then has been evident in their media treatment of him and

in official messages to his government. The Soviets also made it clear

that their commitment was to the Afghan nation, the DRA and the

People’s Democratic Party—not to a particular leader. Since the key

Kabul military units remained loyal to Amin, however, the Soviets

played along with him—until the effectiveness of these units could be

neutralized by the introduction of Soviet units into Kabul.

7. Presumably one of the main constraints on Soviet introduction

of their own combat troops into Afghanistan had been their concern

about the detrimental effect on their relations with the U.S. and particu-

larly on SALT II ratification. Concern about the impact on their rela-

tions with neighboring Muslim states such as Iran and Pakistan prob-

ably also played a role. The Soviets may have concluded that U.S./

Soviet relations were already so bad, and the chances for ratification of

SALT II so poor, that there was little to be lost on that score. Moreover,

they probably calculated that the continuing crisis in U.S.-Iranian rela-

tions would minimize an adverse Iranian reaction to the Soviet move,

which might otherwise have pushed Iran toward the United States. In

the case of Pakistan, the Soviets may have calculated that the U.S.

Congress’ cutoff of military assistance to Pakistan over the nuclear

issue would leave the Pakistanis little alternative but to accommodate

themselves to the Soviet move.

8. It is too soon to tell whether Soviet calculations about the poten-

tial political gains and losses from replacing Amin with Babrak Karmal

248.

Editorial Note

On December 30, 1979, Acting Secretary of State Warren Christo-

pher approved a telegram to Moscow, the contents of which contained

President Jimmy Carter’s December 29 hotline message to Soviet Gen-

eral Secretary Leonid Brezhnev regarding the Soviet invasion of Af-

ghanistan. Also included in Christopher’s telegram to Moscow was

Brezhnev’s response to Carter of the same date.

Christopher wrote, “Following is text of President Carter’s mes-

sage of December 29 to Brezhnev (there may have been minor changes

in final version, as transmitted, but this text is virtually authentic):

“Begin text:

“Dear President Brezhnev:

“I want to insure that you have fully weighed the ramifications of

the Soviet actions in Afghanistan, which we regard as a clear threat to

the peace. You should understand that these actions could mark a

fundamental and long-lasting turning point in our relations. Taken

without any previous discussions with us, they constitute in our view a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

clear violation of the Basic Principles on Relations, which you signed in

1972.

“My government can in no way accept the Soviet Government’s

explanation, conveyed to Ambassador Watson on December 27, that

Soviet military forces were sent into Afghanistan at the request of the

leadership of that country. The facts of the matter clearly show that

these same Soviet forces were employed to overthrow the established

Government of Afghanistan and to impose a new government,

which has brutally executed the former President and, reportedly, his

family.

“Large-scale movements of military units into a sovereign country

are always a legitimate matter of concern to the international commu-

nity. When such military forces are those of a superpower, and are then

used to depose an existing government and impose another, there are

obvious implications both for the region and for the world at large. We

note with the utmost seriousness that this is the first time since the in-

vasions of Hungary and Czechoslovakia that the Soviet Union has

taken direct military action against another country. In the present in-

stance, the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan—a previously

non-aligned country—obviously represents an unsettling, dangerous

and new stage in your use of military force, which raises deep appre-

hension about the general trend of Soviet policy.

“We are pledged not to exacerbate conflict-fraught situations and

to consult when threats to the peace arise. If these mutual obligations

are to have any meaning, then they must obviously include a refusal by

the superpowers to engage in armed combat except as a very last resort

and then only in legitimate self-defense. Because our interests are

global, we must recognize that actions taken in one area have a spill-

over effect in other seemingly unrelated areas, as well as in that area

itself.

“Neither superpower can arrogate to itself the right to displace or

overturn a legally constituted government in another country by force

of arms. Such a precedent is a dangerous one; it flouts all the accepted

norms of international conduct. Unless you draw back from your

present course of action, this will inevitably jeopardize the course of

US-Soviet relations throughout the world. I urge you to take prompt

constructive action to withdraw your forces and cease interference in

Afghanistan’s internal affairs. Many years of promoting more stable

and productive relations between our two countries could well be un-

dermined if this situation is not resolved promptly.

“End text.

“Following is text of Brezhnev’s response to the President, re-

ceived December 29:

July–December 1979

“Begin text:

“Dear Mister President,

“In answer to your message of 29 December I consider it necessary

to inform you of the following.

“It is impossible to agree with your evaluation of what is occurring

in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. We have sent through your

Ambassador to Moscow in a confidential manner to the American side

and to you personally a clarification based on facts of what is actually

occurring there, as well as the reasons which caused us to respond fa-

vorably to the request of the Government of Afghanistan for the intro-

duction of limited Soviet military contingents.

“The attempt taken in your message to cast doubt on the very fact

of the request itself of the Government of Afghanistan for sending our

forces to that country seems strange. I am compelled to note that it is

certainly not a question of anyone’s perception or lack of perception of

this fact, or agreement or disagreement with it, which determines the

actual state of affairs, which consists of the following.

“The Government of Afghanistan during the course of nearly two

years has numerous times turned to us with this request. In point of fact

one of these requests was sent to us on 26 December of this year. This is

equally known by us and by the Afghanistanian Government which

sent us these requests.

“I want to once more stress that the purpose of the limited Soviet

contingent in Afghanistan has only one goal—to provide assistance in

repulsing the acts of external aggression, which have been taking place

for a prolonged time and have now taken on even greater scale.

“It is absolutely impermissible, and not in conformance with actu-

ality, the claim (accusation), which appears in your message that the

Soviet Union allegedly did something to overthrow the Government of

Afghanistan. I must with all certainty stress that the change in the Af-

ghanistani Government was the result of the Afghanistanis themselves

and only by them. Ask the Afghanistani Government itself.

“Also not corresponding to reality is that which is said in your

message in relation to the fate of the families of the former leaders of

Afghanistan. We have at our disposal information contradicting the in-

formation you have received.

“I must further clearly state to you that the Soviet military contin-

gents did not take any military action against Afghanistan and we

clearly do not intend to do so.

“You have reproached us in your message that we did not consult

with the USA Government in reference to the Afghanistani matter be-

fore introducing our military contingents into Afghanistan. Permit us

to ask you—did you consult with us prior to beginning the massive

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

concentration of naval forces near Iran and in the region of the Persian

Gulf, as well as in many other cases, about which it would have been

necessary as a minimum to notify us?

“In connection with the content and spirit of your message I con-

sider it essential to again clarify the point that the request of the Af-

ghanistani Government and the satisfaction of this request by the So-

viet Union are exclusively a matter for the USSR and Afghanistan,

which regulate their mutual relations themselves, by mutual agree-

ment, and naturally cannot permit any sort of interference from

without in their mutual relations. They, as any member states of the

UN, enjoy the right not only to individual self-defense, but to collective

defense as well, which is envisioned by Article 51 of the UN Charter,

which the USSR and USA formulated themselves. And this was ap-

proved by all member states of the UN.

“There is, of course, no basis for your assertion that our actions in

Afghanistan allegedly threaten the peace.

“In light of all of this, the immoderate tone of certain formulations

in your message hit us squarely between the eyes. What is the purpose

of it? Would it not be better to evaluate the situation more calmly,

keeping in mind the supreme interests of the world rather than, ulti-

mately, the mutual relations of our two powers.

“Concerning your ‘advice,’ we already informed you, and here I

repeat again, that as soon as the reasons which prompted the Afghanis-

tani request to the Soviet Union disappear, we fully intend to withdraw

the Soviet military contingents from Afghanistani territory.

“And here is our advice to you: The American side could make its

contribution toward ending the armed incursion from without into Af-

ghanistani territory.

“I do not believe that the work to create more stable and produc-

tive relations between the USSR and USA can be in vain. Unless, of

course, the American side wants this to be. We do not. I think it would

not be to the benefit of the United States of America itself, either. It is

our conviction that the way relations develop between the USSR and

the USA is a joint matter. We believe that they must not be subject to

vacillation under the influence of some kind of attendant factors or

events.

“Despite disagreements on a number of issues in world and Euro-

pean politics, which we understand quite clearly, the Soviet Union is an

advocate of conducting affairs in the spirit of those understandings and

documents which were adopted by our countries in the interests of

peace, equal cooperation, and international security.

249.

Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the

Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 31, 1979

SUBJECT

U.S. Soviet Relations and Afghanistan

In accordance with the NSC request, I attach the Department’s

papers on U.S. Soviet relations and Afghanistan for Wednesday’s2 NSC

meeting.

Peter Tarnoff

Executive Secretary

Attachments:

Tab 1—Afghanistan: Steps in the Framework of U.S. Soviet

Relations.

Tab 2—Possible U.S. Actions.

Tab 3—Possible Soviet Reactions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Tab 2

Paper Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, December 31, 1979

PAGE

I.

U.S. Unilateral Actions

A.

Political

1.

Withdraw SALT II from Senate Consideration

2.

Announce Review of other Bilateral Arms Control

Negotiations

3.

Presidential Statement on US-Soviet Relations

4.

Recall Ambassador Watson

5.

Restrict Social and Official Contacts with Soviet

Officials

6.

Force Reduction in Soviet Diplomatic Staff in US

7.

Suspend Preparations for Opening of Consulates

General in Kiev and New York

8.

Expel Soviet Intelligence Agents

9.

Raise Level of Human Rights Criticism

10.

Step Up RL/RFE, VOA Broadcasts

11.

Publicize Soviet Role in Afghanistan

12.

Delay Recognition of Karmal Regime: Suspend/

Break Relations

13.

Other Bilateral Political Measures

a.

Cancel Consular Review Talks

b.

Reimpose Travel Ban on Soviet NY Advance

Party

c.

Refuse/Delay Visas for Official Soviet Visitors

d.

Reduce Soviet Media Representation in US

e.

Defer Exchange Agreement Negotiations/

Cancel or Reduce US Participation

f.

Cancel/Reduce US Participation in Selected

Exchanges

g.

Olympics

h.

Harassment

July–December 1979

B.

Military

1.

US Military Alert

2.

Increase US Permanent Military Presence in Indian

Ocean and Persian Gulf

C.

Economic

1.

Abandon Efforts to Secure Soviet MFN

2.

Grain Sales

3.

Postpone Joint Commercial Meeting

4.

Postpone Business Facilitation Talks

5.

Postpone Civil Aviation Talks

6.

Tighten US Export Controls

7.

Limit Soviet Commercial Expansion in US

8.

Suspend Soviet Fishing in US Zones

II.

US Multilateral Actions

A.

Publicity

1.

Urge UK, FRG, and France to increase broadcasts

to Muslim countries and Soviet Central Asia.

2.

Daily circular to UN and others on status of the

occupation.

3.

Continue world wide demarches, urging others to

take actions complementing our unilateral

initiatives.

B.

UN

1.

Seek Security Council Resolution

2.

Special UNGA

C.

Economic Actions

1.

Consultations with others to reinforce U.S.

unilateral moves.

2.

Tighten COCOM restraints on USSR/loosen on

China.

3.

Increased economic assistance to countries in

region (FY 80 supplemental and FY 81

incremental)

4.

Urge IFI’s and countries with assistance programs

to Afghanistan to terminate such assistance.

D.

Arms Control

1.

CSCE/CDE/CBM’s

2.

MBFR

3.

CTB

4.

CW

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

E.

Afghanistan

1.

Withdraw Embassy and urge others to follow suit.

2.

Supply insurgents.

F.

Regional Security

1.

Accelerate process of increasing US presence and

acquisition of base rights.

2.

Increase US arms supplies to Soviet periphery.

G.

Other Concerned Countries

1.

Yugoslavia

2.

Romania

3.

Turkey

H.

China

1.

Increased political ties

2.

Increased military ties

[Omitted here is the body of the paper.]

January–May 1980

250.

Overview of an Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the

Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, January 1980

Impact of Economic Denial Measures on the USSR

[handling restriction not declassified]

Overview

The impact of economic denial measures on the USSR depends

critically on whether (a) the United States acts alone or is joined by

other major suppliers and (b) the measures are enforced for a year or a

few months or are continued for several years. Acting alone, the United

States can hurt the USSR appreciably only by its grain export embargo

and, to a lesser extent, by cutting off critical oilfield exploration and de-

velopment equipment. The effect of even a one-year denial of grain on

Moscow’s consumer programs will be marked. A longer term curb on

US grain would be even more effective if other producing countries co-

operated. These countries are capable of stepping up production to

meet Soviet import requirements over a period of several years. A com-

bination of Western countries could severely impair Soviet economic

growth by refusing to sell steel and steel pipe, metallurgical equipment,

and a broader range of oil and gas equipment. Except for steel,

however, the denial would have to be maintained for a prolonged pe-

riod to have a substantial effect. Finally, while a widespread boycott

of the Moscow Olympics would not hurt the USSR economically, it

would tarnish the leadership’s image badly. [handling restriction not

declassified]

Of the measures introduced or suggested in the aftermath of the

Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, three (grain embargo and denial of su-

perphosphoric acid and fishing rights) would impact mainly on Soviet

plans to upgrade consumer diets. Four measures (denial of oil and gas

equipment, metallurgical equipment, communications and automotive

equipment and computers, and specialized steel products)—if sup-

ported by other Western suppliers—would impinge on Soviet efforts to

eliminate bottlenecks that are holding down Soviet economic growth.

Limits on Western credits would also retard Soviet growth by inter-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

fering with plans to modernize the Soviet economy across the board

with the help of Western equipment and technology. Finally, a pro-

posed boycott of the Olympics would be a political setback for Mos-

cow and deny the USSR some hard currency. [handling restriction not

declassified]

A review of these measures suggests that a one-year grain em-

bargo would force meat consumption in the USSR down to the level of

the early 1970s, which would have an immediate impact on consumer

perceptions. A continued denial of Western grain would severely cur-

tail the Brezhnev livestock program in the 1981–85 period. Losing the

superphosphoric acid would reduce the availability of fertilizer (and

thus grain) only marginally. The impact of a denial of fishing rights

would also be minimal, even if Canada and Japan cooperated with the

United States. The Soviet Union’s catch in the waters belonging to these

countries has been declining, and the USSR probably can move else-

where to maintain its production. [handling restriction not declassified]

Although the United States is the predominant manufacturer of

petroleum equipment, the USSR probably could satisfy most of its

needs from other Western countries if they did not cooperate with a US

embargo. In any event, a brief embargo would have little impact. Con-

tinued denial of US petroleum equipment technology and know-

how—if at least partially supported by other countries—would force a

more rapid decline in Soviet oil production than we now expect and

greatly reduce the chances that the decline could be slowed or stemmed

in the late 1980s and beyond. [handling restriction not declassified]

Because the steel industry ranks second only to energy as a Soviet

problem area, Western denial of steel products could have a substantial

impact on domestic steel supplies for several years at least. In the long

term, a denial of Western help in building up the Soviet steel industry

would severely impede Soviet efforts to modernize that industry and

slow improvements in the technological level of machinery output. It

would delay the completion of several projects necessary (a) to produce

quality steels that the Soviet economy requires in growing amounts

and (b) to eliminate Soviet dependence on imports. In addition, a long-

term denial of steel pipe would seriously interfere with Soviet pipeline

construction and cut the growth of gas production in half—a loss

equal to about 250,000 barrels of oil per day. [handling restriction not

declassified]

Curbs on Soviet purchase of Western computers, communications

equipment, and automotive production equipment would have little

economic impact unless all important suppliers cooperated and the

curbs were maintained for an extended period of time. The effects

would be felt to a degree in oil exploration, and production would be

251.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

SCC Meeting on Soviet Forces in Afghanistan (S)

PARTICIPANTS

State

JCS

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Admiral Thomas Hayward

Deputy Secretary

Lt. General John Pustay

Warren Christopher

White House

Defense

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Secretary Harold Brown

David Aaron

Deputy Secretary

NSC

W. Graham Claytor

William E. Odom

CIA

Marshall Brement

Deputy Director Frank Carlucci

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

CIA reported that about 40,000 Soviet troops are now in Afghani-

stan. They are encountering some resistance. The Afghan army is

shrinking rapidly through desertions. The rebel tribes will retreat in the

mountains and continue resistance, probably increasing in the spring.

Thus, the insurgency will continue, and Soviet forces will be the main

source of the counterinsurgency effort. (S)

[1 paragraph (2½ lines) not declassified]

It was asserted in the discussion that the degree of resistance in Af-

ghanistan will depend upon two factors: [2½ lines not declassified]

[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

Aid to Pakistan—Pakistan’s ability to support the insurgency and to

resist Soviet pressures, it was agreed, will be highly dependent on U.S.

assistance and commitment. It was argued that the small support we

can now promise Pakistan will be more confusing than reassuring be-

cause of the publicity about changing U.S. policy. It is essential, there-

fore, to address the non-proliferation issue with the Congress and find

a satisfactory way to make an exception in the Pakistani case. It was

agreed that this matter should be discussed at the National Security

Council meeting today and a decision taken on whether to seek an

amendment to the law or to seek Pakistani assurances sufficient to cer-

tify Pakistan’s intentions on nuclear proliferation to the Congress. (S)

Christopher’s Trip to the NAC—Warren Christopher gave a brief re-

port on his impressions from the NAC meeting. He added that Japa-

nese participation would be useful. He also argued that we need a

standing mechanism for coordinating any joint actions with the Allies

which may be taken in response to the Soviet intervention in Afghani-

stan. States are more likely to support actions as a group than alone

without the reassuring presence of other states in the group. (S)

NSC on the larger Strategic Questions Posed by Soviet Intervention in

Afghanistan—It was agreed to seek a meeting of the NSC later this

week to discuss the larger regional issues arising from Soviet actions

in Afghanistan as well as issues concerning our Allies in Europe and

252.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Vice President Mondale,

Secretary of State Vance, and Secretary of Defense Brown

Washington, January 2, 1980

SUBJECT

Results of the NSC Meeting, January 2, 1980

The following decisions were reached as a result of the meeting:

1) The SALT II Treaty will be left on the Senate calendar. There will

be no effort to bring it to the Floor for a vote. Our public posture will be

to reaffirm that SALT is important irrespective of the tone of our rela-

tionship with the Soviet Union but, at this time, we do not believe it is

advisable to bring it to a vote.

2) We will make no announcement concerning other bilateral arms

control negotiations but, if asked, will take the position that they

should proceed. The Indian Ocean talks will remain moribund. We will

proceed with CSCE. In MBFR, we are awaiting a Soviet response to our

initiative. CTB negotiations will continue at a slow pace. CW/RW ne-

gotiations will be pursued since they are in our interest. The proposed

meeting next week of the heads of delegation for the Conventional

Arms talks should be postponed.

3) The recall of Ambassador Watson will be announced today.

4) The Department of State will forward its proposal2 for reducing

the Soviet diplomatic staff in the U.S., excluding the Soviet UN Mission,

to the level of the United States in the USSR. This should include meas-

ures to tighten restrictions on Soviet official travel in the U.S. to the

equivalent of those imposed on the U.S. officials in the USSR.

5) Preparations for opening the Consulates General in Kiev and

New York will be suspended.

6) Radio Liberty, Radio Free Europe and Voice of America broad-

casts will be stepped up along the lines proposed in the State Depart-

ment’s December 31 paper. The necessary funds will be made avail-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

able by OMB. Worldwide diplomatic demarches and ICA actions will

be increased to publicize the Soviet role in Afghanistan.

7) Our posture toward the Afghan Government will be not to con-

duct any formal business for the time being. The number of American

personnel at the Embassy will be reduced to ten. The question of recog-

nition of the Babrak regime does not arise.

8) The Consular Review Talks which are now in a state of suspen-

sion will not be resumed.

9) On a case-by-case basis, The Department of State will reject and

delay visas for official visits to the United States.

10) Soviet media representation in the United States will be re-

duced to the same level as U.S. media representation in the Soviet

Union.

11) Shipment by C5A aircraft of the MHD channel will be deferred

indefinitely.

12) Negotiations with the Soviet Union on the General Exchange

Agreement will not be resumed.

13) We will cancel the following:

—The Agriculture Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for January

in the USSR.

—The Health Joint Committee Meeting scheduled for February in

Moscow.

—Representative Green4 will be urged to cancel his Congressional

Delegation visit to the Soviet Union scheduled for January 11–18.

14) Any meetings at the level of Assistant Secretary or above will

be reviewed on a case-by-case basis with the presumption that they will

be cancelled unless there are overriding reasons not to do so.

15) On the Olympics, we will take the following position which

may be used publicly: “Our European Allies have questioned whether

we should proceed to participate in the Olympic games in Moscow. We

will assess this question and review the position taken by other coun-

tries in reaching our decision.”

16) U.S. travel controls on Soviet officials and the enforcement of

these controls will be reviewed to ensure greater reciprocity with the

treatment accorded our officials in the Soviet Union.

17) We should postpone the following meetings: the Joint Com-

mercial Committee Meeting scheduled for April 14–15 in Washington;

the Business Facilitation Talks scheduled for January 9 in Moscow; and

the Civil Aviation Talks scheduled for February 13. In addition, Aero-

flot’s scheduled service will be limited to the two weekly flights cur-

rently authorized.

January–May 1980

18) The United States export controls on exports to the USSR will

be tightened up on a case-by-case basis. The United States should be

prepared to restrict export licenses to an even greater degree than our

allies if it does not disadvantage U.S. business in comparison with our

allies.

19) There should be an examination of Soviet commercial expan-

sion in the United States with a view to restricting it. The Department of

State should forward proposals to this effect within one week.

20) Allocations to the Soviet Union under our Fishing Agreements

should be restricted.

21) The United States should continue to urge our allies to increase

broadcasts to Muslim countries and Soviet Central Asia on develop-

ments in Afghanistan. There should also be prepared in conjunction

with our allies a periodic circular to be distributed at the United

Nations on the status of the Soviet invasion and occupation in

Afghanistan.

22) The United States will join in a letter to the President of the Se-

curity Council urging that the Afghanistan situation be placed on the

agenda. Unless it would be a violation of the UN Charter, Ambassador

McHenry will be instructed to tell other nations that it is our preference

to also raise this issue at the current General Assembly.

23) We will proceed on a case-by-case basis to implement the “Bel-

gian Formula” for creating a de facto differential in COCOM favoring

China in comparison to the Soviet Union. There will be no public state-

ment of this policy.

24) We will consult with other countries to urge them to deny the

Soviet Union further credit.

25) We will work with our allies to urge the IFI’s and countries

with assistance programs to Afghanistan to terminate such assistance.

26) We will seek an amendment in the Foreign Assistance Bill to

except Pakistan from the restrictions of the Symington and Glenn

Non-proliferation Amendments so that it will be possible for us to pro-

vide FMS and ESF.

The Department of State should immediately inform our allies of

our intention to take these actions and should urge appropriate allied

support.

Zbigniew Brzezinski

253.

Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to

President Carter

Washington, January 3, 1980

SUBJECT

Possible Restriction of Grain Sales to the Soviet Union

I very much hope that you will decide not to reduce grain sales to

the Soviet Union. I believe it is in our interest to gain the cash sales—

and it is all cash—from these sales to the Soviet Union and to maintain

this market in future years which has a very beneficial impact on our

economy and on the dollar. Sales of food for cash to the USSR takes

hard currency from them to develop a stronger consumer economy

with higher protein components for their consumers. All of this is good

for us. If you feel we must do something in the grain area, I would hope

at the most we would terminate our agreement for sales in excess of

those already contracted. Some 17 million tons are already under con-

tract—the remainder (i.e. up to 25 million tons) has not yet been con-

tracted. It would hurt far less if we could do that. We might then follow

Harold Brown’s suggestions that the difference between the 17 million

tons and the approved 25 million tons be made available on conces-

sional terms for use in countries such as Bangladesh that are having se-

rious nutritional problems. I think that this would be viewed by the

farmers as moving with proper concern for their needs and be seen in

the world as a responsible decision.

If you look at the list of actions that we’ve taken and will take in re-

gard to this matter, it is pretty impressive.

1. Defer SALT

2. Recall Ambassador from USSR

3. Reduce Soviet diplomatic presence including expelling some So-

viet agents and restricting travel. I think we also ought to review

whether we can block Russian occupation of their new Embassy here in

Washington—something that they want very much.

4. Suspend opening of Kiev and New York consulates.

5. Step up VOA broadcasts

6. Stall consular review

7. Reduce numbers of Soviet visitors

8. Require equal numbers of media representatives

9. I hope we would really go after the Olympics—I don’t see why

that is sacrosanct.

January–May 1980

10. Reduce U.S. participation in selected exchanges.

11. Establish a permanent military presence in the Indian Ocean

and Persian Gulf.

12. Let MFN lie.

13. Postpone commercial and civil aviation talks—limit commer-

cial expansion.

14. Substantially tighten export controls—a significant move.

15. Tighten rules on Soviet fishing

16. The moves that we’re making before the UN Security Council

and hopefully thereafter the General Assembly.

17. Tightening COCOM rules

18. Substantially expanding the types of technical and defensive

assistance available to the People’s Republic of China.

19. Ending all international aid to Afghanistan.

20. Substantial aid to Pakistan.

21. Broadened resources for the CIA and for Foreign Aid.

22. Add to that the steps we’ve already taken to increase the De-

fense budget and the decision taken in LRT–NF

It seems to me that all these steps make a most significant response

to the outrageous invasion of Afghanistan.

I realize that you have to make this decision without regard to pol-

itics. But if corn were to drop 10 cents or more a bushel—and the esti-

mates are that it would drop more at first and then slowly stabilize—

and wheat were to drop 20 cents a bushel—and the farmers were to re-

alize, as they will, that the chances of a future market in the Soviet

Union had been basically and fundamentally damaged and that a lot of

this market would be picked up by the other wheat and bean producers

around the world, that the reaction would be very, very tough political-

ly in Iowa, in Minnesota and in Ohio and throughout the grain-

producing areas of our country. Because of that, this decision could

undermine your ability to persevere in a strong and unified assault

upon the Soviet Union with a unified nation behind you. To me, there is

something particularly grubby about using food as a weapon and the

use of it could damage us in the international community as well. I

might also point out that we did not use the food weapon in the case of

the holding of American hostages and I believe to do so now would

also raise questions as to how the differences in policy might be justi-

fied. I try very hard not to be a hair shirt for you, but I feel very strongly

about this matter and have therefore written this memo.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

254.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

2093. Subject: Vasev Call on Shulman January 3.

1. Secret-entire text.

2. After initially seeking a meeting with the Secretary, Soviet

Charge Vasev called on Marshall Shulman January 3 to deliver (septel)

a non-paper in reply to the Secretary’s demarche of December 182 on

NATO interest in TNF arms control.

3. On Afghanistan, Vasev offered his personal view that the US

seemed to be overreacting. Shulman wondered how Moscow could

have failed to anticipate the effect of such a blatant violation of sover-

eignty. Vasev allowed that Moscow had expected the US to object, but

less severely, he asserted that the Soviet action was not against any US

interest and claimed that the Soviets had nothing to do with the change

in leadership in Afghanistan. When pressed on how long the “limited

duration” of the Soviet intervention would be, he said that this would

depend on operational needs. Shulman told him we frankly disbe-

lieved the version of events circulated by the Soviets after the coup, and

we were concerned about the implications of the Soviet action for fu-

ture military action outside their own territory.

Vance

January–May 1980

255.

Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 7, 1980

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations During the Remainder of the First Carter Administration:

The Domestic Angle (U)

The turnaround in the polls demonstrates—if any demonstration

was needed—that the country wants the President to exercise firm, vig-

orous leadership in foreign affairs. The crisis in Afghanistan will en-

hance this desire. US-Soviet relations are, of course, central to Amer-

ican foreign policy. In the popular mind no aspect of our foreign

relations is more important than how the President handles the Rus-

sians. This has been true for every President since Truman. (C)

But we should face the fact that, despite its enormous achieve-

ments, this Administration does not get the credit it deserves for

handling foreign policy. A central factor in this, in my view, is that

there exists a commonly-held perception that this Administration

speaks with two voices on Soviet affairs. Kennedy and other Adminis-

tration critics have repeatedly charged that the President cannot make

up his mind as to what he believes about the Soviets; that consequently

the Annapolis speech2 was the greatest “paste job” in our diplomatic

history; and that Moscow therefore reads us as weak, divided, and ir-

resolute and does not hesitate to take advantage of our irresolution. (S)

The Afghanistan situation gives us a priceless opportunity to turn

this perception around. To do so, it is essential that from this point on-

ward the Administration speak with one voice about US-Soviet affairs.

If we could accomplish this, then we would be in a position to make the

following case on a private, background basis to key opinion molders:

—At one point there was considerable substance to the charges

that the Administration was divided on Soviet affairs and as a result

the President was receiving divided counsel on the subject;

—This was reflected in the Annapolis speech;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

—The President’s views on this matter, however, have been

changed by three events:

(a) The Vienna Summit. This required the President to read deeply

in Soviet and Marxist history, philosophy and politics and to ponder

the continuing outward thrust of Soviet foreign policy.

(b) The Soviet Brigade in Cuba. This focused for the President the di-

lemma which we face in trying, on the one hand, to achieve strategic

stability and balance with the Soviet Union and, on the other hand, to

restrain its mischievious policies in vulnerable areas throughout the

world.

(c) The Afghanistan Crisis. This has brought home to the President,

as no previous event during his Administration, the brutal cynicism of

the Soviets, the outward thrust that their system requires, and their

willingness to sacrifice a detente relationship with the US to the needs

of Soviet expansionism.

—The President is determined not to allow the Soviets to have

their cake and eat it. He is convinced that the only way to stop Soviet

expansion in Southwest Asia and into the Persian Gulf area is for the

United States to adopt a firm and unequivocal policy of resistance to

Soviet machinations. He believes that the Soviet rape of Afghanistan

should not be viewed as an isolated event, but that it has to be seen in

the context of what has been happening elsewhere in the world in such

places as Angola, Ethiopia, Yemen and Cambodia. The Soviets are

posing a challenge to us, he believes, and we must respond to it.

—As a result of this changed perception, the President will ensure

that during the remainder of his first Administration and throughout

the next Carter Administration the US Government will be speaking

with one voice on Soviet affairs.

—He has come to realize that, both in terms of our relationship

with Moscow as well as in terms of formulating US Government policy

for dealing with the Soviet Union, it is essential that we enunciate

clearly what US policy toward Moscow really is and that appearance of

divided opinion on our part can not only be ineffective but dangerous

as well, since it can lead to miscalculation.

—As a result, during meetings with his key advisors the President

has directed that his Administration speak and act with one voice on

this central aspect of American foreign policy.

—Those policymakers within the Government who are not in

accord with the President’s views will shortly be leaving the

Administration. (S)

In sum, the above approach would enhance the President’s polit-

ical stature, the popular perception of his leadership ability, as well as

the argument that we need experience and steadiness at the tiller during

256.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, January 9, 1980

SUBJECT

A Long-Term Strategy for Coping with the Consequences of the Soviet Action in

Afghanistan

You have stressed—rightly so—that the Soviet action has created

consequences which cannot be dealt with in only a few weeks or with a

series of short-term measures. The Soviet action poses a test involving

ultimately the balance of power between East and West. Our response

will determine how several key states will adjust their foreign policy

and particularly whether they will accommodate themselves to the

projection of Soviet military power.

Before outlining for you an agenda of possible responses, let me

put the foregoing in a brief historical context, which may also be useful

to you when you comment on the subject. We have, in effect, entered

the fifth decade in the U.S.-Soviet competition. Each of the decades has

had a specific historical character:

1. The 1940’s: consolidation of Soviet gains in the context of U.S.

disarmament after World War II and probes for Western weakness;

2. The 1950’s: lines drawn sharply in the West and in the East (the

Iron Curtain, the Korean buffer);

3. The 1960’s premature Soviet global challenge; increasing compe-

tition in other areas: economic (we will bury you); space (Sputnik); with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the U.S. then becoming bogged down in Vietnam after the respite won

in Cuba, with massive Soviet investments in defense.

4. The 1970’s: detente and continued buildup of Soviet strength;

5. The 1980’s: the danger of conflict in the context of wider global

turbulence.

It is both symbolic and significant that Soviet action in Afghanistan

occurred in the first week of the new decade of the 1980’s. To respond

to that initiative, we need to generate a wider domestic consensus be-

hind legislative and budgetary matters. Anything less will cause vacil-

lation and accommodation by our allies and by states within the Per-

sian Gulf region.

The context for a major response is provided by the three interde-

pendent central strategic zones of our concern: Western Europe, the Far

East, and the Persian Gulf. We have an alliance system and military de-

ployments in two of these regions. We are only beginning to create a

significant military posture in the third, the Persian Gulf. Accordingly,

our response to the Soviet Union action ought to deal with the fol-

lowing aspects:

I. Regional Security

A. Unilateral U.S. Actions

1. Covert Assistance. We have in recent months authorized a

number of new programs of covert assistance. David Aaron, Frank Car-

lucci and David Newsom will be reviewing each and recommending

necessary additional steps (e.g. YAR, PDRY or Eritrea).

2. Military Assistance to Pakistan (the subject of a separate paper to

you).

3. Bases. Survey teams will depart on January 14 to assess the ade-

quacy of existing facilities for U.S. use.

4. Military Exercises/Deployments. We will review the planned

U.S. Marine deployment scheduled for late summer and the possibility

of rapidly deploying a brigade to the region in late spring or early

summer as a demonstration of our ability and will to project effective

military power into the region.

5. U.S.-Saudi Security Consultations. The Saudis have agreed to

the deployment of AWACS through Saudi airspace. We will determine

January–May 1980

if the Afghanistan situation has changed the Saudi view of security co-

operation with the U.S.

6. U.S.-Turkish Security Consultations. We will review the possi-

bility of sending a mission to Ankara to consult with the Turks on the

situation resulting from the Iran and Afghanistan situations.

7. U.S.-Indian Security Consultations. We will review the possi-

bility of sending a high-level mission to India to consult on the changed

circumstances in the region.

B. Multilateral Actions

1. Covert Assistance to Afghan Rebels. We will raise the question

whether our European allies, in addition to the Chinese, should become

involved in support for the Afghan rebels.

2. Security Assistance Consortium. We will pursue this concept

with the allies. We might want to organize along the lines of the old

Berlin Task Force (U.S., France, UK and FRG) to implement the lines of

action agreed upon.

3. PRC. We will follow up on the Harold Brown mission.

4. ASEAN. We will ask the ASEAN states to talk to the Indians

about the appropriate Indian role in the region.

5. Refugee Assistance. We must examine the question of how as-

sistance to the Afghan refugees in Pakistan can meet the humanitarian

need as well as serve other objectives. Multilateral assistance provided

outside the UNHCR context (perhaps through Islamic organizations)

could allow us to further the resistance effort more effectively.

6. Approaching our Allies. We must plan for the desire of our Eu-

ropean allies to set the Afghanistan issue aside as soon as possible so as

not to do permanent damage to European detente. Our strategy should

focus on seeking their assistance in the Persian Gulf region while defer-

ring further direct European-Soviet initiatives (e.g. Schmidt mission to

Turkey; French approach to the Iraqis).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

II. U.S.-Soviet Relations in the Wider Global Context

—Soviet actions in Afghanistan, regardless of their motives, have

changed the strategic situation in the region; and we must take steps

which will restore a balance. The steps outlined under Regional Secu-

rity began to address this balance.

—This development requires two classes of response on our part.

• First, the actions which you have already taken vis-a-vis the So-

viets in the economic and other areas have clearly demonstrated to the

Soviets that their behavior will not be cost-free. I think the Soviets were

surprised by your actions. Thus, further bilateral steps are not neces-

sary; however, we must follow through with full implementation of the

steps which have already been taken.

• Second, to counter growing Soviet aggressiveness, a long-term

commitment is required. There are no easy solutions to an increased

willingness on the part of the Soviets to use the military power which

they have built over the past decade at great domestic cost. U.S. stra-

tegic modernization, increased defense spending, improvements in

NATO, and the RDF are all steps which will in time work to deter the

Soviets, if pursued diligently.

—Because the Soviets underestimated the U.S. response as well as

that of the international community, especially the third world, to their

invasion, we should expect that as soon as possible—within several

months—the Soviets will embark on a peace offensive designed to sep-

arate us from our allies and to improve the Soviet image in the third

world. We should anticipate this event and be prepared to counter ef-

forts to deter us from our required course.

These are preliminary thoughts. In effect, they add up to three key

propositions:

1. Our response has to be a sustained one and a regional one.

Success or failure will depend on what we do in terms of the longer run

in Southwest Asia. You might want to think of a “Carter doctrine.”

2. There is no need to freeze the U.S.-Soviet relationship any fur-

ther, but by the same token we should have no illusions about an early

improvement—nor should we strive for one. Any alteration, of course,

would look like a zig zag, and it would make the attainment of our first

objective more difficult, while undercutting your domestic support.

257.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, undated

SUBJECT

Embassy Moscow Assessment of the Impact of U.S. Economic Denial

Measures (U)

Embassy Moscow has provided an assessment of the economic im-

pact in response to the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

The Embassy believes that the principal short-term effect of eco-

nomic sanctions upon the Soviet economy will be a significant decline

in 1980 meat supplies resulting from the withholding of the bulk of

planned U.S. grain exports. This decline will undercut a major

Brezhnev program. Furthermore, the absence of an American cushion

against another short Soviet grain crop will be a serious concern for the

Soviet leadership each year the embargo remains in place. Over the me-

dium to longer term (through 1985), denial of access to U.S. technology

to the USSR could affect Soviet economic development significantly in

sectors of the economy for which technology imports are considered

critical to modernization and growth.

The effect of a U.S. technology embargo on the Soviet economy

will depend largely on the degree to which it covers machinery and

equipment produced in third countries, some of which is under license

from U.S. firms. Soviet planners, anticipating severely limited access to

U.S. technology, will try to substitute West European and Japanese

technology. In the absence of direct or indirect limitations on such sub-

stitutions most Soviet projects will be able to proceed (although

perhaps less efficiently), even with an embargo on direct exports from

the U.S.

Our information on popular reaction is severaly limited. We have

looked for, but not seen, evidence of panic buying of staples. In fact, so

far as we can tell, the reaction of the “man in the street” to both the So-

viet invasion and the U.S. measures is one of puzzled apathy. Lectures

in Leningrad have revealed considerable curiosity about Afghan events

on the part of listeners, but no indication of their frame of mind. We

have heard some minor grumbling over the possibility that events will

make even worse the chronic shortages of meat and some consumer

goods in some part of the Soviet Union. Our intellectual contacts are

more sensitized to such matters and have caught on that U.S. action on

grain could make the food situation even worse, but most Soviets prob-

ably are unaware of the extent of planned Soviet grain purchases.

In short, the traditional feeling of powerlessness to influence

events, a vague patriotism and resistance to pressure from abroad, and

a high toleration for privation and ability to sacrifice make it unlikely

that we will see much popular reaction to the U.S. measures. Thus, we

conclude that economic (and for that matter other) measures involving

consumer goods will be effective primarily through their effect on in-

centives. In other words, if Brezhnev had planned to use more meat to

get people to work better, he will now have to look for another incen-

tive or settle for less work. But he does not have to worry about workers

rioting in the street.

Embassy Moscow concludes that in order to have the desired ef-

fect, our economic measures must be prolonged, must have wide sup-

258.

Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, January 18, 1980

SUBJECT

U.S. Reaction to Possible Soviet Military Intervention in Iran

I see possibly three strategies for dealing with a Soviet military

move into Iran in the near future; none of them are very attractive:

1. Rapid Escalation to a “CRICON” (Crisis Confrontation).

We can follow the traditional pattern of 1962 and 19732 of esca-

lating rapidly to the nuclear level and then negotiating de-escalation to

a status quo ante-CRICON. You will recall that Kissinger told Sam

Huntington and you in the early days of this Administration that we

can no longer follow this strategy in light of the Soviet strategic force

buildup. The Soviets are in much better shape to maintain domestic

cohesion and implement mobilization and civil defense measures re-

quired for a credible crisis posture. I find it extremely painful to admit,

but we are forced to recognize the strategic and political implications of

the new military balance. The PRM–103 CRICON paper, in retrospect,

is sharply to the point.

2. Contain the Conflict within the Region.

This strategy would require some upgrading of strategic forces

alert levels, [7 lines not declassified] By remaining on the western side of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the Persian Gulf, we would avoid an early direct engagement between

U.S. and Soviet ground forces in which we would be defeated. To make

our deployment credible in the weeks and months to follow, a major

conventional force mobilization in the U.S. would have to occur.

Follow-on deployments up to field army in size, i.e., several corps,

might soon be required.

The response of our allies in Europe and Japan would be critical.

They might abandon us.

This strategy could lead to at least four outcomes which are unat-

tractive. First, a stalemate and a prolonged period—years—of large

U.S. force deployments in the region facing Soviet forces in Iran. Second,

a stalemate followed by erosion and forced withdrawal. We could find

ourselves with large forces deployed in an environment which is politi-

cally hostile, i.e., our allies are equivocating in Europe and our allies in

the region prefer accommodation to the Soviets than war together with

us against the Soviets. Third, direct conflicts between U.S. and Soviet

forces in the Euphrates Valley could lead to a general war, including

Europe (Berlin, a Soviet limited offensive into Germany with peace

overtures to France, et alia). Fourth, a direct U.S.-Soviet ground force

conflict in which the U.S. is defeated and unable to sustain a regional

presence.

3. A Strategic Retirement followed by a Major Long-Term U.S. Buildup.

We would not project U.S. ground forces into the region. [3 lines

not declassified] We would provide some sea- and land-based air to

deter or defeat Soviet air. We would be prepared to retreat if the re-

gional forces could not hold. Meanwhile, we would begin a major mili-

tary reconstruction program at home and a long-term buildup. We

would ask the same of our allies in Europe and the Far East.

Some version of the second alternative is the maximum strategy

we could prudently pursue. We would put less strain on the Alliance

and improve the long-term buildup possibilities by some version of the

third strategy.

The course of action which is both feasible and probably most attrac-

tive to you is a rapid U.S. force deployment [3 lines not declassified]

259.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic

Posts, the Embassy in Pakistan, and the Embassy in Libya

15459. Subject: Presidential Message on Olympics.

1. (C-entire text)

2. Embassy is requested to deliver ASAP to chief of state following

message from President Carter. Recipients should be asked to hold the

message in confidence until 1 pm Washington time January 20. FYI.

President will announce his decision at that time in the course of his ap-

pearance on “Meet the Press.” End FYI.

3. Begin text. On January 20, I am sending the attached letter to the

President of the United States Olympic Committee informing him that I

cannot support United States participation in the Summer Olympic

Games in Moscow, the capital city of a nation whose invading military

forces are occupying Afghanistan. I am requesting that the committee

work with other National Olympic Committees to seek the transfer or

cancellation of the 1980 Moscow Olympic Games unless the Soviet

Union withdraws its troops from Afghanistan within the next month. If

the Soviets do not withdraw and the Games are not transferred or can-

celled, I am asking that the United States Olympic Committee not par-

ticipate in the Games in Moscow, and, instead, work with other nations

to organize alternative Games.

4. I hope that you will urge your own Olympic Committee to take

similar action. I believe that such action is necessary to support the po-

sition of the United Nations General Assembly, to convince the Soviet

Government and people of the world’s outrage at Soviet aggression in

Afghanistan and to deter future aggression.

ington time, January 20.

6. Begin text of letter. To Robert Kane;

7. As President of this nation and as honorary President of the

United States Olympic Committee, I write to advise you of my views

concerning the Games of the XXII Olympiad scheduled to be held in

Moscow this summer.

fidential; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by the White House; cleared by Vest, William

Harrop (AF), Morris Draper (NEA), Roger Sullivan (EA), William Bowdler (ARA),

Nelson Ledsky (H), Raymond Seitz (S/S), and Seton Stapleton (S/S-O); approved by

Vance. Sent for information Immediate to Berlin, Bucharest, Budapest, USINT Havana,

Moscow, the White House, Prague, Sofia, Rangoon, Vientiane, USUN, USNATO, Kabul,

U.S. delegation to MBFR talks in Vienna.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

8. I regard the Soviet invasion and the attempted suppression of

Afghanistan as a serious violation of international law and an ex-

tremely serious threat to world peace. This invasion also endangers

neighboring independent countries and access to a major part of the

world’s oil supplies. It therefore threatens our own national security, as

well as the security of the region and the entire world.

9. We must make clear to the Soviet Union that it cannot trample

upon an independent nation and at the same time do business as usual

with the rest of the world. We must make clear that they will pay a

heavy economic and political cost for such aggressions. That is why I

have taken the severe economic measures announced on January 4,2

and why other free nations are supporting these measures. That is why

the United Nations General Assembly, by an overwhelming vote of

103 to 18, condemned the invasion and urged the prompt withdrawal

of Soviet troops.

10. I want to reaffirm my own personal commitment to the prin-

ciples and purposes of the Olympic Movement. I believe in the desir-

ability of keeping government policy out of the Olympics, but deeper

issues are at stake.

11. In the Soviet Union international sports competition is itself an

aspect of Soviet Government policy, as is the decision to invade Af-

ghanistan. The head of the Moscow Olympic Organizing Committee is

a high Soviet Government official.

12. The Soviet Government attaches enormous political impor-

tance to the holding of the 1980 Olympic Games in Moscow, and if the

Olympics are not held in Moscow because of Soviet military aggression

in Afghanistan, this powerful signal of world outrage cannot be hidden

from the Soviet people, and will reverberate around the globe. Perhaps

it will deter future aggression.

13. I therefore urge the USOC, in cooperation with other National

Olympic Committees, to advise the International Olympic Committee

that if Soviet troops do not fully withdraw from Afghanistan within the

next month, Moscow will become an unsuitable site for a festival meant

to celebrate peace and good will. Should the Soviet Union fail to with-

draw its troops within the time prescribed above, I urge the USOC to

propose that the Games either be transferred to another site such as

Montreal or to multiple sites, or be cancelled for this year. If the Interna-

tional Olympic Committee rejects such a USOC proposal, I urge the

USOC and the Olympic Committees of other like-minded nations not

with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. For a description of the UNGA meetings, see

January–May 1980

to participate in the Moscow Games. In this event, if suitable arrange-

ments can be made, I urge that such nations conduct alternative games

of their own this summer at some other appropriate site or sites. The

United States Government is prepared to lend its full support to any

and all such efforts.

14. I know from your letter to me and your meeting with Secretary

Vance and Lloyd Cutler of your deep concern for the men and women

throughout the world who have trained tirelessly in the hopes of par-

ticipating in the 1980 Olympic Games. I share your concern. I would

support the participation of athletes from the entire world at Summer

Olympic Games or other Games this summer outside the Soviet Union,

just as I welcome athletes from the entire world to Lake Placid for the

Winter Olympic Games.

15. I have the deepest admiration and respect for Olympic athletes

and their pursuit of excellence. No one understands better than they

the meaning of sacrifice to achieve worthy goals. There is no goal of

greater importance than the goal at stake here—the security of our na-

tion and the peace of the world.

16. I also urge that the IOC take a further step to eliminate future

political competition among nations to serve as hosts for the Olympic

Games. I call upon all nations to join in supporting a permanent site for

the Summer Olympics in Greece, and to seek an appropriate perma-

nent site for the Winter Olympics.

17. The course I am urging is necessary to help secure the peace of

the world at this critical time. The most important task of world

leaders, public and private, is to deter aggression and prevent war. Ag-

gression destroys the international amity and good will that the

Olympic Movement attempts to foster. If our response to aggression is

to continue with international sports as usual in the capital of the ag-

gressor, our other steps to deter aggression are undermined.

18. The spirit and the very future of the Games depends upon cou-

rageous and resolute action at this time. I call for your support and

your help in rallying the support of the other Olympic Committees

throughout the world. s/Jimmy Carter. End text of letter.

19. For London: Ambassador Henderson4 informed the Secretary

today that HMG has decided to follow the same path as we have.

London should be sure that FCO is aware of our intentions and should

pass FCO a copy of the President’s message for their information,

telling them that we are seeking wide support for our action.

260.

Letter From Secretary of State Vance to Soviet Foreign

Minister Gromyko

Washington, February 8, 1980

Dear Mr. Minister:

I have carefully studied Ambassador Watson’s detailed report of

his January 30 meeting2 with you and reflected on my discussions with

Ambassador Dobrynin since his return from Moscow. Clearly there is a

high risk of miscalculation between us. In order to avoid this danger, I

am writing you privately and personally to make clear our actions and

policies.

As the President stressed in his State of the Union message, the re-

lationship between our two countries is the most critical factor in deter-

mining whether the world will live in peace or be engulfed in conflict.

A series of events culminating in the Soviet actions in Afghanistan have

brought us to a critical juncture in our relations. It is vital that both of us

give sober and dispassionate consideration to the implications of the

current situation for each side’s interests and the maintenance of world

peace.

Despite the differing political convictions of our two countries,

and because of the inherent competition between us, we have sought to

establish common rules of behavior which would reduce the risk of

January–May 1980

conflict, and to search for areas of cooperation which would help pro-

duce a more stable world. I have hoped and believed that this might be

possible. This will not be possible, however, unless both of us recognize

the need to act with restraint in troubled areas across the globe. As

events following your actions in Afghanistan make clear, unrestrained

actions in any one area inevitably have an impact on our relations as a

whole.

Our most serious concern at present centers in Southwest Asia.

The presence of Soviet military forces in Afghanistan creates a new and

more dangerous situation in that region. We do not know your ulti-

mate aims in sending your forces into Afghanistan. We do know, how-

ever, that your action has violated the sovereignty of an independent

nation.

The continued Soviet military presence in Afghanistan will inevi-

tably continue to raise concerns about the desire of the Soviet Union to

conquer and subjugate the Afghan people and the further possibility of

Soviet military action against Pakistan and Iran. Both the presence of

Soviet troops in Afghanistan, and the precedent of their use there, are

of serious concern to Pakistan and other states in the region. The Soviet

action in Afghanistan and increasing Soviet military activity along the

northwest border of Iran also generate apprehension about the possi-

bility of Soviet actions to undermine the independence and territorial

integrity of that country.

It should be evident that the prompt withdrawal of all Soviet mili-

tary forces from Afghanistan is necessary to restore stability to this re-

gion. The actions of the United Nations and the Islamabad Conference

of Islamic States4 have made it clear that most of the peoples of the

world share this conviction.

For our part, we have no interest in seeing a government in Kabul

hostile to the Soviet Union. A return to a neutral, non-aligned but gen-

uinely independent Afghanistan would be in the interests of all and we

would support such a development.

There are similar dangers in the Middle East and in particular the

Persian Gulf. It is essential you understand that the United States has

vital interests at stake in this region. We are prepared to defend those

interests. But if there is restraint on both sides, as befits our two great

nations, and respect for the independence and territorial integrity of

dress questions dealing with Afghanistan. For a summary of those meetings, see Yearbook

Conference of Foreign Ministers met in Islamabad from January 27 to 29. The first resolu-

tion of the conference condemned the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, suspended the Af-

ghan membership in the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and called on all

member states to suspend aid to the current Afghan regime.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the states in the region, our respective interests need not lead to con-

frontation. In this connection, I must note that the substantial Soviet/

Cuban presence in the PDRY is a matter of grave concern to us and

perhaps we should search for ways whereby we could reduce the pos-

sibility of confrontation.

The US has made clear that it supports the independence, unity,

and territorial integrity of non-aligned Yugoslavia. In my discussion

with Ambassador Dobrynin, he indicated that the Soviet Union does

also. We welcome this position. We and our allies have no intention of

interfering in Yugoslavia’s internal affairs and would view any effort to

weaken Yugoslavia’s internal cohesion or undermine its independent

foreign policy with gravest concern, as we understand you would.

In his State of the Union message, the President gave particular

emphasis to the importance of SALT in the prevention of nuclear war.

It is the President’s intention to press for the ratification of SALT II at

the earliest moment that the political climate permits. In the meantime,

as we have said privately and publicly, we believe that observing the

mutual constraints imposed by the terms of the SALT I and SALT II

treaties will be in the best interests of both our countries and will help

to preserve world peace.

Mr. Minister, I look forward to any response you may wish to

make on these matters and any clarification you may care to provide.

Sincerely yours,

Cyrus Vance

261.

Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Secretary of

State Vance

February 16, 1980

Dear Mr. Secretary,

Having read your letter of February 82 I would like to tell you

frankly the following.

One could only welcome the recognition in the letter of the crucial

importance of relations between our countries for the general world sit-

uation and the apparent desire to search for ways of overcoming the se-

rious situation prevailing now in these relations.

However, the attempt to evade consideration of the real causes

complicating the international situation, efforts to reduce the whole

matter to the recent developments in Afghanistan depicted, for that

matter, in a completely distorted light, and the raising of various kinds

of other far-fetched questions—all this in no way demonstrates a real

intention to rectify the current situation.

Indeed, it is impossible, without sinning against the truth, to dis-

pute the fact that the exacerbation of the international situation by no

means began at the end of last December, but rather much earlier. We

also pointed out to the US side the reasons for this exacerbation much

earlier.

Among these is the decision on deployment in the US of the MX

mobile ICBM system3 which was made almost immediately after the

SALT–II Treaty was signed in Vienna.

There is also the artificially created “mini-crisis” on the question of

a “Soviet brigade” in Cuba.

There is also the urgent establishment of the “Rapid Deployment

Force” designed for armed intervention in various parts of the world.

There is the long-range program of permanent defense spending

increases and arms build-up imposed by the US on its NATO allies.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Finally, there is the decision to deploy new US missiles on the soil

of Western Europe, which creates a serious threat to the security of the

USSR and its allies.

And what has become of the SALT II Treaty? Incidentally, in

taking the decision to develop and deploy MX missiles the US Govern-

ment stated that this decision would promote the ratification of SALT

II. Without addressing now the substance of the MX missile question—

which is a subject for a special discussion—one cannot fail to observe

that in fact the decision on the MX missile is being implemented while

the SALT II Treaty has not been ratified. In pressing its NATO allies to

agree to the deployment on their soil of new American missiles, the US

was also saying that this would facilitate the ratification of the SALT II

Treaty. Even putting aside, once again, the question of the invalidity of

such linkage, the picture remains the same: the decision on the deploy-

ment of new missiles in Western Europe has been adopted and is being

implemented, but the Treaty has not been ratified.

Try to see all this through our eyes. Can these facts be seen in any

way other than as a departure by the US from the principle of equality

and equal security which was reconfirmed in Vienna, as evidence of a

policy line now pursued by the US to break out of the existing military

and strategic parity between the USSR and the US, to rush ahead in an

effort to gain military superiority for itself?

No references to events in Afghanistan can conceal this turn in US

policy—a turn from detente to a new aggravation of international ten-

sions, to a new round of the arms race.

In your letter you mention the need for our two states to show re-

straint and moderation in international affairs and in relations with

each other. Well, the thought itself is correct. We, on our part, are also

in favor of this. It is important, however, for the United States also to

adhere to such a course in international affairs and not treat them with

such astonishing light-mindedness as it now does.

As for Afghanistan, our position on this question has been set forth

more than once with utmost clarity, specifically as you know in the an-

swers by L.I. Brezhnev to the questions of the Pravda correspondent as

well as in our contacts with the US side.

Facts do not cease to be facts because the US side does not want to

admit that acts of aggression against Afghanistan have been and con-

tinue to be committed from the territory of Pakistan. Also indisputable

is the fact that in providing assistance to Afghanistan in repelling ex-

January–May 1980

ternal aggression, the USSR has acted in full accordance with the UN

Charter and the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between the

USSR and the DRA.

We have also spoken on more than one occasion as to when and

under what circumstances the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Af-

ghanistan will be carried out. I would only like to stress that if the US

really wanted this to occur sooner, it could, of course, take measures

to stop the aggression against Afghanistan. So far, the practical actions

of the United States go exactly in the opposite direction: everything

is being done to expand armed incursions into the territory of

Afghanistan.

You say in your letter that the US has no interest in seeing a gov-

ernment in Kabul hostile to the Soviet Union. In fact, however, the

United States is exerting every effort toward uniting counterrevolu-

tionary Afghan groups under foreign auspices and even toward the

virtual establishment of an illegal Afghan “government in exile” in the

territory of Pakistan.

Nor does the reference in your letter to some kind of “increasing

military activity” on the Soviet border with Iran bear witness to any US

desire to contribute to the reduction of tensions. You must be well

aware that this is not true. We have no “designs” whatsoever upon Iran

or any other countries of this region. It is not for the United States to

speak of “concern” about the fate of Iran while it is precisely the US

which directly threatens this country and places all kinds of pressure

on it.

For some reason you also raise now the question of the People’s

Democratic Republic of Yemen, asserting that the situation in that

country and its relations with third countries, particularly with the So-

viet Union, are supposedly also a matter of “grave concern” to the US.

There is no basis for this, nor can there be. But if we are to speak in

terms of concern, the Soviet Union has far more basis for it in connec-

tion with the US military presence in, for example, Turkey and Greece,

countries which either directly border on the USSR or are situated in

close proximity to our borders. It is clear that an approach whereby the

US arbitrarily declares regions of the world thousands of kilometers

away from it to be a sphere of its “vital interests” and reduces every-

thing only to securing its own narrow egoistic interests without

wishing to take account of the legitimate interests of others, cannot lead

to anything good.

And what is the meaning of the sudden mention in your letter of

Yugoslavia? Presumably it is not just because such a country exists on

deployment of Soviet troops into Afghanistan, if requested.

262.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

The Vice President*

State

White House

Secretary Cyrus Vance*

Zbigniew Brzezinski**

Deputy Secretary Christopher

David Aaron

Lloyd Cutler

Defense

Hamilton Jordan*

Secretary Harold Brown*

Anne Wexler***

Deputy Secretary Graham Claytor

Hedley Donovan***

JCS

Joe Onek***

General David Jones**

Henry Owen***

Lt. General John Pustay***

Peter Ueberroth, Executive

CIA

Director of the Los Angeles

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Olympics

The SCC then reformed itself into a larger group, including two

representatives of the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee

(Messrs. Ueberroth and Wolper), to discuss the possibility of orga-

nizing alternative games. Mr. Cutler outlined some of the problems. He

thought alternative games would be helpful in persuading other na-

tions to join us in boycotting the Olympics if the alternative games were

not seen as destructive of the International Olympic movement. One of

the problems is that the West Europeans, Canada, New Zealand and

Australia do not have direct governmental control of their respective

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

national Olympic Committees. The Africans, by contrast, can order

their committees not to participate. Some nations would probably at-

tend alternative games even if they decide to participate in Moscow.

The key nations which will have to be persuaded are France, West Ger-

many, the UK, Kenya, China, Mexico, Japan and Italy. These are the

most influential nations in terms of sports competition and participa-

tion in the Olympic movement. The West Europeans are the key. We

must attempt to persuade them to commit to support alternative

games, even if they will not make a firm commitment to stay away

from Moscow. That would permit us to proceed with planning for the

games. A major factor will be persuading the international sports feder-

ations to support these games since their approval is necessary to in-

sure that participating athletes will not be disqualified. (U)

At the present time, we have no offer of any site but Los Angeles,

and everyone agrees that we should not make this a solely U.S. alterna-

tive. We need 3–4 sites, perhaps including Los Angeles, which could be

linked by television worldwide. The LAOOC representatives felt that

such an approach was feasible and could be marketed worldwide.

Japan, for example, could be the site for volleyball and judo, the UK for

equestrian events, etc. It may be necessary for the governments to put

in some money to handle the initial costs of organizing the games, al-

though the LAOOC representatives believed strongly that the games

would be self-supporting once they had overcome the initial lag and

were widely accepted. Once a decision is made, it will be extremely im-

portant for the U.S. to convince the networks that this is a major

event—perhaps by insuring Presidential attendance at the opening,

The best prospective time for the games to be held was for nine

days, spanning two weekends, in the second half of August. That was

desirable in terms of maintaining peak training by the athletes, to avoid

the national conventions, and to stay ahead of the regular TV season

programming. All agreed that was a reasonable planning date. (U)

All agreed that our next step should be to approach the various

key governments involved to get them to make a firm commitment that

they would send a team to the alternative games, regardless of what de-

cision they may make on attendance at Moscow. This will have to be

carefully handled to avoid giving the waverers an excuse to avoid a de-

cision on boycotting Moscow, but we cannot wait for a decision past

the end of March if planning for the alternative games is to be a success.

The games should be open to all nations, including the Soviets, just as

Lake Placid was. (U)

The LAOOC representatives noted the need to establish a private

international coordinating committee as well as an advisory committee

composed of leading sports and business figures. The LAOOC had

January–May 1980

demonstrated that a private committee could organize such games

without official government (or in their case, city) funding. Each site for

the games would also require a local committee—either private or offi-

cially sponsored. Mr. Cutler noted that a meeting of all the key gov-

ernments involved will be held in 10 days to two weeks. All agreed that

we must make formal approaches to each government before they ar-

rive at that meeting if it is to get any agreement. The LAOOC repre-

sentatives stressed that unless we could get firm commitments of par-

ticipation by at least the top five (France, West Germany, UK, Kenya

and China), they would advise not to proceed. France is critical because

of its dominant role in the International Olympic movement. However,

if those nations are willing to commit, the rest of the world will almost

certainly fall in behind them, and there is a strong probability that the

Russians would end up cancelling their games entirely, as being largely

irrelevant. They warned that the International Olympic Committee and

its national components will fight very hard against the notion of alter-

native games of any kind. (U)

The SCC agreed that we would immediately go to the key foreign

governments. We will reiterate our firm decision not to go to Moscow

and seek their firm commitment to attend alternative games even if

they have not made a final decision about Moscow. Mr. Aaron will

meet with Mr. Christopher and Lloyd Cutler to work out the details of

how this approach will be made and by whom. Mr. Cutler will also

meet today with the Swiss representative of the sports federations to

seek their sanction of alternative games. It is generally believed that

they will find the potential economic benefits attractive and they are

likely to go along if the key countries accept the concept. The LAOOC

representatives observed that if a decision is made by the end of March,

the logistics would not be a serious problem. (U)

263.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Iran/Afghanistan

PARTICIPANTS

State

STR

David Newsom

Robert Cassidy

George Vest

White House

Dean Hinton

David Aaron

Nelson Ledsky*

Lloyd Cutler

OSD

Hedley Donovan

W. Graham Claytor

Henry Owen

Frank Kramer

NSC

JCS

Colonel William Odom

Lt. Gen. John Pustay

Gary Sick

CIA

Admiral Stansfield Turner

Justice

John Shenefield

Commerce

Secretary Philip Klutznick

Homer Moyer

Treasury

Robert Carswell

Robert Mundheim

*Present only for discussion of Olympics

1. Olympics. Mr. Cutler summarized what has happened since the

discussion at the last SCC. It had been decided that it was important to

go quickly to the key Olympic countries and get their commitment to

support alternative games, irrespective of a decision on their attend-

ance at the Moscow games. At the strong recommendation of Secretary

Vance, letters are being prepared for dispatch today to the Foreign

Ministers of the key states urging their commitment. Mr. Cutler has in-

dependently talked to the German representative and the ANZUS

group during their visits to Washington, and the President will see

January–May 1980

Schmidt next week. The Australians were particularly concerned that

we move on this since public opinion in their country is slipping. (C)

Mr. Cutler had met with Mr. Keller, the Swiss head of the Interna-

tional Sports Federations, to request their support, which will be essen-

tial. Mr. Keller had not said flatly no, but he had not been encouraging

about the likelihood that the federations would back the idea of alterna-

tive games. Mr. Cutler had given him a one-page memo outlining our

position. Keller will take this back with him for a meeting of the Federa-

tion heads in Lausanne in early April. We will probably hear nothing

from them until that meeting is over. (U)

Thirdly, Mr. Cutler thought it important that a promotional group

be formed, and he strongly favored asking Messrs. Ueberroth and

Wolper to take on the job as informal consultants looking toward the

eventual formation of an International Committee. We have received

offers of financial support from a number of industry and other

sources, and a tax-exempt non-profit group was being put together to

receive donations. (U)

Mr. Cutler said that we will go after Schmidt early next week and

that would be crucial. The letters were intended to prepare the way for

a group decision when the Steering Committee meets on March 10. We

could hope for a decision at that time if the various national delegations

were instructed in advance. The position of Germany will be critical to

that process. All agreed that it would not be advisable to start with a

letter to the French Foreign Minister. We also want to use the Germans

to approach the French. However, the British were already in discus-

sions with their Olympic Committee, and it was important to get to

them as quickly as possible, by telephone to Ambassador Brewster4 if

necessary. (C)

Mr. Aaron wondered about the advisability of forming committees

at this point when we still do not have commitments from the key

countries. The advice at the last meeting had been that if we cannot get

those commitments, we should not proceed, and an existing infrastruc-

ture could be an embarrassment if that occurs. Mr. Cutler noted that his

proposals to lay the groundwork for an organizing committee and a

non-profit organization to receive donations were merely preparatory.

Messrs. Ueberroth and Wolper would be coming on as consultants ini-

tially. The non-profit organization would be sponsored by a private

law firm and would merely be a recipient of early donations. Neither

would be public and neither would commit us to a course of action. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

With regard to the blocking of shipment of goods to the Soviet

Olympics, Mr. Cutler noted that he had worked on a draft public state-

ment with Secretary Klutznick and Henry Owen. All of them had

doubts about the advisability of such a statement since it risked making

the President appear foolish. They believed it would be better simply to

contact the key companies privately. Also, Levi Strauss was insisting

that they needed a formal order in order to escape their contractual

obligations. State noted that, based on the President’s decision to pro-

ceed with a public announcement, a cable had been sent to 20 countries

notifying them that such a statement would be forthcoming last

Monday, and we are now beginning to get requests for the text. Henry

Owen suggested it would be better to tell them we had changed our

mind rather than look foolish. Secretary Klutznick expressed concern

that the White House would be besieged by small operators wondering

whether or not they should proceed and the whole thing would turn

into a mess. (C)

Mr. Aaron expressed surprise at this development since the subject

had been discussed rather exhaustively at the previous meeting and the

President had made his decision on the basis of that discussion. There

appeared to be no new issue here except a drafting problem. He won-

dered if the problem could not be taken care of by Secretary Klutznick

privately contacting the key companies, urging them strongly to re-

spect a boycott, and then posting an announcement at the White House

that this step had been taken at the President’s direction, without

pumping it up into a matter of major importance. All agreed that this

would be an acceptable way to proceed. (C)

Approve

January–May 1980

this might best be accomplished. This will be reviewed at a subsequent

meeting for a decision well in advance of April 1. (C)

2. COCOM. Secretary Klutznick reported that the internal U.S. re-

view process is complete except for specific decisions concerning such

difficult items as computers, software and technical data packages. Mr.

Newsom agreed that this is the problem. The allies are aware of our

policy in broad terms, and we have made clear decisions on certain spe-

cific cases, but the allies are now asking for greater detail on these com-

plex and difficult areas of definition. At the present time, the U.S. effort

is stalled awaiting a recommendation from the Department of Defense

on how to handle these complex definitional problems. Mr. Claytor

said that DOD was working on this; however, the complexity of the

problem must not be underestimated. DOD will have a proposal avail-

able for interagency consideration by next Friday, March 7. State cau-

tioned that the process would begin once the DOD proposal is sub-

mitted. Mr. Hinton drew attention to the fact that the computer paper

for COCOM consists of 53 pages of highly complex and technical de-

tails. It will not be a simple process to revise this. (C)

Mr. Hinton pointed out that we have made a number of significant

decisions establishing policy in the area of oil and gas technology,

Kama River, phosphates, and non-exceptions to the COCOM list. He

thought that we should be prepared to begin approving some licenses

for exports in those areas where policy is well established, rather than

keeping all export licenses frozen. Henry Owen and Mr. Aaron re-

marked that it was their understanding that Congress is looking for us

to take an even harder position on punishing the Soviets, and our own

announcements indicate that we would have completed our policy re-

view before now. They did not believe this was the moment to begin

approving exports. (C)

Henry Owen suggested that it might be useful to have Secretary

Klutznick report to the Congress or in some other forum on those areas

where decisions have been made—which are considerable—and note

that some of the more complex issues remain under consideration. Sec-

retary Klutznick agreed that it was important to make people under-

stand the reasons for delay on certain issues were not just stalling or

lack of decisiveness. Mr. Aaron agreed with this approach: Secretary

Klutznick would prepare a report to the President9 which could, after

approval, then10 be used to brief the Congress and the press. Once this

had been accomplished and we had some reading on the public and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Congressional reaction, then we might consider moving to approve

certain licenses which are consistent with policy. The SCC agreed on

this phased approach. (C)

Approve

the simple fact that the Europeans want the jobs and the exports. (C)

Mr. Aaron said that the allies have done nothing, despite the diffi-

cult and painful decisions which the President has taken on grain and

trade. He wondered if they were aware that this would have signifi-

cant political implications for America’s view of the alliance. State said

that indeed the allies were getting the message and they were worried.

They have slowed down on their contracting with the USSR and they

have not undercut us on major deals such as ARMCO and ALCOA—at

least not yet. However, they all say that they are afraid to act so long as

there is the likelihood that the French will take advantage of their deci-

sion. The Japanese have generally been cooperative, but they are com-

plaining that they may be undercut by the European allies to the detri-

ment of their own business community. (C)

All agreed that the Germans were the key nation, if economic sanc-

tions are to hold and be made effective. It was agreed that several key

projects with the Soviets would be identified which the President could

raise with Schmidt. We could also continue to press the Europeans to

change the date of maturity of credits, which would cost the Soviets

something by raising the price. Commerce and Treasury pointed out,

however, that even the denial of all official export credits to the USSR

would not prevent them from getting the development projects they

want. They did not feel that this was an area which was promising if

264.

Memorandum of Conversation of a Special Coordination

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Soviet Brigade Exercise in Cuba (S)

PARTICIPANTS

State

Secretary Cyrus Vance

Bruce Clarke, Director, NFAC

Warren Christopher, Deputy

White House

Secretary of State

Lloyd Cutler, Counsel to the

OSD

President

Secretary Harold Brown

Zbigniew Brzezinski

David Aaron

JCS

General David Jones

NSC

Marshall Brement, Staff Member

ACDA

Ralph Earle

Zbigniew Brzezinski: The next question on the agenda is the exercise

which the Soviet Cuban brigade is now carrying out. Our problem is

how do we handle this.

Secretary Brown: It is not fundamentally different from what they

did before.

ZB: However, we expected them not to do it.

HB: But the public did not expect to see any difference.

Brigade in Cuba. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the White House Situa-

tion Room.

265.

Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic

and Consular Posts

56102. Subject: Summer Olympics: Update on National Reactions.

Ref: State 042913.

1. (Confidential-entire text)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

2. Following is update of reftel. As before, this information should

be used with extreme discretion so as not to embarrass governments

whose positions are private or still evolving favorably.

3. Our count on non-participants for the Moscow Olympics stands

about where it was two weeks ago. Some 50 states will join us and not

participate in the Moscow Games this summer. Support for non-

participation continues to be strongest in East Asia and the Near East.

In Western Europe as well as in Africa and Latin America, we have

seen a growing tendency to hold off a decision in the expectation that

the Afghanistan situation will improve in the next 60–90 days. None-

theless our assumption continues to be that in the final analysis the

West Europeans will join us in boycotting Moscow and that a number

of additional African and Latin Americans will follow suit. As a conse-

quence the Games themselves, if they are held at all, will be a pale imi-

tation of previous Olympics.

4. We are publicly committed to holding high-quality international

athletic competition later this summer. We hope that details for the al-

ternative games can be developed and agreed to between March 15 and

31. Most American sports federations (called national governing

bodies) we have spoken to would be interested in participating in these

alternative competitions. Few of these groups favor the idea of a do-

mestic sports festival, a concept recommended by the U.S. Olympic

Committee.

5. The U.S. Olympic Committee, although it has given an informal

pledge of support to the President, has technically not yet reached a

formal decision on the Moscow Games. The Executive of the U.S.

Olympic Committee will meet together on March 15 and draw up a

resolution recommending non-participation. This resolution will

then be sent to all members of the U.S. Olympic Committee’s House

of Delegates which will be convened in mid-April to vote on the

recommendation.

6. A number of important meetings at which the Olympics issue

will be on the agenda are planned for the near future. The British

Olympic Association meets on the Olympic issue on March 4. The Japa-

nese Olympic Committee holds a similar meeting on March 7. The

Olympic question will be on the agenda of the Andean Pact Foreign

Ministers Meeting in Quito March 10. The Olympic subject will also be

discussed at the forthcoming African Football Confederation Meeting

in Lagos. We have asked all posts to keep us informed as far in advance

as possible of meetings at which the Olympic issue could be discussed.

7. Twenty-six governments have publicly stated that they do not

wish their athletes to participate in the 1980 Summer Games in

Moscow: Australia, Bahrain, Bermuda, Canada, Chile, Djibouti, Egypt,

Fiji, Great Britain, Haiti, Israel, Japan, Kenya, Liberia, Luxembourg,

January–May 1980

Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea,

Paraguay, People’s Republic of China, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan,

Zaire.

8. Privately working toward non-participation are 14 gov-

ernments: Bangladesh, Gabon, Gambia, Honduras, Ivory Coast, Mauri-

tania, Monaco, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Singapore, Somalia, South

Korea, Swaziland.

9. The following 8 governments have informed us that they will

not be participating in the Moscow Olympics because of lack of re-

sources, lack of a team; or other reasons. British Honduras, Chad, El

Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Malawi, St. Vincent, Taiwan, United Arab

Emirates.

10. Leaning or evolving toward non-participation in Moscow are

21 governments: Belgium, Bolivia, Burma, Colombia, Comoros, Costa

Rica, Dominican Republic, FRG, Guatemala, Hong Kong, Indonesia,

Iran, Ireland, Lichtenstein, Philippines, Portugal, Spain, Thailand,

Togo, Tunisia, Switzerland.

11. Finally, 26 governments are still undecided: Antigua, Bahamas,

Barbados, Botswana, Cape Verde, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Ice-

land, Italy, Lebanon, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, Rwanda, San

Marino, Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Sao Tome and Principe, Tanzania,

Turkey, Uganda, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela.

12. Others are either unheard from, leaning against our position, or

have decided to proceed to Moscow.

13. Addressees may as they deem it advisable use list contained

in para 7 on an unclassified basis. Lists in the subsequent para-

graph should be discussed only with extreme discretion with host

government.

Vance

266.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

3989. Subj: (C) Ambassador’s Discussion With Arbatov on Afghan-

istan and US-Soviet Relations.

1. (S-entire text.)

2. Summary: I had a lengthy discussion yesterday with USA Insti-

tute Director Arbatov, who provided no fresh insights into how the Af-

ghan problem might be solved other than to stress that the Soviets

would never accept an outcome which made it appear that they were

being “punished.” He said the Soviets were convinced that the US had

been providing significant support to the Afghan insurgents, but he

also described the excesses of the Amin regime as one reason for the So-

viet action. He thought stability could be brought about within a few

months if outside interference stopped. In blaming the US for the dete-

rioration in Soviet/American relations, Arbatov said, that after almost

all the other aspects of the detente relationship had been dismantled

SALT II was left in an exposed position and therefore was also vulner-

able. He was not optimistic that a relationship could be rebuilt on arms

control alone, though he agreed on the urgency of getting the SALT

process started again. While he had no specific suggestions on how

this might be done, he mentioned the possibility of a Vance/Gromyko

meeting in Vienna as a desirable beginning. End summary.

3. Mr. Arbatov came to lunch at Spaso House March 10 with his as-

sociate Mr. Zhurkin. The Acting DCM and I represented the American

side. Lunch started on an exchange of pleasantries. I had met Zhurkin

at an Airlie House conference which I attended with Marshall

Shulman, so the atmosphere was easy and relaxed. Shortly after sitting

down at the table, we began to get into matters of substance. I men-

tioned that we were trying to find means of changing the present very

low level of Soviet-American relations and getting the relationship

back on track, moving ahead, and improving again. Arbatov expressed

the same general sentiments and indicated his clear understanding that

if we stayed in the present mode very long, an uncontrolled arms race

in the future would be impossible to avoid. He said he thought our rela-

tions could not remain even in their present very bad state for long. If

they did not improve soon, they would get much worse. And “many

January–May 1980

people here in town” he said, are beginning to have doubts about the

prospects.

4. We talked about perceptions and throughout the luncheon there

was an interesting theme expressed again and again by Arbatov, which

I shall characterize by a few examples. In response to Arbatov’s men-

tion of Soviet concern about our increasing conventional weapons

budget, I mentioned the inexorable increase of Soviet weapons budgets

year in and year out. Arbatov said even if you added all of the budgets

of the Warsaw Pact countries and his own, the amount of expenditure

actually made was less than that made by NATO and the US. This

seems like a doubtful statement to me, but he made it. In speaking of

the SS–20/Pershing II situation, he mentioned that for years the Soviet

Union was on the receiving end of superior weapons deployed by

NATO countries and that it was only with the deployment of the SS–20

that this inequity was being attended to. He stressed, however, that

with the deployment of the Pershing II, all of the Soviet western cities

were for the first time at risk from our missiles based in Europe. He, like

most Soviets who argue this point, seem to forget that Western Euro-

pean capitals have for a long time been under the threat of USSR me-

dium range missiles. But the fact that this is a new situation for his

western cities is indisputable. He mentioned that U.S. forward based

systems could reach his western cities but the warning time was rela-

tively long, whereas the warning time on the Pershing II’s would be ex-

tremely short relative to the warning of strategic missiles from the U.S.

All Soviets that I have talked with absolutely forget Western capitals

when they begin this argument. He also mentioned his concern about

cruise missiles and the FRG which is not a new idea.

5. On Afghanistan, I made very strongly the argument that the So-

viet press was blaming the whole problem upon the US upsetting the

internal situation in Afghanistan and that we had specifically stated

that we had not been interfering and had done so many times, most re-

cently in President Carter’s letter to Tito, from which I quoted. Ar-

batov’s answer to this was, “I am not disputing your word, but perhaps

the Agency has been misinforming the State Department.” He said his

government was convinced that the US is in fact training and sending

in Afghans from Pakistan to disrupt the internal situation. He said that

about three million Afghanis moved back and forth between Pakistan

and Afghanistan seasonally with their flocks and that the infiltration of

200,000 armed Afghans would be relatively simple to be hidden in this

migration—though he added that he had no information that this was

actually happening.

6. While he stressed the role of outside interference, by the US and

also by China and Pakistan, Arbatov discussed the internal situation in

Afghanistan as well as a reason for the Soviet action. He said the So-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

viets had gotten along very well with the King3 and with Daoud and

then talked about the excesses of Amin, whom he compared with his

namesake Idi Amin. He said that the elimination of the Amin regime,

while in the Soviet interest, was also somewhat in the American in-

terest because they were attempting to remove a bloody tyrant, in-

stalling a more generally popular regime, and bringing stability to the

region.

7. As for how long it might take to bring about the stability they

were seeking, Arbatov thought maybe only a few months—provided

outside interference stopped. He did not dispute my point that the

Brezhnev formula seemed like a non-starter, since it was impossible for

us to pledge to stop doing something we are not doing. He did not

seem much interested in talking about other formulas for getting the

Soviets out of Afghanistan, although he thought the idea of having

Mrs. Ghandi4 and a group of nonaligned nations or others work to-

gether to find some way to guarantee the Pak/Afghan border was an

idea worth exploring.

8. The main point we made repeatedly with regard to an Afghan

settlement was that the US seemed intent on “punishing” the Soviet

Union and that they would not under any circumstances accept a solu-

tion that made them look punished. He said that when the US was

willing to cease making Afghanistan a pure propaganda issue the

matter could be treated seriously.

9. We talked in general about the state of US/Soviet relations, and

Arbatov spent a good deal of time characterizing the things that made

the Soviets decide after Vienna that the Carter administration was not

going to follow through on SALT II. Among the things he mentioned

were the Cuban brigade issue, human rights, the decision to go for a

five percent increase in defense spending, and the refusal to accept the

Brezhnev offer for negotiations on theater nuclear forces.

10. Arbatov seemed pessimistic about the prospects for getting the

arms control dialogue started again in the near future, though he of

course placed all the blame on our side. He said that arms control was

only one part of the overall detente relationship and claimed that we

had dismantled most other aspects of the relationship. He spoke of our

excluding the Soviets from the Middle East peace process, trying to use

trade as a weapon to interfere in Soviet internal affairs, and using SALT

II as a vehicle for actually increasing our defense spending rather than

as a step toward disarmament. All that was left was SALT II, and in its

exposed position it also fell victim to what he saw as the anti-Soviet

267.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union and the U.S. Mission at Geneva

68654. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree2 only. Subject: Sverd-

lovsk BW Incident.

1. (Secret-entire text).

cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Mark Palmer (PM/DCA) and Martin McLean

(EUR/SOV); cleared by Aaron, Robert Martin (INR/PMT), Brement, Shulman, Earle,

Peter Wilson (S/P), Walter Slocombe (DUSD/PP), J. Taylor (S/S–O), John Pustay (JSC),

R. McCrory (CIA), Kahan, and Barry; approved by Christopher.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

2. Summary and action requested. There is disturbing evidence

pointing to the release of lethal biological agent as the cause of nu-

merous deaths in Sverdlovsk, USSR, in April–May 1979. The intelli-

gence community’s present conclusions and report have been sent to

you septel. Ambassador Watson is instructed to raise this matter with

Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko as soon as possible. Ambassador

Flowerree should inform Ambassador Issraelyan4 of the demarche

promptly after it is made in Moscow. End summary.

3. We are deeply concerned about the incident in Sverdlovsk in

April 1979 and its implications. We wish to make a serious effort to

discuss this issue bilaterally in accordance with Article V of the Biolog-

ical Weapons (BW) Convention. Speed is essential in view of the end of

the BW Convention Review Conference on March 21, and our desire to

give the Soviets as much time as possible to give us a considered re-

sponse. It is in both our interests to have at least a preliminary response

before the end of the Review Conference, since we will have to state at

the conference that we have raised a compliance issue.

4. Ambassador Watson should personally make the following

points as soon as possible to Korniyenko or, should he be unavailable,

to another official on the First Deputy Minister or Deputy Minister

level. Points should be provided in the form of a non-paper as well.

A.—The United States and the Soviet Union have a continuing in-

terest in sustaining our mutual efforts to control the arms race.

B.—I have been instructed to raise a matter which potentially has

extremely serious implications for the future of arms control negotia-

tions between our countries and more specific bearing on the Biological

Weapons Convention.

C.—Although no public announcement was made by Soviet au-

thorities, for some time we have been aware of reports of an extraordi-

nary outbreak of disease which was apparently pulmonary anthrax,

which caused numerous deaths in Sverdlovsk in April 1979, and which

resulted in the establishment of a quarantine.

D.—We have now received further information which indicates

that this extraordinary outbreak appears to have been caused by the re-

lease of a quantity of anthrax agent exceeding that justified for prophy-

Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0592.

January–May 1980

lactic, protective, or other peaceful purposes and that it originated at a

military facility in Sverdlovsk.

E.—Article V of the Biological Weapons Convention provides that

the parties shall consult and cooperate with one another in solving any

problems which may arise. In accordance with that Article, the US Gov-

ernment is asking that the Soviet Government consult and cooperate

with it and provide information to explain this outbreak of disease in

Sverdlovsk in April 1979.

F.—We want to deal with this matter in the same serious way in

which we have consulted on a number of questions involving compli-

ance with arms control agreements in recent years. Because of the im-

plications regarding compliance with the Convention itself and for

other arms control negotiations, we are raising this matter directly with

you and asking for prompt and full consultations. A simple denial in

response to this present US approach will not advance the situation and

will not serve our mutual interests.

G.—Since we are now in the process of consulting with you on a

compliance related question, we will make a statement before the Re-

view Conference concludes indicating that we are pursuing consulta-

tions in accordance with Article V. Any response you can make to our

request for consultation and cooperation under Article V before the end

of the Review Conference will be taken into account in determining the

character of the statement we will make.

H.—Obviously, under these circumstance we would not be pre-

pared to approve language in the final document of the Review Confer-

ence which states that no questions have arisen relating to compliance.

5. Embassy Moscow should inform Ambassador Flowerree imme-

diately after Ambassador Watson sees Korniyenko. Ambassador Flow-

erree should then inform Ambassador Issraelyan of the demarche, and

repeat points made in para 4 above.

6. For Geneva: We will provide additional guidance on RevCon

and consultations with allies.

Vance

268.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

The conversation started with Dobrynin expressing considerable

pessimism about the longer range trends in U.S.-Soviet relations. He

feels that we are on a spiral—that both sides are becoming increasingly

antagonistic, and that he does not see much prospect for an early

improvement.

I suspect that this was a deliberate line designed to “smoke me

out.” I made the point in response that he may well be right, but that

what happens this year in U.S.-Soviet relations is likely to influence a

great deal the next four years. This is why we both have an obligation to

see if something could not be done in the near future to reverse the neg-

ative trends set in motion by the Soviet action in Afghanistan.

Substance

The discussion then turned more specifically to the question of Af-

ghanistan. Dobrynin spoke at some length, reviewing recent history.

He said that the Soviets had no intention of moving into Afghanistan

but the deteriorating situation gave them no choice. (Incidentally, he

told me that Babrak returned secretly to Kabul in October of last year.)

The Soviets have no intention of dominating the region according

to him and will withdraw once a “stable government” has been

created. He put a lot of emphasis on organizing a new Afghanistan

army which will carry on once the Soviets have left. In response to a

question, he indicated that it may be up to a year or so before the So-

viets can leave, but he professed great optimism about their capacity to

crush the resistance.

He said that the Soviet Union would be willing to give guarantees

to us that it has no designs against Pakistan and Iran.

I responded by saying that the key issue is whether the Soviet

Union insists on imposing a Communist government on Afghanistan

or whether it desires an Afghanistan that is genuinely non-aligned and

non-hostile to the Soviet Union. If it is the former, conflicts between us

January–May 1980

will persist because it will require the Soviet army to maintain such a

regime. But if it is the latter, I am sure that we could work out interna-

tional arrangements, including transitionally some neutral forces from

Moslem countries to assure Afghanistan’s genuine neutrality. Commu-

nists could participate in such a government, even if they could not

dominate it. (I cited Finland as an example.) In effect, the Soviets have

to decide whether their objective is to make Afghanistan into a Mon-

golia or whether they can live with an Asian variant of Finland. In the

latter case, there could be a relatively quick upswing in U.S.-Soviet

relations.

Dobrynin responded by saying that the above is a “harder” state-

ment than made to Moscow by “some of your allies.” He gave me the

impression that my position on this is also harder than he thought the

U.S. position actually was. He maintained that his impression was that

we would be satisfied with Soviet “guarantees” for the region and with

Soviet departure after Afghanistan has become “stable.” Our allies are

more interested in the region than in Afghanistan and the Soviets can

assure us about the region.

I responded that the President in his letter to Tito2 made it clear

that we saw neutralization and departure of the Soviet troops as linked,

though we are not insisting that the latter is sequentially a precondition

for the former. I drew his attention to the sentence in the letter which

said that we would be prepared to enter into guarantees “with the

prompt withdrawal of all Soviet troops” and I emphasized that the

word “with” implied simultaneity.

I went on to say that the issue is not assurances but arrangements

that can endure. If the Soviets insist on a Communist government in

Kabul, the Soviet army will have to stay in Afghanistan for a long time

and this has objective consequences not only for relations with us but

for stability in the region.

At this point, Dobrynin seemed to hint that it is not to be excluded

that there could be some change in the Afghani government and

Babrak could become non-essential—though he immediately qualified

this by saying that he is not in a position to negotiate on this subject

with me.

I responded by saying that the creation of a genuine Afghani gov-

ernment need not be the point of departure for a solution because it is

not our intention to humilitate the Soviet Union, but we do have to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

agree in advance on where we will end up (i.e. a genuinely neutral and

independent Afghanistan) and then we can work on the steps of get-

ting there. (I have to add that the hint about Babrak’s dispensability

was quite vague and I am not certain whether it did indicate some flexi-

bility on the Soviet part.)

Procedure

Dobrynin said that formal talks on the Vance–Gromyko level are

premature. He thinks it is better to continue his discussions with Vance

and occasionally perhaps with me, and then formal Vance-Gromyko

talks can be held when the time is right. He thought it would be inap-

propriate to hold them at Tito’s funeral. He then referred disparagingly

to the idea of sending Shulman as an emissary to Brezhnev, but I did

not respond to his baiting.

Other Matters

On the Olympics, he did not respond to the possibility of

postponement.

On this Administration, he asserted a similarity between its

anti-Sovietism and Reagan’s, but I felt he was saying that for the record.

I did talk to him about SALT and MBFR and reiterated our intention to

pursue both. I told him flatly that we will not wage the Presidential

campaign on an anti-Soviet basis but that we will also not rescind our

current measures unless the situation in Afghanistan alters in a reason-

able fashion.

He is leaving this weekend for Moscow and hopes to see Cy before

he goes. He said he would call me if he has any afterthoughts, and he

also urged me to do the same.

The whole evening was very cordial and also involved some ex-

change of personal gifts.

269.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

4225. Department repeat Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree. Subj:

Demarche on Sverdlovsk BW Issue. Refs: (A) Moscow 4211, (B) State

1. (S-entire text.)

2. I made the demarche on the Sverdlovsk incident this morning to

First Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko, reading and leaving with

him as a non-paper the talking points from Ref C as amended by Ref B.

In supplemental remarks I made the additional point that a simple de-

nial would not advance the situation or serve our mutual interests.

3. Korniyenko responded to my presentation by stating that the

Soviets would of course study the statement I had made, but that he

would like to make a few immediate points. First of all, he said, in the

case of the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), as with all interna-

tional agreements to which the Soviet Union is a party, the Soviet

Union strictly complies with all requirements of the agreement. Sec-

ondly, in a number of instances US Government agencies have been

compelled to admit publicly and officially that charges which have ap-

peared from time to time in the US press about the alleged non-

observance by the Soviet Union of this or that agreement were

unjustified.

4. In the present case, Korniyenko continued, he could not but

wonder why we were raising the matter and what the purpose of our

statement was. He noted that Soviet, US, and British specialists, as rep-

resentatives of the BWC depositories, had jointly worked on a report

for submission to the BWC Review Conference and that no such ques-

tions had arisen during the preparation of the report. Now, all of a

sudden, the US side was raising expressions of concern, asking for ur-

gent consultations, and stating that it would inform the Review Confer-

ence that it had done so.

cret; Immediate; Nodis.

16, both of which addressed the Sverdlovsk biological weapon incident, are in the Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

5. Korniyenko then characterized the information I had provided

about the incident itself as vague. He did not know, he said, on what it

was based and added that it was not unheard of for there to be no basis

for such allegations. Even assuming, Korniyenko went on, that some

kind of illness did occur in the Sverdlovsk area, what relationship did

this have to the BWC? He asked me to imagine how we would react if

the Soviets today or tomorrow were to make such a representation to

us, expressing concern about the “Legionnaires’ disease,” obliging us

to enter into consultations under the BWC, and trying to bring that

matter into the work of the BWC Review Conference.

6. In commenting on Korniyenko’s remarks, I stated that the US

representation was occasioned by an interagency study of all available

evidence of the unexplained incident in Sverdlovsk, some of it received

fairly recently, and that what we were seeking was an explanation of

the incident. As for his reference to the vagueness of the information, I

told him that I thought it was spelled out rather clearly in the

non-paper I had left with him but that if he could characterize what was

not clear to him I would try to elaborate. Noting that the parties to the

BWC are not permitted to have biological warfare stocks, I told him

that if there was a sensible explanation for what had occurred in Sverd-

lovsk I hoped it could be provided to us quickly so it could be taken

into consideration in the report we were required to make [garble].

7. Answering his question on how we would react if challenged

about the Legionnaires’ disease, I said I thought I had a pretty good

idea of what our procedure would be. We would in all likelihood invite

the Soviets to send scientists to discuss the matter with our scientists

and to visit the Communicable Disease Center in Atlanta to go over the

records of what our investigation had shown thus far.

8. Korniyenko said he had nothing to add and would merely re-

peat that the Soviets would study our statement and provide a re-

sponse. He stressed that he did not know whether anything had hap-

pened in Sverdlovsk or not and that it would require looking into and

checking. But he was still struck by the fact that our experts had

worked together for several months and that no such matter had been

raised. Our raising of the question at this point could only give rise to

feelings of apprehension on the Soviet side as to our good faith in doing

so—particularly in view of the fact that the Soviets would do nothing

which would violate the Convention.

Watson

270.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

4496. Subj: Soviet Reply to Demarche on Sverdlovsk BW Incident.

1. (S-entire text.)

2. In replying to our demarche on the Sverdlovsk incident, the

Foreign Ministry confirmed that an outbreak of anthrax occurred in

Sverdlovsk in March/April 1979 but said this was due to natural

causes, denied that it had anything to do with the Biological Weapons

Convention and charged that the raising of the issue by the United

States creates the impression that someone is trying to cast a shadow on

the efficacy of the Biological Weapons Convention. The reply was

given to the Acting DCM in the form of an oral statement this morning

(March 20) by Viktor Komplektov, Chief of the Foreign Ministry USA

Department. Because Komplektov insisted that the appointment take

place before 12 noon, we imagine the Soviets may be planning shortly

to release the text of the statement to the press.

3. Following is the Embassy’s informal translation of the oral state-

ment, a copy of which was given us as a non-paper.

Begin text:

In connection with the representation of the Embassy of the USA

in Moscow of 17 March 1980, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the

USSR is instructed to state the following.

The Soviet side firmly rejects the efforts of the Government of the

USA to place in doubt the conscientious fulfillment by the Soviet Union

of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriolog-

ical Weapons. With regard to this Convention, just as with other inter-

national agreements in which the Soviet Union participates, the Soviet

side strictly fulfills all provisions of the documents under which it has

accepted the relevant obligations.

In accordance with the legislation and practice of the Soviet Union,

the observance of the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition

of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological

(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction, ratified by

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

order of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR of 11 Feb-

ruary 1975, is guaranteed by the appropriate state institutes of the

USSR. In a statement made by the representative of the USSR in the

committee on disarmament on 24 June 1975, it was pointed out that the

Soviet Union does not have any of the bacteriological (biological)

agents and toxins, weapons, equipment and means of delivery indi-

cated in Article 1 of the Convention.

As for the incident referred to by the American side which oc-

curred in April 1979 in the area of Sverdlovsk, there did in fact occur in

this area in March–April 1979 an ordinary outbreak, arising from nat-

ural causes, of anthrax among animals and cases of illness of people

from the intestinal form of this infection, connected with the use as food

of the meat of cattle which was sold without observance of the rules es-

tablished for veterinary supervision. Appropriate warnings in connec-

tion with this were given in the press. No quarantine of any kind was

established.

That it occurred, however, has no relationship to the question of

observance by the Soviet Union of the Convention on the Prohibition of

Bacteriological Weapons, and therefore there is absolutely no basis for

putting forward the question which has been raised by the American

side.

The impression is automatically created that someone would like

under a clearly invented pretext to cast a shadow on the efficacy of the

Convention on the Prohibition of Bacteriological Weapons—one of the

most important agreements in the arms control area—and to do this at

the very moment when the Review Conference on the operation of this

Convention is taking place in Geneva. Such actions by the Govern-

ment of the US are clearly not dictated by concern for the strengthening

of valid international agreements on disarmament. On the contrary,

they are only capable of weakening these agreements, of complicating

the situation, of hampering the efforts of states in the matter of limiting

the arms race. The Soviet side condemns such actions as directly con-

tradicting the interests of preserving and strengthening peace. End text.

4. A/DCM stated that the Embassy would transmit the Soviet

Union’s response immediately to Washington. He took note of the fact

that the response contained some information on the incident in Sverd-

lovsk, but added that it was not possible to accept the allegations as to

the motives of the US in raising this matter. Given the growing evi-

271.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Alexander Bessmertnykh; Minister-Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member

SUBJECT

Afghanistan and US-Soviet Relations (U)

Bessmertnykh opened the conversation by insisting on the need to

maintain channels of communication between us, a sentiment with

which I readily agreed. (U)

It was particularly important for us to understand, he continued,

the sour view of the US that is now widespread in the USSR, not only in

official circles, but among the general populace as well. He said he was

struck during his recent home leave by the fact that most people who

specialize in foreign affairs were taken aback by the US “overreaction”

to Afghanistan. We, of course, understood that there would be a strong

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

response, said Bessmertnykh. That was unavoidable. But what sur-

prised us was the vehemence of the response, the language used, and

the willingness to throw away what had been built up painfully over

almost a decade. (S)

This contrasts markedly with Soviet behavior in Vietnam in 1972,

Bessmertnykh went on. When the Americans were blockading Hai-

phong2 and bombs were falling right next to Soviet ships, the USSR

nevertheless went ahead with the first Moscow Summit3 and the

signing of the basic agreements which led to the period of detente, a

period which has now ended. There were those who counseled a can-

cellation of the 1972 Summit, but their advice was rejected. We had

a sense of balance and knew what was important. It is that sense

of balance which seems to us completely absent in the US reaction to

Afghanistan. (S)

The situations are hardly comparable, I replied. The bombing of

North Vietnam was in response to a major direct invasion of South

Vietnam by mainline North Vietnamese divisions supplied by the

USSR. That invasion was planned with the support and foreknowledge

of Moscow. It is not the Soviet Union which deserves praise for en-

tering a detente relationship with the US during the Vietnam war, I

said, but rather the other way around. American soldiers were, after all,

being killed and maimed by Soviet-supplied and Soviet-encouraged

armies. Nevertheless, we were willing to conclude the basic arms con-

trol negotiations with the USSR which ushered in the period of detente.

I pointed out that from 1964–1966 I had served in our Embassy in

Moscow as the officer in the Political Section covering Soviet relations

with Asia, and could personally attest to the fact that Soviet reaction to

the war in Vietnam was far more offensive to my government and far

more “unbalanced” than Washington’s reaction to the Soviet invasion

of Afghanistan. Furthermore, I continued, I was surprised to hear him

allude to Soviet behavior in Vietnam in the context of Afghanistan.

Surely he was not proposing that the US model its behavior toward the

conflict in Afghanistan on Soviet behavior in Vietnam? (S)

Such was not his intention, Bessmertnykh acknowledged with an

icy smile. (S)

In fact, despite the extremely unhelpful Soviet attitude toward

Vietnam, I said, both Presidents Johnson and Nixon clearly desired

better relations with the Soviets and regarded this as a fundamental

ment 136.

January–May 1980

aim of US foreign policy. I could assure him personally, I continued,

that President Carter had a deep commitment to detente, to improved

US-Soviet relations, and to the establishment of viable, reciprocal, and

mutually beneficial arms control agreements with the USSR. It was

these very goals which had made the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan so

disappointing and repugnant to us. (S)

The difference with previous administrations, Bessmertnykh re-

joined, was that they placed US-Soviet relations at the center of Amer-

ican foreign policy. The great mistake that this administration had

made was to reduce the focus on this vital subject. A supreme irony is

the fact that Afghanistan clearly restored US-Soviet relations to the pri-

macy it should have had all along for the Carter administration, and

this was clearly shown in the President’s January 4 speech. (S)

In any case, Bessmertnykh said, many people in Moscow had

given up on the idea of trying to establish good relations with the US.

There are some, such as Gromyko and Korniyenko, who are genuinely

in favor of restoring US-Soviet relations to an even keel. But such

people only represent 20–30 percent of the policymakers. Those who

maintain that there is no point in going on with such a policy represent

60–70 percent, and this includes not only foreign ministry officials, but

people in the Central Committee as well. Many of my colleagues were

really taken aback by the pointless nature of the American response,

Bessmertnykh said. It is “a policy of pin pricks.” Nothing you have said

or done will have any real influence over us. I hope nobody within the

Administration believes that the efforts you have made can accomplish

anything. Such is not the nature of the Russian people. In fact, your

propagandists made a great mistake in announcing that the grain em-

bargo would affect Soviet living standards. That kind of threat has a

very bad effect among the Russians. We do not like to be menaced by

foreigners. You have lived in Moscow and you know that Americans

are not unpopular there. There is much good will still left over from the

war. Even if the government would want to change the views of the So-

viet people, it cannot do it. (S)

Another real irony is that despite the differences in our two

systems the American government can have a profound effect on

public opinion, which can change overnight, whereas my government

cannot reshape the basic attitudes of the Soviet population, Bessmert-

nykh said. Nevertheless, I can assure you in all sincerity that both in

Lithuania, where I spent my vacation, as well as in Moscow, quite ordi-

nary people voiced their indignation to me about this American an-

nouncement. After all, a great many people in the USSR did not even

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

know we were buying grain from you. They only learned about it when

our press carried reports of your statement. Furthermore, we are not in

the least concerned about your various economic measures against us.

It has not exactly escaped our notice that your allies are crawling all

over each other trying to replace the US for commercial benefit, he said.

You have been reading our press and you must know the effect this has

had. Before Afghanistan, both Dobrynin and I had some influence in

toning down the way our journalists treated US affairs. But now they

have full freedom to give vent to their bitterest feelings about the

United States, Bessmertnykh said. (S)

I had indeed noticed the way our leaders have been treated re-

cently in the Soviet press, I replied, and consider it most unfortunate.

Personal attacks on the President or his close associates do not serve

any useful purpose. I am not sure what your journalists think they are

doing, but they should understand that personal slanders of the Presi-

dent cannot have a good effect on future US-Soviet relations, and this is

not just a question of the next several months. (S)

I agree that some of our writers may have gone overboard about

some Administration figures and that this really serves no purpose,

Bessmertnykh replied. Nevertheless, you should understand that we

follow what is said about us very closely, and it is difficult to restrain

our journalists. We certainly understand and anticipate that we are

dealing with an administration that will be here for another five years.

It is our prediction that President Carter will be nominated and re-

elected, and our expectation that Dr. Brzezinski will be a part, an im-

portant part, of the new administration. Nevertheless, our feeling is

that the rhetoric you have used about the USSR has exceeded what was

really necessary. You have to understand that we are no longer living

in the world of the 1950s and 1960s. At some point we will return to a

detente relationship. It may be in two years, it may be four years from

now, but we have to live together in this world. We have no choice

about that. But it will never be the same as it was. It will have to be an

entirely different track, Bessmertnykh said. (S)

Based on a close reading of your press and of what I know about

Afghanistan, what is not clear to me, I responded, is whether you fully

understand that the current low state of US-Soviet relations is entirely

the fault of the USSR. It was, after all, the USSR which invaded Afghan-

istan and brought about the very dangerous situation which now faces

both of us in Southwest Asia. (U)

Afghanistan is only the latest in a series of events, Bessmertnykh

rejoined. Relations were on the way down beginning last summer and

they have gotten steadily worse ever since then. We had absolutely no

choice but to take the action we did in Afghanistan. It was a state along

our borders. Our vital interests were involved. Hostile states were dis-

January–May 1980

turbing our security. We have no intention of remaining in Afghani-

stan. We will get out. But we could not let the situation simply fall

You did not use your security needs to justify the invasion, I re-

torted. You did not say that this was a vital interest of the Soviet Union

and therefore you had no choice but to invade Afghanistan. On the con-

trary, you said you were invited into Afghanistan by the legally consti-

tuted government and that you had every right to be there because you

have a treaty with the Afghans. That kind of justification can apply

anywhere in the world. And if the superpowers arrogate to themselves

the right to use combat forces whenever they feel like it, then we will

truly be living in a dangerous situation in the ’80s and ’90s. (S)

You say that Afghanistan involved your “vital interests,” I con-

tinued. But you do not explain why it involved your vital interests. The

fact of the matter is that Soviet vital interests were far better served by

the Daoud government, when Afghanistan was a true buffer state. The

President has said that this is the most dangerous situation we have

faced since the Second World War, and I am firmly convinced that this

is an accurate statement. My hope is that the Soviet government will

perceive the danger and that a reasonable solution will be worked out

to resolve this problem. (S)

But your allies are not in accord with your assessment, Bessmert-

nykh interjected. They have said so publicly. More convincingly, they

told this to us privately. Nevertheless, I agree with you that the

problem of how to define vital interest is a real one. The heart of our

problem is that we seem to disagree on that definition. We do not un-

derstand how an area halfway around the globe can be a “vital in-

terest” to another country. (S)

I hope it is very clear, I stated, that the United States regards that

area of the world as a vital interest. The State of the Union speech5 is not

in the least ambiguous, and I would hope that there was clear under-

standing about this very important point in Moscow. (S)

Afghanistan was, of course, a buffer state in the past, Bessmert-

nykh said. We were perfectly comfortable with Daoud—and with the

King, for that matter. But one could only seriously regard it as a buffer

state when the United States had 40,000 servicemen in Iran, a country

that is no longer the same. It has changed and changed for good. So Af-

ghanistan is no longer a buffer state between us. You no longer control

either Iran or Pakistan. It is Iran rather than Afghanistan that has

perhaps become a buffer state. We are dealing with a changing area,

and the United States always finds it difficult to accept change. (S)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

You state that the Daoud government was perfectly acceptable to

you, I rejoined. Nevertheless, you felt it necessary to support those who

had shot and killed Daoud and who had overthrown his government.

Your response was to prop up the government of Daoud’s killers by in-

creasing your military personnel and economic assistance tenfold, de-

spite the fact that the new Afghan government was following policies

which were highly unpopular and which eventually led to the current

destabilizing crisis in the area. (S)

It is true that support for revolutionary movements is a funda-

mental aspect of our foreign policy, said Bessmertnykh. We have no

choice in such situations. For better or worse, we feel we have to sup-

port revolutionary movements. “If anyone wants Soviet support, all

they have to do is start a revolution.” (S)

While we might not like your various actions in Afghanistan and

elsewhere, I replied, we nevertheless can accept that the USSR has a

right to assist those governments and political forces with which it is

sympathetic. This could even include military assistance. However,

where one has to draw the line is armed combat. The introduction of

Soviet combat troops, or even the introduction of the troops of Soviet

surrogates, such as the Cubans or Vietnamese, creates situations which

make a detente relationship between the superpowers impossible to

maintain. Furthermore, it makes no sense to view the invasion of Af-

ghanistan in isolation. In 1975 the USSR shipped a Cuban army to An-

gola. In 1977 and again in 1978, Soviet generals commanded Cuban

troops in combat in Ethiopia. Then the Vietnamese attacked Cambodia.

Finally, at the end of 1979, you invaded Afghanistan with Soviet

troops—the first time in 30 years that Soviet troops have transgressed

the boundaries you achieved as a result of World War II. This is not

something which you could expect the United States or its allies to ig-

nore. It sets a remarkably dangerous precedent and is an event to which

we have to respond unambiguously, so that your government does not

mistake the depth and gravity of our reaction or what our reaction will

be if this type of behavior continues. (S)

The fact of the matter is, Bessmertnykh replied, that your allies see

the situation entirely differently than you do. Not only do they not re-

gard Afghanistan as endangering them in any way, they rather see it as

an opportunity to derive commercial advantage in their dealing with

us. Many people in Moscow are aware of this and are trying to take ad-

vantage of it. Dobrynin and I have worked very hard to build up

US-Soviet trade, and now it will all go to the West Europeans and the

Japanese. (S)

More important than trade, I said, is whether the Soviet Union

thinks it has the right to introduce armed combat troops anywhere in

the world to support “revolutionary movements” wherever they exist.

January–May 1980

We have the right to do whatever you do, Bessmertnykh replied. There

has been a great change in the world. This is no longer the ’50s or ’60s,

he repeated. And what has changed is that we have achieved military

parity with you not only in the strategic field, but in conventional arms

as well. You have your troops all over the world, half a million of them.

You do not ask our permission to go into places like Korea. Your troops

are there not only to defend that territory, but to prop up the local gov-

ernment. There is no reason for you to have any rights which we do not

have. We must insist on equality. It is hard for you to adjust to this, but

you must come to realize that it is a new fact of life. You have lived

many years in my country and you understand very well that we are

quite cautious. We do not undertake actions such as those in Afghani-

stan without fully realizing their implications. We moved only to pro-

tect our vital interests. We do not consider that Afghanistan is a prec-

edent for future action. (S)

Although you say this, and might even believe it, I replied, there is

no way that you can know for certain that what you are saying is the

truth. Events have a way of becoming precedents which can ultimately

surprise the people who triggered those same events. It is therefore es-

sential that Afghanistan indeed not be a precedent for future Soviet ac-

tions. US-Soviet relations cannot stand future Afghanistans. We there-

fore must find a viable way to resolve this problem. The President

suggested one such way when he indicated that the US is ready to sup-

port efforts by the international community to restore a neutral,

non-aligned Afghan government that would be responsive to the

wishes of the Afghan people. The essence of a settlement must there-

fore consist of prompt and complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghani-

stan, coupled with agreement by all interested parties that such a gov-

ernment be installed in Kabul. (S)

The key to a settlement must be the stopping of assistance to the

rebel forces, Bessmertnykh countered. Once such assistance has ceased,

we will be able to resolve this problem quickly and satisfactorily. (S)

The problem does not arise because of outside forces, I rejoined,

but rather because of the Soviet invasion. A genuine national liberation

movement exists within Afghanistan. In fact, it is not one movement

but several, with roots in different regions within the country. Resist-

ance arose through spontaneous combustion, not outside help, and Af-

ghanistan was aflame before the world knew anything about it. There

were 300,000 refugees in Pakistan less than a year ago. Today there are

more than 600,000. These people left their country because they could

not support the government which existed there. It is their determina-

tion to carry on the struggle which makes a long and bitter war inevi-

table unless some means is found of installing a government in Kabul

which is to some degree responsive to their wishes. If your aim is to es-

272.

Memorandum of Conversation

SUBJECT

Conversation with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin

PARTICIPANTS

US

Soviet Union

The Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin

Assistant Secretary George Vest,

EUR

SUMMARY. Dobrynin, who returns to Moscow on Sunday for a

medical check-up, had a one and a half hour conversation covering

SALT, the possibility of a future meeting between the two Foreign Min-

isters, the state of relations between the United States and the USSR, the

causes of friction and the future. Dobrynin had little to give but pessi-

mism. He saw the relationship built up over the last ten years down the

drain and thought it likely that US-Soviet relations by the end of the

Administration’s second term would be about where it was when it

began the present term. END SUMMARY.

SALT II

The Secretary said that he was aware that the Soviets were ques-

tioning whether there had been a change in our policy on SALT. He

stressed that the President has left SALT on the Senate calendar and on

the top of the calendar. The climate is not yet ripe, however. There is

just a possibility that there may be a window when SALT II could be

considered around June. If we miss that window, we will have to wait

until after the elections. In response to Dobrynin’s question, he re-

peated we have made no decision to “postpone indefinitely” ratifica-

tion of SALT II. We remain firmly committed to SALT II and are deter-

mined to pursue its ratification as soon as circumstances permit.

The Secretary continued that we are disappointed by the position

taken by the Soviet side at the SCC that there was no justification to

continue the work on SALT II implementation procedures. We had

proposed to continue the work on these procedures in the belief that

this served our mutual interest and this remains our view. Dobrynin

said that the reason for the Soviet attitude was there [that] it seemed

pointless to continue this work if SALT were to be postponed indefi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

nitely. Moscow had heard what the President had said and they also

heard the comments of so many Senators, but in any case he would

pass to Moscow what the Secretary was now saying.

The Secretary said that the President is firmly committed to SALT

II and we feel it becomes even more important when times are tense.

We do not intend to take any action which would impede the imple-

mentation of the treaty and we will maintain that policy. We hope and

expect that the Soviets will do the same. Dobrynin replied that the

United States has the means to check the Soviets.

Possibility of a Foreign Ministers’ Meeting

The Secretary said he would talk to the President this weekend

about when such a meeting might be appropriate. Dobrynin had ap-

parently nothing with which to respond. He said there had been

various exchanges since the year’s beginning, including the proposal to

send a special emissary for conversations in Moscow. The Secretary

and Dobrynin went to and fro about events. Dobrynin thought we had

changed our mind. The Secretary observed that from the tone of the

high-level exchanges we had been left uncertain whether the Soviets

wanted to have a meeting; that was why earlier the President had de-

cided to let the matter rest. However, the Secretary thought the time

had come to consider when a meeting would be worthwhile—April or

May—and he asked Dobrynin to pass on his views to Gromyko.

US-Soviet Relations

Dobrynin was pessimistic about the future. He saw no prospect of

improvement in our relations during or until well after the election

campaign and thereafter it might take six months, two years, or longer

before we could make progress. What did the Secretary think?

The Secretary pointed out that the invasion of Afghanistan had

caused a major deterioration in our relationship and this would con-

tinue to be an important negative factor until the Soviet troops were

withdrawn. We don’t see much chance in the foreseeable future of that

withdrawal. The President had made our position clear in his response

to Tito2 and in his comment on guarantees as related to a Soviet with-

drawal. The relations between our two countries is the most important

foreign policy issue for both of us and we had to find a way to control

the dangers. There are positive things we must do. We should pursue

SALT and key nuclear negotiations between us such as TNF and CTB.

Arms control is the area in which bridges can be built, even in difficult

times like the present. We on our side do not wish to destroy this essen-

tial part of the East-West framework. We will continue to abide by the

January–May 1980

terms of our existing legal agreements with the Soviet Union. We will

continue our other arms control negotiations, including MBFR and

chemical warfare treaty. We have a common interest in the NPT review

and in going ahead with the CSCE review in Madrid. Dobrynin inter-

jected that Moscow until now is prepared for Madrid also. The Secre-

tary added that we are trying to move our British friends on the site

numbers for CTB and it is just possible that we will see more positive

action there. In the more general bilateral areas, cultural and scientific,

we are pursuing these activities at lower levels and at a slowed-down

pace but they should be kept in place for the future because it will be

easier to build on them than to reinitiate. The Secretary concluded that

our relationships are under strain and there are indeed many negative

factors on the immediate horizon, but there is a basic desire on our part

to get the relationship back on track through frank talks, to develop a

more stable understanding in the important areas such as arms control,

Southwest Asia, Southeast Asia, etc.

Dobrynin replied that this was his assessment of our policy. He

was very unhappy with the present state of affairs. As he saw it, there is

nothing but negativism for now and the immediate future. It was his

impression that the US is disrupting our relationship so completely that

it now affects even the least things between us. It took years to build the

relationship which the US is so easily disrupting. That kind of relation-

ship cannot be rebuilt possibly until the end of a second term, at which

time the US will only be where it was when the Administration began.

In the meantime, the US reaction is moving the Soviets to a counter-

reaction, internally, not seen but happening with considerable emotion

and even if it doesn’t show, it will be difficult to handle later on.

The Secretary asked Dobrynin what he saw in the future con-

cerning the Afghanistan problem. He would be ready to sit down and

discuss this with Dobrynin when he returned or to discuss it with Gro-

myko when we could also discuss broader concerns. Dobrynin won-

dered if this would be fruitful given the mood of the present US

Administration.

Dobrynin reverted to US negativism again and the Secretary re-

minded him of Soviet negativism in Afghanistan. Dobrynin replied:

But you ask how Moscow sees things, and they see this Administration

as 100 percent negative, right down to the lesser things. He cited as

examples:

—PanAm refused to ship the coffin containing the wife of the UN

Deputy Secretary General for Political Affairs, Mrs. Sytenko. PanAm

said this was against PanAm policy so the coffin went on Polish air-

lines. (Comment: PanAm had labor union difficulty on all freight ship-

ments to USSR at that time. The Department was not asked to help.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

—The situation has so deteriorated that now Soviet diplomats are

acting as longshoremen.

—A Soviet trawler violated its catch limits on fish in Alaska and

was handled with unusual harshness. (Comment: The trawler was han-

dled in accordance with routine Coast Guard procedures followed in

all violations of this nature, e.g., Japanese, Korean, Taiwanese. The

vessel was escorted to Kodiak and the Coast Guard explicitly reported

that relations with the crew of the “Zelenograd” remained cooperative

and cordial.)

—Soviet scientists, seeing the mood in the US, are increasingly re-

luctant even to come to the US.

—The mood of the country is reinforced by the pronouncements of

the Administration, so much so that there seemed to be practically

nothing left to maintain in our bilateral relations.

Dobrynin illustrated his point with the report of Soviet gassing of

Afghanistan villages, complaining that our official press briefing ac-

cused the Soviets without evidence to back it up. The Secretary replied

that for weeks we have gotten extensive and numerous reports which

give detailed accounts describing two kinds of gas, smoke and another

which causes bleeding and death. We have report after report from

many different sources. Therefore, our Spokesman was correct when

he said that, although we have no photographs, we have so many re-

ports from refugees that we have to take account of them. Dobrynin’s

reply was that these are only stories and we have no proof. Do you be-

lieve, he asked, that we have no sense of civilization? It seems that you

will accept any accusation against the Soviets.

He then turned to the bacteriological warfare episode. Anthrax, he

said, is a disease which from time to time occurs in the Asian world.

The Soviets have experienced it before in Siberia3 and warned people to

avoid infected meat. In this case it was not a secret episode, it happened

a year ago. Yet when people came to the West and told stories, we lis-

tened to their stories, reacted in public and to the UN agency without

waiting for or giving credence to what the Soviet Union said. The Secre-

tary pointed out that the essential fact was that there appeared to be ev-

idence that some material had not been destroyed which should have

been. Dobrynin replied that the Soviet authorities would not take such

chances with their own citizens. The episode took place a year ago and

now was being used as propaganda against the Soviets. The State De-

partment Spokesman had no answer as to why this subject came up a

year late or why we made accusations without proof. He was forced to

conclude that a US TV commentator was right when he described it as

January–May 1980

an instance of the Administration’s “aggressive psychological war-

fare.” Certainly that is the atmosphere, an atmosphere which is alto-

gether negative, a search warrant atmosphere, and as a result the struc-

ture of the past ten years is left standing like a building exposed to an

atomic bomb. The Secretary commented that it was not our intent to de-

stroy the structure. He had said that before and stood by it, but he did

not minimize the problems. Dobrynin repeated gloomily that the only

thing left was the bare framework of the structure and nothing else. The

Secretary asked if Dobrynin thought the people in Moscow understood

the intensity of the US public reaction to the invasion in Afghanistan.

Dobrynin replied yes, they did understand it and, if not, the US re-

minded them of it daily.

The Secretary asked Dobrynin what he thought were the reasons

for the deteriorated relationship. Dobrynin replied there were many

reasons, including:

—The conduct of the SALT talks at the beginning of the Adminis-

tration which should have been more prudently handled to dispose

only of the remaining issues (the Secretary said it took us two plus

years to dispose of them); the US suggestion for deep cuts had thrown

off the negotiating stride.

—Human rights.

—Middle East. After the communique with Gromyko the Soviets

were dropped out of the picture.

—Disarmament, where the US really set out to build up its arms.

—Vienna, a good meeting but instead of building on it the US

fanned the Cuba incident4 and lost two months on SALT because of a

non-existent issue and it was non-existent because Soviet troops had

been in Cuba for 15 years.

Dobrynin then turned to SALT and TNF. The Soviets had thought

SALT, as agreed at Vienna, would represent rough parity—and then

we threw in TNF. The Secretary interjected that the Soviets had begun

it with the SS–20 with multiple warheads. Dobrynin argued that we

should not have thrown TNF into the middle of SALT but should have

finished SALT II first, then turned to the problems of weapons in the al-

lied area when we could have dealt with them sensibly. Doing it our

way had built more and more impediments into the US-Soviet nuclear

relationship. As a result the Soviets had grown angry and now said

they would not discuss TNF. He saw each side having new weapons

systems by 1983 and as a result did not see any prospect for SALT III.

Dobrynin concluded that massive US negativism affected even

minor aspects of the US-Soviet relationship. Consequently he had to

273.

Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, April 17, 1980

SUBJECT

Dissidence in Eastern Europe and the USSR—Are We Doing Enough? (U)

Dissidence in this paper is used to mean not simply actions by re-

gime critics who achieve prominence, but the entire range of activity,

some obvious, some extremely unobtrusive, which generates pressures

for freedom of thought and expression, human rights and the advan-

tages of a pluralistic society. (U)

January–May 1980

On the demonstrative and declarative level the record of the Carter

Administration is second to none in the past fifteen years. The Presi-

dent has personally identified himself with prominent Soviet dissi-

dents such as Bukovsky, Shcharansky and Sakharov and during his

visit to Poland2 insisted on contact with both dissident and church

figures. Other Administration officials, most notably yourself, have re-

peatedly met, endorsed and communicated with dissidents in the

USSR and Eastern Europe. The “spies for dissidents” exchange you ar-

ranged last year was one of the most politically astute moves the U.S.

Government has ever made on behalf of Soviet dissidents. The Admin-

istration’s human rights policy has generated worldwide debate on

human rights on which dissidents in Communist societies have capi-

talized. Our participation in the Belgrade CSCE meetings under the

vigorous leadership of Arthur Goldberg underscored our commitment

to principle and highlighted Soviet efforts to avoid honoring commit-

ments they accepted in 1975. The Administration took early decisions

which will soon expand the power of VOA and RFE/RL. (U)

Other programs for communicating with Eastern Europe and the

USSR have been modestly expanded. (S)

Allocation of resources—both manpower and money—to pro-

grams encouraging dissidence and serving the needs of dissidence has

not been proportionate to the high level of attention the Administration

has given this field in statements and demonstrative actions. There

have been other problems in respect to performance and procedure. No

new operational instrumentalities have been created for implementing

human rights policies, sustaining research effort and channeling and

coordinating human rights initiatives on a self-propelled basis. (C)

Human rights have been overly politicized domestically as a result

of priority assigned by the State Department to more energetic pursuit

of human rights issues with non-Communist Latin American and Af-

rican countries than with Communist-ruled states. As a result human

rights is in danger of becoming a negative concept among conserva-

tives both in the U.S. and abroad. The subject needs to be brought into

better balance. (C)

Our most valuable instruments for communication with Eastern

Europe and the USSR are the big radios. New investment in trans-

mitters has not been matched by comparable investment in program-

ming. Though budgetary allocations for broadcasting have risen each

year, they have not been sufficient to offset inflationary increases in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

both the U.S. and Europe and the declining value of the dollar. As a re-

sult manpower rejuvenation and expansion of programming and re-

search support have continued to be postponed. The effect is evident in

decline in Radio Liberty listenership in the USSR. New investment for

programming improvement is urgently needed. This has been strik-

ingly demonstrated as we have taken up the question of broadcasting

in Muslim languages, where Radio Liberty’s current level of perform-

ance is only a fraction of its potential. The same is true to a lesser extent

Book and publication programs for Eastern Europe and the USSR,

like the radios, provide the basic seed and fertilizer on which dissi-

dence is nourished. These programs were at a low ebb in 1977, at a far

lower level of real-dollar input than they had been ten years earlier.

They have received modest increases each of the past four years but are

still, at a total expenditure of less than $5 million per year, funded at

levels which do not enable them to exploit the new opportunities for

penetrating the Communist world with ideas and information which

are constantly developing. Samizdat and tamizdat available for repub-

lishing and distribution into Eastern Europe and the USSR are be-

coming available at a much faster rate than they are able to take advan-

tage of because of limitations of funds and manpower. (S)

Realization of the importance of Islam, national self-assertion

among the Muslim peoples of the USSR (as well as Christian peoples

such as the Balts, Ukrainians and Georgians) and the ferment and feed-

back generated by events in Iran and the Soviet invasion of Afghani-

stan, (inter alia the resultant suppression of dissidents of which the Sak-

harov exile is only the most flagrant example) are developments which

have highlighted new opportunities. Existing resources are inadequate

to meet these opportunities. Existing manpower working on these sub-

jects is insufficient to do all the research and operational planning that

is required. (C)

RECOMMENDATIONS:

Programs for exploiting dissidence in Eastern Europe and the

USSR (and perhaps Cuba as well?) are, comparatively, in terms of the

continuing effect they generate within Communist societies, the most

cost-effective activity the U.S. Government undertakes. (U)

• While maintaining and refining its verbal commitment and demonstra-

tive public actions in behalf of dissidents and human rights in these coun-

tries, the Administration should urgently consider immediate increases

January–May 1980

in resources allocated to these activities. At a minimum they merit classifi-

cation as essential national security operations subject to real annual in-

• The creation of one or more semi-autonomous institutions for

sustained implementation of human rights goals, with perhaps a

combination of governmental and private funding, should be urgently

studied. (C)

• Expansion and refinement of radio programming by all instrumen-

talities available—VOA, RFE/RL—should be undertaken at a steady

• Plans should be made for future expansion of radio transmitters to

counter continued Soviet increases in transmitter power and efforts to

jam our transmissions. The long lead-time required for building trans-

mitters makes this essential. (C)

• Expansion of publication and distribution operations should also be

undertaken. Even modest increments of funds enable existing publica-

tion and distribution projects to perform at a much higher level of

efficiency. E.g., publishing 6,000 rather than 3,000 copies of a Ukrai-

nian dissident book costs much less than the initial cost of the original

• A tape-cassette distribution program should be developed to

augment existing book and magazine programs; there is increasing

evidence that cassettes are popular and effective in the Communist

• Substantively, areas and peoples who are poorly served by cur-

rent or even planned publication and distribution programs include:

—The Baltic States, especially the Lithuanians.

—The Ukrainians.

—The Caucasus, including the Georgians, Armenians and Muslim

peoples. (C)

• Religion, not only Islam, should be given higher priority for plan-

ning new operations. E.g., the potential of persistent Orthodox tradi-

tion in the Ukraine and among Russians as a focal point for anti-

Communist nationalism (or nationalism that regards Communism as

irrelevant) needs to be examined. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

274.

Special Analytical Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence

Agency

Washington, undated

USSR

Suppression of Dissidents

by [name not declassified] CIA

As relations between the US and USSR have become more strained,

Moscow has intensified its campaign against the Soviet dissident movement.

The authorities have detained more than 40 dissidents since the crackdown

began in October 1979, concentrating particularly on human rights activists

such as members of the Helsinki Act Monitoring Group. The activists have

been subjected to continual harassment, including repeated house searches and

close surveillance. [handling restriction not declassified]

The greatest blow to the dissidents was the exile in January of An-

drey Sakharov to Gorkiy, which removed the human rights move-

ment’s most prominent spokesman. He is now isolated from contact

with all but family members. [handling restriction not declassified]

In the past, Sakharov’s remarks automatically commanded the at-

tention of Western correspondents in Moscow and shaped world

opinion against Soviet tactics toward dissent. Without Sakharov, the

members of the Moscow Helsinki group believe that they are being ig-

nored by Western media at a time when the group is being decimated

by arrests. [handling restriction not declassified]

There was little publicity in the West when Malva Landa, one of

the most prominent members of the Moscow group, recently was sen-

tenced to three years of internal exile for “slandering the Soviet state.”

Trials of several other human rights activists in custody should follow

shortly. [handling restriction not declassified]

The Soviets had been expected to remove likely troublemakers be-

fore the Olympics, but the severity of this latest campaign appears

aimed at paralyzing all forms of dissent. Following Sakharov’s exile, a

number of dissident activists reportedly were warned by Soviet offi-

cials that the action taken against Sakharov demonstrated that the au-

thorities are prepared to take measures against any member of the dis-

sident movement. Some reportedly were told that the authorities

expect to “finish off” the movement within a couple of months. [han-

dling restriction not declassified]

January–May 1980

Dissidents Discouraged

The US Embassy reports that most dissidents believe that the So-

viet human rights movement will survive the crackdown, while others

are less optimistic that it will be able to continue in its present form. The

Soviet intelligentsia has allegedly become disenchanted with the move-

ment, partly because the dissidents are preoccupied with the arrests of

their colleagues rather than focusing on the main problems in the

USSR. [handling restriction not declassified]

In addition, the current climate of cynicism and apathy among stu-

dents has resulted in fewer young people being drawn to the dissi-

dents. Those who do become activists are attracted by the nationalist

and religious dissident movements, which apparently have a broader

base than does dissent over human rights. According to the Embassy,

the human rights movement has lost much of its sense of purpose and

is being forced into a period of relative inactivity. [handling restriction

not declassified]

Restrictions on Jewish Emigration

Although not directly linked with the crackdown on dissidents,

new restrictions on Jewish emigration reportedly were introduced

about the same time. A reduction in the number of visas became evi-

dent last November when the total dropped to 3,600 from the year’s

monthly average of 4,200. A slow decline has continued through

March, lowering the total for the first quarter of 1980 by more than 25

percent as compared with the same period last year. [handling restriction

not declassified]

The reduction is caused primarily by a severe cutback in emigra-

tion from the Ukraine, a result of strict enforcement of a regulation lim-

iting sponsorship of emigrants to immediate family members living in

Israel. Considerable variation in emigration practices is still apparent

among the Soviet republics, however, with the majority showing a

slight increase in the number of emigrants this year. [handling restriction

not declassified]

275.

Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordinating

Committee Meeting

SUBJECT

Summary of Conclusions: SCC Meeting on Soviet Grain Policy

PARTICIPANTS

State

USTR

Acting Secretary

Ambassador Robert Hormats,

Warren Christopher

Deputy USTR

Richard Cooper, Under Secretary

JSC

for Economic Affairs

Brig. Gen. David Palmer

Defense

Lt. Col. Don Miller

Ellen Frost, Deputy Assistant

Secretary for International

Douglas Diamond, Chief USSR

Economic & Technological

Eastern Europe Division,

Affairs

Office of Economic Research

Treasury

OMB

Robert Carswell, Deputy Secretary

John White, Deputy Director

Herbert Horowitz, Director, Office

Kitty Schirmer, Associate Director

of East-West Economic Policy

Vice President’s Office

Agriculture

Gail Harrison

Jim Williams, Deputy Secretary

White House

Dale Hathaway, Under Secretary

Ambassador Henry Owen

for International Affairs

Lloyd Cutler

and Commodity Programs

NSC

Commerce

Marshall Brement

The Secretary Philip Klutznick

Timothy Deal

Robert Herzstein, Under Secretary

for International Trade

The SCC reviewed a State/USDA options paper2 regarding US

policy on grain sales to the USSR. The paper sets forth three options:

(1) Continue the present policy. The US would sell the Soviets 8 million

metric tons (MMT) of grain, as required by the bilateral grain agree-

ment, and would ask other exporting countries to limit shipments to

January–May 1980

“normal and traditional” levels. (2) Seek agreement to a more restrictive

program. We would hold sales to 8MMT and ask other exporters to re-

tablish a competitive export posture. (C)

The group agreed that the grain suspension had been effective this

year. The Soviets would obtain only about 7 MMT of the 17 MMT we

had denied them. Except for Argentina, the other exporting countries

had been fairly cooperative in limiting shipments. But the overall com-

mitment was imprecise, and some countries (e.g. Canada) are pushing

the upper limit of “traditional” sales. Continuation of the present

farmer would continue to bear most of the economic burden while

other countries increased their share of the Soviet market. Option 3

would require the US to retreat from the decisions announced in Jan-

uary and was undesirable from a foreign policy standpoint. Option 2

seemed the preferable course if: (a) it would have a significant impact

on the Soviet economy; and (b) other exporters would cooperate. (C)

On the first point, assuming a Soviet crop of 215 MMT (trend esti-

mate), option 2 would impose further pressures on the Soviet livestock

sector and prevent the rebuilding of stocks. If their crop is much higher

than 215 MMT, there is little we could do unilaterally or jointly to

punish the Soviets. They could rebuild stocks and increase livestock

There was detailed discussion about the prospects for gaining ex-

porter cooperation. It was agreed that Argentina is the key. If Argen-

tina continues massive grain shipments to the USSR, it would be diffi-

cult to convince others to hold the line, much less cut back exports.

Argentina has just concluded a long term agreement with the Soviets,

calling for minimum grain shipments of 5MMT annually. We might be

able to convince Argentina to hold to that level. It was noted that we

have little bargaining leverage with Argentina to go below this level

unless we are willing to back away from our policies on human rights,

nuclear nonproliferation, etc. If we don’t go below this level, other ex-

porters would object, since 5MMT is 180% of average Argentine ex-

ports to the USSR in recent years. Canada and Australia both have large

unsold stocks from this year’s crop. Canada wants our approval for the

export of 1979/80 grain to the USSR. Canadian farmers claim they have

borne the main burden of the embargo—just as ours do. Conceivably,

Canada might conclude a long term agreement with the USSR. (C)

The group agreed that the degree of cooperation we receive will

depend in large part on the size of the Soviet harvest. If their crop is

good, there will be a competitive scramble for a limited market, and

any agreement will fail. We will not have a good estimate of the crop

until July. (C)

276.

Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, May 2, 1980

SUBJECT

Organizing the State Department to Deal With US-Soviet Relations (C)

In the belief that it is very important to do something tangible to

demonstrate (a) that the Administration now speaks consistently on its

policy toward the Soviet Union, (b) that it realizes that how you deal

January–May 1980

with the Soviets can sometimes be as important as what you do about

their behavior, and (c) that Secretary Muskie2 does not intend to perpe-

tuate the grave errors in style that Vance was guilty of in his handling

of Dobrynin, this memo proposes:

—that an Under Secretary of State, preferably Matt Nimetz, be des-

ignated to handle not only arms control and security matters, but So-

viet relations as well;

—that a new bureau of Soviet and East European affairs be formed

in the State Department, preferably headed by someone who has a clear

association with you, such as Sam Huntington or Madeleine Albright;

and

—that new rules of conduct on how to handle the Soviets be

agreed upon and that Vance’s deplorable practice of having long

one-on-one subsequently largely unreported conversations with Do-

brynin be stopped. (C)

The Nature of the Problem. Critics of the Administration (including

Reagan, Bush and Kennedy) have repeatedly charged, and continue to

charge, that one of its great weaknesses has been an inability to deal

consistently with the Soviets and have cited the well-publicized

Vance-Brzezinski differences on strategy and tactics as evidence of the

gulf which divides the NSC and the State Department on the subject.

Turning this perception around would be of obvious help to the Presi-

dent and to our entire diplomatic effort around the world. Were we

able to convince others that we now view Soviet policy consistently and

realistically and that we have achieved a widely shared consensus

within the government on the Soviet threat which faces us, it would not

only help domestically, but it would markedly undercut Soviet efforts

to drive a wedge between us and the allies. (C)

Given the problems that face us in Afghanistan and Iran as well as

with the West Europeans, it is important to demonstrate that Senator

Muskie regards US-Soviet relations as central to our foreign policy and

that he is moving vigorously to come to grips with the problem. It

would also demonstrate both domestically and to the allies that the

President is continuing to give the creative resolution of US-Soviet dif-

ficulties the priority it deserves. (C)

The three recommendations enumerated below are based on the

assumption that Marshall Shulman, in line with his personal desires,

will be going back to Columbia no later than this summer. The Univer-

sity wants him to do so and now that Vance has departed there is no

logical justification for the senior man on Soviet affairs at the State De-

partment to be a lame duck, particularly at a time when US-Soviet bilat-

eral relations have ground down to almost zero. Once Marshall has left

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the scene, the new Secretary could make the changes suggested

without reflecting unfavorably on Marshall or implying that Senator

Muskie has no confidence in him, since his desire to return to the

Academy is well known. (C)

(a) Designate an Under Secretary for Strategic and Soviet Affairs. Re-

porting to him would be both the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs

and either the offices of Soviet and of East European Affairs or a newly-

created Bureau of Soviet and East European Affairs (see below). This

would ensure that one official at the top level of the State Department

would be responsible for the entire range of questions dealing with the

Soviet Union, just as Korniyenko deals with all aspects of American af-

fairs within the Soviet Foreign Office. Such a move at one stroke would

overcome most of the irrational aspects of organization that have

plagued us in our relations with the Soviets in the past, parallel the bu-

reaucratic structure which the Soviets use to deal with us and thereby

rationalize the process of US-Soviet diplomatic interchange, and con-

siderably ameliorate some of the burdens on the Secretary, who on too

many occasions has been acting as Soviet desk officer, since there has

been nobody underneath him in the hierarchy who dealt both with bi-

lateral affairs and arms control matters. (This meant, incidentally, that

the Soviet side of the Department made no input into a whole range of

questions which formed the most important US-Soviet business from

Moscow’s point of view.) The rationality of having a single Under Sec-

retary of State for both Soviet, strategic, and arms control matters

should be obvious, since the latter fields are really only separate aspects

of US-Soviet relations. (C)

My candidate for the job is Matt Nimetz. He is already in place as

the Under Secretary handling security policy. He is smart, tough, and

realistic about Soviet affairs—by far the best man in this regard on the

seventh floor of the State Department. At least as important, Nimetz is

a well-known Vance protege, a former partner in his law firm. Both for

its symbolic continuity and for its substance the appointment would be

an outstanding one. (C)

(b) Create a Bureau for Soviet and East European Affairs. The United

States spends more than a third of its national budget dealing with the

Soviet Union. Yet it is the only major Western nation without an official

of Assistant Secretary or comparable rank dealing with Soviet and East

European affairs in its Foreign Ministry. Instead, we subsume Soviet af-

fairs under the broader aegis of European affairs and ask one Assistant

Secretary of State to be in charge of everything from London to Vladi-

vostok. The fact of the matter is that George Vest and all of his prede-

cessors spend more than 90 percent of their time dealing with our

knotty relations with the allies. This is inescapable. It is impossible for

someone handling Western European affairs to devote adequate time

January–May 1980

and creative energy to dealing with the Soviet Union. Soviet affairs are

thus neglected at the bureau level. SOV now has just a shade of its

former influence and competence. It is largely ignored on high policy

matters. The creation of a new bureau devoted exclusively to Soviet

and East European affairs would demonstrate that:

—Secretary Muskie is taking a creative and dynamic approach

toward US-Soviet relations;

—he is giving them the emphasis they deserve during these trou-

bled times;

—he intends to implement organizational changes which demon-

strate that he is convinced he will be Secretary of State for the next five

years; and

—he recognizes that NATO and Soviet affairs should not be in the

same bureau of the State Department because the problems we face in

dealing with these areas are in many cases antithetical and therefore

should not be settled within the bureau, but rather be dealt with at the

high policy level. (C)

Finally, the person in charge of such a bureau (or for that matter

Shulman’s replacement if a new bureau is not organized) should obvi-

ously be somebody who has been closely associated with you in the

past. This would help the President because—together with the Nimetz

appointment—it would be a striking symbol of the new unity between

the Department and the NSC on Soviet affairs. With Nimetz (a Vance

protege) in command and one of your own colleagues or former col-

leagues as the new Assistant Secretary for East European affairs, we

would have in place what would be perceived as a new, balanced team.

This would be an important symbol that there are no longer funda-

mental differences in viewpoint within the Administration on how we

should be dealing with the Soviets during the Era of Afghanistan. Pos-

sible candidates which occur to me might be Sam Huntington or Made-

leine Albright, but you, of course, are in the best position to suggest

somebody, if you believe the idea has merit. (C)

(c) Adopt Sound Basic Principles on How to Deal with the Soviets. Sen-

ator Muskie has an opportunity to behave toward the Soviets in a way

that makes sense diplomatically, that will strike the right tone publicly,

and that will gladden the heart of the State Department and of all pro-

fessional observers of US-Soviet relations. To do so he should adopt the

following basic principles of behavior. (C)

(1) Maintain a multiplicity of channels, i.e., do not use Dobrynin as

the single means of communication for dealing with the Soviet gov-

ernment on high policy matters. It is Gromyko and Brezhnev who

should be the recipients of our message, not Dobrynin, who cannot

always be counted on to convey our message in the way we want it

conveyed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

(2) Adhere to Strict Reciprocity in all our Bilateral Dealings. This is a

cardinal rule for handling the Soviets, who are past masters at nickeling

and diming you to death if you let them get away with it.

(3) Do Business at a Normal Level, i.e., to the extent possible, avoid

negotiations of routine matters at the level of Secretary of State.

(4) Utilize the Embassy in Moscow as Much as Possible, i.e., double

track all messages of importance both to ensure that Dobrynin is being

an accurate reporter and to enhance the prestige of our Ambassador in

Moscow.

(5) Never see Dobrynin Without a Third Person Present. This has been

a real dereliction on Vance’s part, for which he and the Administration

might pay heavily in the eyes of future historians.

(6) Never Have a Conversation with Dobrynin or Other Key Soviet Offi-

cials Without a Detailed Written Record Being Made. This is fundamental

diplomatic behavior. Vance’s many violations of this principle were

shocking to specialists in Soviet affairs.

(7) Keep Our Ambassador in Moscow Fully Informed on All Aspects of

the Relationship. There is no point in having an Ambassador and not

making real use of him.

Implementation of the above guidelines would not only ensure

more effective and professional handling of our relations with the

USSR, but it would also elevate the new Secretary of State enormously

in the eyes of his State Department colleagues. (C)

RECOMMENDATION

That you float the above ideas with the President and with Senator

Muskie at Camp David.

277.

Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the

Director of the National Security Agency (Inman)

COUNTRY

USSR/Afghanistan/Italy

SUBJECT

Comments by Georgiy Arbatov on Soviet perceptions on Afghanistan and

possible scenario for Soviet withdrawal [less than 1 line not declassified]

SOURCE

[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]

1. According to Georgiy Arbatov, head of the USSR’s Institute of

the U.S.A. and Canada (IUSAC)—Soviet perceptions about the dangers

of the internal situation in Afghanistan in December 1979 had been dis-

torted, and he implied that there had been a serious debate within the

Soviet Politburo on the advisability of intervening militarily in Afghan-

istan. Arbatov said that at the time the “hardliners” in the Politburo

had been successful in pointing out that there was little of benefit to the

USSR that could be obtained by continuing to exercise restraint in Af-

ghanistan, but Arbatov commented that now there was beginning to be

a reflection in the Politburo of a perception that the Soviets had suf-

fered a greater propaganda defeat over the intervention than had been

anticipated prior to the Politburo decision to move troops into Afghani-

stan. [14 lines not declassified]

2. Arbatov described some of the atmosphere in Moscow that pre-

ceded the intervention decision. Arbatov noted the decision of the U.S.

Government to exaggerate the presence of a Soviet combat brigade in

Cuba and then back away from the issue as one of the initial factors

contributing to a Soviet perception of American inconsistency and

weakness. The second factor was the 12 December 1979 decision of the

NATO governments to permit the basing of modernized theatre nu-

clear forces (TNF) in Europe, a decision that Soviet hard-liners viewed

as an attempt to create a disequilibrium in the balance of strategic

forces. The third factor, and the one that Arbatov cited as the predomi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

nant factor in the Soviet decision, was the Soviet assessment that SALT

II was in significant trouble in the U.S. Senate and was not likely to be

ratified and thus nothing was to be lost in this regard by intervention.

3. Arbatov said that the regime of Prime Minister Babrak Karmal in

Afghanistan was prepared to accede to the withdrawal of Soviet forces

in his country if an international guarantee could be provided that

would neutralize Afghanistan and end the civil war. Arbatov made it

clear that he was speaking about abandoning the Soviet public policy

position of preserving a Socialist regime in Kabul and did not make it a

precondition that Karmal himself would have to remain as head of

state. [4 lines not declassified]

4. Arbatov said that he expected that Afghanistan would be one of

the main subjects discussed between the U.S. Secretary of State and So-

viet Foreign Affairs Minister Gromyko at Vienna. Arbatov noted that

the earlier refusal of the Carter administration to broaden the agenda of

the Vienna talks from strictly Afghanistan had prevented an earlier

meeting between Gromyko and former Secretary of State Cyrus Vance

at Vienna, and that the apparent decision of the U.S. Government to

broaden the agenda to include SALT II apparently signaled a more

open attitude by the U.S. Government about reestablishing detente.

5. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]

278.

Memorandum of Conversation

Vienna, May 16, 1980

SUBJECT

Meeting between Secretary of State Muskie and Foreign Minister Gromyko

PARTICIPANTS

U.S.

Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie

William D. Krimer, Interpreter

USSR

Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko

Viktor Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Foreign Minister Gromyko opened the conversation by suggesting

that he and Secretary Muskie conduct their talks in compact form since

they did not have much time at their disposal. It was his understanding

that there was no formal agenda for this meeting; thus they would be

free to choose whatever topics they wanted to discuss.

Bilateral Relations

Gromyko thought he would be fully justified in asking a specific

question in order to obtain Mr. Muskie’s reply to it in his capacity as

Secretary of State of the United States: how was the Soviet leadership to

understand why the U.S. Administration had decided to enter upon a

path of serious disruption of the relations between the U.S. and the So-

viet Union? Why had the U.S. Administration done so much to throw

back these relations, throw them back a considerable distance, he

would say, although in the Soviet view there were no reasons for such

setbacks. That was his first question. Where did the U.S. Administra-

tion intend to lead matters with regard to Soviet-American relations?

The Secretary wanted to tell Gromyko first that the question of

whether or not their present meeting should take place had been

pending when he became Secretary of State. His own reaction had been

based on his background as a legislator. It was important to explore

each other’s positions, and, therefore, he was glad to be here. He

thought he could answer Gromyko’s question best from his perspective

as a member of the U.S. Senate and his reaction to the events which had

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

led to the disruption of relations of which Gromyko had spoken. His

answer would be based on the reaction of not only President Carter and

the present Administration but also on the reaction of the Congress of

the United States and the country at large. He would try to put his an-

swer in as precise and clear terms as he could because he believed, as

Gromyko did, that the answer to this question was central to every-

thing else.

At the point of the events in Afghanistan, we were facing a very

difficult challenge in the Senate in connection with ratification of the

SALT agreement. If Gromyko could recall their meeting in Moscow in

calendar of all other business, disposing of domestic issues in order to

be ready to debate the Treaty in late January and early February, ex-

pecting that after several weeks of debate the Treaty would have a

fighting chance of being ratified. The events in Iran3 had set us back in

this respect, simply because Iran had stimulated and strengthened the

conservative elements in the U.S., those who in any event were already

opposing SALT. The events in Afghanistan destroyed any chance of

getting a two-thirds majority for this very reason. The Soviet interven-

tion with troops across the Afghan border had created doubts as to

whether detente had the same meaning for the Soviet Union as it did

for us. The belief became prevalent that the Soviet Union had changed

direction in its foreign policy, thereby creating new risks and chal-

lenges for us. Afghanistan was geographically close to the Persian Gulf

region, appeared to be a threat to the oil life line of the U.S. and the

West, and in addition the Soviet action looked like pointing a dagger at

the U.S. and the West. That was a real perception with which a politi-

cian simply had to deal.

The Secretary added that a lot of people in the U.S. still would like

to see the SALT Treaty proceed toward ratification, but could not see

January–May 1980

any prospect of obtaining the necessary votes unless the Afghanistan

problem was resolved. Even then, it would take some time to re-build

the positive atmosphere which had been carefully built up by both

sides during the decade since the Secretary had last seen Gromyko.

In that connection, we were aware that the calendar exerted certain

pressures; that there were provisions in the SALT Treaty that would be-

come outdated with the passage of time unless the Treaty was ratified

this year or early next year. He believed it urgent for the sides to get

back on track if at all possible.

There were other issues between us, such as Theater Nuclear

Forces in Europe, SALT III, the CSCE Final Act Review in Madrid,

MBFR, and others, all of which had a high priority. But, what stood in

the way of possible support in connection with these problems was the

problem of Afghanistan. The President as a politician had to respond to

public opinion. When people feel as deeply as ours did as a result of

this event, the President had to respond.

The Secretary wanted to add one other perspective. At the begin-

ning of 1979 a lot of people in the Senate thought that we were on the

right track, although a number of problems were still with us: economic

problems which affect the entire world, SALT II, getting our federal

budget under control, and several other critical domestic issues in the

United States. There was therefore no disposition for us to be diverted

by events abroad which exacerbated relations between us and the So-

viet Union or anyone else. We had plenty of work to do. In addition, as

a result of the SALT hearings in the Senate there was a perception that

the Soviet Union had engaged in a massive expansion of its arms and

that we had reached a point where we had to build our defenses in

order to match the Soviet effort. This applied both to strategic and to

conventional arms. In his position as Chairman of the Senate Budget

Committee the Secretary had not been able to achieve any success in

curbing such tendencies. Therefore, even before Afghanistan, support

in the Congress for defense spending had reached proportions we had

not seen since Vietnam. That support had grown even further after Af-

ghanistan. The Secretary was sure that Gromyko was familiar with

similar tendencies in his own country: if the military has public support

for a build-up of weapons (and that was really their job), it became very

difficult to erode that support for economic reasons, to fight inflation

by reductions in domestic spending. The whole situation had added

burdens which we certainly did not welcome. It is with this back-

ground that the Secretary welcomed the present chance of talking with

Gromyko, assuming that perhaps some misapprehension on the Soviet

part with respect to our reaction to Afghanistan might be cleared up.

What we might do about the Afghanistan problem was another matter;

the Secretary had no answers and could only express the hope that out

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

of these discussions might come some ideas that would lead in the di-

rection of resolving the problem.

Gromyko said he fully understood that it was not an easy task to re-

spond to the question he had asked at the very beginning of their

present talk. To provide an objective response to that question it was

necessary to refer to the actual facts which had a bearing on it. He

would now recall some of these facts, which could not be refuted by the

Secretary or the President or anyone else if the purpose was to arrive at

an objective assessment of the present situation.

The first such fact was the following: several years ago the U.S. had

undertaken a sharp escalation in the area of weapons. The question

arose as to whether the U.S. had deliberately engaged in an increase of

military spending at the very time when the Soviet Union at the U.N. in

New York was proposing measures aimed at disarmament or at least at

restraining the arms race, measures to be taken jointly by both states. In

spite of that the U.S. had gathered with its allies in Washington and had

taken the decision to engage in a sharp upsurge in military spending

for many years ahead. This had come as a surprise for the Soviet leader-

ship and not only for the Soviet leadership; this had been taken to mean

that the U.S. was moving counter to all the efforts the Soviet Union had

undertaken jointly with the U.S. and with other countries toward

curbing an arms build-up and toward disarmament. And, he would

point out, this had taken place long before Afghanistan. How was the

Soviet Union to assess this fact? At that time there had not even been a

hint of any problem in the Afghan situation. The second fact was that

following the meeting between President Carter and Brezhnev in

Vienna, the U.S. had promptly moved ahead with the decision to in-

troduce large numbers of new weapons in Europe, weapons which

were usually referred to as medium-range missiles, some of which,

however, also had strategic significance, although, Gromyko strongly

emphasized, in Vienna both sides had solemnly declared that approxi-

mate equality existed between the forces of the two sides. President

Carter had spoken to that effect and Gromyko could assert that because

he had been present. Brezhnev had said as much on this subject. As

soon as the U.S. President had returned to Washington, it had turned

out that what he had solemnly stated in Vienna was not at all in accord

with reality, and what he said now had run counter to the statements

he had made in Vienna. Official Washington took the position that it

was necessary to introduce new weapons into Western Europe. Gro-

myko was sure that there could not be two different truths; there was

only one. Where was the truth? Was it what the President had said in

Vienna or what he had said in Washington? Gromyko stated emphat-

January–May 1980

ically that the fact was that in Vienna he had expressed a generally ob-

jective assessment of the existing equality between the sides; i.e., the

Soviet Union and the United States, while in Washington he took the

position of striving for a military advantage for NATO and first and

foremost for the United States. Gromyko would now cite a third fact;

the Secretary had mentioned SALT II and while he, Gromyko, had in-

tended to speak on this subject separately, he would present the third

fact here. This fact was that the U.S. had undermined the Treaty. The

U.S. Administration seemed to have been selling it, but it could be said

that in fact it had buried the Treaty. This, too, happened before the

events in Afghanistan. The U.S. Government invented a certain situa-

tion in Cuba, and this had made it very clear for the Soviet authorities

that something was brewing in Washington. The Soviets understood

then that the Cuban situation had been invented artificially for a spe-

cific purpose. It became clear that SALT II was being pigeon-holed for a

long period of time and that the Senate had decided at an early stage to

remove SALT II from its agenda. Leaving aside the fact that the U.S.

had taken a very frivolous attitude toward an agreement that had been

carefully arrived at as a result of lengthy negotiations, and had been

signed by the two heads of state, the practical result of withdrawing

SALT II from the ratification process had struck a severe blow at the re-

lations between our two countries and had gone a long way to under-

mine the Soviet Union’s confidence and trust in the U.S. Administra-

tion, its words, and its agreements and understandings with the Soviet

Union. Indeed, the U.S. Administration was acting quite frivolously—

achieving understandings today and rejecting them tomorrow. Gro-

myko said that the Secretary might reply that in the U.S. the President,

the Secretary of State, many officials and other people, among them the

Secretary’s predecessor as well, had made speeches in favor of SALT II.

It is true that some statements to that effect had been made, but they

were of the kind that undermined rather than supported the substance

of the Treaty.

These three facts were irrefutable; they could not be denied by

anyone. All three taken together and, indeed, each one of them sepa-

rately, constituted a well-rounded system designed for striking a se-

vere blow at Soviet-American relations. Considering the role that the

U.S. and the Soviet Union played in world affairs, such a severe blow

could not but have a negative effect upon the international situation as

a whole. This had already produced a strong effect: many people today

are worried about their tomorrow. The Soviet leadership had the im-

pression that there were some people in Washington who had com-

pletely lost their self-control, particularly in these days, when weapons

of terrible destructiveness were in the hands of both sides. This was an

entirely different situation from anything twenty, thirty, or forty years

ago. The Soviet leadership asks itself how responsible statesmen could

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

make such frivolous statements on a question of such vast importance

for the entire world. Gromyko had no desire to name names today; the

people he was referring to were well known to the Secretary, people

who influenced the foreign policy of the United States directly or indi-

rectly. If one analyzed the whole situation, one was forced to ask how

all this could have come about. It was indeed true that not only the U.S.

Administration, but also those forces in the U.S. which play a role in de-

termining U.S. foreign policy had taken such views. How could it not

be clear to them that the absence of friendly relations between our two

countries would destroy detente and be contrary to the genuine in-

terests of world peace? Here Gromyko wanted to emphasize in this first

contact with Senator Muskie in his capacity as U.S. Secretary of State

that the Soviet Union was equally interested in improving the interna-

tional atmosphere, and its relations with the U.S., as was the U.S. He

would ask the Secretary not to misunderstand: when the Soviet Union

raises these questions and expresses concern, it is not standing there

with outstretched hand, begging as it were. No, the Soviet Union pro-

ceeds from the premise that both countries are equally interested in

basing their relations on equality and respect for each other. At the

present time it appeared that the U.S. was proceeding from a different

principle. It was trying to get an advantage over the Soviet Union, to

outstrip the Soviet Union in its military might. Many skillfully worded

official statements in the U.S. made this quite clear, failing to conceal

this striving for superiority over the Soviet Union. Indeed, it is quite

impossible to conceal something like that. The Soviet Union will not

and cannot permit such superiority to develop. Perhaps some U.S. offi-

cials underestimated the capabilities and determination of the Soviet

Union in this respect. They keep on trying to get an advantage, but the

Soviet Union will not permit that to develop, whether in arms or other

crucially important fields. He would say that there was no need for

anyone in the U.S. to step on Soviet toes or seek to gain an advantage.

This would hardly be a promising endeavor. If one looked at the entire

history of Soviet-American relations, many presidents—Truman, Ei-

senhower, Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, and now Carter—not even

to mention Franklin Roosevelt, for at that time our two countries were

fighting on the same side—both our countries always benefited only

when they conducted their relations on the basis of equality and mu-

tual respect, when they did not try to gain an advantage over each

other. It is only on this basis of equality that he wanted to and indeed

could conduct our bilateral relations.

Gromyko noted that the Secretary had said before leaving Wash-

ington that at this meeting between them he would not intend to go

into detail, but would want to speak in more general terms on matters

of principle. Gromyko could only agree to such a way of proceeding.

He had discussed this matter with L.I. Brezhnev personally and they

January–May 1980

had decided to let the Secretary know through the Soviet Embassy in

Washington that they agreed to speak in terms of principle. That was

indeed what they were doing now. Gromyko emphasized that if the

most important principle of equality was adhered to in the conduct of

our mutual relations, our two countries could move forward toward

normalization. Should that principle be violated, however, it would be

most damaging to both our countries, and here he was not speaking in

terms of money only; not everything could be measured in terms of

money. On that basis the Soviet people in general, its Party, its Central

Committee, and its outstanding leader, L.I. Brezhnev personally, fa-

vored the development of normal relations with the U.S. and believed

that hostility between us would not only be unreasonable but would

also inflict major damage and involve enormous risk. Taking into ac-

count the enormous strength of each side there was no need to prove

the enormity of the risk involved. The risk ensued from hostility, from

the possibility that someone might not always carefully manage these

forces. Gromyko would point out that he expected no profit or interest

payments from propaganda efforts. Therefore, when he and his col-

leagues said that there was no reasonable alternative to peaceful rela-

tions between us, this was not propaganda, not by any means. In the

Soviet view this represented a realistic assessment of the existing situa-

tion, and up to very recently U.S. political leaders had also made iden-

tical statements on this subject. He recalled the statement made by Pres-

ident Carter in Vienna last year—he had been present on that occasion.

Gromyko said that he intended to speak separately on the problem

of Afghanistan, but would stop at this point in order to give the Secre-

tary an opportunity to respond to what he had said so far.

The Secretary agreed to this way of proceeding: two words oc-

curred to him to describe a problem which he supposed would always

plague our two countries in dealing with each other. Both concepts re-

sulted from our respective strengths. One of these words was “miscal-

culations”; the other was “misreading.” The Secretary intended to

cover briefly the first three points Gromyko had made.

1.—defense spending,

2.—Pershing missiles, and

In discussing these issues he would not assume that he would be able

to disabuse Gromyko of all misperceptions. As concerns NATO

spending, he supposed that Gromyko had referred to the 3% real in-

crease in spending each year over the next five years, which the NATO

defense ministers had agreed upon two years ago. The fact was, of

course, that with respect to the forces in Europe it has been difficult for

opponents of such increases to prevail in view of the Soviet build-up

and in view of the fact that the steps taken in the MBFR negotiations to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

reduce those forces had not succeeded. The NATO ministers were per-

suaded that the advantages gained by the Soviet side were of such an

extent as to make it necessary to increase spending by NATO countries

each year. Of course, the entire question had been a controversial sub-

ject in our Congress. Not all the NATO countries had met their commit-

ment. There were some dissimilarities between NATO conventional

forces vis-a-vis those of the Soviet Union, and it was these dissimilar-

ities that the increases had been intended to correct. In our judgment at

least, the kind of increases provided for would not constitute an offen-

sive threat for the Soviet Union. Whether that level of spending can be

sustained, of course, is a question and will to a large extent depend

upon successful conclusion of the MBFR negotiations. As for the Per-

shing missiles, which had been developed long ago, the Secretary

would only point to the development of Soviet SS–20 modern and ad-

vanced missiles, against which we did not have comparable weapons

in Europe. The Secretary would also recall in this connection that the

decision taken by the NATO countries December 12 last year involved

weapons that were not covered by the SALT Treaty. Each side, of

course, viewed this differently: we saw this in terms of the SS–20s de-

ployed, while the Soviet side viewed this in terms of missiles that were

not yet in place. We believed that it was entirely legitimate to discuss

this issue and still supported such talks because whenever one side or

the other goes ahead with new weapons systems, this was bound to

raise questions on the other side. The asymmetries involved concern

different defense requirements in view of the Soviet Union having a

larger and stronger army. This was one of the complex questions—how

to act with respect to requirements that were not symmetrical. The Sec-

retary had the impression that in the SALT negotiations both sides had

exercised a great deal of skill in dealing with such asymmetries.

As for SALT II, Gromyko had referred to the Senate’s decision to

remove this issue from its agenda. In fact, however, no such decision

had been taken.

As for Cuba, perhaps we had misread the situation in Cuba, but in

any case this item had dealt a setback to ratification of SALT II. By the

end of 1979 that perception had blown over and we had thought it pos-

sible to obtain ratification and were determined to do so. He could only

assure Gromyko that this was so, although he realized it may take some

time before Gromyko could accept that assurance as to the background

of SALT II ratification.

As for the question of equality, the Secretary would tell Gromyko

that he had long ago abandoned the notion mentioned by Gromyko

that either side could win an arms race should we give each other the

signal that arms control was no longer possible. However, he did not

believe this to be the case. He was in a position to think back to World

January–May 1980

War II; in fact, he had been in it. Until the early 1960s we had been in a

superior position in nuclear arms. A number of conflicts had arisen

during the early 1960s (for example, the Cuban missile crisis), but that

had not deterred us from seeking genuine arms control negotiations. It

had not stopped us from understanding that equality and not superi-

ority must be the test. We had watched the development of Soviet tech-

nology and knew what the Soviets could do. We had no desire or ex-

pectation that the Soviet Union would come to us as a petitioner as it

were. It had come to us as an equal, and the Secretary accepted that and

believed that the people of the U.S. had accepted that. The Secretary

would add one other characteristic which rendered the situation most

difficult: equality was a fact that can be recognized, while respect was

something that had to be earned. Trust and confidence in each other’s

intentions and motivations had been shaken. What Gromyko had said

indicated that clearly. On the other hand, what the Secretary had said

with respect to Afghanistan was that the situation there had also

created these kinds of doubts. He agreed with Gromyko that normali-

zation of relations served each of us better than any other basis. He did

not know if there was any test of normalization of relations between the

two superpowers. It was difficult to arrive at in view of our different

cultures and histories. Whenever any nation has the kind of power that

we each had, it was difficult to establish mutual trust. We knew that

and believed the Soviet side knew that. Much could be said that would

be useful for discussion at great length. The Secretary was glad that

Gromyko had raised these points, because he had seen press reports

about the concern in the Soviet Union with respect to our country. He

would only suggest that Gromyko consider the situation thoroughly

and use his experience in arriving at a judgment that he could convey

to his people.

Gromyko said that before addressing the Afghanistan issue he

wanted to make two or three points in connection with the questions

the Secretary just discussed. The Secretary had alleged that the U.S. and

NATO move to deploy medium-range missiles in Western Europe had

been dictated by the deployment of SS–20 missiles. In this connection

he had to tell the Secretary that this was not a new weapons system.

The SS–20 was an old missile, but the Soviet Union was modernizing it;

in brief, equipping it with MIRVs, although the overall yield of the mis-

sile remained the same. Thus, what NATO had done in Western Eu-

rope and in the Mediterranean was something entirely different. It had

decided to deploy new missiles armed with nuclear weapons, which

could reach deep into the territory of the USSR. Apart from that, he

could recall a time when the U.S. did not have ships in the Mediterra-

nean, armed with nuclear weapons that could also reach deep into the

territory of the USSR. Now such a fleet was there, and so were U.S. air

forces in the British Isles, also capable of reaching Soviet territory, not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

to mention the territory of Soviet allies such as Bulgaria, GDR, Hun-

gary, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Romania. He would point out that

Soviet SS–20 missiles cannot reach the territory of the U.S. and that this

weapons system had not been designed for that purpose. Conse-

quently, if there is equality in Europe at present, the balance works in

the favor of the U.S.

Gromyko was sure that the Secretary knew all of this very well.

Therefore, it seemed to him that when the Secretary was referring to So-

viet actions, in particular deployment of SS–20s and alleged that these

constituted a threat to NATO forces in Europe, he was convinced that

the Secretary himself did not believe that Soviet arms or Soviet policy

could be a threat to the U.S. and NATO. But, if that was so, he would

ask the Secretary to put himself in his shoes and think objectively. As

for the Soviets, since there was no basis for NATO’s decision, it had to

ask very serious questions as to the purpose of some of the statements

made in this connection. It was evident to Gromyko that such state-

ments were made for the purpose of concealing NATO’s own actions.

That was how the Soviet side assessed the situation, and he would ask

the Secretary to look at it objectively.

Gromyko said that further, as far as strategic weapons were con-

cerned, the U.S. was now planning to deploy the MX missile. He had to

tell the Secretary that the Soviet Union had not yet reacted to those

plans, that it had not yet had its say. The time will come when the So-

viet side will have to say something about this system of strategic arms.

Further to the subject of strategic arms, Gromyko noted that some

statements had been made, including one by the Secretary after en-

tering upon his new duties, to the effect that SALT II had been sus-

pended, but that the U.S. would like to have an understanding with the

Soviet Union for both sides to observe the obligations under the SALT

II Treaty as if it had entered into force. That was strange logic indeed.

How could there be a situation when a treaty was not in force, but the

parties to the treaty had to observe its provisions? No, it seemed to him

that this could not be done. Those who made statements to the effect

that a treaty not in effect obligated anyone to do something or other

were probably the only ones in possession of the secret of how that

could be accomplished.

Gromyko had a second point. Since he and the Secretary were

speaking frankly he had to tell the Secretary something that might not

be to his liking. It was a fact today that the Soviet Union did not fully

trust the U.S., that if the two sides were to agree that they would ob-

serve the provisions of the Treaty, the Soviet side would not have full

confidence that the U.S. side would do so, in view of what had been

done by the U.S. side with respect to agreements and understandings

January–May 1980

concluded with the Soviet Union. This was all he had to say on the sub-

ject of arms.

Afghanistan

Gromyko now wanted to turn to the subject of Afghanistan. He

would deal with it in the context of how this problem had affected

other problem areas between us. First of all, he would like to demon-

strate the complete untenability and absurdity of an argument current

in the U.S. today. He had not yet heard it from Secretary Muskie in so

many words (in this respect being a new man was an advantage), but

he had certainly heard many statements on the U.S. side to the effect

that the Soviet Union wanted to dig in in Afghanistan. It was said that

the Soviet Union wanted to occupy Afghanistan in order to target the

oil-rich regions in the Gulf of Iran, thereby either depriving the U.S. of

the possibility of buying Iranian oil, or making it more difficult to pro-

duce and to transport oil from the Persian Gulf to the U.S. Gromyko

wanted to emphasize as strongly as he could that such a view was pos-

sible only as a result of a very low level of understanding of Soviet

policy, a very low level indeed. Some people were talking of some sort

of “Arc of Crisis” which started no one knew where and ended perhaps

in Africa or perhaps even in the Atlantic. The Secretary should realize

that such an “arc” existed only in the thinking and imagination of those

who talked in this manner. The Soviet Union did not need any kind of

Iranian oil. The very manner of looking at the question from this stand-

point could only be regarded as schoolboyish, nothing more. He be-

lieved it important to explain the Soviet position on this subject to the

Secretary. He did not know whether he would be able to convince the

Secretary, but such was the Soviet position nevertheless. He would

state it on behalf of the entire Soviet leadership and L.I. Brezhnev

personally.

Now to the substance of the Afghanistan question. The Soviet

Union had introduced its forces into Afghanistan at the request of the

Afghan Government in order to assist it in repelling outside aggression

against that country. That request had been made not only by the

present Afghan leadership, but had also been made repeatedly earlier

by Amin and before him by Taraki. The Soviet leadership had reflected

on that request for a long period of time, hoping and expecting that the

external intrusion would cease. Under the UN Charter such interven-

tion could only be qualified as aggression. When the Soviet leadership

saw that this aggression was being expanded, when it saw that forces

were being trained and armed on the territory of Pakistan and then sent

into Afghanistan, the Soviet Union had sent in its contingent of troops.

The Secretary surely knew that the border between Afghanistan and

Pakistan runs through a mountainous region and that there were liter-

ally hundreds of passages through the unsecured border. Each year at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

least 100,000 people crossed through them. When forces crossed from

Pakistan, where they had been armed and trained, the Soviet Union

had come to the conclusion that it must send in its own forces to put an

end to the threat to Afghan independence. At the very outset, the Soviet

Union had stated that as soon as the reasons for which it had sent in its

forces ceased to exist, and as soon as the Afghan Government was in a

position to ensure its country’s independence, the limited Soviet troop

contingent would be withdrawn from the territory of Afghanistan. The

Soviet Union had stated that on the very first day of its action, and the

U.S. Government had the text of the relevant Soviet statement. He

would repeat that statement today and add that there was no need for

the Soviet Union to say anything else in clarification. There had been no

zigzags in Soviet policy. If anyone on the Western side believed that the

Soviet Union would comply with the wishes expressed in several capi-

tals, and withdraw its forces as a precondition for a political settlement

in Afghanistan, he would have to tell the Secretary very frankly that

those who had such expectations were very poorly informed of the ac-

tual situation. They had their heads in the clouds and were engaging in

fantasy and unrealistic polemics.

Nevertheless, statements continue to be made, calling upon the So-

viet Union to withdraw its forces. That is totally ruled out. He would

repeat that as soon as aggression against Afghanistan from the territory

of Pakistan and to a lesser extent from that of Iran was halted, the So-

viet troop contingent would be withdrawn. He was availing himself of

the opportunity to clarify Soviet policy for the Secretary.

Gromyko said that the Secretary might want to ask the question

(and he had encountered such questions in his talks with others): was it

really true that there was a massive invasion into Afghanistan from the

territory of Pakistan or Iran for the purpose of fighting against the

present Afghan regime? He would ask the Secretary to look into this

matter more thoroughly. He would suggest that he ask President

Carter and Zia ul-Haq, President of Pakistan, that he ask if there are

dozens of camps on the territory of Pakistan where forces are being as-

sembled, trained and equipped, and whether incursions into the terri-

tory of Afghanistan are taking place. Even President Carter had re-

cently said publicly: “Yes, we do assist those forces and will continue to

assist them.” He had called this assistance, but in fact it was a struggle

against the regime in Afghanistan. President Zia had confirmed this

and said that he was aware that this was taking place, but that he could

do nothing to stop it. It was strange, indeed, that the President of Pak-

istan cannot stop all this, although it was taking place on the territory of

his country; that he was unable to put his house in order. Gromyko

wondered if the Soviet Union should offer its assistance to Zia to ac-

complish that purpose. However, he had not heard Zia make such a re-

January–May 1980

quest of anyone. As for the domestic affairs of Afghanistan, one thing

had to be said firmly: questions of the internal leadership of Afghani-

stan were internal affairs of that country and could only be resolved by

the Afghans themselves. No one had the right to interfere in these

matters. The President of Pakistan had said that he did not wish to ne-

gotiate with the President of Afghanistan, Babrak Karmal. Gromyko

wondered whether Zia had asked himself the question of how many

people liked the present leadership of Pakistan. Many people recalled

that Zia himself had come to power at the point of a rifle or bayonet; but

now Zia did not want to talk to these people, although people did talk

to him. Gromyko wanted to emphasize that the core of this problem

was that any settlement had to be arrived at in negotiations between

Afghanistan and Pakistan, that there must be peace between these two

countries. The Afghan leadership agreed with this premise and was

prepared to enter into negotiations. Naturally, Iran must be involved as

well, but first and foremost this was a matter of relations between Af-

ghanistan and Pakistan. Just two days ago the Afghan leadership had

once again made its proposal, but Zia says that he does not want to sit

down at a table with them. Gromyko would urge the Secretary to try

and persuade Zia to enter into negotiations. If he genuinely wished to

settle this matter peacefully, Zia must be persuaded to enter into nego-

tiations. The Soviet Union was certainly in favor of a political settle-

ment, and believed that such a settlement was necessary and possible.

Thus, it was necessary to persuade Zia. As soon as the invasion of Af-

ghanistan was halted and a settlement reached, and relations between

Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran returned to a peaceful basis, Soviet

forces would be withdrawn and Afghanistan’s neutrality would be

guaranteed. Of course, guarantees would be required and, as Brezhnev

had said, one such guarantor power could be the U.S., perhaps also the

Soviet Union and some other countries. That question, too, should be

discussed between Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran. Gromyko could not

understand why this was not acceptable to the U.S. He had explained

his position to the Secretary. He had explained that the Soviet Union fa-

vored a peaceful solution, but no one should demand that Afghanistan

conduct its affairs to suit some other capital, whether it be London or

any other. In conclusion, he would point out that this was an internal

matter for Afghanistan. He would urge the Secretary to reflect on this

matter. In the Soviet view it was something well worth reflecting on. If

such a course is followed and a settlement reached, the question of Af-

ghanistan will simply disappear and disappear completely. It was cur-

rently being used in an artificial manner to stop progress on other

issues. While the Secretary might not agree, Gromyko was certain that

it can and must be resolved in a political manner.

There were two more issues Gromyko wanted to address briefly—

China and Iran.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

China

This was one issue to which the Soviet Union had drawn attention

repeatedly. L.I. Brezhnev had talked about it during his meeting with

President Carter in Vienna last June. In effect the U.S. had now started

to cooperate with China in a number of fields and to some extent at

least—Gromyko did not know to what extent—in military areas. In the

past U.S. Administrations had repeatedly stated to the Soviet leader-

ship, including L.I. Brezhnev, that the U.S. would not endeavor to de-

velop its relations with China to the detriment of its relations with the

Soviet Union. Presidents Nixon, Ford and Carter had made statements

to that effect. Today, however, the situation appears to be different.

Gromyko could tell the Secretary that from the standpoint of our bilat-

eral relations, both present and future, and also from the standpoint of

the long-term prospects of world peace and the entire international sit-

uation, such a policy will be very harmful indeed. He felt there was no

need to go into detail, except to point out that the very heart of China’s

policy is a course toward war (in their dreams, a war between the

United States and the Soviet Union). In fact, this is the main reason for

the break between the Soviet Union and China. Soviet policy is a policy

of peace, theirs a policy of war. Of late, the Chinese leadership has re-

touched their war-like statements to some extent, but their basic policy

remains war-like and can have very dangerous consequences.

So much for China.

Iran

Turning to the question of Iran, Gromyko said that some political

leaders had frequently asked him why the Soviet Union had not pub-

licly advocated release of the American hostages, saying that this

would ease tensions throughout the world. Gromyko would tell the

Secretary that the Soviets had made very clear statements to the effect

that the holding of U.S. hostages by Iran violates international law and

all relevant international conventions. Moreover, the Soviet Union had

undertaken a private demarche with the Iranian leadership through re-

stricted channels, calling for the release of the American hostages. At

the time of this demarche Washington had been informed to that effect;

that was several months ago. But, instead of hearing thanks for its ini-

tiative, the Soviet leadership had heard nothing but an avalanche of un-

friendly statements against the Soviet Union. True, there was a minor

assistant who had expressed appreciation, in passing as it were, but the

Iran. Information about the Iranian hostage crisis and rescue attempt is scheduled for

publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XI, Iran: Hostage Crisis, November

1979–January 1981.

January–May 1980

Soviet leadership had heard nothing from the President of the United

States or from the Secretary of State. Let no one throw stones at the So-

viet position with regard to hostages. But, the Secretary knew very well

that the Soviet leadership did condemn military methods of liberating

the hostages. It believed that such methods cannot help the United

States and can only damage U.S. prestige. That also applies to the re-

cent action undertaken by the United States. In his judgment, had the

mission proceeded, it would have resulted in the death of all the hos-

tages and probably in the death of many other people as well.

The Soviet Union did not need anything at all from Iran. Let Iran

develop its own country peacefully and live in peace with all its

neighbors and everyone else.

Afghanistan

Gromyko wanted to add one additional thought with respect to

Afghanistan. He would like the Secretary to know that the Soviet

Union was in favor of Afghanistan being a non-aligned state, and that it

had informed the Afghan leadership to this effect. Non-aligned status

for Afghanistan fully suited the Soviet Union.

The Secretary noted that they had come to a very difficult problem.

He believed that their discussion today could be most valuable if he

were to convey to Gromyko a frank description of perceptions in the

United States.

Gromyko had asked how a treaty could be in effect if it had not en-

tered into force. He would point out that restraint does not require a

treaty. It was obvious that restraint could not operate indefinitely in the

absence of a treaty, but restraint might be useful for both sides; both

sides would be taking risks. That was the reason why he and President

Carter had made statements about mutual restraint pending ratifica-

tion. That was a policy that they wanted the Soviet Union to consider.

Neither of them regarded this as a substitute for the SALT Treaty but

rather as an interim kind of measure. He recalled that something sim-

ilar had been done during the negotiation of the Test Ban Treaty, i.e.,

the sides had exercised mutual restraint prior to signature of that

Treaty.

Afghanistan

With regard to Afghanistan the fact was that as a matter of geog-

raphy many Americans viewed the Soviet move into Afghanistan as

giving the Soviet Union the potential to interrupt our oil supply lines

whether or not such was the intention of the Soviet Union. This was a

very sensitive matter and as long as the Soviet Union appeared to

possess such capability, it was bound to lead to apprehensions among

the American people. After all, we were thousands of miles away from

the Strait of Hormuz while the Soviets were just 200 miles away. This

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

indicated clearly that even in the absence of any inimical intentions by

the Soviet Union, its move into Afghanistan was regarded as a risk,

whatever the reasons for it. He would add that in the Senate Budget

Committee hearings a number of witnesses had appeared who were

not at all in agreement regarding Soviet motives. Thus US concern in

this regard was not a frivolous matter. If it were, we would not have

acted that way.

As for the justification Gromyko had provided for the Soviet move

into Afghanistan—if by massive arms intervention from the outside he

had meant the involvement of U.S. forces, that was not a fact. He had to

say that we were not yet persuaded that there was justification for the

Soviet action. However, he had listened to what Gromyko had told him

today. In fact, he had come here to listen.

Gromyko had also asserted that the Soviet Union had moved its

troops into Afghanistan at the request of that country’s government.

And yet, Amin, who had been President of Afghanistan at the time of

the Soviet move had not survived. That appeared to us to be very

strange indeed.

As for the precondition Gromyko had mentioned, the Secretary

had simply stated the fact at the outset of the present talk that the

problem of Afghanistan was a roadblock to the development of rela-

tions between us. It would not be hard to make a distinction between

that statement and a statement concerning preconditions. He would

only repeat that if this problem was not resolved, it would be very diffi-

cult to make progress elsewhere. Therefore, the failure to withdraw So-

viet troops had to be regarded as the largest obstacle to resumption of

detente. He would repeat that he had not spoken about a precondition,

but had simply stated a fact. What formula could express this ade-

quately remains a problem.

As for the proposal Gromyko had outlined today, it was the same

proposal that had been offered by Afghanistan during the last two

days. We had studied it and saw the biggest problem in legitimization

of the government of Karmal. Such legitimization would give the So-

viet Union full control as to the judgment when the reasons for Soviet

intervention cease to exist. Therefore we had trouble with this pro-

posal. He naturally intended to indicate to President Carter that he and

Gromyko had discussed this proposal today.

China

Normalization of U.S. relations with China in the first instance was

not directed against the Soviet Union. Before normalization the Secre-

tary had led a Congressional delegation into China in the belief that it

made sense for us to normalize our relations with that country. We

were not contemplating any military alliance with China. Indeed, we

January–May 1980

had not sold any weapons to the Chinese and could see the risks in-

volved in such a relationship. It was unfortunate that the situation in

Afghanistan created pressures to develop a military relationship with

China, although we had no intention to develop such a relationship.

Our relations with the Chinese were aimed at assisting that country to

modernize in peaceful areas. Gromyko surely was well aware of the

fact that as part of our agreement with China we continue to provide

arms to Taiwan. We agree with the Soviet Union that it would be unfor-

tunate if pressures to develop that relationship continue.

Iran

The Secretary said that he was aware of Soviet support and oppo-

sition to taking hostages last January. He appreciated that support in

spite of other difficult problems we have with each other. But he had to

tell Gromyko that two questions were being raised in the United States

in connection with Soviet actions with respect to Iran. First there was a

feeling among some that the Tudeh Party of Iran was an instrument of

Soviet policy in that country, and that part of the problem with the hos-

tages was the fact that no one in Iran today had authority. The Iranians

have not finished structuring their government; perhaps when they

finish we might be able to do business with whoever emerges. Sec-

ondly, the Secretary had been told of radio broadcasts from the Soviet

Union that were provocative in nature and fed anti-American feelings

in Iran. He would make one final point in conclusion. The rescue effort

we had undertaken was not regarded by us or intended as a military ef-

fort against Iran. It was strictly a rescue effort. It was his view that any

government would be remiss in its responsibilities if it did not consider

and implement efforts to rescue its citizens. It was unfortunate that our

effort had failed, but no one could say with certainty what would have

happened had it succeeded. In any case, the rescue effort had served a

useful purpose in dispelling some of the frustrations felt by the Amer-

ican people. The hostages have now been held for more than six

months and it must be clearly seen that the United States as a great

power had displayed extraordinary patience toward a much smaller

power such as Iran. The course of patience is what we must follow and

hope that diplomatic contacts with Iranian authorities would demon-

strate to them that their own best interests dictated release of the hos-

tages. The Secretary did not know whether we will succeed or not. In

any case, the failed effort had bought us some time. This was an elec-

tion year in the United States and he did not know whether in the heat

of the contest a policy of patience can survive. Gromyko knew who the

contestants were and he could draw his own conclusions. Conservative

opinion in the United States is on the rise and it has had its effect on

questions involving detente, arms control, and defense spending.

There are pressures on the President who is running for reelection and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

he cannot ignore those pressures. The Secretary suspected that he had

been selected for the office of Secretary of State precisely because he

had a political constituency that would take pressure off the President.

He was willing to do that. In that spirit he had come to the present

meeting in order to explore possible solutions. He hoped that its result

would be more than simply he and Gromyko gaining confidence in

each other. He hoped that some ideas for solutions would emerge from

this meeting, enabling both sides to pick up the policy of detente, which

in the Secretary’s view was the only sensible and serious course to

follow. Both of them had said things to each other that were un-

pleasant, trying to be frank. Perhaps they would be able to communi-

cate some of these sentiments to those they represented.

Iran

Gromyko first wanted to reply to the Secretary’s comments about

the Tudeh Party. This was an internal domestic political force in Iran,

and the Soviet Union had nothing to do with it. It seemed to be an old

habit of political leaders in Washington to refer to special relationships

between the Soviet Union and such forces as the Tudeh Party. He could

only say that these political leaders were victims of their own

inventions.

As for the Soviet radio broadcasts to Iran of which the Secretary

has spoken, Gromyko could only point out that these broadcasts stated

official Soviet policy, i.e., condemnation of the military means con-

templated by the U.S., condemnation of the actions of the U.S. fleet of

contemplated blockade and mining. That was official Soviet policy and

it had been stated in the broadcasts. It was difficult for the Soviet Union

to understand why such military actions were being contemplated or

undertaken. In particular, the last rescue operation seemed to him to be

contrary to the purposes the United States wanted to accomplish. Had

it continued, it would surely have led to the death of all the hostages

and perhaps many other people. It would surely be much better to get

the hostages out alive. As for the broadcasts the Secretary had men-

tioned, if one were to compare these broadcasts with those the United

States beamed at the Soviet Union, one could only come to the conclu-

sion that if medals were awarded for hostile statements, the United

States would walk away with all the medals. He would only ask the

Secretary not to consider these to be Olympic medals since the United

States obviously did not believe in the Olympics.

Gromyko said that the only policy toward Iran the Soviet Union

was pursuing was aimed at seeing an independent, sovereign state,

peacefully developing its own interests without any outside interfer-

ence or intrusions.

Gromyko noted that they were now approaching the end of their

conversation and surmised that each of them would probably be asked

January–May 1980

a lot of questions by representatives of the press. For himself, he would

say that they had had a meaningful discussion, that they had discussed

a number of important problems of Soviet-American relations, as well

as a number of important international problems. Since this was the

first meeting between the Foreign Ministers of our two countries in sev-

eral months, it could be said that the meeting was necessary and he

would express the hope that it will turn out to have been useful as well.

Quite obviously, certain questions will continue to crop up between

our two countries, but he would express the hope that the Secretary

will reflect on what Gromyko had told him today and that he would

find a way to provide a response through whatever channels were

available to him.

The Secretary said that he would make a very similar statement to

the press. In addition, he would say that he preferred not to discuss the

details of this talk before reporting to President Carter. Of course, that

will be somewhat more difficult for him than for Gromyko, for a

number of press representatives were flying back to the U.S. on the Sec-

retary’s plane. He would try to resist their pressure. He believed that it

was very important for them to have had this talk. He had not expected

that either of them would come up with proposals to which the other

one could agree. But he believed it important that they each understand

what the real problems with each other are so that they can work out

proposals to resolve these problems.

Gromyko agreed with the Secretary’s view of the importance of

their meeting today. He had believed that it would turn out to be

useful, and he had been joined in this view by all his colleagues in the

Soviet leadership, including L.I. Brezhnev, with whom he had a long

talk just yesterday.

279.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

8339. Special encryption. Subject: Ambassador Watson’s Call on

1. (S-entire text)

2. Summary: I had a wide-ranging discussion with Gromyko on

various issues affecting U.S.-Soviet relations and, drawing on Depart-

ment’s instructions, made a general presentation of our views on these

subjects. On the overall state of U.S.-Soviet relations, Gromyko re-

peated the Soviet position that responsibility for normalization of rela-

tions and repairing the damage is that of the United States administra-

tion. He took an uncompromising line on the Afghanistan question and

urged the U.S. to “be more or less objective” so that “a common lan-

guage can be found” to resolve this issue. He said the U.S. underesti-

mated the significance of the May 14 Afghan proposal. On arms con-

trol negotiations, Gromyko claimed that both bilateral and multilateral

negotiations were “terminated” by the U.S. before Afghanistan. While

stating that the entire burden of blocking SALT II was on the U.S. side

and that the Soviets do not place much hope on repeated U.S. state-

ments of intent to have SALT II ratified, he voiced guarded optimism

over “hints” of positive developments leading possibly to SALT II rati-

fication. On the U.S. offer to negotiate mutual and equal limitations on

LRTNF within the SALT III framework, Gromyko said this is not con-

trary to the Soviet position but that the way to do it was on the basis of

the Soviet proposals for the cancellation or suspension of the NATO

LRTNF decision and after SALT II ratification. He specifically rejected

preliminary negotiations on TNF. He supported the Madrid CSCE

Conference, but cautioned against anyone undermining the conference

well in advance of its taking place. Concerning Iran, he repeated the So-

viet position on diplomatic immunity, charged that the U.S. is ex-

January–May 1980

ploiting the hostage issue more and more against the USSR and con-

demned the U.S. rescue attempt and any use of force in Iran. On Cuban

refugees, he basically said that Cuba was free to choose its own policies

and the U.S. was exploiting the issue for hostile purposes against Cuba.

On Soviet media and official attacks against President Carter, Gromyko

deflected the issue by stating that if a comparison was made, U.S. offi-

cials and media accounts would win “first place” in the intensity of crit-

icism against Soviet officials.

At the end of Gromyko’s long presentation I said it would be

useless to comment on each of the points he made and singled out some

of his key statements for rebuttal. I made clear that since the beginning

of our relationship with the Soviet Union there has not been anything

to parallel their military invasion of Afghanistan which was recognized

as a nonaligned state. The Soviet action has jeopardized the interna-

tional situation to such an extent that the Soviet Union must live up to

its responsibilities and a way must be found to make some forward

movement, lest the situation become even more dangerous. I stressed

that it was the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan which forced the post-

ponement of SALT II ratification, that the U.S. intent to pass SALT II at

the appropriate time was real, and that our interest in preliminary ne-

gotiations of LRTNF within the SALT III framework was serious and

could help relieve tensions. I pointed out the unilateral Soviet deploy-

ment of SS–20’s is the cause of the unbalance in European theater

systems. Finally, I concluded that Gromyko’s allegations of the U.S.

seeking unilateral strategic advantage were patently false. End

summary.

3. I called on Foreign Minister Gromyko on May 25, at our request,

and made a basic presentation based on Department’s instructions

contained in reftels, which included U.S.-Soviet relations post-

Afghanistan, arms control negotiations, Iran, Cuban refugees and at-

tacks on President Carter by the Soviet media and officials. I also

handed over our representation list of divided families and a shorter

list of U.S. citizens and their families who wish to depart the Soviet

Union. Gromyko asked that I proceed with my talking points and that

he would respond after I had finished. He took notes on specific issues

throughout the course of our meeting. I preceded my presentation by

informing Gromyko that I would be leaving this week for the United

States to testify before the SFRC on the state of our relations and ex-

pressed my appreciation for his meeting with me on such short notice.

Gromyko was cordial and relaxed throughout the course of the

meeting and made his remarks in a calm and reflective manner inter-

spersed with instances of his well-known barbed wit.

4. Gromyko prefaced his remarks by stating that his government

would reserve the right to make any additional response or comments,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

if necessary, after studying the substance of the points I had raised

more fully. Gromyko then stated the following:

5. Afghanistan

You emphasize that Afghanistan is the main event which has

brought about the deterioration in relations between the U.S. and the

Soviet Union and which is responsible for the general deterioration in

the international situation. We categorically reject this. We believe that

the problem has been artificially exaggerated. Afghanistan is not the

main problem, especially if it is viewed factually. In any event, Afghan-

istan should not be viewed as a problem resulting in negative conse-

quences for U.S.-Soviet relations and for international relations in gen-

eral. The U.S. completely distorts the meaning of Soviet actions and the

introduction of Soviet forces into Afghanistan. We introduced those

forces to help Afghanistan repel aggression and did so according to the

UN Charter and our treaty with the Government and leadership of Af-

ghanistan. We have not violated anything by that action and have acted

in accordance with international law. We categorically reject all these

distortions of the situation which are made by Washington. We shall

withdraw our forces after we are requested to do so from the Afghan

Government and, of course, if there is such a request. Also, our with-

drawal is dependent on whether or not interference and intervention

cease from Pakistan and Iran and they stop fighting against the legiti-

mate Government of Afghanistan. The withdrawal of our forces will be

accomplished also when an agreement is reached and it is guaranteed.

The question of a withdrawal of our forces before that is beside the

point. Those who raise such questions are wasting not only their time

but our time. We have expressed our position publicly and Leonid

Brezhnev has done so on more than one occasion. Our position has

been explained to the United States and I repeated it the last time in my

meeting with Secretary Muskie. Our position should be clear to you.

Why does the U.S. continue to take such an unrealistic position on Af-

ghanistan after all these explanations? We are aware of what Wash-

ington and the West wish to see happen (in Afghanistan) but are you

prepared to take a realistic position? If the U.S. were prepared to be

more or less objective, a common language can be found but, I repeat,

only if you are prepared to look objectively at the situation and take an

objective position.

Concerning the Afghan Proposal which was recently made and

which the U.S. has been critical of, it seems to us that the U.S. under-

estimates the significance of that proposal. If you do wish to settle the

situation around Afghanistan, your attitude would be different. The

January–May 1980

Afghan Proposal is aimed at normalizing the situation around Afghan-

istan, including Pakistan. It is a good basis for normalizing the

situation.

6. Arms control

The U.S. alleges that the events in Afghanistan and Soviet activities

had provoked some negative effect on negotiations that had taken

place on arms control before Afghanistan. Indeed, there were negotia-

tions in both the bilateral and multilateral fields but it was the U.S. that

terminated them before that. Why did you do this? You must know the

number of times the American side terminated negotiations because it

did not want them. And all this before Afghanistan could have ever

been thought up. That approach should be rejected.

7. As for SALT II, you are aware of our position. The entire burden

of blocking the entry into force is on the U.S. side. The U.S. has made

very many statements on SALT ratification. We have had promises,

half-promises and quarter-promises. Therefore we don’t attach much

weight to these promises. What comes out of these statements are

nothing—zero. There have been hints given of positive developments.

We will now see how the U.S. administration acts from now on. To be

optimistic would be hasty on our part. Nevertheless, the entry into

force of SALT II would be a major event and would contribute to

U.S.-Soviet relations and the international situation as a whole.

8. On SALT III, it seems the U.S. administration believes it is pos-

sible to exchange views on medium-range systems. When the question

arose lately on an exchange of views on SALT III, it was understood we

could do so if SALT II was ratified. This is not contrary to our under-

standing. There are ways to resolve the question of medium-range

systems in Europe and it is possible, but the way to do it is on the basis

we have proposed. In order to resolve the problem without any long

delay what is needed is to cancel the NATO decision or to officially sus-

pend its implementation. Concerning preliminary negotiations, how

can one separate preliminary and non-preliminary negotiations? What

will be decided in these negotiations will be the same subject. Nothing

will change if you call these negotiations preliminary. But you have re-

moved the basis for these negotiations. Washington did not want those

negotiations and the West has sought unilateral advantage. We want to

work on the basis of the principle of equality. Leonid Brezhnev said

that to Carter in the Vienna meeting and I repeated this to Muskie in

Vienna. We cannot accept a situation where the U.S. seeks unilateral

advantage. The idea of preliminary negotiations does not remove the

barricades surrounding this problem.

9. U.S.-Soviet relations

Concerning actions which have allegedly harmed the fabric of

U.S.-Soviet relations, this is a distortion of the situation. The responsi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

bility for normalizing and repairing the damage is that of the U.S. ad-

ministration. It’s not Soviet actions which have damaged U.S.-Soviet

relations or the Afghanistan problem. Rather, these relations have been

damaged as a consequence of the U.S. administration’s frivolous ac-

tions, not to put it harder. The real reasons for the damage are not Af-

ghanistan at all. One has the impression that Washington is trying to

cram all the hard words it can into this issue. They understand our

policy and character poorly in Washington. Before, they used to under-

stand our policy and our character better and they viewed U.S.-Soviet

relations more soberly. It is not we who are responsible for what has

happened in our bilateral relationship.

10. Attacks on President Carter

It is not our style to be much interested in personalities and refer to

them frequently in statements in our mass media. But there is an ava-

lanche of anti-Soviet statements in the U.S. media and on the part of of-

ficials including those at the highest levels. We have no special interest

in mentioning personalities like President Carter. From time to time

some representatives of the President make references concerning us

which, I can assure you, cannot be compared to what is done in the So-

viet Union. You would certainly win first place on this issue. Refer-

ences are made in our media, but we do not take any official steps

toward our press.

11. CSCE

We are for Madrid and wish it to be positive and successful. This

depends, of course, if all the countries including the U.S. work for the

success of the conference. But if any party wishes to undermine the

conference well in advance, then it will have to bear its responsibility.

12. Iran

Briefly, our position on the hostages is well known. We condemn

the arbitrary actions against diplomats. As I told Secretary Muskie, we

sent private messages to the Iranians and informed Washington about

that. The response of the U.S. administration was a rude and tactless re-

action. We received the most hostile statements from Washington. We

decided at that time that Washington was not thinking of putting the

various elements of its policy together or that Washington was thinking

of the matter in an entirely different way.

It would have been an elemental matter to explain one’s gratitude

for our actions but, when we saw that our actions were not appreciated

and that Washington was not interested in our assistance, we decided

that the minimum behavior of the U.S. administration clearly deprived

us of the opportunity to take another step on the hostage question. It is

hard for us to act on that problem when it is used against the Soviet

Union, and it is being directed more and more against the Soviet Union.

January–May 1980

The U.S. cannot really think that Washington’s camouflage can actually

hide that aspect of U.S. actions.

We resolutely condemn U.S. military action against Iran and there

can be no other approach. Iran did not invite you, you did yourself. No

one objectively can agree to your military action. We resolutely con-

demn any use of force in Iran in any form.

13. Cuba

We are for having the Cubans resolve their emigration issue and

problem themselves. They are free to resolve their emigration problem

in their own way. It is an entirely different problem how one or another

government may assess the Cuban Government’s policy. As far as we

know, Cuba is doing nothing which goes beyond its sovereign rights.

The U.S. is exploiting this question for hostile purposes against Cuba.

This fact is demonstrated in the southern part of the United States, and

especially in Florida facing Cuba. The U.S. is a big country. Why is this

all necessary? These actions can backlash against your policy. U.S.

policy can find no justification beginning with your presence in Guan-

tanamo and ending with the emigrant issue. I will confine myself to

these remarks on this issue.

14. Upon the completion of Gromyko’s remarks I told him that I

would, of course, communicate what he said to my government and

that it would be useless at this point to try to address each point he had

made, many of which I took strong objection to. I then singled out some

of his key statements for rebuttal and made the following comments.

15. Since the beginning of our relationship with the Soviet Union

we think there has not been anything that parallels the Soviet Union’s

invasion of Afghanistan which was recognized as a non-aligned state. I

stressed the importance of the historical implications of the Soviet

Union’s actions and that they had endangered international stability

and peace. The Soviet Union must understand this. It is now necessary

to find a way to make some progress in removing tensions lest the

world situation become even more dangerous. In this respect the Soviet

Union must live up to its responsibilities as a world power.

16. I questioned Gromyko’s remarks on U.S. termination of arms

control negotiations. It was evident that withholding SALT II ratifica-

tion was our decision and that we recognize our responsibility to move

forward on that at the appropriate time. However, it was the Soviet in-

vasion of Afghanistan which forced the postponement of SALT ratifica-

tion. Also, I was unaware of the U.S. unilaterally terminating any major

arms control negotiations. Concerning TNF negotiations within the

framework of SALT III, I stressed that what was important was to make

forward movement in arms control negotiations wherever we can and,

thereby, reduce tensions. That is why the U.S. is prepared to begin pre-

liminary exchanges on TNF without preconditions or delay even before

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

SALT II is ratified and SALT III begins. I pointed out that it was the So-

viet deployment of SS–20’s which has given the Soviet Union a definite

lead in theater nuclear weapons in Europe. Our theater systems would

not be deployed until the mid-80’s. In effect, the whole purpose of our

TNF decision was to establish equilibrium in Europe, which had been

disrupted by unilateral Soviet deployments.

17. Concerning Gromyko’s remarks on our quest for unilateral ad-

vantage, I told him that his allegation was patently false. After

spending two years on arms control matters, I saw no way that either

side could successfully seek unilateral advantage in a thermonuclear

environment.

Watson

June–December 1980

280.

Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, June 2, 1980

SUBJECT

CIA’s Book & Publication Programs

CIA’s comptroller called me this afternoon to say that they had

reached the end of the line in their efforts to persuade OMB to provide

adequate funds to keep the book and publication program going in

FY1981—OMB had simply turned them down and Turner concluded

he must appeal to you for further support. So they are sending a draft

letter from you to McIntyre. I will review it and send it to you as soon as

it arrives.

It is appalling—as we all know—that these excellent programs

should have fallen into such jeopardy at a time like this. You probably

noticed the piece in the NYT last week on Chojecki. These programs

relate to his activity in many ways—and what he is doing in Poland is

an example of what others like him may eventually be able to do in

other places, including the USSR, if we keep these activities going. . .

281.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, June 5, 1980

SUBJECT

US-Soviet Relations

PARTICIPANTS

Alexander A. Bessmertnykh Minister-Counselor, Soviet Embassy

Marshall D. Shulman Special Adviser on Soviet Affairs to the Secretary of State

Muskie-Gromyko Meeting at Vienna

Bessmertnykh said that before the meeting took place the Soviet

side had been following with some apprehension the things that were

said about the meeting beforehand. However, Bessmertnykh said that

Gromyko had come away from the meeting itself with a good feeling

and with a favorable impression of Muskie. He had found him an ex-

tremely intelligent man who presented the US positions in a very effec-

tive, reasoned, and non-irritating way.

Watson-Gromyko Meeting

Bessmertnykh said there had been some puzzlement in Moscow as

to why Ambassador Watson had been sent in to see Gromyko so soon

after the Vienna meeting. It seemed to them that the Watson message

reflected a hardening of the US position and they wondered if some-

thing had happened in the interval to produce this hardening.

I indicated that one of the purposes of the Watson meeting with

Gromyko was to be sure that Gromyko did not have the impression

that the American reaction to Afghanistan was primarily a function of

the election season; Bessmertnykh assured me that neither Gromyko

nor other high officials in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs believe that

this was so or thought that their troubles on this issue would be over

after the election.

Negotiating Process

Bessmertnykh said that they had noted what the Secretary had

said about the need to keep the channel open and they agreed with this,

although it might be a while before the Afghanistan problem can be re-

June–December 1980

solved. “We will definitely get out of Afghanistan—there can be no

doubt about that—but it may take a while before conditions make this

possible.” The negotiating process should not wait until we are ready

to withdraw, he said. It would be good if there could be discussions be-

forehand of the steps that each side could take as part of the process.

Perhaps there will be a role for third countries to play in the process.

In the meantime, he said, the channels of communication should

not be solely occupied with Afghanistan. Other subjects could be dis-

cussed as well.

He said that Gromyko would probably take his vacation from the

latter part of July into August. The Soviet Embassy here had not re-

ceived definite word, but he assumed that Gromyko will be coming to

the United Nations General Assembly in late September, as he has done

in previous years. His personal view was that if there were to be a

meeting between the Secretary and the Foreign Minister in New York

at that time it might be good; conversely, the absence of such a meeting

would be regarded as a negative break with the precedent of earlier

years.

Bessmertnykh is leaving for his regular vacation in the Soviet

Union this coming week. He expects to be back in the latter part of July,

and anticipates that Dobrynin would take his vacation following

Bessmertnykh’s.

Soviet Vessel Port Stop

At the end Bessmertnykh asked me whether we could do anything

to clear up the refusal they had received about the stop of a Soviet

vessel in Baltimore for five hours on June 26 to pick up members of the

Soviet Embassy and take them on a vacation cruise. The Baltimore Port

Authority had cited political and labor factors in their refusal, but Bess-

mertnykh believed that the labor difficulties had been cleared away in a

conversation with Gleason. Vasev had mentioned this to Barry yes-

terday, and Bessmertnykh said he would appreciate anything we could

do about this since all the vacation schedules at the Embassy had been

built around the anticipated port stop of the ship. I said I would do

what I could.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

282.

Letter From Secretary of State Muskie to Soviet Foreign

Minister Gromyko

Washington, June 5, 1980

283.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

9449. Subj: (S) Delivery of Secretary’s Letter2 to Gromyko on

Afghanistan.

1. (S-entire text.)

2. Summary and comments. Though Gromyko was in an amiable

mood during my 90-minute meeting with him this afternoon, his line

on Afghanistan was hard. In effect, he said that the proposals in the

Secretary’s letter offered no prospects for reaching a settlement, stating

that insistence on prior withdrawal of Soviet troops is a dead end. If the

US really wished to promote a political settlement, he said, it should

urge Pakistan to stop the aggression and enter into a dialogue with

Afghanistan.

Gromyko repeated what he said he had made clear at Vienna—

that the withdrawal of Soviet troops could take place only after—repeat

after—an agreement on cessation of external aggression had been

reached and implemented. He focused on the formulation in the Secre-

tary’s letter on implementing other arrangements “with the prompt

withdrawal of Soviet forces” but seemed to reject any notion of simul-

taneity. He criticized the idea that outside states should have any voice

in the nature or composition of the Afghan regime and, while not abso-

lutely rejecting it, questioned the reasons for suggesting third-party

peacekeeping forces. As for “transitional arrangements,” referred to in

the letter, Gromyko said the proper subject for discussion under that

heading would also be the stopping of outside aggression—this by im-

plication being the transitional stage to a troop withdrawal. After dis-

cussion of Afghanistan, Gromyko made a demarche (reported sepa-

rately) on the two recent NORAD computer malfunctions. End

summary and comments.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

(June 12), I mentioned briefly my meetings in Washington last week

with the President, the Secretary, and members of the Senate and

House committees, then stated that the Secretary had asked me to de-

liver a letter, which was the result of very careful deliberations in

Washington. Gromyko first asked his interpreter to read a translation

of the letter into Russian, then went over the English text very carefully

himself.

4. In the initial translation, the Soviet interpreter, in the second sen-

tence of the second paragraph (“accordingly, with the prompt with-

drawal of all Soviet forces . . .”) rendered the word “with” as “after”

(posle). My political counselor, who was present as notetaker, inter-

rupted to suggest that “after” was not an accurate translation and after

some discussion with the interpreter and USA Director Komplektov it

was agreed that “pri” might be a better Russian translation.

5. Gromyko stated that he would like to say the following in re-

sponse to the Secretary’s letter; the position of the USSR was set forth

very clearly and precisely in Vienna during my meeting with the Secre-

tary. I will repeat briefly the essence of that position; the Soviet Union

will be prepared to withdraw its military contingent from the territory

of Afghanistan, as it has stated many times, after—and I emphasize the

word after—the aggression and armed intrusion into Afghanistan from

the territory of Pakistan and, naturally, from Iran also, to the extent that

it is taking place from Iran, is terminated. If that termination is guaran-

teed, [omission is in the original] contingent will be withdrawn. Until

that has been done, there can be no discussion of the withdrawal of the

Soviet contingent.

6. Gromyko continued that the Soviets resolutely reject any state-

ments that the Soviet Union is interfering in the internal affairs of Af-

ghanistan, any allegation that the introduction of the Soviet military

contingent is a form of interference in Afghanistan’s internal affairs, or

any allegation that it is as if the Soviet forces created the current leader-

ship or current regime of the Afghanistan Government. “We intro-

duced our contingent in order to assist Afghanistan at repelling aggres-

sion, in order to liquidate interference in the most flagrant form—

armed interference in the affairs of Afghanistan. It is not our action

which constitutes interference; rather our military contingent is the

means of eliminating that interference, of repelling aggression.” It is in

this way that the situation must be viewed if one wishes to view it

objectively.

7. Gromyko continued by stating that one can hear from the Amer-

ican side statements to the effect that the Afghan leadership or regime

must be acceptable to other states, especially to neighboring states such

as Pakistan. Since when, he asked, do other states have the right to

June–December 1980

create the regimes or leadership of a neighboring state? Such claims

must be resolutely rejected. One can only marvel at the view of those

who say that the nature of the Afghan Government must correspond to

the taste of its neighbors. Does the US really share such a view, that for

the Afghan regime to have the right to govern it must suit the taste of

the leaders of other states?

8. Turning to the reference in the Secretary’s letter to an interna-

tional peace keeping force, Gromyko asked whether the reference was

to the forces of other states, forces which were not now on the territory

of Afghanistan. Why, he asked, were such forces needed? The US ad-

ministration knows very well that this is not a realistic idea, that it has

no prospects. Gromyko said he could only express surprise at the rea-

soning of the USG in expressing such a view.

9. If, Gromyko went on, the US administration really wanted to

contribute to a resolution of the problem, to settle the situation around

Afghanistan, it could do so. It would simply need to drop a few

weighty words to Pakistan to the effect that Pakistan should stop the

aggression and all acts of banditry which it is now taking against Af-

ghanistan. One must be afflicted with political blindness, he added, to

take such acts against Afghanistan, because the goals of the organizers

of the aggression are futile. Gromyko then added that he was not

speaking formally to the paragraphs of the Secretary’s letter but rather

was responding to the position of the US administration on the Afghan

question. It appeared, he said, that that position is expressed in the

letter of the Secretary of State, and at this he could only express regret.

He added that a policy has strength only when it is based on an objec-

tive formulation, on a realistic evaluation of the situation. That factor is

unfortunately lacking from the policy of the USG on the Afghan ques-

tion. So far, we have seen no attempt to take a more realistic position,

no indication that Washington is so far ready to do so.

10. Gromyko then asked me to transmit the foregoing views to the

Secretary with the request that he be understood correctly. He had no

wish to enter into polemics; he had expressed his thoughts because

there is a tremendous difference between the positions of our two

countries on the Afghan question.

11. Without waiting for me to respond, Gromyko then picked up

the letter again and began to comment on some of the individual for-

mulations. The reference, he said, to “arrangements” in the second and

fourth paragraphs in itself represented flagrant interference in Afghan

affairs. The possibility of such “arrangements” is totally excluded, he

said; there is no room for an accommodation of our positions.

12. In referring to the “prompt withdrawal” of Soviet troops, Gro-

myko continued, the letter loses sight of the main question, which is

stopping the armed aggression from the territory of Pakistan and Iran.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

To stop that armed intrusion, an agreement is needed. Once agreement

is reached, to sign a paper embodying the agreement takes only three

minutes. It is after that that the question of the withdrawal of Soviet

forces will arise.

13. Gromyko then focused on the passage in the fourth paragraph

concerning exploration of a “transitional arrangement” and asked what

was envisaged by that. Obviously, he said, it referred to the early lan-

guage in the letter concerning changing the regime and leadership of

Afghanistan. If the US has something else in mind by “transitional”

then it should say so. But to be precise, what one should have in mind

by a “transitional arrangement” is the stopping of the aggression. That

is what he would consider the appropriate transitional stage; what the

US meant by the term he did not know.

14. I then responded that Gromyko had covered a great many

points and that I would only reply to a few of them. We in the Embassy,

I said, had considered this message from the Secretary as something

which would open the door at least a crack for further discussion. I was

therefore disappointed at Gromyko’s reaction to the letter. On the one

point in which there had been initial confusion in translation, I com-

mented that, although I was not in a position to interpret the Secretary’s

letter, which I thought spoke for itself, my own understanding was that

the phrase “with the prompt withdrawal” would mean “simulta-

neously”. As for Gromyko’s suggestion that the US was somehow in a

position to facilitate the stopping of the “aggression,” I said it was diffi-

cult to see how we could prevent the sorts of intrusions from outside on

which he generally based his conversations, but said we would like to

have any suggestions he might have in that regard. As for his assertion

that the Soviet Union is not interfering in Afghan affairs, I commented

that I have frequently expressed the position of the US on that matter

and would not waste his time by repeating it. Finally, as for his com-

ment concerning the acceptability of the Afghan Government to its

neighbors, I said I had the impression that it in fact would be in the in-

terest of the Soviet Union to have an acceptable government because of

Afghanistan’s traditional buffer status. Gromyko seemed to be adding

a new dimension. To this latter point, Gromyko said that I had not in-

terpreted his position correctly; the interest of the Soviet Union was

that there be a leadership established by the Afghans themselves and

that no one interfere in its internal affairs.

15. Gromyko then returned to the question of simultaneous action,

stating that it was surprising to suggest that there could be a coinci-

dence in time between the withdrawal of Soviet troops and the stop-

ping of aggression. It should be an easy task he said to stop the aggres-

sion and easy to sign an agreement on stopping it; this would take only

a few minutes. But the withdrawal of forces takes time. And a with-

June–December 1980

drawal cannot take place in any way other than by the guaranteed

agreement on the stopping of aggression and the entering into force of

that agreement. “There can be no thought of simultaneity of these two

things; the concept is devoid of sense.”

16. Gromyko then referred to statements that the US side is “still”

not convinced that armed intrusions into Afghanistan are taking place

from Pakistan. He acknowledged that the terrain was difficult and the

border complicated but insisted that the intrusions were nevertheless

taking place and that no thinking person would seriously assert the

contrary. One only need read statements being made in Washington

and also by the Pakistani president. He also attacked a statement by

President Zia to the effect that it was not within his power to stop the

intrusions, asking whether this meant he was unable to manage the sit-

uation in his own country and what one could expect in the way of ad-

ventures from such a country. But the point is, he said, that no one be-

lieves in Zia’s inability to stop the intrusions: this is a deliberate

distortion of the situation.

17. Gromyko asked that Secretary Muskie think over what he had

had to say. If the US also wants a political settlement of the issue, he

said, there is a possibility for settling it. What is required is for Pakistan

to stop the carrying out of intrusions from its territory. The Soviet

Union has no doubt that a word from the USG to that effect would be of

great significance for stopping the action. Gromyko then stressed the

importance of a meeting between representatives of Pakistan and Af-

ghanistan in order to reach agreement on the complex of issues in-

volved, criticized Pakistan’s rejection of such a meeting, and expressed

the view that the USG could play a realistic role in initiating a dialogue

between Pakistan and Afghanistan. He also noted that such a dialogue

between Iran and Afghanistan was desirable but added that he

doubted a US role was possible in the case of Iran.

18. Responding to Gromyko’s earlier question about the introduc-

tion of third party forces, I noted that Afghanistan is currently occupied

by Soviet troops, that it is a very primitive country and that when the

Soviet troops pull out someone must be there to maintain order. Of the

possibilities which might be explored, it seemed to me that the UN

might offer one approach. As for his reference to our endeavoring to

persuade Pakistan to sign an agreement on “stopping the aggression,”

I thought if he reread the Secretary’s letter carefully would find that

that possibility was not excluded so [long?] as there were other actions

on the part of the Soviets. While I said I thought it unnecessary to com-

ment on all of the positions he had stated with which we disagree, I

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

would emphasize that it would be difficult for us to support a regime

which had been established and maintained by Soviet troops. But I

added that we had been over the ground before on our respective

views on the nature of the current regime and that it was perhaps un-

necessary to repeat those views.

19. Before turning to another subject, Gromyko asked me to tell the

Secretary that the formulation in his letter was a deadlock—that insis-

tence on prior withdrawal of Soviet troops is a dead end. And to

discuss the simultaneous withdrawal of troops and the stopping of the

aggression is “quite impossible”—it is like trying to add together two

things that are quite different and incompatible—like comparing the

painting on the wall with the weather in Moscow. Warming to his si-

mile, he went on that to try to compare these things is like saying Kom-

plektov wants to go to the Crimea and isn’t that a very pretty clock.

20. At the conclusion of the meeting Gromyko, taking up a new

subject, read a statement concerning the recent NORAD false alarms

(reported septel).

21. Department please repeat to other posts as desired.

Watson

June–December 1980

284.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the Office of

Management and Budget (McIntyre)

Washington, June 16, 1980

SUBJECT

CIA’s Soviet/East European Book and Publication Program (S)

At my request, CIA has provided the attached summary2 of the

funding status of its highly cost-effective book and publication distri-

bution program targeted at the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. This

long-established program, notably sophisticated and with demon-

strated impact in its target areas, has taken on added significance since

the invasion of Afghanistan and the resultant strain in East-West rela-

tions. It provides the basis for continued stimulation and channelizing

of discontent and ferment among elites in these Communist societies

and feeds the processes which take the form—most spectacularly—of

the dramatic open letter of Academician Sakharov which was pub-

lished in the New York Times Magazine3 last Sunday. It is important that

this program have the funding to continue at the very least at a level of

effectiveness achieved prior to the Afghan invasion. Releases from the

CIA Reserve in the amounts sought by the Agency appear to me to be

fully justified to sustain it. They do not require appropriations of new

money. I urge you to authorize them as soon as possible for this matter is

urgently in our national security interests. (S)

Zbigniew Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

285.

Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Secretary of

State Muskie

June 27, 1980

Dear Mr. Secretary,

I have carefully read your letter of June 5, which is a continuation

of the exchange of views we started in Vienna. As we agreed at that

time the purpose of this exchange is to promote the improvement of

286.

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central

Intelligence Agency

July 1980

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

287.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Deputy Director of the

Office of Management and Budget (White)

Washington, July 3, 1980

SUBJECT

CIA’s Soviet/East European Book and Publications Program (S)

I have reviewed your memorandum2 on the chronology of OMB’s

consideration of added funding for the Soviet/East European book

program and am in sympathy with the points you raise. In considering

all the factors, however, I believe that the importance to our national se-

curity interests of augmenting the program outweighs the potential

risk in Congressional perceptions of the CIA Reserve for Contin-

gencies. Therefore, I ask that you authorize the use of the Reserve for

the remaining $550,000. Though, as you say in your memorandum,

your accession is reluctant, I appreciate your support in this matter,

which—as you know—I consider to be very urgently3 in the national

interest.

Zbigniew Brzezinski

June–December 1980

288.

Memorandum From Steve Larrabee of the National Security

Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, July 3, 1980

SUBJECT

Strikes in Poland: A warning sign?

289.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

10852. Subj: Discussion With Korniyenko. Refs: (A) State 179940,

1. (S-entire text.)

2. My luncheon conversation with First Deputy Foreign Minister

Korniyenko today, at times heated and at times amiable, was general in

June–December 1980

nature, covering a broad range of topics touching on the current state of

US-Soviet relations. Much familiar ground was gone over again, but a

few points of interest emerged:

3. TNF negotiations. I did not bring up the Soviet TNF proposal

and Korniyenko offered no comments on the proposal itself. He did

say, however, in the course of a general discussion of the desirability of

resuming the SALT dialogue, that “it is possible” that the Soviets will

be sending us a direct communication on the proposal they had dis-

cussed with Chancellor Schmidt. As he had told me at the 4th of July

reception that there would be no such communication from the Soviets

to us, it was clear that he was correcting himself on that score, though

there was nothing definite in what he said.

4. NATO LRTNF decision. As is customary, Korniyenko asserted

that the US had shelved the SALT II Treaty long before Afghanistan,

and he made the usual references to the Cuban brigade issue, our de-

fense spending increases, etc. A new argument which had not been

made directly to me before was that the December NATO moderniza-

tion decision violated “both the letter and the spirit” of SALT II. His ar-

gument was that the protocol to SALT II and the Joint Statement of

Principles for SALT III made it clear that the cruise missiles issue was to

be left open for discussion in SALT III. By deciding now to deploy

cruise missiles we were unilaterally determining that the general issue

of cruise missiles was no longer open for discussion and that we would

only be prepared to discuss numbers of cruise missiles. I pointed out

that this was not an interpretation which we can accept, since it was

clear that the protocol had a fixed expiration date. In addition, as he

had become almost belligerent in his allegations that we had scuttled

SALT, I spoke with considerable frankness on Afghanistan as being at

the root of the difficulties with SALT and with the state of our relations

in general.

5. Afghanistan. I probed for any indication of interest in additional

Soviet steps on Afghanistan but basically drew a blank. My political

counselor, as we had agreed beforehand, raised the point suggested in

ref A as to how the Foreign Ministry was translating “transitional ar-

rangements”. He noted that, since the Soviets had thrown cold water

on our willingness, expressed privately and publicly, to explore such

arrangements, and since the Soviet press was translating the term as

“settlement,” Washington was wondering whether the point might

have been misunderstood. Both Korniyenko and USA Department

Chief Komplextov insisted that it was not a question of translation but

of concept. They then asked for a fuller explanation of what we had in

mind by the concept, and we described transitional arrangements in

terms of measures or a process by which we would get from today’s sit-

uation to a situation in which Afghanistan was once more an independ-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ent non-aligned nation with no foreign troops. As had been officially

stated by the US, the sorts of arrangements that might be reached for

that interim period were something that could be discussed if it was of

interest to the Soviet Union.

6. Instead of responding directly, Korniyenko said that the Presi-

dent has already made clear what we had in mind by transitional ar-

rangements in his February 13 press conference3 and that the Secretary

had defined the term to Dobrynin by referring him to that press confer-

ence. This meant, in effect the overthrow of the legitimate Government

of Afghanistan and was therefore unacceptable to the Soviet Union. I

suggested that the February 13 remarks should be considered illustra-

tive and that there was no point in going into any greater detail in the

absence of a Soviet indication of interest in discussing the possibilities,

while Korniyenko implied that there was nothing to discuss if the Feb-

ruary 13 formulation was what we were proposing.

7. Korniyenko then reiterated in considerable detail the May 14 Af-

ghanistan proposal, which he said the Soviet Union fully supported,

and asked what was wrong with that approach to a peaceful settlement

in Afghanistan. I responded that the basic problem for the Pakistani

and Iranian Governments was that the starting point of that proposal

was that they should deal with a government that had been imposed on

Afghanistan by outside force.

8. US-Soviet relations. Early in the conversation and at various

points throughout, Korniyenko made the familiar point that the Soviet

Union desired no freezing in our relations and that the fault lay entirely

with the United States for trying to link totally unrelated matters to-

gether. Though I had made the point in previous conversations with

him, I again explained in no uncertain terms the political realities in the

US which do mean that, until there is some real movement on Afghani-

stan, SALT ratification remains problematical despite the firm desire of

the President and the Secretary to move the treaty through the Senate at

the earliest possible time.

9. Aside from disputing the fact that Afghanistan was at the root of

our problems, Korniyenko also tried to belittle the significance of the

measures we had taken in response to Afghanistan. He spoke deri-

sively of our refusal to request flight clearance for Armand Hammer5 to

come to the Olympics in his private plane (something on which he said

he had just received a telegram from Washington) and asked what pur-

290.

Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 10, 1980

SUBJECT

BW: The Sverdlovsk Incident

PARTICIPANTS

US

USSR

The Acting Secretary

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

PM—Reginald Bartholomew

S/MS—Marshall Shulman

Toward the end of a discussion on TNF, the Acting Secretary men-

tioned that he had one other matter to raise. This concerned the out-

break of anthrax in Sverdlovsk last spring. The Acting Secretary said

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

that we felt that we hadn’t been able to engage the Soviet Government

on this matter to the extent its seriousness warranted. He noted that

Ambassador Earle would meet with Dobrynin to discuss this issue in

some detail.

Dobrynin responded by questioning what it was the US wanted,

since this was not clear. He noted that the Soviets have already given us

an explanation of this incident.

The Acting Secretary again stressed the seriousness we attach to en-

gaging in bilateral consultations so we could satisfy ourselves on this

issue, and not permit this question to undermine the BW Convention or

damage prospects for arms control generally.

Dobrynin reiterated that they have given us what they have on this

matter, and that the Soviets have not seen anything from us that would

contradict their explanation. He said that our goal should be preserving

the Convention and prospects for arms control. Dobrynin again stressed

that what they have heard was based on hearsay, and that if we have

anything else more to say in terms of evidence or proof would we

please tell them.

The Acting Secretary replied by stressing that Ambassador Earle

will provide information that will underline the seriousness of our

concerns.

Due to the press of vacation plans, Dobrynin suggested that Am-

bassador Earle see Vasev instead and give him a paper, which Do-

brynin would then make certain is dealt with in Moscow. Dobrynin

stressed that he needed to take something back with him.

The Acting Secretary repeated that this was a serious political

matter, that Ambassador Earle had important things to say about this

question, and that Dobrynin should definitely try to see Earle before re-

turning to Moscow.

Dobrynin said that he understood the seriousness of this issue, but

suggested that it reflected domestic American election-year politics.

But he asked whether we really had something to say. If so, this would

be good. But he did not want to discuss just anything on this issue in a

general fashion. People in Moscow are critical of the way in which this

issue has been the subject of rumor, hearsay, and press reports.

The Acting Secretary said that this issue would be every bit as se-

rious to the USG if we were now in the first year of this Administration

instead of the fourth year. He suggested the possibility that the issue

might be addressed by distinguished scientists from each country.

Dobrynin repeated again that up to now there has been no proof,

and there have been indirect discussions in the scientific community

June–December 1980

which have caused a chain reaction. There has not been a single addi-

tional fact but only hearsay.

The Acting Secretary concluded this portion of the conversation by

urging Dobrynin to see Ambassador Earle on the BW question.

Attachment

Paper

undated

In March 1980 at the Five-Year Review Conference of the Biolog-

ical Weapons Convention, the United States Government reported that

it had initiated consultations with the Soviet Union as the result of in-

formation which raised questions concerning the compliance of the So-

viet Union with the Biological Weapons Convention. We indicated that

we were proceeding in these consultations in a cooperative spirit and in

accordance with the specific provisions of the Convention; we further

indicated our hopes that the Soviet Union would also proceed in the

same manner. At that time, anticipating that the bilateral consultations

would take some time, the USG promised to make a full report on the

results of those consultations to the Parties at a later appropriate date.

This paper constitutes that promised report. (S)

The basic obligation of the BWC, set forth in Article I, provides that

parties undertake “never in any circumstances to develop, produce,

stockpile or otherwise acquire or retain microbial or other biological

agents, or toxins whatever their origin or method of production, of

types and in quantities that have no justification for prophylactic, pro-

tection or other peaceful purposes.” The Convention also provides, in

Article V, that Parties undertake to consult and to cooperate with one

another “in solving any problems which may arise” relating to the ap-

plication of the provisions of the Convention. (S)

Early in 1980, the United States Government became aware of an

event which apparently happened in the city of Sverdlovsk in the So-

viet Union during the spring of 1979. Information concerning this event

raised questions regarding the compliance of the Soviet Union with the

obligations it had undertaken in Article I of the Biological Weapons

Convention. On the basis of the evidence then available, it was decided

that the matter would be raised with Soviet authorities pursuant to Ar-

ticle V of the treaty. The timing of the request for information from the

Soviets was complicated by the fact that, purely by coincidence, the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

long-planned Five-Year Review Conference of the parties to the Biolog-

ical Weapons Convention had convened in Geneva and was in session

at that time. (S)

The USG raised the matter in Moscow on March 174 and informed

the participants in the Geneva Conference of that action. The USG fur-

ther promised to report the results of consultations with the Soviet

Government to the parties to the BWC. In responding to the USG de-

marche, the Soviets acknowledged that a number of deaths had oc-

curred due to an anthrax epidemic in Sverdlovsk in April 1979, but as-

serted that it was the intestinal form of anthrax resulting from

contaminated meat. The USG again raised the issue with the Soviets on

March 28 and proposed expert consultations as called for in Article V.

The Soviet Government repeated its earlier explanation and denied the

request for consultations. Most recently, in June, the USG reiterated its

concerns to the Soviets and re-emphasized its interest in pursuing ex-

pert consultations as provided in Article V. The Soviet Government has

again repeated its simple denial and refused its request for consulta-

tions to resolve the issue. (S)

The concerns which originally led the USG to raise this issue with

the Soviet Government are as follows:

There is located in the south of Sverdlovsk a military facility which

is subordinate to the section within the Soviet Ministry of Defense

which is responsible for biological and chemical warfare. This facility is

contained within a heavily secured perimeter and operates in secrecy.

It includes structures, including animal pens, which suggest that it is

engaged in research and/or production activities involving biological

effects on living organisms. Other physical characteristics of the facility

include structures suitable for storage of explosives. The facility was

built before 1972 (i.e., before the signature of the Biological Weapons

Convention), and it remains in active use up to the present time. (S)

According to reliable reports, during the first weeks of April 1979,

at least 40 persons died in Sverdlovsk after experiencing pulmonary

and other symptoms normally associated with inhalation anthrax.

Many additional cases were reported in the following weeks, and a

large hospital in Sverdlovsk became devoted exclusively to the treat-

ment of anthrax cases—under military control and strict secrecy. (S)

Anthrax is an animal disease caused by a bacterial organism which

may infect humans who are exposed to it. There are three forms of an-

thrax, which are distinguished by the manner in which the spores enter

the body. Cutaneous anthrax, the most common form, is caused when

spores enter through a cut in the skin of a person handling contami-

June–December 1980

nated animals or animal products. Intestinal anthrax results from the

consumption of contaminated meat. Inhalation anthrax is caused by air-

borne spores entering the lungs. (Spores in animal hair or hides can be-

come airborne in industrial processing of contaminated material.) Cu-

taneous anthrax is readily diagnosed, easily treated, and not usually

fatal when treated. (Untreated cases result in death about 20% of the

time.) The intestinal variety, however, often results in death. Inhalation

anthrax is almost always fatal. Anthrax organisms which are ingested

or inhaled are transported within the body to lymph glands (in the ab-

domen and in the chest, respectively) where they multiply and produce

a toxin which spreads through the body and is difficult to arrest. These

forms of anthrax are more difficult to diagnose, but are readily indenti-

fied and distinguished from each other in clinical diagnosis. A prin-

cipal difference between intestinal and inhalation anthrax which assists

in clinical diagnosis is that the former type is usually characterized by

abdominal distress and the latter by respiratory distress. Both varieties

produce cyanosis, general toxemia, and death within about a week of

exposure. (S)

The initial victims of the Sverdlovsk outbreak resided or worked in

the immediate vicinity of the military facility described above. Many

reports indicate the widespread belief in Sverdlovsk that the outbreak

of anthrax was indeed caused by an accident at that military facility.

The reported locations of the initial victims, near the facility, suggest

that the disease could have reached them by an airborne cloud ema-

nating from the facility. Meteorological data for the most likely dates of

such an occurence are consistent with this possibility. (S)

Official Soviet explanations of the outbreak as initiated by anthrax-

infected cattle are not credible because of the large number of victims

and the contrary clinical reports indicating symptoms of inhalation an-

thrax rather than intestinal anthrax. Furthermore, decontamination

measures taken by Soviet authorities, including the spraying of

buildings and terrain with disinfectants, were more consistent with

a response to an airborne infection than with a response to the pres-

ence of contaminated meat. A quarantine of the affected region of

Sverdlovsk was established and transportation out of the city was

controlled. (S)

The information which gave rise to the USG’s concerns has come

from a variety of sources, including extremely sensitive technical and

human intelligence information. The USG will not jeopardize these

sources and methods of intelligence collection. Consequently the USG

cannot elaborate further on its understanding of the events in Sverd-

lovsk or on the origins of its information. (S)

Although this evidence is less than conclusive, the USG believes

that it raises questions serious enough to warrant pursuit of the issue

291.

Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin

The Ambassador opened by saying that he wished to ask me two

questions prior to his return to Moscow, because he will be asked them

by the Politburo: (1) who will win the elections; (2) what outcome

would be better for U.S.-Soviet relations?

I responded by saying that my objective judgment is that Reagan’s

lead will evaporate as the public nears the moment of decision re-

garding who ought to be the President of this country, especially since

Reagan will not be able to withstand close press scrutiny, and that the

reelection of the President is obviously better for U.S.-Soviet relations

because the President can pursue both a policy of firmness in dealing

with Soviet expansionism and arms control as well as detente. Accord-

ingly, his reelection can avoid the decade of the 80’s being a repetition

of the unmitigated Cold War of 1945–1955.

June–December 1980

Dobrynin responded by saying that he fully agrees but wanted to

know what, in that case, prevented an improvement in our relations. I

told him that there is no point in playing games with each other, that

Afghanistan was clearly the issue because it not only posed a strategic

challenge to our interests but also because it has become a symbol of

what is perceived in this country as Soviet expansionism.

This led to a discussion of whether the Afghanistani problem can

somehow be solved. I explained to him what we mean by the “transi-

tional arrangements” designed to create a government in Afghanistan

which is not hostile to the Soviet Union but which is not dependent for

its survival on the presence of a Soviet occupation army.

Dobrynin maintained that we are in effect insisting that Babrak

Karmal has to go, whereas the Soviet Union is willing to solve the

problem on the basis of withdrawal of Soviet forces, once an Afghan

army that is capable of sustaining Karmal has been created. “Why not

accept then a solution based on the principle of neutrality and non-

interference?” he asked.

I pointed out that Babrak Karmal is part of the problem that needs

to be solved and hence cannot be the solution. To govern he has to have

a Soviet army of occupation. Moreover, to govern without Soviet

troops, there would have to be a massive and inevitably brutal counter-

insurgency operation which would further poison U.S.-Soviet rela-

tions. This is why it is in our mutual interest to try to find an accommo-

dation soon, perhaps through more extensive explorations of what a

transitional arrangement would involve. If such a solution could be

found, it would be a real breakthrough, making possible rapid progress

on other issues, notably arms control.

Dobrynin then asked me about the prospects for SALT. I told him

that the President and the Secretary of State are fully committed to it

and that we will seek its ratification. However, (1) if the present situa-

tion in Afghanistan continues, ratification will be difficult; (2) if there is

a massive Soviet counter-insurgency after the Olympics, ratification

will become even more difficult because public emotions here will be

further aroused; (3) but if there is some genuine progress on Afghani-

stan, pointing toward the withdrawal of all Soviet troops and involving

perhaps some transitional arrangements, then the public would wel-

come SALT and ratification would be facilitated.

I added that the public wishes a firm policy toward the Soviet

Union but also desires accommodation with the Soviet Union. It is our

task to make that accommodation possible and I hoped that Dobrynin

would impress the Soviet leaders with this thought.

He tried to discuss TNF and the Middle East with me but I told

him that TNF had been discussed with Christopher, that on the Middle

East I did not have anything new to say, and that in any case, I knew

292.

Letter From Secretary of State Muskie to Soviet Foreign

Minister Gromyko

undated

293.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11164. Dept. pass USDA/FAS for Saylor, Vovotny; USICA. Sub-

ject: Effectiveness of U.S. Grain Embargo on the USSR: Mid-July

Assessment.

1. (C-entire text).

2. Although the grain embargo has been less effective than origi-

nally hoped for in terms of limiting total Soviet grain imports, it has

nevertheless been costly to the Soviets. It certainly compounded the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

problems the Soviets were already suffering from the small grain har-

(MMT) of grain the Soviets had planned in 1979/80, they were able to

buy only an estimated 31. MMT. Moreover, the Soviets paid a consid-

erably higher price for the non-U.S. grain and may well have gotten

lower quality grain. We have heard reports that the switch in origin of

certain imported grain caused shortages and problems in formulating

animal rations, particularly for poultry.

3. Based on published statistics, it appears that the Soviets have

been able to maintain cattle and poultry numbers in spite of the em-

bargo, but they have been forced to reduce hog numbers due to limited

feed supplies. The rate of build-up in Soviet animal numbers has also

definitely been slowed, affecting future production potential.

4. It now seems clear that the crop failure in 1979, combined with

the embargo has resulted in a serious setback to Brezhnev’s plans to im-

prove the availability of meat and other animal products to Soviet con-

sumers. Not only will meat production fall in the short-term, but we

think the Soviets will have no chance of meeting planned production

goals for sometime into the future. In effect, this means that per capita

meat consumption, already at a low 57 kilograms (Poland is close to 82

kg), will not likely increase for sometime to come. Also during 1979/80,

the Soviets were forced to draw down their strategic grain reserves to a

level where we think it is causing considerable concern. Based on cur-

rent crop prospects, plus estimated grain import availabilities in 1980/

81, we see little, if any, chance of rebuilding these reserves without a

further cut in meat production in 1981.

5. Recently there have been many reports about food shortages in

the Soviet Union, mainly meat and dairy products. We believe such

shortages are in part related to the U.S. embargo on grains sales. Al-

though there are reports suggesting that current shortages are due to

the Soviets stockpiling meat for the Olympics, Soviet published sta-

tistics show that meat production has been declining steadily since the

first of the year. Cattle and hog slaughter weights are declining due to

the tight feed situation. Partly as a result, total meat output in May was

5. percent below the same month a year ago. We feel official statistics

will show that meat output in June will be as much as 8 percent below a

year earlier. State procurements of meat have been running at an even

lower level than production.

6. There is no question that the availability of dairy products is also

less, with the embargo aggravating an already bad situation. Milk pro-

duction in the Soviet Union has been trending downward for the past

three years, mainly as a result of the difficult feed situation. Milk

output so far this year has been running 5 percent under a year ago, and

government procurements 6 percent under. The butter shortage is

294.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

189291. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree. Subject: Soviet Re-

sponse to U.S. Demarche on Sverdlovsk Incident.

1. S-entire text.

2. Summary: Soviet Charge Vasev came in with a reply to Ambas-

sador Earle’s demarche of July 112 to Dobrynin requesting consulta-

tions under the BW Convention on the reported incidence of anthrax at

Sverdlovsk. Vasev said he had been instructed to confirm that the So-

viet side considered the allegations completely unfounded, that there

had been no violation of the BW Convention and that there was conse-

quently no basis for consultation. Ambassador Earle regretted that the

Soviet reply had not addressed the factual information we had con-

veyed and cautioned that, since the problem would not go away, we

would have to continue pursuing the matter by other means which

would probably include the participation of other parties. End

summary.

3. Saying that he was speaking on instructions, Vasev delivered the

following “oral reply” on July 17:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

“In view of repeated requests of the American side the Embassy

has been instructed to confirm once again that the Soviet side considers

as completely unfounded allegations which try to establish some sort

of connection between an outbreak of anthrax in the region of Sverd-

lovsk in April 1979 and the compliance by the Soviet Union with the

Convention Prohibiting Bacteriological Weapons.

“The Soviet Union, as one of the initiators of and participants in

the Convention, has always attached the utmost importance to the un-

deviating fulfillment of all its provisions which represent a major meas-

ure in the field of real disarmament and the effective prevention against

making and storing types of weapons of mass destruction lethal for

mankind. We have already emphasized that the fulfillment by the So-

viet side of obligations established by the Convention is guaranteed by

the appropriate state institutions of the USSR and that the Soviet Union

does not possess bacteriological (biological) agents, toxins, weapons or

equipment and means of delivery as mentioned in Article I of the

Convention.

“Besides, in view of the request made by the American side con-

cerning information on the causes of an outbreak of anthrax in the re-

gion of Sverdlovsk in April of last year the Soviet side has communi-

cated the fact that the outbreak was a result of periodic livestock

epidemics in those regions and that the cases of human illness were due

to the consumption of cattle meat sold in violation of established veteri-

nary rules. This communication was based on data from the Epidemio-

logical Service furnished in particular by the magazine ‘Microbiology,

Epidemiology, and Immunology’ (May 1980 issue).

“The stated facts show that the incident concerning anthrax in the

region of Sverdlovsk is completely within the realm of veterinary and

public health and does not touch upon any matter relating to the aims

or observance of the Convention Banning Bacteriological Weapons as

mentioned in Article V.

“It is noted with bewilderment and regret how irresponsibly some

American officials make public statements obviously trying to cast a

shadow over the faithful fulfillment by the Soviet Union of its treaty

obligations. The obviously inspired clamor in the American mass

media around this contrived problem is also noted.

“The Soviet side reaffirms that there is no basis for consultations

within the context of Article V of the convention on the Banning of Bac-

teriological Weapons”. End text.

4. In the discussion which ensued, Ambassador Earle regretted the

Soviet disregard of our demarche which had furnished detailed infor-

mation underlying our concern over compliance. He noted the Soviets

had not addressed themselves to the information in our paper. Refer-

ring to his conversation with Ambassador Dobrynin last Friday, Am-

June–December 1980

bassador Earle reiterated his concern that the Soviet unresponsiveness

would cast a shadow over both our bilateral relations and the multila-

teral arrangement created by the Convention. Noting that we had not

accused the Soviets of a direct violation, he stated our purpose as

seeking to raise in a diplomatic and noncontentious way a mutual

problem which called for consultation under Article V of the Conven-

tion. He added that we were open to Soviet suggestions on the form

such consultations might take. This was our preferred course. How-

ever, Ambassador Earle cautioned, the problem would not go away

and if necessary we would be obliged to deal with it by other means

which would include the involvement of other parties.

5. Vasev denied that the substance of the US demarche had been

ignored. He said the Soviet side had studied our paper carefully and re-

viewed the situation. The Soviets did not possess any biological agents,

weapons, or means of delivery. Their explanation of what happened in

Sverdlovsk had been based on data furnished by medical experts.

Nothing more was required since Article V did not cover matters of

public health and sanitation. Vasev charged that we were pursuing

psychological warfare against the Soviets and referred to recent news-

paper articles based on emigre sources.

6. Ambassador Earle pointed out that we could not let the issue be

resolved by a flat Soviet statement. He referred to the information we

had supplied in our paper, noting that many of the points had not

been based upon emigre sources. Vasev responded that the heart

of the matter was simply that the Soviets had given us a complete ex-

planation. He claimed we were indulging in rumors and psychological

warfare. Ambassador Earle again stressed the applicability of Article V,

quoting from it directly to make his point. He noted that as a

co-depositary of the Convention we had responsibilities to insure its

observance. Vasev again stressed that the Soviets found no basis for

consultation under Article V. After Ambassador Earle had denied a

final time Vasev’s charge that our purpose was one of propaganda,

Vasev said he had nothing to add and the meeting ended.

7. Septel will contain instructions for briefing allies.

Christopher

295.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

11437. Subject: Post-Afghanistan Sanctions: Some Thoughts on

1. (C-entire text)

2. This cable was largely approved in draft by Ambassador Watson

before his departure.

3. Summary. Ref A provides a good basis for a fresh look at both

Soviet and our own tactics and strategy regarding Afghanistan. We

agree that the Soviets are trying to gain our acceptance of the fait ac-

compli by dangling the prospect of improved relations. Paradoxically,

if we admit publicly or to our friends in private the probability that the

Soviets are not going to withdraw from Afghanistan, we run a serious

risk of encouraging the erosion of the punitive measures we and our

allies have adopted, and thus acceptance of the fait accompli the So-

viets are urging. For this reason our best tactic is to continue to express

firm determination to continue the sanctions and belief that continued

pressure can lead to a political solution and withdrawal. In order to

keep our allies aboard, we should take appropriate initiatives to hold

out rewards to the Soviets for movement, respond appropriately to So-

viet gestures, and argue convincingly to keep the measures in place,

until there is sufficient movement to warrant relaxing them—even if

this means a protracted wait. Specifically, we should try to keep all

meaningful sanctions in place but pursue possibilities in arms control

matters and possibly consult with the Soviets on CSCE, as well as take a

positive position on efforts to develop a political solution in Afghani-

stan. This package of incentives for the Soviets would provide a good

platform from which to persuade our allies to stand firm on trade and

other ostracizing measures. End summary.

4. Ref A arrived at a time when we were giving thought to the

question of whether, when and under what circumstances it may be-

June–December 1980

come appropriate—or necessary—to relax some of the sanctions which

the U.S. and our allies imposed on the Soviet Union in the wake of the

Afghan invasion.

5. Already there are indications of difficulties for the sanctions

policy:

—efforts are underway in the U.S. to rescind the grain sales

embargo;

—some of our allies are displaying nervousness over the impact of

detente and are inclining toward normal political contacts;

—one of our most significant sanctions—the Olympic boycott—

will in any case soon have run its course;

—sustaining trade restraints is becoming more difficult: if the

French break ranks, others will quickly follow suit, making our own

trade sanctions almost meaningless while leaving us isolated;

—though we have no clear-cut indications as yet, we can envisage

a situation in which prominent American scientists and cultural figures

begin to argue for exchanges, and move to circumvent them.

6. One factor contributing to the erosion of support for sanctions is

a growing sense of resignation, a realization that international pres-

sures may not succeed in dislodging the Soviets from Afghanistan. We

expect increasingly to hear the line now being articulated privately by

Dobrynin (as reported in ref A) that we are faced with a fait accompli in

Afghanistan, that we may as well adjust to it and move ahead on other

matters of greater importance to the world. There is probably a parallel

here with the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea, where Gromyko

and his colleagues soon after the event simply stood down all com-

plaints and asserted that what has happened was irreversible.

7. At this juncture, the Embassy draws these conclusions:

—In the absence of Soviet concessions, now is not the time to begin

to rescind the measures we have imposed; this would reduce or elimi-

nate any incentive the Soviets might have for following up their initial

withdrawal announcement with some more meaningful steps toward a

political settlement.

—While standing firm, however, we should not commit ourselves

to continuing the full array of current sanctions until the last Soviet sol-

dier is out of Afghanistan; that probably won’t happen for a long time,

if at all, and to set that as the criterion for any relaxation whatsoever

would tie our hands and risk our becoming isolated.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

—Instead, we should begin trying to formulate a strategy that

maximizes our influence on Soviet behavior, attainment of our own se-

curity objectives, and maintenance of allied unity.

8. Our strategy should be based on our objectives of deterrence,

punishment and minimizing the regional and global consequences of

the Soviet action by achieving the fullest possible Soviet withdrawal

and the greatest possible autonomy for Afghanistan. It must also take

account of the reality that truly effective deterrence is possible only in

circumstances where Western military power can be brought effec-

tively to bear.

9. In concrete terms, this means:

A. Using all possible means to urge solidarity and patience on our

allies and friends in maintaining trade and other sanctions. We can

argue that any future deterrent effect of our sanctions depends heavily

on their duration. We can argue that total withdrawal is still a possi-

bility if we remain firm, and that the way to get withdrawal is to allow

even slight relaxation of sanctions only in exchange for movement

toward total withdrawal. We can underline the importance to Moscow

of acceptance by the rest of the world as an equal in all fields—in-

cluding cultural as well as political and economic relations—and the

usefulness therefore of raising Afghanistan as an obstacle to contacts of

all kinds.

B. An important element of a strategy to maintain solidarity is to

continue expressing our readiness to explore a political settlement

(while trying to develop a clearer idea of what that might entail). We

are struck by Embassy Kabul’s idea (ref B) for proposing the sort of

peacekeeping scheme which would be needed to assure stability, even

if we know there is little or no chance the Soviets would accept any

such scheme. Not letting the propaganda initiative slip away is essen-

tial. Soviet rejection of a plan would help keep the pressure on. And the

Soviets might be constrained to make counter-offers which could pro-

vide the starting point for compromises eventually leading to a reduc-

tion in direct Soviet involvement in Afghanistan sufficient to meet our

purposes for restoring a broad dialogue with the Soviets.

C. In order to succeed in keeping our allies and friends on a course

of firm opposition to the occupation but flexibility in negotiating with-

drawal, the U.S. must be careful not to appear to be prematurely re-

laxing its own sanctions:

—The grain embargo is crucial not only in terms of showing our

allies that we will stand firm even if it hurts us, but also in terms of

showing strong national will toward the Soviet Union. The embargo

has had a significant though not crippling effect on the Soviet effort to

use consumption as a tool to achieve [garble] economic efficiency

[garble]. Its real force, however, is in its potential effect in the future if a

June–December 1980

very poor Soviet harvest should coincide with a tightening of interna-

tional markets. Although such a nightmare for Moscow is now only a

possibility, the consequences would be so disastrous that it undoubt-

edly affects Soviet calculations even though Soviet leaders cover up

any such concerns.

—U.S. limitations on high technology exports and the freeze on

large projects are also significant, both symbolically and in terms of un-

certainties in the planning process. They will be more difficult to main-

tain in the face of inevitable sliding away by other industrialized coun-

tries, but it seems possible that the U.S. can continue to have a

dampening effect if we adhere strictly to our own policy and are not

stampeded by isolated examples of West European or Japanese

backsliding.

—The U.S. freeze on high visibility cultural, educational and scien-

tific exchanges will, if it continues, cause these staples of the relation-

ship to wither away. That is a pity, because these opportunities for es-

tablishing long-term direct contacts with individuals and institutions in

the Soviet Union have useful potential for eroding the isolation and sin-

glemindedness of this society. But they are not essential to the U.S. in

any immediate sense and are symbolically important to the Soviets.

Therefore we should resolutely resist any temptation to relax our re-

strictions on the high visibility exchanges prematurely. In the Em-

bassy’s view, a return to normalcy in high visibility exchanges should

not be one of the first steps toward a normal relationship with the

USSR, but should be held back until the Afghanistan situation has

changed to U.S. satisfaction.

D. A final and important element of U.S. strategy is the delinking

of certain key issues and negotiations from Afghanistan as we are

doing in the case of the test ban negotiations, MBFR, the Committee on

Disarmament, and LRTNF. CSCE should be considered as another ac-

ceptable area for preliminary talks with the Soviets; CSCE itself is valu-

able as an ongoing forum to demonstrate the ideological dividing line

between democracy and totalitarianism, but in order for it to be effec-

tive we have to keep in close harmony with the West European de-

mocracies. We should therefore show the way, by consulting with the

Soviets and telling them that we will sound off at Madrid nonpolemi-

cally but firmly on aggression in Afghanistan as well as human rights.

10. In sum, the U.S. should be in the forefront of efforts to demon-

strate to the world how to cope with Soviet aggression when circum-

stances prevent a direct military response: by principled and long-

lasting sanctions, readiness to show flexibility in negotiating an end to

the aggression, and clearmindedness in defining key issues to be dealt

with separately. How to carry this out in practice is not so easy to

specify, but the way may become clearer in the process. We should not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

let progress on arms control issues distract attention from the issues

raised by Afghanistan. But we must recognize that if we simply stand

fast and insist on no movement on any front until the Soviets leave Af-

ghanistan, we will eventually be standing pretty much alone and

without having significantly affected Soviet behavior.

11. Department pass to other posts as appropriate.

Garrison

296.

Letter From Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko to Secretary of

State Muskie

July 22, 1980

Dear Mr. Secretary,

I would like in continuation of our exchange of views to express

some considerations in connection with your letter of July 14.

We have noted the interest of the US Government expressed in

your letter in improving Soviet-US relations. As is well known to you,

this is consistently favored by the Soviet Leadership. However, it is im-

portant to act precisely along these lines in practice. We, on our part,

are ready to do so provided there is a similar readiness on the part of

the United States.

Given such an approach and being guided by broad goals of

strengthening peace and security our two countries, as was proved on

more than one occasion in the past, are quite capable of developing

constructively their relations and finding mutually acceptable solu-

tions to most complicated questions of mutual interest for the USSR

and the US.

297.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

1. (S-entire text.)

2. On August 11 Charge raised Sverdlovsk incident with First

Deputy Foreign Minister Korniyenko, presenting oral statement as pro-

vided in reftel. (Demarches on MBFR and Iran reported septels.)

3. Korniyenko’s response followed familiar lines. He said the So-

viet side could agree that the “fuss” being made over the outbreak of

anthrax could damage future joint efforts at controlling the arms race,

but asserted that the fuss, including the public distribution of informa-

tion with vague accusations that the USSR had violated the Biological

Weapons Convention, had been organized by the American side over

an imaginary incident. The whole affair was thus the responsibility of

the U.S.

4. Korniyenko said that the Soviet position on what had occurred

at Sverdlovsk had been expressed many times. Unfortunately, he said,

outbreaks of anthrax do occur almost every year in the Sverdlovsk re-

gion; last year’s outbreak was reported in the local press, which pre-

scribed precautionary measures for the population to prevent infection

from contaminated animals. But the anthrax outbreaks which occur in

Sverdlovsk have no relation to the Biological Weapons Convention.

Ambassador Dobrynin had already explained this, Korniyenko added.

5. Korniyenko said the U.S. request for consultations under Article

V of the BW Convention aroused suspicion on the Soviet side. After all,

either side could always dream up pretexts for invoking the Conven-

tion. Why the U.S. was doing so at the present time, Korniyenko said,

was not hard to guess: it was the result of an irresponsible attitude on

the U.S. side toward international agreements. Korniyenko went on to

note that the BW Convention was the first agreement that had fully

banned not only the use of a type of mass destruction weapon, but also

June–December 1980

its possession. The sides should be striving to protect the Convention,

he said, but instead the U.S. was discrediting it by raising Sverdlovsk.

This understandably caused indignation on the Soviet side. He won-

dered how the U.S. would have reacted if the Soviet Union had in-

voked the BW Convention and demanded information on the outbreak

of Legionnaire’s disease in the U.S.

6. Continuing, Korniyenko noted that the U.S. had proposed con-

sultations of the sort conducted under SALT. But in SALT, he said,

there was a special commission for discussing questions which might

arise (implying, without saying it, that there is no such body under the

BW Convention). Moreover, the U.S. underlined its desire for confiden-

tiality, yet at the same time was spreading information around the

world about the USSR’s suspected violation of the BW Convention. The

two sides began to discuss the issue, yet immediately the American

side began to spread stories that it was not convinced by the USSR’s

statements.

7. Summing up, Korniyenko said that, from the Soviet perspective,

it was clear that the U.S. had chosen to create a fuss over Sverdlovsk as

yet another way of increasing tensions and another attempt to damage

US-Soviet relations.

8. In response, Charge said he would attempt once more, briefly, to

clarify the U.S. position, since Korniyenko’s remarks indicated con-

tinued serious misunderstanding of the U.S. position. It was precisely

the great concern that was bound to arise and did arise in the U.S., in

Congress and elsewhere, when the reports became known about the

event in Sverdlovsk, that made it essential for the sides, if they wished

to “protect” the BW Convention, to deal with the questions that had

arisen concerning Sverdlovsk. Charge stressed that U.S. had not ac-

cused the Soviet Union of a violation. The U.S. was simply asking for

information pursuant to Article V of the BW Convention, and felt the

best way to exchange information would be through bilateral meetings

of experts. The U.S. cannot accept the explanations provided thus far by

the Soviet side, because the information available to us points to inhala-

tion anthrax rather than a form of the disease transmitted by contami-

nated meat. If the Soviet Union, as Korniyenko suggested, raised Le-

gionnaire’s disease with the U.S., the U.S. would have invited Soviet

experts to consult with U.S. disease control specialists.

9. Korniyenko replied that there would not have arisen any public

concern if the U.S. Government had not taken the initiative after the

first of the year to activate the issue in the press and in Congress. After

all, the subject was not unknown prior to the first of the year; the local

newspapers in Sverdlovsk had published warnings to the population

at the time. It seemed to Moscow that the American authorities had de-

cided in January to worsen the atmosphere between the U.S. and USSR

298.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President

Carter

August 21, 1980

Distinguished Mr. President,

I deemed it necessary to address myself to You on the issue which

deeply concerns and affects the peoples of the European continent and

has also a substantial bearing on the prospects of USSR and USA

relations.

I have in mind the issue emerged in connection with plans to de-

velop and deploy in Western Europe new American medium-range

missiles.

As is known, seeking to prevent a new round of nuclear arms race

on the European continent, we approached, as far back as last fall, the

United States and other NATO countries with a proposal to initiate ne-

gotiations on the medium-range nuclear systems, while readiness was

expressed on our part even to cut the number of these systems de-

ployed in the western regions of the USSR, provided there is no addi-

tional deployment of nuclear missiles of that category in Western

Europe.

At the present time too, we believe that it would be the most cor-

rect and radical solution of the question of medium-range nuclear

June–December 1980

systems in Europe. We maintain our proposal to this effect but for it to

be translated into reality it is necessary, of course, to restore the status

which existed prior to the December session of the NATO Council.

It is also known to You, I believe, that in order to overcome the im-

passe created as a result of the said NATO decision we are ready to

adopt yet another alternative, whereby the questions concerning

medium-range nuclear missile systems in Europe would not be subject

of separate negotiations but would be discussed, after the SALT–2

Treaty enters into force, in the framework of SALT–3 negotiations and,

naturally, on the basis of those principles which are agreed between

our countries for the SALT–3 negotiations.

Although there followed no formal objection from the US side and

the other NATO countries against such an alternative, it has proved im-

possible of practical realization since the United States does not ratify

the SALT–2 Treaty.

Having thoroughly weighed up the existing situation and being

guided by broader interests of peace and international security we de-

cided to undertake one more step.

Without withdrawing our former proposals we expressed our-

selves in the course of the Moscow conversations with FRG Chancellor

H. Schmidt in favor of starting negotiations to discuss simultaneously

and in organic relationship both medium-range nuclear systems in Eu-

rope and American forward-based nuclear systems.

That these weapon systems are to be considered as being interre-

lated and also in connection with the question of their locations i.e. the

bases, is determined by the factual state of affairs. After all, the Soviet

Union cannot disregard hundreds of American nuclear carriers which

due to their location can reach the territory of the USSR and its allies

and which thereby constitute a substantial and integral element of the

general strategic situation. The same is also true of the bases per se

which not only expand operational capabilities of the systems already

there but make it possible in a short time, additionally and on a great

scale, to increase the number of such systems.

It is not a new question at all. This question was already subject of

discussion in the process of negotiations on strategic arms limitation. It

was touched upon by us too when we met in Vienna last year.

We are prepared to begin right now the negotiations that we are

proposing, without waiting for the SALT–2 Treaty ratification. How-

ever, practical implementation of agreements that could be reached

during these negotiations, as is understood, would be carried out only

after the Treaty enters into force. This is necessitated by the fact, that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the subject of the proposed negotiations is closely tied not only to the

existing balance of forces in Europe but also to the general strategic

equilibrium between the USSR and the USA.

I want You to understand me correctly, Mr. President: we are con-

fident about our ability to neutralize any attempts to disrupt the ex-

isting correlation of forces, to change it in the NATO favor and to attain

military supremacy over us. In other words, if the West triggers a new

round of arms race, we will, although with a heavy heart, accept the

challenge.

However, we believed and continue to believe that further arms

race is not the kind of a road which can lead to a stronger security of

anyone; on the contrary, this road is fraught with serious danger for all

countries and peoples without exception. This is the reason why we

resolutely favor negotiations and are convinced that only this way cor-

responds to the vital interests of the peoples of the USSR and the USA,

as well as all other peoples.

Since there has been no answer from the American side to the pro-

posal we made, we cannot but have an impression that the US gov-

ernment took the course of delaying the beginning of the negotiations.

In the meantime, the possibility, which we believe is there, to find a

mutually acceptable solution may slip away and be wiped out by the

march of events.

I would like to hope, Mr. President, that You will accord all due at-

tention to this communication of mine and that we will be able without

further delays to reach agreement on the beginning of negotiations on

the aforementioned question.

Sincerely,

L. Brezhnev

June–December 1980

299.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

232100. Subject: President’s Reply to Brezhnev Letter on TNF2. Ref:

State 226447.

1. Confidential-entire text.

2. On Tuesday (September 2) Charge should request an appoint-

ment with Gromyko or Korniyenko for Wednesday (September 3) to

deliver President Carter’s reply to Brezhnev’s August 21 letter on TNF

(reftel). Text follows.

3. Begin text: Dear Mr. President: I am responding to your letter of

August 21 concerning theater nuclear forces

—It is useful to recall that this matter arises primarily because of

the Soviet Union’s substantial deployment of new long-range theater

nuclear weapons, and in particular, the SS–20. Our own plans in NATO

are a measured response which is necessary to preserve the security of

our alliance. For our part, we did not have and do not now have any in-

tent to seek any advantage in these weapons.

—Indeed from the very outset, we made clear our interest in nego-

tiating equal limitations on theater nuclear forces in the framework of

SALT III. Beginning in December 1979, we repeatedly urged the Soviet

Union to join with us in preliminary exchanges to this end without pre-

condition or delay, notwithstanding postponement of ratification of the

SALT II Treaty caused by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

—For the ensuing seven months, your own position and proposals

delayed any discussions because they required that we and our allies

renounce the planned deployments which are necessary to respond to

your own substantial and ongoing programs. Now that you have

agreed to move ahead without any preconditions, the path toward pre-

liminary exchanges lies open and we are preparing for them in consul-

tation with our allies.

—I note your views concerning what you refer to as American

“forward-based systems.” We have also repeatedly stated our views on

this issue. We continue to believe that the most expeditious way of pro-

fidential; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted in the White House; cleared by H. Allen

Holmes (EUR), Raymond Seitz (S/S), Raymond Snider (D), and Bartholomew; approved

by Christopher.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ceeding to concrete arms controls results is to focus initially on

achieving agreed limits on long-range land-based theater nuclear mis-

siles, because these are the most dynamic and threatening new deploy-

ments. This approach will enhance the prospects of reaching timely

agreement.

—I propose that Secretary of State Muskie and Foreign Minister

Gromyko take the opportunity of their visits to the United Nations in

September to agree upon precise timing and venue for the exchanges. It

is, of course, my earnest hope that now that you have agreed to move

ahead these important exchanges will be productive. Sincerely, Jimmy

Carter. End text.

Christopher

300.

Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central

Intelligence Agency

September 8, 1980

THE PROSPECTS FOR SOVIET MILITARY

INTERVENTION IN POLAND

SUMMARY

We do not think that Moscow is now seriously considering military inter-

vention in Poland. Although the Soviets are deeply troubled by developments

there, they probably do not view the concessions granted so far regarding inde-

pendent trade unions as sufficient cause for the use of Soviet military force in

Poland. The Soviets probably also do not consider these concessions irrevers-

ible and will place substantial pressure on Warsaw to curtail them. In fact,

with Kania’s replacement of Gierek as first secretary, their hopes appear

buoyed that the development of political and social chaos in Poland that might

have compelled them to use military force in the near future has been fore-

stalled. Nevertheless, Moscow’s anxieties are still high, and if Kania does not

limit the concessions granted the strikers or if he cracks down too force-

fully and sparks a violent popular reaction which the government cannot con-

June–December 1980

trol, the Soviets may yet have to step in militarily. [handling restriction not

declassified]

Current Soviet Attitudes

The Soviets behaved cautiously during the Polish labor crisis. Only

after the settlement of the strikes on the Baltic coast—that is, when the

immediate danger of an explosion had lessened—did they openly

begin to express their anxieties. Subsequent critical commentary re-

flected Moscow’s recognition that the negotiated settlement with the

strikers may have set in motion a process of political liberalization of

the Polish system, which could at some point prove to be beyond the

control of the Polish Communist Party and could spread elsewhere in

Eastern Europe. It also was a sign of Soviet dissatisfaction with Gierek’s

handling of the crisis. Whether or not Moscow had a hand in Gierek’s

ouster, the Soviet leadership is openly pleased with the choice of Kania

as first secretary and consider him to be the best possible replacement

at this juncture. [handling restriction not declassified]

It remains to be seen whether Kania will live up to his image as an

orthodox, hardline apparatchik, who will strictly limit the gains made

by the strikers. At the very least, the Polish party has bought time as far

as Soviet military intervention is concerned. But if Kania proves unable

or unwilling to curtail the new unions, the Soviets would step up first

the political, then the military, pressure tactics on him to reverse the

erosion of party control in Poland. If these pressures failed, Moscow

would intervene militarily. [handling restriction not declassified]

Fundamental Threat to Party Control

The agreement reached between the strikers and the Polish regime

at the end of August, if implemented liberally, would threaten the very

foundations of the Communist system in Poland. The theoretical justifi-

cation of the Communist party’s control is its claim to rule as the van-

guard of the working class. But with the overwhelming majority of the

workers rejecting the party-run unions for unions that will truly repre-

sent their interests, that justification would be undermined. [handling

restriction not declassified]

The Soviet Union, quite clearly, would not stand by idly if this oc-

curred. The case could even be made that Moscow has already decided

that its military intervention is necessary—that the threat is so dan-

gerous that it should be stamped out before it has a chance to spread.

[handling restriction not declassified]

The Soviets may have already decided that the Polish leadership

has given up too much of its authority in agreeing to the unprecedented

establishment of free trade unions and the partial lifting of censorship.

The Politburo may have reasoned that, as in Czechoslovakia in 1968,

the political and social conditions for continued dissipation of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

party’s authority had been established. There is no reason to believe,

however, that this is the case and that the Soviets have gone that far in

their thinking—let alone their contingency planning. We believe that

the Soviet decision to intervene will depend on where the situation

goes from here, not on what has happened so far. [handling restriction

not declassified]

Even if the Soviets had decided in favor of intervention—and there

have been no signs of Soviet military preparations that would precede

such a move—Kania’s accession to power would call for a delay in

plans. If Kania can erode the concessions and restore the Polish party’s

shaken authority, thus obviating the need for Soviet military interven-

tion, Moscow would be delighted. It would much rather achieve its

goals without suffering the substantial damage to Soviet global in-

terests military intervention would bring. [handling restriction not

declassified]

Possible Precipitants of Intervention

The Soviets nevertheless realize that the situation in Poland will

continue to be unpredictable and unstable for the immediate future and

that they must monitor events closely during the coming months for

any signs that their concerns are materializing. The breakdown of the

Polish party’s control does not appear imminent, but should it occur,

the development could be a rapid one and the Soviets would move in

quickly with force. [handling restriction not declassified]

The essential grounds for Soviet military intervention in Poland

are:

—the Communist Party’s loss of control over Poland, including its

ability to contain the political actions of the workers and the dissidents,

and

—any compromise of the basic socialist orientation of the regime’s

domestic and international policies.

The path to either or both of these worst case scenarios (from

Moscow’s point of view) could be lengthy and full of zig-zags. An accu-

mulation of seemingly minute factors could convince the Soviet leaders

to intervene. We will not necessarily realize when the Soviets, them-

selves, actually cross that decision threshold to intervene, but once they

do there may not be any turning back even if it appears to Western ana-

lysts that the Polish regime is getting the situation under control. [han-

dling restriction not declassified]

Moscow will keep a particularly sharp eye on the development of

the new independent trade unions, which pose a potential serious

threat to the Communist Party’s control over Polish society. Moscow

would be particularly concerned if unions spring up across the country,

cohere into a potent political force, and influence national economic

June–December 1980

decision-making, especially trade with the USSR and defense spend-

ing. In the wake of Cardinal Wyszynski’s meeting with Lech Walesa,

the Soviets will be especially sensitive to any signs that the unions are

developing meaningful alliances with the Catholic Church or political

dissidents, receiving substantial aid from unions and other organiza-

tions in the West, or adopting openly hostile attitudes and policies

toward the Soviet Union. Soviet media are already attacking assistance

provided to the independent unions from Western trade unions. [han-

dling restriction not declassified]

The relaxation of censorship is another issue that the Soviets will

find difficult to live with. Although the media restrictions the Gierek

regime pledged to lift are minimal when compared to the near total

abolition of censorship agreed to by the Dubcek2 regime in Czechoslo-

vakia in 1968, this issue was one of the primary Soviet complaints to the

Czechoslovak party in the months before the invasion. [handling restric-

tion not declassified]

Although it appears unlikely at the moment, the possibility exists

that the present or a future Polish leadership—whether out of fear of

the consequences a crackdown could bring or from a genuine sym-

pathy with the workers’ desires—could assume the lead in the liberal-

ization process and take it much further. This could create a situation

reminiscent of Czechoslovakia in 1968. Soviet party officials have al-

ready noted [text not declassified] that there are trends evident in Polish

society similar to those present in Czechoslovakia during the Prague

Spring. If Moscow perceived these trends in the Polish party leader-

ship, it might feel compelled to take preventive action before the

process reached an unmanageable stage. [handling restriction not

declassified]

An opposite course by the Polish leadership—a crackdown on the

unions and all opposition—while probably more in line with the de-

sires of the Soviet leaders, could inadvertently lead to Soviet interven-

tion. If the workers responded to this tightening by resuming their

strikes, there would be a strong likelihood of violent confrontation

which, if it got out of the Polish authorities’ control, could trigger the

use of Soviet force. [handling restriction not declassified]

Another development that would profoundly disturb the Soviets

is a serious outbreak of labor unrest elsewhere in Eastern Europe or in

the USSR. Unrest appears unlikely in the USSR at the moment, but the

reports of strikes at major automotive plants in Tolgiatti and Gorkiy

earlier this year have to give the Kremlin pause. Strikes and/or calls for

free trade unions in other East European countries will induce the So-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

viets to step up their pressure on the Polish leadership to curtail the

new unions. [handling restriction not declassified]

These variables will interact in a complex, protracted process, the

specific developments of which cannot be predicted with any certainty.

Moscow’s perception of this process may be quite different from ours

or the Poles’. No one of these factors is likely to develop by itself. But a

combination of developments could suggest to Moscow that a trend

toward liberalization was approaching the point of irreversibility and

that Soviet vital interests were at stake and that the situation could only

be put right by military intervention. [handling restriction not declassified]

A Decision to Intervene

Once the Soviet threshold of tolerance is crossed, Moscow would

take direct action. The Soviets would first demand that the Polish lead-

ership contain the liberalization process. If Warsaw either refused or

was unable to bring the situation under control, the Soviets might opt

for still another change in leadership, believing that only a more hard-

line group could put a stop to the erosion of power. [handling restriction

not declassified]

Past experience suggests that the Kremlin would resort to political

and military pressure to get the Poles themselves to bring the situation

under control before sending in troops. This would probably include

high-level visits between Moscow and Warsaw, increasingly explicit

warnings in the Soviet press, and possibly threatening military move-

ments. Several factors probably would be at work here—among them a

hope that the Poles would back down when faced with a display of

overwhelming force. The absence of unanimity within the Soviet Polit-

buro could also be a vital factor. It would be no easy matter to get the

entire Politburo—or perhaps even a significant majority—to agree that

armed intervention was the only way to hold the Poles in line. This cer-

tainly seems to have been the case in 1968, when Kosygin, Suslov and

others reportedly held out to the last moment in opposing the Soviet in-

vasion of Czechoslovakia. [handling restriction not declassified]

The Soviet leaders, in reaching a decision to use military force,

would have to weigh the constraints, which are substantial. They must

assume that:

—the strongly anti-Russian Polish people would fight, as might

part or all of the Polish Army.

—Poland’s submission would require the largest military opera-

tion by the Soviet armed forces since World War II and would involve

protracted combat.

—Moscow’s effort to salvage detente in one of its most critical

areas—Europe—would receive a setback from which it would be a

long time recovering.

June–December 1980

—intervention would probably entail a substantial long-term oc-

cupation that would complicate Soviet security planning in both Eu-

rope and Asia. [handling restriction not declassified]

In the final analysis, however, the Soviet leaders would decide to

bear these enormous costs rather than lose control of Poland:

—Poland lies astride the traditional invasion routes to and from

Russia and is thus a vital corridor, essential to Soviet military planning.

—A less politically reliable Poland would leave East Germany in

an exposed position.

—A Soviet failure to act forcefully could encourage similar unrest

elsewhere in Eastern Europe and, possibly, in the Baltic republics of the

USSR as well. [handling restriction not declassified]

301.

Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to

President Carter

Moscow, September 15, 1980

Esteemed Mr. President,

I avail myself of this opportunity—the meeting between the Min-

ister of Foreign Affairs of the USSR, A.A. Gromyko, and the United

States Secretary of State, E. Muskie2—to convey a reply to your letter of

September 23 on questions of limiting nuclear arms in Europe.

Your interpretation of the reasons for a delay in starting negotia-

tions on these questions and your considerations as to the motives for

the NATO decision to develop and deploy new American missiles in

Western Europe certainly cannot be accepted.

Neither can we accept the interpretation of the events in Afghani-

stan contained in your letter, or an attempt to link these events with

issues that have no relation to them whatsoever.

In taking note of the readiness expressed in your letter to begin an

exchange of views on nuclear arms in Europe, I must say that this time,

too, you have failed to respond to the substance of our proposal to the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

effect that concurrently and in organic interrelation discussions be held

on questions pertaining to both medium-range nuclear systems in Eu-

rope and US forward-based nuclear systems.

Our approaching the issue in this way—and I have already written

this to you—is determined by the principle of equality and equal secu-

rity. We are pursuing no other objective. There is nothing unclear about

this position of ours. But the question of what specific systems would

be limited and in what way is naturally something that is subject to dis-

cussion and agreement.

302.

Summary Memorandum of Conversation

PARTICIPANTS

United States

USSR

Secretary Muskie

Minister Gromyko

Marshall Shulman Special Adviser

G.M. Kornienko First Deputy

to the Secretary

Minister of Foreign Affairs

Reg Bartholomew Director,

A.N. Dobrynin Ambassador to

Political-Military Affairs

the U.S.

Robert L. Barry, Deputy Assistant

V. Isakov Deputy Director,

Secretary, European Affairs

USA Division

Dmitri Zarechniak, Interpreter

V. Sukhodrev, Interpreter

Secretary Muskie opened the conversation by pointing out the im-

portance he attached to face-to-face meetings as an effective way of

moving toward accommodation. The President had called him this

morning and asked to have his best wishes passed on to Brezhnev and

Gromyko.

The Secretary said that he and Gromyko had listened to one an-

other’s speeches and thus their discussion had already begun. There

were many differences but both sides also sought positive results. He

wanted to begin the discussion where possibilities for accommodation

were greatest.

Iraq-Iran

Pointing out that we wanted to avoid new areas of misunder-

standings Secretary Muskie said we were deeply concerned about the

unfortunate outbreak of hostilities between Iraq and Iran. This conflict

was taking place in an already unstable part of the world and could en-

danger our hostages as well as Western oil supplies. Our aim is to end

hostilities immediately and we are pursuing this goal through the UN

and other international efforts. We favor a meeting of the UN Security

Council and a cease-fire resolution as a means of obtaining an imme-

diate end to hostilities.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Gromyko said he wanted to begin by giving the Soviet perspective

on the current international situation. Both the international situation

and US-Soviet relations have become more complex lately and tension

in the world is to a large degree due to the deterioration in US-Soviet

political relations. US-Soviet economic relations have virtually been

broken off. Cultural relations which had been maintained in earlier pe-

riods of tension were not disrupted. Contacts on various levels—which

had earlier served as a means of developing relations as well as demon-

strating their level—had withered away.

The cause of this deterioration is US policies directed at the wor-

sening US-Soviet relations, Gromyko said. The US has recently violated

many agreements, understandings, and promises. The US administra-

tion has set out to destroy the principles of equality and equal security

on which relations between two great nations must be founded.

Brezhnev and Carter both recognized this principle in Vienna and for-

mally declared their allegiance to it. Now, as demonstrated by the rapid

growth of US military budgets, the US is not observing this principle.

Gromyko pointed out that the new tension in international rela-

tions was reflected here at the UNGA. This is not the fault of the Soviet

Union, which does not want a deterioration in US-Soviet relations. This

is demonstrated by the decisions of the 25th Party Congress, Plenums

of the CPSU and decisions of the Supreme Soviet supporting the devel-

opment of normal and good relations with the U.S. The USSR wants to

put relations back on a normal track where both sides respect each

other’s legitimate interest. We call upon the US government and the US

President to follow a similar policy.

Turning to the Iraq-Iran situation, Gromyko said that despite re-

cent tense relations, the outbreak of military conflict had been some-

what unexpected at least to us. It is in the interests of the region and the

world not to let the conflict spread but to extinguish it. In the Soviet

view, no country—neither great powers or others—should interfere in

the conflict. The USSR will follow this course on the understanding that

others do so as well. From US statements it appears that the US intends

to pursue this same line. If so, this would be a positive development.

Gromyko went on to say that in the Soviet view it would help the

situation if the US would withdraw its very powerful Naval force from

the Persian Gulf. Its very presence creates greater tension. So far neither

Iran nor Iraq has cut oil communications or access to oil resources. The

USSR was opposed to the presence of the US fleet in the area before but

is all the more persuaded that its presence is unjustified at present.

Secretary Muskie responded to Gromyko’s comments on the gen-

eral international situation by pointing that attitudes of governments

are affected by their peoples’ perceptions of actions of other gov-

ernments. As superpowers, the US and the USSR are especially sensi-

June–December 1980

tive to each other’s actions. Once confidence has been undermined, it is

very difficult to restore.

The Secretary said that he had long believed in a policy of accom-

modation and before the SALT process had begun had urged a delay in

deployment of MIRVs as a means of avoiding a new spiral in the arms

race. As Chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, he had watched

Soviet defense expenditures climb steadily from the early 1960s to the

present. Throughout this period the US had been ready to accept

equality, although a minority disagreed with this policy. Most Amer-

icans supported increased contacts and saw the prospect of building an

enduring peace.

Since then, a single act—the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan—had

turned the situation around. There had been a good prospect of getting

SALT II ratification in January after televised TV debates in the Senate

had shaped public opinion. The Soviets have their version as a justifica-

tion for invading Afghanistan, but the US sees it differently because we

and our Allies rely on Persian Gulf oil. This is a vital US interest in an

area far removed from us logistically. This explains our naval presence

in the region, although we had tried to hold this to a minimum before

Soviet actions in Afghanistan.

Naval powers create fleets to defend their vital interests, Muskie

continued. The Soviets have been recently developing a Navy which

sailed the Pacific, appeared near the straits of Malacca and off US

shores. We see this as legitimate. The US Navy in the Persian Gulf is not

contributing to war but may restrain the combatants. The fact that Iran

has declared the Straits a war zone is causing shipping to back up and

threatening a cut-off in oil flows. If Iran and Iraq began to stop vessels,

what would happen? The presence of the US fleet is designed to re-

strain, not to provoke. It makes no sense to argue that the US presence

is provocative.

The Secretary repeated that it was urgent to call for and implement

a cease fire as soon as possible before one side gained an advantage

over the other. At present, both parties want to obstruct a Security

Council meeting. (Gromyko said he agreed.) It would be best if the non-

aligned called such a meeting or the Islamic countries, but everybody

wants someone else to take the first step. Thus we are immobilized.

Muskie said that US relations with both Iran and Iraq were poor.

We had cancelled the sale of civilian planes to Iraq as well as the sale of

US engines for Iraqi ships in hopes of exercising restraint.

In sum, Muskie said, the US was making two contributions in

order to end hostilities:

—Encouraging a Security Council meeting.

—Using diplomatic channels to promote a cease fire.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Gromyko agreed that our countries need to have confidence in

each other. But he decried the flood of US hostile propaganda against

the Soviet Union. All aspects of Soviet life are attacked by people totally

unconcerned about facts. This takes place every day in the US, in-

cluding at the top levels. The Soviet Union and its foreign policy are de-

scribed as the epitome of evil. This kind of propaganda is “not our

style,” Gromyko said, and we carefully weighed our reaction. Finally

we concluded that it would be a sign of weakness not to reply.

In the US we recognize that the tone of the media is set by the Ad-

ministration, which is following a policy designed to prejudice the le-

gitimate interests of the USSR. It is true that our confidence has been

undermined by this official Washington line and we do not know how

much time it will take to restore it.

Turning to SALT II the USSR believes that if the US Administration

took a stand for ratification this would not be hard to achieve. But we

are uncertain if Administration statements to the Congress are de-

signed to support ratification or undermine the Treaty. Objectively

they undermine it. A typical statement devotes one phrase to saying

the Treaty is mutually advantageous and then devotes 25 phrases to

undermining it. In fact the Administration pigeon-holed the Treaty be-

fore the Afghanistan question arose. In this connection, Secretary

Muskie’s references to the Afghan question won’t work.

Afghanistan

Gromyko went on to say that he would like to state the Soviet posi-

tion on Afghanistan so that it would not be necessary to return to this

question. The USSR has described the real situation in its correspond-

ence with the President and the Secretary and Gromyko explained it

to Muskie at Vienna. The USSR sent in its limited contingent in ac-

cordance with the Soviet-Afghan Treaty and Article 51 of the UN

Charter—a very good article which the US and the USSR wrote at San

Francisco. We said from the outset that we would withdraw as soon as

there is a guaranteed end to armed intrusions from the outside and if

there are effective agreements between Afghanistan on the one hand

and Iran and Pakistan on the other.

Gromyko said that he believed that the US did not in fact doubt

that the Soviet Union would live up to its word. If we didn’t, what posi-

tion would we be in? The US simply does not wish to admit this

publicly.

The continued incursions into Afghanistan are the fault of Pakistan

and Iran is also not without sin. While large-scale gangs no longer cross

the border, small bands of terrorists burn and loot the villages. You

won’t win this war, Gromyko said. We will keep our word and won’t

get out until there is a guaranteed and secured end to outside intru-

June–December 1980

sions. The Soviet Union questioned whether the US could not look seri-

ously at this question and give its good advice to Pakistan so that they

would enter into contact with Afghanistan and develop good relations

with them. Recognizing the state of affairs between the US and Iran, the

USSR would not ask us to use our influence there but Iran would

follow Pakistan’s lead. The Pakistanis should not use the excuse that

they do not like the present Afghan leadership since the Afghans

hardly respect Pakistan’s leaders.

If agreement can be reached, Soviet forces would withdraw and

Pakistan would have nothing to fear. Pakistan should have no appre-

hensions about Afghan territorial claims against them. The Soviets

knew there were no such claims. However, if this remains a question in

Pakistani minds they can raise it when talks begin.

Gromyko said there had been some talk on an international confer-

ence on Afghanistan which the USSR considered totally unnecessary.

There could be no question of such a conference discussing the internal

situation in Afghanistan. As for the situation between Afghanistan and

its neighbors, this must be discussed between them.

Indian Ocean

Gromyko went on to describe the US effort to build bases far from

US shores as an effort to threaten the USSR and encircle it. This poisons

the general atmosphere between our countries and is opposed by coun-

tries of the region. The US has refused to discuss the Indian Ocean

while it is grabbing a new military bridgehead. The US should ap-

proach this question from a broader perspective.

Secretary Muskie said that if the USSR thought it was being treated

badly in the US press, they should pay more attention to President

Carter’s press clippings. Skepticism about one another’s intentions is

easy to generate but based on his long experience in the Senate, the Sec-

retary said he could testify to this Administration’s good faith on SALT

II. It took time to head off amendments and convert them to under-

standings which would not destroy the Treaty. But SALT II was never

pigeonholed and had been ready to be acted on.

Concerning the future, the Secretary said the President had made

SALT ratification an issue in the campaign. This was not an easy deci-

sion since promoting a Treaty while Soviet intentions were in doubt

was unpopular. The President took a courageous decision because he

believed in the issue. The President, the Vice President, Secretary of De-

fense Brown on “Face the Nation” Sunday, the Secretary in his many

speeches had begun an effort to build support for SALT II. They hoped

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

to make the Treaty better understood and to make people understand

the consequences of a no SALT world. We would make an effort to ob-

tain ratification early next year or before; it was a long shot but worth

the effort.

On the question of equality or equivalence, the US is committed to

it. We can’t have Arms Control on any other basis. This is common

sense—though not to all. Some believe in superiority but this is

impossible.

Turning to Afghanistan, the Secretary said that we see no basis for

saying that self-determination is at work in Afghanistan. The gov-

ernment which the Soviets say invited them in did not survive their ar-

rival. Babrak was installed by Soviet forces. Gromyko interjected that

Afghanistan did not have a tradition of elections and Muskie re-

sponded that they didn’t have tradition of governments installed by

outside invaders either.

Muskie said we agree on the need for political settlement. But the

question was how to arrive at this point and gather support in Afghani-

stan. A political settlement without the support of the Afghan people

would simply lead to new Soviet intervention. There might be a basis

for further US-Soviet dialogue on this question, but the Secretary

wanted to eliminate all misunderstanding. Withdrawal was essential to

the normal, good US-Soviet relations we want to have.

Concerning the Indian Ocean, Muskie said he understood how US

deployments might be misunderstood by the Soviets but when a nation

has vital interests far from its shores, it logically uses its Navy to defend

these interests. The Soviets assert a right to be involved in Cuba close to

the US. The US is prepared to discuss Naval limitations in the Indian

Ocean when the Afghan situation is resolved.

TNF

Muskie went on to propose talks in Geneva to begin at an agreed

date in October on TNF. The US proposed that its delegation would be

at the level of ACDA Deputy Director Keeny and that the initial round

would last about one month. We are prepared to deal positively and

constructively with the issue. We did not think the description of the

talks should be a problem. Questions of scope could be addressed in

the negotiations themselves. We wanted to describe the discussions as

preliminary since we did not want to give the impression of moving to

SALT III before SALT II was ratified. This would only encourage those

Senators who wanted to avoid a vote on SALT II.

Gromyko began by objecting to what was published in the US con-

cerning Soviet military budgets. He went on to raise a question which

he said was relevant to SALT II or SALT III, claiming that the US has

taken steps to undermine SALT II by developing a new type of strategic

June–December 1980

weapon which goes beyond the provisions of SALT II. Both SALT II

and SALT III had to be founded on the principle of verifiability by na-

tional technical means. The US is underestimating the importance of

that principle, and the Soviet Union has not yet said its final word on

that subject.

Concerning TNF, Gromyko said that the Soviet Union had not de-

veloped any new type of weapon but had only more or less compen-

sated for steps the US had taken to modernize its weapons in Europe.

At no time had the Soviets achieved equality, given the presence of US

bases in Europe. Referring to the Brezhnev-Carter exchange of letters

and Gromyko’s exchange with Muskie in Vienna, Gromyko said So-

viet views had been clearly formulated. We are prepared to discuss US

FBS in Europe and medium range nuclear systems organically as one

problem. In the US, one sometimes hears that you want to discuss me-

dium range systems only and overlook the other half. We are not sim-

pletons to forget the second half of our position. We want you to take

this into account so that you will see what is going on.

We have agreed to an exchange of views. It is up to you whether

you call them preliminary or not. We agree that whatever can be agreed

to would be implemented only after SALT II has been ratified. We are

agreeable to be represented at the same level as you. Our man will have

the rank of our representative at SALT II negotiations at the latter

stages in Geneva.

Gromyko said the Soviet side was agreeable to start talks in the

week beginning October 13 in Geneva. The decision should be made

public by a short joint formulation which could be worked out now or

in a few days.

PD 595

Gromyko asked to continue to make one more point. There is a

strange and worrisome thing going on in the US which is new. It is a

cult of war, and a nuclear war at that. The concept of limited nuclear

war and a lowering of the threshold of nuclear war is being drummed

in to the ordinary American man. The Americans are beginning to

think about the acceptability—or the inevitability—of nuclear war.

There is a military fever with civilians scaring the military and the mili-

tary scaring the Administration. This really worries the Soviet Union

and we cannot fail to reach the conclusion that the US is preparing for

ment 278 for the meeting between Gromyko and Muskie in Vienna.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

the first strike. If the Soviet Union did the same thing, nuclear war

would become inevitable.

Gromyko asked the Secretary to inform the President on behalf of

Brezhnev that the Soviet leadership wants to know where this doctrine

is leading. They want a reply to the question. This is not like allocating

agenda items to committees in the UN but a truly serious matter. Gro-

myko asked the question be posed to the President.

Gromyko then turned over Brezhnev’s reply to President Carter’s

recent letter.

Secretary Muskie said that the Soviets posed a legitimate question

about PD 59, one he had looked into himself. The US had no intention

of acquiring a first-strike capability and didn’t believe the Soviets did

either. In any event, strategic capabilities are determined by weapons,

not by doctrine alone.

The purpose of the new US doctrine was to cover the full range of

deterrents. PD 59 succeeds NSDM 2427 issued at the end of the Ford

Administration. It reflects an evolutionary change from this doctrine,

not a sharp departure. The evolutionary change is caused by changes in

weapons themselves—their accuracy and numbers.

The US does not believe that a limited war is conceivable and

thinks that use of nuclear weapons will escalate to a full scale exchange.

But we believe that a flexible doctrine is necessary in case someone else

may consider nuclear war conceivable. The Secretary said he would

convey Gromyko’s comments to the President and that he recognized

the need to avoid any misunderstanding. This could be explored in the

context of the SALT process.

Iran and the Persian Gulf

The Secretary turned over a copy of the attached non paper8 which

he first read aloud to Gromyko.

Gromyko said the US statement had “piled word upon word.” In

light of what he had already said concerning Soviet policies, the US

statement was wide of the mark. He urged the United States not to in-

tervene and to keep hands off the region. Gromyko said he had already

set forth Soviet policy concerning Iran and the Persian Gulf.

Gromyko asked if we planned to publish our statement and said

the USSR would make a suitable response in that case.

303.

Message From Secretary of State Muskie to

President Carter

WH07367. Forwarded per request of Secretary Muskie. Please de-

liver as soon as possible. Subject: Soviet Demarche on Iran-Iraq

Conflict.

1. (S-entire text).

2. Begin summary: Dobrynin gave the Secretary an oral statement

on the Iran-Iraq conflict on October 4 in which the Soviet Government

requested clarification from the USG on the purpose of reported plans

for naval activity in the Straits of Hormuz and the deployment of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

AWACS to Saudi Arabia. The statement also reaffirmed the Soviet po-

sition on non-interference in the conflict and expressed the assumption

that the U.S. was aware of the “far-reaching consequences” of any in-

terference in the conflict. The Secretary noted that U.S. naval activity,

like the AWACS deployment was defensive in nature, aimed only at

being prepared for contingencies which we hoped would not arise. He

said the Soviet statement would be studied carefully to determine

whether an additional reply would be needed. He also responded to

questions from Dobrynin on our assessment of the present military sit-

uation in the Gulf area and on his recent conversations with the Iraqi

and Pakistani Foreign Ministers. End summary.

3. Near the conclusion of a meeting in the Department on October

4 which the Secretary had requested to discuss other topics (reported

septel), Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin stated that he had just received

instructions to deliver an “oral statement” on the Iran-Iraq situation.

Translated text of the statement follows:

Begin text

In the course of the recent conversation with the Minister of For-

eign Affairs of the USSR, the Secretary of State on behalf of the Amer-

ican Government gave assurances to the effect that the USA would ob-

serve neutrality in the Iranian-Iraqi conflict and that it in general did

not intend to interfere in the affairs of the countries of that region.

However, there have been numerous communications in recent

days to the effect that plans are being discussed within the US Govern-

ment as well as between the USA and other Western powers con-

cerning a possible use of their armed forces in the Persian Gulf area

under the pretext of assuring freedom of navigation in the Straits of

Hormuz.

No refutations of such communications on the part of the U.S.

Government have followed. Moreover, the accuracy of some of them,

for example those concerning the transfer to Saudi Arabia of military

aircraft of the “AWACS” type with American crews, has been con-

firmed by official representatives of the US Defense Department and

Department of State. Nor do they deny the fact that additional naval

forces, including one more aircraft carrier, are being moved to the Per-

sian Gulf area.

A legitimate question cannot but arise on the Soviet side: how can

one understand all this in the light of the assurances given by the

American side?

June–December 1980

In Moscow they expect to receive from the Government of the USA

prompt and comprehensive clarifications on this score, having in mind

the need—as was also emphasized by the Secretary of State—for the

USSR and the USA to have a precise and clear view of the position of

each other in connection with the Iranian-Iraqi conflict.

The Soviet position on this question remains just as it has been

stated by us, namely: no one should interfere in this conflict, be it a

large power or any other state. The Soviet Union will also in the future

adhere to this course on the understanding, of course, that all other

countries, including the USA, will act in the same manner.

We proceed on the basis that the far reaching consequences with

which any, especially military, interference of the USA or of anyone

else in the Iranian-Iraqi conflict, and in general in the affairs of the

countries of the Persian Gulf area, would be fraught must be clear to the

American side. End text.

4. After hearing the statement, the Secretary stated that he would

give a brief reaction now and that the statement would be studied to

see what additional response might be required. He stated first of all,

that with regard to the sea lanes in the Persian Gulf and elsewhere, our

only concern was that they be left open. In the first days of the war we

were concerned that the Iranians were going to seek to “regulate” ship-

ping in the Straits of Hormuz, and they in fact went so far as to hail two

ships transiting the Straits.

We were concerned that this might be the first step in an effort to

restrain shipping. The immediate effect was an increase in insurance

rates, and a second effect was that shipping was backing up in the

Straits area. If shipping and the flow of oil were to be seriously dis-

rupted, our vital interests would be so seriously affected that we would

need to consider what steps to take.

5. Recently, the Secretary continued, the risks appeared to have di-

minished. The Iranians have stated that they too want to protect the

open sea lanes; in fact much of their normal shipping flows through the

Persian Gulf. Nonetheless, we continued to discuss possible options

that would be available to us because of the serious consequences of a

disruption of shipping.

6. The Secretary said that it was not our desire to take sides in the

conflict and that it was important that we not be perceived by either of

the combatants to be taking sides.

7. With regard to AWACS, the Secretary noted that the aircraft had

no offensive capabilities. The Saudis had requested this assistance so

that they would have as much advance notice as possible of any “des-

perate” attacks by Iran. The AWACS deployment was thus a defensive

move made at the request of Saudi Arabia, and was not an attempt to

violate our policy of neutrality. The Secretary added that, when the de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

ployment was being discussed, he was aware of the possibility that it

would raise concerns on the part of the Soviet Union and thus had

made it clear to the Saudis and publicly that the planes were strictly for

Defensive 3. He assured Dobrynin that both our naval movements and

the AWACS deployment were thus done strictly in preparation for con-

tingencies which we hoped would never arise.

8. Dobrynin asked whether the U.S. was discussing with other

countries the creation of some joint flotilla. The Secretary responded

that we had no concrete idea in mind for keeping open the sea lanes,

and that the situation might never go beyond the discussion stage. As

he had said we saw the risk diminishing at present. We had no desire to

get into the Persian Gulf with our naval forces and hoped the region

states would patrol the Gulf and keep it open.

9. Dobrynin commented that the U.S. already had a sizeable

strength in the area and asked why, if we saw the risk diminishing, it

was necessary to continue to beef up our naval forces there. This served

only to increase tensions, he said. The Secretary responded that the Ira-

nians had a continuing ability to disrupt the flow of oil. While we did

not want the contingency to arise where we would need to act to pro-

tect the oil flow, we could not act as though the risk did not exist.

10. Continuing his argument, Dobrynin stated that the Secretary

had earlier in the conversation spoken of the need for mutual restraint.

But after his conversation with Gromyko the U.S. had sent an addi-

tional carrier to the area—an action he implied showed lack of restraint.

The Secretary pointed out that Iran had displayed an inclination to in-

dulge in irrational acts; the U.S. was already the victim of one such act.

It was impossible to know what role Iran might see for the hostages, or

what it might perceive as the best way of bringing pressure on Iraq.

11. Asked by Dobrynin for his general impression of the present

military situation, the Secretary responded that it appeared to be stabi-

lized at a containable level but that the conflict might be a prolonged

one. The Iraqi Foreign Minister had told him their objectives were lim-

ited, though there had been subsequent movements into Iran. It was

possible Iran could force a stalemate and thus the Iraqis faced a di-

lemma—whether to sit where they were or to take some additional ac-

tion. If they choose the latter, the next steps in the conflict would be

unpredictable.

12. Dobrynin asked whether it was true, as he had heard, that the

Secretary had advised Iraq not to move its aircraft into other states of

the region. The Secretary responded that he had not discussed this with

Iraqi Foreign Minister Sa’dun Hammadi except in terms of the possi-

bility that the conflict could spread. He had told Hammadi that if it did,

other nations would have to decide how to respond, and the Soviet

Union would then have to decide its own reaction—especially if insta-

June–December 1980

bility inside Iran increased. He added that he had told Hammadi that

the U.S. was following a hands off policy and that it was his impression

that the Soviet Union was doing the same. Dobrynin asked whether

there were any Iraqi planes in Oman and Saudi Arabia, to which the

Secretary responded he thought those planes had left and that in fact

this had occurred before his discussion with Hammadi. It was possible

that the Iraqis had decided not to spread the war to the southern end of

the Gulf.

Afghanistan

13. After the Secretary had stated once more that the oral statement

Dobrynin had delivered would be studied, Dobrynin asked whether

Pakistani President Zia, in his talks in Washington, had been “helpful”

with regard to the Afghanistan situation. The Secretary responded af-

firmatively, adding that he had also talked with Shahi4, who had de-

scribed to him his meeting with Gromyko. Shahi said there had been a

frank exchange and that he had found the meeting relaxed, not threat-

ening as he had expected it to be. (Dobrynin interjected, “of course not

since the Soviets were trying to find a way out.”) The Secretary said it

was obvious from our discussion with the Pakistanis that they were re-

ceptive to a political settlement of Afghanistan, but that they have se-

rious difficulties with the May 14 proposals.

Muskie

304.

Message From Secretary of State Muskie to

President Carter

WH07366. Forwarded per request of Secretary Muskie. Please de-

liver as soon as possible. Subject: Muskie-Dobrynin Meeting: Follow-

up to Gromyko Bilateral.

1. (S-entire text).

2. Begin summary. Secretary Muskie met with Ambassador Do-

brynin October 4 to take up several issues which time had prevented

his raising with Gromyko in New York: Poland, the Sverdlovsk an-

thrax outbreak, the September 14 Soviet high-yield test, prospects for

Madrid, including human rights issues, and a problem affecting contin-

uation of construction of the new Moscow Embassy complex. He also

responded to a question which Gromyko had raised during the New

York bilateral on PD–59. In response, Dobrynin complained that most

of what the Secretary had to say was negative, that there was nothing

very positive about it. On the specific issues raised, Dobrynin said the

Poles knew how to handle their problems without outside interference;

there was no utility in continuing to discuss Sverdlovsk; he had no in-

formation as yet on the September 14 test; our plans for discussing

human rights issues at Madrid would have a very negative effect; and

he could understand that the construction problem was one that might

bother us. The Secretary pointed out that the fact that we continued to

set forth our views frankly, in an effort to lessen the differences be-

tween us, should not be regarded as “negative.” He also stressed the

importance of resolving issues which would facilitate our efforts to

achieve ratification of SALT II. End summary.

3. The Secretary told Dobrynin he thought his talk with Gromyko

in New York on September 25 had been very useful and that he had ap-

preciated Gromyko’s frankness and relaxed tone. Despite the fact that

the meeting had been extended beyond the agreed time, however,

there were several subjects we had not had time to cover. He thought

the best way to treat these was to set out our position on each of them in

a non-paper, briefly and without any polemics, which Dobrynin could

EST.” Sent from the White House Situation Room. The initial “C” written in the upper

right-hand corner indicates that Carter saw the cable. Carter spent October 4 and 5 in a

fishing cabin in Spruce Creek, Pennsylvania. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials,

President’s Daily Diary)

June–December 1980

transmit to Gromyko. If there were additional subjects which Gromyko

would like to bring to the Secretary’s attention in a similar manner he

would be glad to consider them.

4. The Secretary then summarized each of the issues orally and at

the end of his presentation handed Dobrynin the following non-paper:

Begin text:

Follow-up to September 25 meeting

Poland: We wish to reiterate the commitment of the U.S. Govern-

ment to exercise the greatest restraint in dealing with events in that

country. This continues to be our position, and we expect others to ex-

ercise similar restraint. We continue to believe that the Polish people

and Government must be left free to work out their problems without

outside interference. Outside military intervention from any quarter

would have incalculable consequences and would inevitably place in

jeopardy the entire framework of detente in Europe.

On arms control matters, we wish to reaffirm the U.S. commitment

to SALT II ratification and to the achievement of progress in CTB,

MBFR, CW, and ASAT. We would also like to raise two matters which

could have far reaching implications for the future of arms control ne-

gotiations in general and, in the near term, for SALT II ratification.

First, the inability to find a suitable means of resolving the concerns ex-

pressed by the United States regarding the April 1979 outbreak of an-

thrax in Sverdlovsk raises serious questions concerning Soviet compli-

ance with the Biological Weapons Convention. This is a problem that

will not simply go away with the passage of time. We continue to be-

lieve that the best way to resolve our legitimate concerns in this matter

would be to arrange for technical discussions among experts. Although

we prefer to resolve this matter on a bilateral basis, the U.S. Govern-

ment will also consider other ways to resolve our concerns in accord-

ance with the terms of the Biological Weapons Convention—including

possible multilateral action. Soviet cooperation in resolving this matter

would be a very positive step.

Second, our seismic data concerning the Soviet nuclear test of Sep-

tember 14 strongly suggest that the yield may have exceeded 150

kilotons. The President is concerned about this matter and has directed

that this be conveyed to the Soviet side. The U.S. attaches even higher

priority now to its proposal of last December for the establishment of

an ad hoc bilateral working group to exchange geophysical and geolog-

ical data for regions of active test sites on both sides. This would help to

reduce the uncertainties involved in estimating the yields of our respec-

tive nuclear tests. The U.S. attaches great importance to the statement

we made in 1976 concerning limiting our tests to 150 kilotons and

below. However, if the Soviet side is not responsive to our legitimate

security concerns in this area, it will be increasingly difficult to con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

tinue the policy of restraint which we have consistently exercised. Fur-

ther, it is particularly important that the Soviet Government under-

stand that failure to resolve this problem could constitute a severe blow

to SALT II ratification prospects.

With regard to the concerns of President Brezhnev over PD–59,

conveyed by Foreign Minister Gromyko on September 25, 1980, we

wish to make clear that PD–59 is not a radical departure from previous

policy, nor is it a first strike strategy. Nothing in United States nuclear

strategy, including PD–59, conflicts with our determination to avoid

the outbreak of nuclear war or our commitment to the arms control

process. PD–59 reflects our fundamental conviction that there can be no

victor in a nuclear war of any kind or at any level. Thus, its purpose is

to strengthen deterrence and reduce the likelihood of such a conflict.

Specifically, with regard to alleged U.S. preparations to carry out a nu-

clear first strike, the President has asked that we reaffirm the cate-

gorical denial which Secretary Muskie gave Foreign Minister Gromyko

in New York.

CSCE: One of the most important contributions to the lessening of

tensions in Europe has been the signing of the CSCE Final Act in Hel-

sinki. We look forward to a full and thorough review of the implemen-

tation of this agreement at the upcoming Madrid Review Conference.

We are committed to work for a constructive session which avoids a

sterile exchange of polemics and which creates the basis for balanced

progress in all areas of CSCE. But we intend to discuss such retrogres-

sive steps as the resumed jamming of the Voice of America and other

Western radio broadcasts and to pursue in a businesslike manner the

deep concerns of the American people and Congress concerning

human rights, including freedom of emigration and the treatment of

dissidents. We want to draw special attention to those cases of partic-

ular interest to the American people, for example the cases of A.D. Sak-

harov, and of Anatoliy Shcharanskiy, Yuriy Orlov and other members

of the Helsinki Monitoring Group, the resolution of which would be

welcomed in the U.S. and in the international community as a whole as

a positive step which would improve the prospects for a fruitful review

session.

Chancery construction: We wish to raise a matter which threatens

our ability to continue with the construction of our new Embassy in

Moscow. Despite the agreement reached in December 1972 that both

sides would “assist each other in the unhindered importation and de-

livery of freight to the construction site,” problems with Soviet customs

clearance of construction materials could force us to suspend the entire

project. The United States has suggested a solution to the customs

problem which we hope will receive an early and positive response

from the Soviet side. If it should become necessary to suspend work on

June–December 1980

the U.S. complex, other aspects of the December 4, 1972 Agreement on

Embassy Complexes would have to be addressed. End text.

5. Dobrynin said he would of course report the Secretary’s remarks

to Gromyko. Overall, however, his impression was that they, quite

frankly, were not very encouraging. He then commented briefly on the

individual issues raised as follows:

—Poland is an independent country and knows how to handle its

problems without outside interference.

—The U.S. knows the Soviet position on arms control very well:

the Soviets favor a continuation. But we have discussed Sverdlovsk

“hundreds of times” and he doesn’t see anything useful in discussing it

further. As for the September 14 Soviet nuclear test, he has no informa-

tion as yet.

—He would report what the Secretary had to say about PD–59.

—The Secretary’s remarks on CSCE were discouraging. The Ma-

drid Review Conference should have two purposes—performance re-

view and constructive steps for the future. The U.S. of course has the

right to discuss anything it wishes. But in planning to raise such issues

as the Shcharanskiy case, does the Administration understand that this

will have a very negative effect? This was the beginning of the Soviets’

trouble with this Administration from the very beginning. In short,

there is nothing positive in our remarks on CSCE—and even the allies

of the U.S. are telling the Soviets that the U.S. has “only negative” plans

for Madrid.

—As for the Embassy construction issue, Dobrynin would report

what the Secretary had to say. He could understand it was a problem

that might bother us.

6. Dobrynin then remarked that most of the questions the Secretary

had raised were not new; many of them had a “long beard.” This sur-

prised him; he had thought that, with the approach of elections, we

would have something on the positive side to say.

7. The Secretary responded that it was obvious that the state of

US-Soviet relations was such that the problems were difficult and sen-

sitivities were strong. In presenting these problems, as in his discussion

with Gromyko in New York, he was motivated not by a negative atti-

tude but by a desire to find a positive way of improving our relations.

He thought it necessary to keep working at resolving our differences.

He had particularly mentioned the problems in the arms control area

because they were all interrelated. He had told Gromyko of our plans

for moving toward SALT II ratification and considered it important to

mention as well the other [garble—related?] problems. While we plan to

move for ratification in any case, the issue would be decided by a

handful of votes and it was important to resolve as many problems as

possible beforehand.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

8. The Secretary noted that PD–59 was an issue which had been

raised on the Soviet side; he had the impression that Gromyko had ex-

pressed greater feeling in discussing that issue than on any other

topic—to which Dobrynin responded, “that’s true.” Recognizing that it

was obviously of concern to Gromyko, the Secretary continued, he had

raised it at the highest level and wanted to reassure Gromyko. He rec-

ognized that that might not end the matter, but wanted to make the

point that even if Gromyko should repeat his views on the subject he

would not regard it as a “negative” approach, but rather as an indica-

tion that problems remained which must be ironed out, just as we suc-

ceeded in doing in the SALT process.

9. On human rights, the Secretary said he understood what Do-

brynin was saying but pointed out that the problem was not simply one

which was being raised by this administration. Rather, our position re-

flected concerns widely felt within this country, and we had an obliga-

tion to continue raising those concerns with the Soviets.

10. The Secretary reaffirmed the President’s and his own commit-

ment to the arms control process but noted that we were going to need

some assistance from the Soviets to get the job done. If we could make

progress in resolving Afghanistan, we ought to try; if we could make

progress in the other problem areas he had mentioned, we ought to try.

It was in that context that he had raised them—not because of a nega-

tive attitude. Progress in all these areas would improve prospects for

the arms control process, something which was important both in order

to reduce the risk of nuclear confrontation and in order to reduce the

cost of the arms burden on both sides.

11. The Iran-Iraq conflict, the Secretary said, drove home to both

sides the importance of developing policies of restraint. So long as the

fighting continued the threat of a broadening war became more evi-

dent. He had found concern over this possibility in his travels inside

the U.S., in his discussions with other foreign ministers in New York,

and in his meeting with Gromyko. He sensed that both the U.S. and the

USSR were at present following a policy of restraint toward that con-

flict, and he thought restraint was the best description of what our

policy should be. We should attempt to lessen irritants. He recognized

that this was not going to be easy and that this was a very difficult pe-

riod in our relationship.

12. Dobrynin then abruptly changed the subject by asking whether

the Secretary was going to attend the Madrid Conference, adding that

FRG Foreign Minister Genscher had told Gromyko he planned to do so.

The Secretary said that it was not his present intention to go to Madrid.

He then commented that he realized Madrid offered the possibility that

there would be much shouting at each other, but that it was not his de-

sire that the Conference develop in that manner. He thought there were

305.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

16123. Subj: Meeting With Gromyko October 14: Iran/Iraq. Ref:

State 271743.

1. (S-entire text)

twenty minutes of an icy and confrontational meeting. After hearing

me out on the talking points3 in the nonpaper, and having me repeat

the last paragraph (regarding inflammatory Soviet accusations), he

then delivered a thirty minute rebuke on the following lines.

3. Gromyko said he had explained in clearcut terms the position of

the Soviet leadership toward the Iraq/Iran conflict when he met with

Secretary Muskie in New York. It has been clearly stated that the USSR

had no intention to intervene and that no other party, big or small,

should intervene, either. In particular, the US, for reasons known and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

understood, should keep its hands off. The US side, for its part, replied

that it had no intention to interfere, subsequently, the Soviet side had

been surprised that the US, after the meeting, made press statements

about having warned the USSR not to intervene. Such unilateral mis-

leading statements served to aggravate the situation, misrepresenting

the facts of what had transpired in the meeting, “turning matters on

their head,” all in an attempt to make public opinion believe that the

Soviets were at fault and had been warned. Why did the US behave this

way, making the Soviets look bad? It was a petty method. No candidate

for political office could get any use out of it and it was not a good basis

for conducting foreign affairs because it undermined credibility and

confidence in high level statements.

4. He went on at length to say that he had not believed when he

talked with the Secretary that in a few days the Soviet position would

be publicly distorted and presented in a wrong way. The USSR could

and should present the US “a political bill for its recourse to such

misrepresentation,” and this was why, after returning from New York,

the Soviet side had decided to draw US attention to matter of interven-

tion. As the Soviets analyze the situation, the US is itself interfering, but

reproaching the USSR as if it were the guilty party. The USSR had a

right to reply to this; had Washington lost its sense of reality? War and

bloodshed could come out of the situation as it was developing and the

Soviet side was free to express this opinion, which he specifically asked

me to convey to Washington. Washington was adopting the principle

that offense is the best defense, but it won’t work. The responsibility

could not be shifted to the USSR.

5. Gromyko said he wished to draw serious attention to the con-

centration of a large US fleet in the Strait of Hormuz and the adjacent

area. There was no reason, “not even a formal pretext,” for this, and the

naval force was even increasing with reinforcements arriving from

other areas. True, the US guns were silent and didn’t shoot, but the

presence was political-military pressure and tantamount to “very rude

interference.”

6. Gromyko said he wanted to speak of Iran: Iraq could be gener-

ally included in his meaning, but he was now speaking about Iran. The

oil riches of Iran could not be construed as belonging to the US. Iran

was not a “US oil tank.” It was the Iranian people’s oil, to dispose of as

they chose, and “no capital in the world is entitled to give Iran a time-

table for how much oil it is to provide in any month or year.” It was in

the interest of detente and a better world situation generally to with-

draw the US Navy from the Persian Gulf. He could include the Indian

Ocean, too. But for the purpose at hand he was referring only to the

Gulf and Hormuz.

June–December 1980

7. He said the American press with gusto suggested and reported

rumors to the effect that the Soviets are delivering weapons to Iraq or

Iran. The USG makes no attempt to set matters straight, although it

knows the truth. He would take this opportunity to say again that the

USSR was not making any arms deliveries to Iran or Iraq. Finally, he

said, the Soviets had nothing to recant, it was the US which was respon-

sible for the military buildup in the Gulf area. Restraint and coolhead-

edness by great powers were in the interests of all, including the US

“and the countries which are carrying out US policy.”

8. I replied that the shipping lanes of the Persian Gulf area are a

lifeline of the industrial world and it appeared that the Soviet Union se-

riously underrated the importance of this to US interests. Shipping had

come under threat and insurance rates had jumped up. Gromyko’s re-

marks underemphasized the vital importance involved. That’s why

our fleet was there, and I noted that there was also a Soviet fleet in

the area, my careful reading of the record of the New York conver-

sation was clearly that both sides, not just the Soviet side, had given

warnings.

9. Gromyko came back at this, saying that the distorted public

statements made by the US side had not been made by the Secretary. It

was up to us to measure precisely the responsibility, but the President

had repeatedly said that the US had warned the USSR. There would be

no objection if it had been truthfully revealed who said what in what

sequence, but all had been distorted.

10. I tried to bring Gromyko back to the question of vital interest,

saying that we had no interest in getting involved in the Iran/Iraq con-

flict and that we did not consider the oil deposits of the area to belong

to us. We had no idea or desire to take oil by force which now had be-

come the thrust of his conversation. But so long as people were willing

to sell us oil—the industrial world received a substantial portion of its

oil from this area—then it was our vital interest to see that we got the oil

out. Our fleet presence could be reduced with the reduction of tensions

in the area and progress toward a peaceful settlement of the conflict. I

could see no reason why this position would bring us into conflict with

the Soviet Union.

11. At this point, saying that it was in the interest of avoiding con-

flict that we not have any surprises or misinterpretations, I took up

orally points in paragraph 4 reftel regarding RD deployment. Gromyko

listened in silence and gave no reaction.

12. Gromyko cooly and abruptly ended the exchange by saying

“our approaches and reasoning are so different that it would be diffi-

cult to erect any bridges between them. The substance of all this is that

306.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

287283. Subject: Muskie-Dobrynin Meeting: Reply to Oct 4 De-

marche.

1. (S-entire text.)

2. Dobrynin called on Secretary Muskie on October 27 to provide

Gromyko’s response to re Secretary’s Oct 4 demarche on those US-

Soviet issues which could not be covered in Sept 25 bilateral in New

York. Text of oral statement follows:

3. Begin text:

—We, for our part, have considered and presently consider it

useful to continue a dialogue on various questions concerning relations

between our countries and on international issues. Such discussion, in

our view, must be aimed at bringing as close together as possible the

positions of the sides, at finding points of overlap, in order to move

toward the solution of questions of mutual interest.

—In the conversation with A.A. Gromyko in New York, the Secre-

tary of State said that the US side also wished to have normal relations

with the Soviet Union. Regretfully, this wish is not to be found in what

was said by the Secretary of State on October 4. The choice of the ques-

tions and the way they are posed do not indicate a readiness by the US

side to seek mutual understanding. We have no desire to engage in po-

June–December 1980

lemics for the sake of polemics. But we, understandably, cannot silently

pass over statements and actions of the US side with which we cannot

agree.

—We would like in this connection to point out the inappropri-

ateness of the US side’s raising questions regarding the situation in Po-

land. Such questions in general cannot be subject of discussion between

the USSR and the USA.

However, since the Secretary of State did touch upon this question,

we cannot help noting that all sorts of statements, including those

made at the official level, as well as certain actions by the US side,

cannot be regarded in any other way but as being directed at interfer-

ence in the affairs of a sovereign state, the Polish People’s Republic. We,

together with the Polish leadership, resolutely condemn such a line of

conduct.

—Recently, on many occasions including the meeting of A.A. Gro-

myko with the Secretary of State in New York we have assessed the

present unconstructive policy of the USA on questions of arms limita-

tion. Unfortunately, the considerations put forward by the Secretary of

State introduce nothing new in this respect. The position held by the

USA is, in fact, impeding progress toward the solution of these ques-

tions; Washington at the same time continues in practice to increase the

arms race.

—We expressed in an explicit and clear-cut manner our sharply

negative attitude toward the so called “new nuclear strategy” of the

USA. This attitude remains as it was stated by L.I. Brezhnev in his re-

cent speech in Alma-Ata. It was also set forth during the conversation

with the Secretary of State in New York. We will follow carefully the ac-

tivities of the United States in this regard.

—Neither is any useful purpose served by attempts to put doubt,

without any grounds whatsoever, [to?] the conscientious implementa-

tion by the Soviet Union of its obligations under the agreements and

understandings in force in the field of arms limitation and disarma-

ment. We are convinced that such a course, which is in fact aimed at

disrupting what we succeeded in achieving in this area, does not corre-

spond to the interests of the United States itself.

—We reaffirm our position on the question regarding an outbreak

of anthrax in the area of Sverdlovsk and on the observance of the

agreed yield threshold of 150 kilotons during the conduct of under-

ground nuclear explosions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

—We would like to express the hope that the US side will after all

embark on the path of a realistic policy and will exert necessary efforts

so as to facilitate the working out and adoption of practical measures in

the field of arms limitation and disarmament. This applies to both the

negotiations already under way for a certain period of time, and to the

just started discussion of questions concerning the limitation of nuclear

arms in Europe. Such efforts on the part of the USA would meet a posi-

tive response throughout the entire world. For its part, the Soviet

Union is ready as before to cooperate effectively in the resolution of the

said questions.

—The present situation dictates in a particularly forceful way the

necessity of taking urgent measures to reduce military danger. In this

connection, we would like to draw the attention of the Secretary of

State to the concrete proposals introduced by the Soviet Union at the

current session of the UN General Assembly: to renounce the extension

of existing military-political groupings and the creation of new ones; to

undertake not to increase from a certain date armed forces and conven-

tional armaments of states; to strengthen security guarantees of non-

nuclear states; and to establish a one-year moratorium on conducting

any nuclear explosions by all nuclear powers. We call upon the United

States to cooperate in implementing these initiatives, that would

without doubt have a positive impact on the international situation.

—We have noted the words of the Secretary of State to the effect

that the USA is determined to work constructively at the Madrid

meeting. For our part, we also resolutely favor this, as we are convinced

that only such a policy corresponds to the interests of all states-

signatories of the Helsinki Final Act and to the objectives of a genuine

strengthening of security and the development of cooperation in Eu-

rope. However, the above-mentioned pronouncement of the Secretary

of State is in no way corroborated by the present line of conduct

adopted at the preparatory session by the US Delegation, which is

doing everything possible to create there a situation of conflict, even in

the coordination of organizational and procedural questions for the

principal meeting in Madrid. We will be ready to carry on a balanced

and business-like discussion there. But it must be clear that, should this

be forced on us, we will respond appropriately to attacks in regard to

Soviet foreign policy as well as to any attempts to interfere in our in-

ternal affairs.

—We again resolutely reject the attempts of the US side to raise

questions which pertain totally and entirely to the internal competence

of the Soviet state, particularly with regard to all kinds of renegades en-

gaging in hostile antisocial activity. We reaffirm also our position con-

cerning the broadcasts of the “Voice of America”.

307.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

291234. Subject: Demarche—Commentary on U.S. Interference in

Poland. Ref: Moscow 17285.

1. S-entire text.

cret; Cherokee; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Warsaw. Drafted

by Mark R. Parris (EUR/SOV); cleared by Barry, Vest, Robert K. German (EUR/SOV),

Harry Gilmore (EUR/EE), Anthony Lake (S/P), Rozanne Ridgway (C), Gary L. Mat-

thews (S/MS), Brement, and Bremer; approved by Muskie.

tral Foreign Policy File, P900077–1754.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

2. You will be receiving separately FBIS text of October 30 Moscow

World Service English commentary by Dimitriyev3 on alleged U.S. in-

terference in Poland. Dimitriyev point of departure is gross distortion

of October 29 comments by Department press spokesman, text of

which is at para 4 [5]. The commentary’s references to US activities

against Allende4 in Chile and its allegations of US disregard for Hel-

sinki Act’s non-interference provisions strike us as sufficiently om-

inous to warrant raising the issue promptly with Moscow.

3. You should therefore seek early appointment with Korniyenko

to convey copy of spokesman’s remarks and make the points below.

You should point out that we are raising this particular issue against

the background of a number of public statements by Soviet and other

Warsaw Pact leaders which contain false allegations about US and

Western interference in the Polish situation. These intentional distor-

tions cause us serious concern.

4. Points to be made:

—The Soviet side is well aware of our position that current devel-

opments in Poland are an internal matter best resolved by the Poles

themselves without outside interference of any kind. We have scrupu-

lously observed this policy ourselves and have displayed the greatest

restraint in our actions and our statement.

—For this reason I have been instructed to protest in strong terms

an October 30 broadcast by the Moscow World Service citing remarks

by a State Department spokesman as evidence of US interference in Po-

land’s internal affairs.

—We are deeply disturbed by this broadcast, which was a gross

distortion of the spokesman’s actual remarks, a copy of which I would

like to leave for the record.

—Such biased and tendentious treatment of the facts can only raise

questions about the intentions of the Soviet Union itself.

—I wish to reiterate in the strongest terms Secretary Muskie’s

statements5 in recent meetings with Foreign Minister Gromyko and

Ambassador Dobrynin that Soviet intervention in Poland would have

incalculable consequences for East-West relations.

5. Text of relevant comments from October 29 press briefing

follows: Begin Text. I don’t have anything in particular to say about Po-

land. We regret that the process of compromise and negotiation that

has been taking place between the Polish Government and the Polish

people has not yet reached an acceptable settlement where the union

June–December 1980

registration question is concerned. We hope that it will be possible to

reach a solution satisfactory to all of the parties. We continue to feel and

state that the Poles should be allowed to work out their problems

without outside interference. End text.

6. Re reftel we agree with your analysis and have been in close

touch with the British, French and Germans concerning approaches to

the Soviets and other contingencies.

Muskie

308.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

1. (S-entire text)

2. The Soviet response to my demarche on Poland (reftel) was es-

sentially to reject that we have any right to raise the subject of Poland.

Deputy Minister Kovalev received me November 3 in place of Korni-

yenko who is said to be ill. After I had made the instructed points in

reftel, Kovalev, who seemed nervous throughout the meeting, made an

initial weak attempt to assert that Soviet radio was doubtless simply re-

peating something which had been said to Western or even American

media about US interference in Polish internal affairs. Then in consulta-

tions with his notetaker, Sokolov from the USA division, Kovalev hit

upon the argument that the statement made by the Department

spokesman contained a “sign” of interference because it tried to drive a

wedge between the people of Poland and their government. This could

be the basis for the Soviet radio broadcast.

3. Warming to this sophistry, Kovalev went on to say that the refer-

ence I had made to concern for Soviet intentions in Poland was irrele-

vant and had no connection with US-Soviet or Soviet-Polish relations.

He implied that I was out of order raising Poland and he noted that he

was replying to the strong terms of my reference with strong terms of

his own.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

4. I replied that the matter of Poland was not at all irrelevant to

US-Soviet relations. It seemed to me that the world situation was be-

coming more and more dangerous. There were three crises now: Af-

ghanistan, Iran/Iraq, and Poland. It was in the mutual interests of the

309.

Editorial Note

The revolution in Poland began in August 1980 when approxi-

mately 16,000 workers at the Lenin shipyards in Gdansk went on strike.

310.

Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in

the Soviet Union

318738. Subject: Poland: Newsom/Dobrynin Meeting.

1. (S-entire text).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

2. Following a discussion of other matters (septel) with Ambas-

sador Dobrynin on December 1, Under Secretary Newsom brought up

the situation in Poland. Newsom pointed out that we were disturbed

by allegations which had appeared in Rude pravo and were now being

repeated by Soviet media to the effect that the West is attempting to

carry out counter-revolution in Poland. Such allegations are, to our

knowledge, totally without foundation and they cause us concern be-

cause they could be designed to set the stage for Soviet intervention.

Such a step would have very serious consequences for East-West rela-

tions in general as we have pointed out in the past. Senator Percy has

conveyed this same point to Soviet leaders in the past few days.

3. Newsom pointed out that recent reports of Soviet military

moves add an element of disquiet. The United States is following a

policy of great restraint and this should be apparent in Moscow.

4. In reply, Dobrynin acknowledged that the administration had

been restrained in its actions but pointed out that broadcasts of the

Voice of America and Radio Free Europe seemed designed to stir up

the situation and make it appear that Solidarity Union spokesman had

a monopoly on the truth. Concerning US warnings, Dobrynin said that

“we are mature people” and understand the various elements of the sit-

uation in Poland and their effect on our relationship. “Your message is

getting through”, he said, and it is not necessary to repeat it. Con-

cerning the substance of Newsom’s comments, Dobrynin would only

say that he too “hoped” that intervention would not take place.

5. Newsom said that he could not accept Dobrynin’s characteriza-

tion of VOA radio broadcasts which he had reason to believe were re-

sponsible and objective.

Christopher

Newsom and Dobrynin’s discussion on Syrian-Jordanian tensions. (National Archives,

311.

Summary of Conclusions of an Ad Hoc Meeting

SUBJECT

Poland

PARTICIPANTS

White House

CIA

Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski

Admiral Stansfield Turner

State

NSC

Secretary Edmund Muskie

Steve Larrabee (notetaker)

Defense

Secretary Harold Brown

On December 3, 1980 a meeting was held in Dr. Brzezinski’s office

to discuss contingency measures in response to increasing signs that

the Soviets may be preparing to intervene militarily in Poland. Partici-

pating in the meeting were Dr. Brzezinski, Secretary Muskie, Secretary

Brown and Admiral Turner. (C)

(Notetaker missed first few minutes of discussion.)

Secretary Brown raised the question of whether a hotline message

should be sent to President Brezhnev. (C)

Dr. Brzezinski thought a message would be appropriate which em-

phasized that the U.S. had no interest in exploiting the situation in Po-

land for its own political advantage and that any invasion would have

serious consequences for East-West relations, especially U.S.-Soviet

relations. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

Admiral Turner asked what the objective of such a message would

Dr. Brzezinski said it could serve as a deterrent. (C)

Secretary Brown felt that such a statement could only be helpful if

the Soviets were on the brink of intervention. He also stressed that it

would have a greater effect if it was supported by the Allies. (C)

Secretary Muskie asked what the effect on the Soviets would be if

we did not do anything. (C)

Secretary Brown said that unless we took the lead on this issue the

European reaction would be too weak and disparate. (C)

Dr. Brzezinski agreed that any statement would not be decisive.

However, it would be an indication of the seriousness of our concern

and would put down a marker. While such a statement would not deter

the Soviets, it was preferable to ambiguity and silence. (C)

Secretary Brown said that if the Soviets were not sure whether they

were going to intervene, the more we made clear to them the conse-

quences of their actions ahead of time, the better was the chance of de-

terring an intervention. (C)

Dr. Brzezinski also pointed out that it would be odd if Gov-

ernor Reagan and Richard Allen3 appeared to make the stronger

statements. (U)

Secretary Muskie agreed that the statement as it stood was fine. (U)

Dr. Brzezinski turned to the question of a hotline message to

Brezhnev. It would emphasize that we had no intention of exploiting

the situation in Poland but that we wanted Brezhnev to know that we

were issuing a statement. He asked what the group thought Brezhnev’s

reaction would be. He pointed out that we had used the hotline before

in non-crisis situations. (C)

Secretary Muskie replied that he did not see how the Soviets could

be upset by such a statement or regard it as threatening to their secu-

rity. In his view it was a relatively moderate statement. He stated that if

we held a meeting of the political directors, we had to be prepared to

tell them what we would do. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski said we could press them harder on economic

conditions. (C)

Admiral Turner felt that the language “exploiting the situation”

would go better in a private message. (C)

June–December 1980

Dr. Brzezinski replied that the language was related to economic

assistance which the Soviets had criticized as interference in Polish in-

ternal affairs. He felt that it was useful to keep it in. (C)

Secretary Muskie stated that the paragraph had to be read as a

whole. It hung together. (U)

Dr. Brzezinski suggested that he recommend to the President that

the group felt that the statement should be issued. He then inquired

again whether a hotline message should be sent. (C)

Secretary Muskie felt that the hotline message should be reserved

until something was imminent. (C)

Dr. Brzezinski asked whether we should precede the statement

with the hotline message. (U)

Secretary Brown thought the statement should be preceded by a mes-

sage; otherwise Brezhnev would not take the statement seriously. (C)

Admiral Turner was uncertain, as was Dr. Brzezinski. He stressed

that it was important to understand the psychology of the Soviet lead-

ership. When they received such a message, how would they react? (C)

Secretary Muskie pointed out that the statement went beyond pre-

vious statements and was therefore not likely to be taken as sheer pos-

turing. It was stronger than what we had said to Dobrynin. (S)

Dr. Brzezinski then dictated the message from the President to

Brezhnev to his secretary. (U)

Secretary Brown noted that the message had the advantage of al-

lowing us to be both tougher and more reassuring at the same time. (C)

Dr. Brzezinski said he was coming around to this view as well. One

had to think about history. They would have to ask themselves

whether they had done all they could to prevent an invasion. (C)

Secretary Brown pointed out the last time they had used the hotline

was the night of the abortive rescue of the hostages in Iran. (U)

Dr. Brzezinski said that the hotline has been used on a number of

occasions in non-crisis situations. (S)

Secretary Muskie agreed that sending a message would be

Dr. Brzezinski pointed out the serious consequences that a Soviet

invasion would have for East-West relations. In many ways it would

set things back to the ’50s. He asked whether it would not be useful to

have a meeting of the Political Directors. He then read aloud the mes-

sage to be sent over the hotline to Brezhnev. (S)

Secretary Muskie said it sounded fine. (U)

Admiral Turner was concerned that the sentence on “exploiting”

would be criticized and felt the word “politically” should be dropped.

The group agreed with this suggestion. (S)

312.

Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner

to President Carter, Vice President Mondale, Secretary of

State Muskie, Secretary of Defense Brown, and the

President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs

(Brzezinski)

Washington, December 5, 1980

SUBJECT

Plans for Warsaw Pact Intervention in Poland

1. The following information was received [1 line not declassified]

The date of the information is 4 December.

a. Moscow has developed a plan for intervention in Poland which

was delivered to the Polish General Staff and agreed to by Polish mili-

tary leaders. The intervention is to take place under the pretext of joint

Soviet, East German and Czechoslovak exercises in Poland. Readiness to

cross the Polish frontiers was set for 8 December.

b. The plan calls for forces to include three armies comprising 15

Soviet divisions, and one army comprising two Czechoslovak divisions

and an army staff and one division from East Germany. Altogether, the

intervention forces in the first phase will comprise 18 divisions. An ad-

ditional four divisions will be attached to the Czechoslovak and East

German armies. [less than 1 line not declassified] these are four Polish di-

visions located along the border with East Germany.)

c. Warsaw Pact officers in civilian dress are currently surveying

the march routes and areas where future actions are contemplated. The

June–December 1980

Czechoslovaks and East Germans are to operate in Western Poland and

the Soviets in Central and Eastern Poland.

d. The operational scenario calls for a regrouping of the Warsaw

Pact troops in all the main training areas of the Polish forces, where

live-fire exercises will be carried out. Then, depending upon how the

situation develops, all major and industrial cities in Poland will be put

under blockade.

e. [less than 1 line not declassified] the political decision to intervene

was taken some time ago, and there appears to have been no resistance

to it from Party leader Kania and Polish Defense Minister Jaruzelski.

Elsewhere in the Polish military establishment, however, there has

been determined high-level opposition to the plan. As a result, an alter-

native (Polish) plan has been worked out which calls for using only the

Polish armed forces to establish internal security in Poland. The key

part of this plan is a program of harsh measures against Solidarity and

opposition groups by forces of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This

plan will be presented to the Soviets on 7 December with an accompa-

nying proposal that the introduction of the Warsaw Pact intervention

forces be put off until the actions of Poland’s own forces have proven to

be ineffective. [less than 1 line not declassified] not believe that the Soviets

will go along with this alternative or even that the Polish leadership

will be forceful in presenting it.

2. [less than 1 line not declassified] is consistent with information pro-

vided [less than 1 line not declassified] earlier this week that Soviet forces

in East Germany had been placed on alert pending orders to move to

the Polish border area and be in position to attack by the weekend of

Kania and Politburo member Stefan Olszowksi. The single agenda item

for the meeting is said to be Poland.

Stansfield Turner

313.

Memorandum From Marshall Brement of the National

Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for

National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)

Washington, December 9, 1980

SUBJECT

Soviet Options in Poland: An Alternate Scenario

As you know, most analysts at CIA think the Soviets will move

into Poland, perhaps as early as this weekend. This conclusion is

largely based on the fact that the Soviets have gone so far militarily to

prepare for an invasion that it is unlikely for them to pull back at this

stage. The timing would be triggered by a desire to head off demonstra-

tions commemorating the 10th anniversary of the Gdansk strikes of

As you know, I take a different view. The difficulties which would

face the Soviets if they actually invaded Poland (international reaction,

compounding Soviet economic weaknesses, possibility of armed Polish

resistance, downgrading of Warsaw Pact forces, inability to predict the

ultimate consequences, etc.) are fairly obvious and are not worth re-

peating here. Because of such difficulties, I do not think the Soviets will

move in Poland until they are completely convinced that the Polish

leadership has little if any chance of handling the situation in a reason-

ably satisfactory manner. (S)

But no matter how pessimistically Polish events are viewed from

Moscow, the Kremlin must see at least a one in five chance that Kania,

or perhaps a successor, will ultimately be able to work out some kind of

modus vivendi which would make it possible for Brezhnev to avoid or-

dering an armed invasion. As long as such a possibility exists, in my

view, the Soviets lose little if anything by holding off an invasion. They

could, after all, undertake such action a month from now, two months

from now, or five months from now. There is nothing to stop them. (S)

What Has Happened in Poland?

My own reconstruction of Soviet/Polish events is roughly as

follows:

—The Soviets must have begun preparing for possible interven-

tion in Poland as early as last August when things, from their point of

June–December 1980

view, were getting out of control. We saw signs of such planning in

September and October.

—Soviet concerns were somewhat alleviated by Kania’s first trip to

Moscow October 30.

—However, the Soviets were undoubtedly dismayed by subse-

quent developments, which they may well have regarded as proving

the unreliability of the Kania leadership.

—The last straw was the release from prison of Narozniak and Sa-

piello3 on November 27, an act which was simply not acceptable to the

Soviets.

—On that date (probably at the usual Thursday afternoon Polit-

buro meeting) the Soviets probably made a firm decision to intervene

in Poland, unless they could get credible assurances from the Poles that

this sort of “capitulationist” behavior would not happen again.

—Beginning November 28, Soviet, Czech and East German forces

proceeded with a military buildup aimed at being ready to invade Po-

land by December 8.

—The Moscow Summit meeting was Kania’s last chance. At

the summit he gave the Soviets assurances that his government

would crack down on any future unauthorized strikes or counter-

revolutionary activities. According to the Romanians, the only Warsaw

Pact leader to argue forcefully for immediate intervention in Poland

was Honecker. That sounds credible to me. Subsequent events would

indicate that the Poles (and the Romanians) left Moscow thinking that

the Soviets were willing to give them more time to solve their

problems.

—Although far from sanguine that the Polish problem had been

resolved by the meeting, the Soviet leadership probably opted to take a

wait-and-see attitude. The Moscow Summit was over on December 5,5

i.e., three days before D-Day.

—Only three days away from achieving full readiness, the Soviets

decided to go ahead with their pre-planned scenario for the following

reasons:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

(a) It gave them the option of moving against the Poles im-

mediately if Kania’s words in Moscow were contradicted by his sub-

sequent behavior in Warsaw, as was the case after the October 30

“consultations.”

(b) It provided a useful dress rehearsal for an ultimate invasion.

(The Soviets went through a similar exercise in Czechoslovakia in

1968.)

(c) By pushing ahead with their preparations to invade, Moscow

forced both this Administration and Richard Allen, representing the

next, to state explicitly and publicly that a Soviet invasion of Poland

would not trigger a military response from the West. (This was, of

course, a logical supposition for them to make, but a supposition is far

different from an explicit assertion by the United States that they had

nothing to fear from us militarily in the event that they decided to in-

vade Poland.)

(d) Most Poles, especially the leaders of Solidarnosc, have been

much too overconfident that the Soviets would not invade. Only by in-

ducing genuine alarm could the Soviets exert a decisive effect within

Poland. By carrying out these invasion preparations they alarmed us

and our alarm brought home the seriousness of the situation to many

Poles. The Soviets thus achieved a very important political objective—

i.e., to ensure that all segments of Polish society understand that the

limits of Soviet tolerance have been reached. (S)

What is Next?

My guess would be that the Soviets will not invade next weekend.

They will rather keep up their current state of readiness for another

several weeks or longer. They will maintain such readiness to invade

until they are satisfied that all Poles—the Party, the Church, the

workers—understand that the Polish government is literally operating

under the gun and that the Soviets will not hesitate to invade Poland if,

by Moscow’s definition, “anarchy” and “counter-revolutionary ac-

tivity” are allowed to continue out of control. (S)

June–December 1980

314.

Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National

Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter

Washington, December 19, 1980

SUBJECT

NSC Weekly Report #161

1. Fact

[Omitted here is the section entitled “Muskie-Brown-Brzezinski

Meeting.”]

Soviet Invasion of Poland Postponed

[1½ lines not declassified] the invasion has been postponed for the

“indefinite future.” The principal reason for the postponement, [less

than 1 line not declassified], was the effectiveness of the Western counter

propaganda campaign which convinced the Kremlin the West would

retaliate “massively” with political and economic sanctions. Invasion

forces, however, remain in a high state of readiness, and can move into

Poland at any time. An invasion move would be made under the pre-

tense of Warsaw Pact maneuvers.

[Omitted here are the sections entitled “Exercise BRIGHT STAR”

and “National Security Affairs Calendar.”]

315.

Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the

Department of State

38. Subject: Ambassador Watson’s Farewell Call on Foreign Min-

ister Gromyko.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI

1. (S-entire text)

2. I received word late Sunday morning, January 4, from the MFA

that Gromyko was prepared to receive me for a farewell call on him at 3

pm that same day. At the meeting Gromyko explained he was going on

leave and that, unfortunately, he would not be available to attend a

farewell luncheon that the MFA wanted to give for me, so he wanted

to take this opportunity, with apology for the short notice, to say

goodbye. He was very courteous, friendly and in a relaxed frame of

mind. I expressed my appreciation for the working relationship we had

established during the number of meetings we had together, despite

the fact that many of those meetings were confrontational because of

the issues involved. Gromyko quipped that although some of our en-

counters may have been confrontational, “at least we didn’t pound our

fists on the table and the people waiting outside the room didn’t hear

such pounding.”

3. I informed Gromyko that Jack Matlock was coming here as

Charge prior to the designation by the incoming administration of a

new US Ambassador. I also told him that I expected to remain active in

US-Soviet affairs at this particularly difficult time in our relations. I was

saddened by the state of the relationship, but hopeful that ultimately

we could work out our differences on some of the key issues which sep-

arated us. In any case I wanted to do what I could to develop US-Soviet

relations.

4. Gromyko, while avoiding any mention of the word “detente”

commented on US-Soviet relations as follows: You came here as Am-

bassador when some cold streams of air blew into our relationship. I do

not want to use harsher words than that. I personally feel that when

there were sharp turns in our relations you did not consider this a very

inspiring situation. Indeed it did not inspire anyone who wanted to de-

velop good relations between the two powers. I don’t want to dwell

further on the matter but wish to concentrate on a positive point. It is

the view of the Soviet leadership—the State, the Party, and President

Brezhnev personally—that, objectively, there exist conditions for the

US and for Soviet Union to find a common language on international

issues, especially the crucial issues. But if such a common language is

not found, we believe that these issues—even if they have to be left

open—should be considered on a policy plane. Confrontation should

be entirely ruled out of our relationship. This is what we mean when

we say we want to have peaceful coexistence with countries of different

socio-economic systems. I believe the same formula has been prevalent

in the US as well. It is the view of the party and of the leadership that

we want to live in peace with the US. Of course it would be even better

still if we could maintain friendly relations. Nevertheless, and even

without friendship in the profound sense of that word, we believe we

June–December 1980

can live in peace with one another and seek solutions to common

problems. That is to say that we can have normal relations. I listened

with satisfaction when you said you favor the positive development of

US-Soviet relations. If this will continue to be your position, it will be to

the mutual benefit of our two countries.

5. I made the point to Gromyko that there should be no misunder-

standing: my basic position on US-Soviet relations has not been in vari-

ance with that of my own government’s and I was in agreement with

my government’s policies. Gromyko commented that he did not wish

to imply that I have ever taken a different position from that of the US

Government, but that he was referring mainly to the inauspicious cir-

cumstances of the situation between our two countries. I emphasized

that among the crucial issues facing our countries I want to give pri-

mary attention to strategic arms control. Both sides are grossly over-

armed and, given the differences in the political systems of our two

countries, we could easily turn toward a collision course. The present

challenge was to do what was necessary to get relations on a better

track and to establish a viable and coherent relationship which would

respect the basic security interests of both sides.

6. At the end of the meeting, which lasted approximately 40

minutes, Gromyko said that he, personally, and the Soviet Govern-

ment, in general, would work with my successor in a cooperative and

businesslike manner.

Watson
