1142
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
plies Treaty’s denuclearization provisions to territories for which sig-
natories are de jure or de facto “internationally responsible” within the
geographical zone of application of the Treaty. The United States
signed Protocol One on May 26, 1977.)
3. Gros Espiell explained that the memorandum is worded some-
what peremptorily in hope that this will help U.S. process of ratifica-
tion. He added that he will present a similar memorandum to the
French next week urging Protocol One ratification to coincide with
Mexican President Lopez Portillo’s planned visit to Paris in May. In re-
viewing memorandum with Gros, we noted that USG fully supports
Protocol One and that U.S. ratification is question of legislative tactics,
not of executive intent. Informal translation of OPANAL memoran-
dum follows.
4. Begin text. President Carter signed Additional Protocol One of
the Treaty of Tlatelolco for the United States on May 26, 1977. This pro-
tocol was sent to the Senate for approval prior to ratification in May
1978. The Foreign Relations Committee began its analysis in public
hearings that received wide journalistic coverage. After this prelimi-
nary analysis, as far as we know, it has not returned to be an object of
consideration of the committee.
5. The General Conference of OPANAL in its sixth regular period
of sessions approved Resolution 121(VI) adopted April 26, 1979, which
says in this regard, “2. Calls on the Governments of the United States
and France to proceed as soon as possible to the ratification of Addi-
tional Protocol One.” The United Nations general assembly in its Reso-
lution 33/58 adopted December 14, 1978 invited the United States of
America, “. . . to make every effort to ratify as soon as possible Addi-
tional Protocol One of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco.)”
6. The absence of ratification of Additional Protocol One by the
United States of America, almost three years after its signature, deeply
preoccupies the Latin American State-parties to the Treaty of Tlatel-
olco. This absence of ratification would appear to demonstrate little in-
terest in the question of military denuclearization of Latin America.
Such an attitude on the part of the United States of America—in certain
form incompatible with the repeated declarations of President Carter
and Secretary of State Vance of full and total support for the Treaty of
Tlatelolco—prejudices Latin American efforts to denuclearize the con-
tinent militarily and affects all policy regarding peaceful use of nuclear
energy in Latin America, reducing the force of United States’ efforts in
this area and affecting negatively negotiations to obtain the signatures,
ratifications, and waivers still lacking for the Treaty of Tlatelolco
(Cuba, Guyana, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile.)
