134 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 JCS General David Jones CIA Admiral Stansfield Turner WHITE HOUSE Zbigniew Brzezinski Hamilton Jordan Jody Powell The President: Need to reasses where we are. We cannot let the Iranians decide the pace. We may need to bring the situation to a head. Should the Shah leave? How can we expedite it? What can we tell Khomeini about the consequences of a trial, of harm to hostages? Harm to even one is the same as to all. There are two military options: mine three ports; destruction of Abadan refinery. How do we get Khomeini to realize that we will do this without having him lose face? That is something we need to resolve. When should we exercise that option? We should try to get our allies to do more. They have not done enough. They have not really reacted. We might call to stop all shipping. What terms through Waldheim would be acceptable? They could have recourse through our courts but that and international review of the Shah’s policies would be seen as a political defeat for the United States. Our hostages have already been punished—we have already been abused. Should be restrict or expel Iranian diplomats? We should kick them out. These diplomats are of no use to us here. To what degree should we consult our allies on our options? If they knew we might mine ports, it might spur them into more action. Secretary Vance: PLO and UN are our main channels. UN exploring the four-point proposal that you and I have approved.2 The President: And Zbig. 2 See attachment. In his memoir, Vance wrote that on November 17 (Vance, Hard Choices, p. 379), he handed the four points to Waldheim, who then handed the proposal to Iranian representatives at the UN. (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, p. 84) Salamatin arrived in New York on November 16 to request a formal meeting of the Security Council in order to “set forward” Iran’s views and to help the Iranian government deal with the students in control at the Embassy. Salamatin told Security Council President Palacios that “the present situation is such that in order to release the hostages the govt would have to kill the students.” (Telegram 5344 from USUN, November 17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790535–0354)
