December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
803
234.
Letter From Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil to Secretary of
State Vance1
March 26, 1979
Dear Secretary Vance:
Pursuant to my letter of yesterday2 concerning the proposed Mem-
orandum of Agreement between U.S. and Israel3 I wish to inform you
of the following:
While Egypt does not contest the right of the United States Gov-
ernment, or any other government for that matter, to take the decisions
it deems compatible with its foreign policy, the Government of Egypt
maintains the right not to accept any decision or action which it con-
siders directed against Egypt. I would like to state that the contents of
the proposed Memorandum will have a direct bearing on the Peace
Treaty.
You are certainly aware of the keen desire of Egypt to strengthen
the friendly relations between our two countries as well as to establish
peace and stability in the whole region. This will be furthered by
achieving a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel as an important step
towards a comprehensive settlement of the conflict in the Middle East.
Bearing this in mind, I want you to know that we were deeply disap-
pointed to find the United States accepting to enter into an agreement
we consider directed against Egypt. The Memorandum does not serve
any useful purpose. On the contrary, its contents and purport would
adversely affect the whole process of peace and stability in the area.
Egypt rejects the Memorandum for the following reasons:
1. It is contrary to the spirit existing between our two countries and
does not contribute to the strengthening of relations between them. I
wish to put on record that Egypt was never consulted on the substance
of the proposed memorandum.
2. The contents of the proposed memorandum are based upon al-
ledged accusations against Egypt and providing for certain measures
to be taken against her in that hypothetical case of violations, the deter-
mination of which is largely left to Israel.
3. We have been engaged in the final process of negotiating the
Treaty for over a month now, however, we have not been notified of the
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 5, Middle East Peace Treaty—1979. No classifi-
cation marking. Printed from a copy delivered by the Egyptian Embassy in Washington.
2 See Document 233.
3 See Document 232.
