Peru 1061 The relationship of IPC’s problem to the Peruvian balance of payments was also discussed. Under the present circumstances, IPC is not disposed to make additional investments needed to increase production and believes the day will soon arrive when Peru will be a net importer of petroleum. If, however, it can obtain satisfaction on the pricing problem, IPC would make investments in secondary recovery which it would hope would maintain output and possibly make a modest increase. This would maintain Peru’s ability to export petroleum for a longer period and put off the day when Peru would become a net importer of petroleum products, which while probably inevitable, would still be perhaps eight or ten years in the future. IPC does not, however, expect any major discovery which would alter the long-­range prospect that Peru would eventually become a net importer. In addition to the affect it is having on Peru’s balance of payments situation, Mr. Brisco pointed out that the unrealistic petroleum pricing policy is also serving to discourage development of Peru’s hard fuel sources. Peru, he said, has ample coal resources, but there is no inducement to develop them. He pointed out that at the Chimbote steel plant, they find it cheaper to use kerosene in the coal drying operation than coal. Mr. Brisco then went on to review the proposal which IPC has made to the Peruvian Government, which the Government has so far not acted upon. In return for an adequate pricing policy, IPC has offered to place its operations under the 1952 Petroleum Law and give up its present fee-­simple status for a 40 year concession and to pay the GOP a 50 percent tax on all its profits in Peru. It has further offered to extend $25 million in low interest loans to the Government for road building, housing and other projects. When asked, based on their experience in the country and knowledge of its political problems, what might be the reaction to the kind of relief which IPC seeks, Mr. Brisco responded as follows: He said that the inefficiency and vacillation of the Prado administration has clearly cost it much of its support and in fact generated much opposition to it. He realizes that a sharp increase in petroleum costs would have a major public impact and said that he would not attempt to predict that this act might not be the straw that would break the camel’s back and bring about the overthrow of the Prado regime. On the other hand, he pointed out that many of the features of IPC’s offer to Peru are such that the Government could make a strong logical case to defend its actions and point out how it would serve the interests of the country. In response to Hr. Haider’s request for comment on the proposals made by IPC, Mr. Siracusa suggested that, while he could not evaluate them from an expert point of view, he did recognize, consistent with what Mr. Brisco had said, that the proposals contained many points
