Bolivia 179 TIME Magazine and I have found absolutely no evidence that such a statement was made by an officer of this Embassy. I have every confidence that no officer of this Embassy did, in fact, make such a statement The reprehensible suggestion that Bolivia be abolished and divided among its neighbors is obviously completely contrary to the demonstrated attitude and policy of the USG as evidenced by its respect for the independence and integrity of Bolivia and by its close and friendly relations with Bolivia, including cooperative efforts in recent years to assist Bolivia toward a solution of its basic economic problems. The Government of the United States is, and will continue to be, interested in a strong, independent and prosperous Bolivia. Accept Excellency, et cetera UNQUOTE Will confirm and report.3 Coerr 3 In telegram 464-B from La Paz, March 2, 1959, Coerr reported that the Government of Bolivia announced, “con placido”, with pleasure, receipt of the Embassy’s note, and repeated its intention to ask the Department to take action against Time if the story was inaccurate. Coerr advised, “For Time to reaffirm an Embassy source now could seriously aggravate already violent situation with consequent increased danger Americans here.” (724.00/3–259) BL–20. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon)1  Washington, March 13, 1959. SUBJECT Bolivia/IMF Standby Agreement As you know, the former GOB/IMF standby agreement expired on February 28. The recently negotiated new agreement has not been recommended to the Fund Board because of failure of the GOB thus far to live up to the terms offered in its Letter of Intent on the crucial miners wage/commissary price issue.2 In the absence of an agreement 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 398.13/3–1359. Confidential. Drafted by Siracusa. 2 After problems arose between the Bolivian Government and the IMF relating to the provision of the Government’s Letter of Intent of October 4, 1958, Bolivia submitted a new Letter of Intent, dated January 26, but actually signed on January 27, 1959. A photostatic copy of the new Letter was transmitted to the Department of State under cover of despatch 644 from La Paz, January 23, 1959, not printed; 398.13/1–2859.
