of all its commercial treaties at this period, and therefore did not desire to
be hampered in this respect. It preferred six or seven years, but agreed to
eight. One year more or less made no particular difference, but it was felt
that two or three or four years might prove embarrassing.
I am enclosing herewith a revised draft in accordance with the foregoing.93
To recapitulate: Upon analysis it will be noted that the only articles really
requiring the Department’s scrutiny and further instructions are articles VII,
XI and XII. Of these, VII and XII are the most important. If it had not been
for the rather elaborate explanation in regard to article VII, made necessary
of course by the Department’s revised instructions, incorporating the new
provisions found in Instruction 566 of April 2, I should have telegraphed
with respect to the other two articles in accordance with the Department’s
authorization. I trust it will be evident that the United States has secured as
a result of the negotiations practically what it asked for, and that the new
language interpolated in article VII marks a very substantial advance in the
direction desired. The Austrian negotiators feel that they have receded on
most of their conditions, as indeed they have, and if the Department can see
its way clear to do so, I trust it will speedily meet the Austrian views with
respect to the three articles in question, and express its preference for the
various alternatives suggested. If my final instructions could be
communicated by telegraph, it would be most helpful. The Foreign Office is
beginning to put the text into German and a draft, subject to my final
instructions of course, will be in my hands towards the end of the month.
The Foreign Office official who has this matter particularly in hand will
leave for a three weeks’ vacation the last week in July, returning about
August 12. By that time it is hoped that I may have my final telegraphic
instructions. The treaty will then be set up in type in accordance, of course,
with Instruction 573 of April 14,94 and any typographical errors or
discrepancies will be discovered and corrected. The revised draft as
herewith submitted was initialled today by Dr. Schüller and myself. It is
understood that the only articles now left open for discussion are VII, XI
and XII, as above indicated. Schüller leaves tomorrow morning, to be
absent until September. The possibility of slight error in the text is not
excluded but I can assure the Department that the final draft for signature
will be carefully checked, both as to text, spelling and punctuation.
