Chapter 5, May–June 1990  801
Thus, in the future talks the two sides will discuss strategic sta-
bility issues of interest to them, including the relationship between 
strategic offensive and defensive arms, taking into account stabilizing 
reductions in strategic offensive arms and development of new tech-
nologies. The sides will work toward the important goal of reaching an 
early outcome in these negotiations.
Second. The United States of America and the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics, as is the case in the emerging START Treaty, will, 
in the new negotiations, seek to reduce their strategic offensive arms 
in a way consistent with enhancing strategic stability. In the new nego-
tiations, the two sides agree to place emphasis on removing incentives 
for a nuclear first strike, on reducing the concentration of warheads on 
strategic delivery vehicles, and on giving priority to highly survivable 
systems.
In particular, the two sides will seek measures that reduce the con-
centration of warheads on strategic delivery vehicles as a whole, includ-
ing measures related to the question of heavy missiles and MIRVed 
ICBMs. Effective verification will be provided by national technical 
means, cooperative measures, and on-­site inspection.
Third. Having agreed on the need to ensure a predictable strategic 
relationship between the United States of America and the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics, the sides will, for the entire duration of the 
START Treaty, exchange, at the beginning of each calendar year, infor-
mation on planned changes in the numbers of strategic offensive arms 
as of the end of the current year.
Fourth. The sides will pursue additional measures to build confi-
dence and ensure predictability of the military activities of the United 
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that 
would reduce the possibility of an outbreak of nuclear war as a result of 
accident, miscalculation, terrorism, or unexpected technological break-
through, and would prevent possible incidents between them.
Fifth. The sides believe that reducing the risk of outbreak of nuclear 
war is the responsibility not only of the United States of America and 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, and that other states should also 
make their contribution toward the attainment of this objective, in partic-
ular in the field of non-­proliferation of nuclear weapons. They call upon 
all states to consider the new opportunities for engagement in mankind’s 
common effort to remove the risk of outbreak of nuclear war worldwide.
Accordingly, the United States of America and the Union of Soviet 
Socialist Republics will give these future negotiations the highest prior-
ity so that the benefits of strengthened stability can be realized as soon 
as possible. End text
4. Leningrad minimize considered.
Baker
