778 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Paragraph 10 (page 10) is the general paragraph on deterrence and, as the majority would have it, is unchanged. State and AEC, however, define the term “general war” by adding the words “a war in which the survival of the United States is at stake.” It is my impression that a large part of State’s concern arises out of the strategic concept which was circulated to the Council in March 1957 in connection with the Mobilization Base Planning. In that document general war is defined as: “A war in which the armed forces of the USSR and of the United States are overtly engaged.” It would appear that this concern of the State Department could be met by a definition in the Strategic Concept which could describe general war as “A war in which sizeable numbers of the armed forces of the USSR and of the United States are overtly engaged.” If this is the case there would appear to be no need to change the existing language of paragraph 10. In such an event the statement in NSC 5904/1, “U.S. Policy in the Event of War” (footnote, page 2), that “U.S. policy is based upon the assumption that any war with the USSR would be gen­ eral war”, should be changed to incorporate the new definition. (Call on: SECRETARY HERTER SERCRETARY McELROY (MR. McCONE)) Paragraph 12–­a (page 11) presents the issue concerning limited war capabilities in conventional terms and also the extent of our reliance on nuclear weapons in limited war. The majority would continue the language of the existing policy paper, which reads in part: “It is the policy of the United States to place main, but not sole, reliance on nuclear weapons;” and “to consider them as conventional weapons from a military point of view. . .” The State Department has a proposal, in which OCDM joins, to change the policy so that we would “place main reliance on nuclear weapons in general war, remaining pre­ pared to fight limited war with or without such weapons.” [Emphasis supplied]2 It is my understanding that State’s interpretation of this language is not that we should be prepared to fight any war short of general war solely without nuclear weapons. I shall ask Secretary Herter to elabo­ rate on this. 2 Brackets are in the original, except for those delinating illegible text in the original.
