Human Rights
135
that is true, but I believe the basis of our support of human rights
should be that we would espouse them and support them even if it
were an asset to the Soviet Union, which, of course, it isn’t. I think that
human rights, if pursued in a sophisticated but committed fashion,
could be the most important contribution that the Carter Presidency
will make to foreign policy. I think it is already showing fruits and I
think you are the first President to be able to pursue this policy effec-
tively without being charged with hypocrisy either personally or in
terms of the American society.
I note the attached editorial in this morning’s New York Times,3
which is beginning to question our commitment. We cannot permit
that to happen. (“Hands have no tears to flow”)4
The last phrase in Objective 10 worries me because, unless defined,
it sounds like Viet Nam. It reads “to develop capabilities, to deter or
counter the Soviet military intervention in the third world . . .”5 Of
course we must. I am not arguing with the objective here, but I do think
we should not mechanically pursue a global policy to counter Soviet in-
tervention. Sometimes that intervention is more of a trap for them and
an asset to us. As we have shown in Zaire, if we are careful, others will
do it and, as we involve ourselves too much in some of these disputes,
we undermine the capability of the indigenous forces to defend them-
selves. We look negative.
On page 6, we cast our definition of human rights by a way of
remedies to nudge or force violating societies to improve, and I have no
objection to that, but I think an equal part of our effort should be to
honor societies which are making progress on their own, for example,
Spain, Portugal, India, Peru. That aspect of our human rights policy is
not reflected either on page 6 or pages 36 and 37. I think it should be.
3 Not printed. Entitled “The Power and the Pity,” the editorial referenced Carter’s
apparent restraint in either identifying specific countries as human rights violators or
speaking out for the rights of dissidents. Noting Carter’s willingness to advocate for
Welsh poet Dylan Thomas’ commemoration in Westminster Abbey’s Poet’s Corner, the
Times editorial staff commented, “Washington’s present restraint on the subject of repres-
sion in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe is an accommodation that Dylan Thomas
would have understood.” (The New York Times, May 12, 1977, p. 26)
4 The “Hands have no tears to flow” line Mondale references is taken from a
Thomas poem that Carter used as an epigraph in his 1976 book Why Not the Best?
5 The complete text reads: “To maintain a defense posture capable of deterring the
Soviet Union both on the strategic and conventional levels from hostile acts and from po-
litical pressures. This will require the U.S. to modernize, rationalize, and reconceptualize
its defense posture in keeping with the broad changes in world affairs that have already
been noted, to improve NATO military strength and readiness, and to develop capabil-
ities to deter or to counter Soviet military intervention in the Third World.” (Memo-
randum from Brzezinski to Carter, undated; Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 27, Goals/Initiative: 4–5/77)
