January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1159
viding for the continuation of the status quo. Our language12 was even
more precise. On the security committee,13 why change “agree to estab-
lish?” There is no security committee yet; or is this saying that that is
implicit? “To examine security aspects” is all right. And we kept out
references to 242, since it is clear in the Camp David Accords that they
are under 242.
The President asked if we have an objection to including the refer-
ence to 242. Would it hurt?
Ambassador Linowitz said no.
Assistant Secretary Saunders said it would, since it gets into the
question of Israeli withdrawal, and Israel may object.
The President said the inclusion of a reference to 242 caused him no
problem.
Ambassador Linowitz said that the Egyptian paragraph 814 is irrele-
vant. It may be good to urge this on Israel, but it has nothing to do with
areas of agreement.
The President said that we could take the rest of the day to negotiate
a draft. (To Secretary Vance: Cy will you sit down in the afternoon,
with whomever President Sadat decides, and work this out,15 with
12 The U.S. version reads: “It is agreed that certain areas, such as water and external
economic relations, cannot be negotiated in detail without the participation of the inhabi-
tants of the territories. Accordingly, such areas will be left for detailed negotiations under
the aegis of the Continuing Committee provided for in the Camp David Accords and con-
sisting of Egypt, Israel, SGA (AC), and Jordan, with the addition of the United States. The
Continuing Committee will operate on the basis of unanimity. Pending agreement on a
particular issue, existing arrangements shall continue under the aegis of the Continuing
Committee.”
13 Reference is to point seven of the Egyptian paper. The text reads: “A Security
Committee will meet during this month to examine security aspects related to the Camp
David Framework and Security Council Resolution 242.” On this subject, the U.S. text
reads: “The parties agree to establish a Security Committee to consider how to implement
security aspects in accordance with the Camp David Accords.”
14 The text of point eight of the Egyptian paper reads: “Confidence-building
measures in the West Bank and Gaza prior to the establishment of the SGA will be dis-
cussed with a view to creating a favorable atmosphere for the implementation of the
agreement.”
15 Linowitz met with Boutros Ghali and El-Baz the afternoon of April 9, from which
a new draft working paper was produced. In an April 10 memorandum to Carter, to
which he attached a copy of the paper, Linowitz described the new draft as “considerably
weaker than we had ourselves proposed” due to “continuing problems which will need
to be resolved during the negotiations.” He listed these problems as the Egyptian asser-
tion “(with few exceptions) that there must be a transfer of full authority from Israel’s
Military Government and Civilian Administration to the SGA;” renewed Egyptian objec-
tion to “the notion that existing arrangements should continue if the Continuing Com-
mittee is unable to agree with respect to a particular issue;” whether “Residual Powers”
would reside with the Israelis or the Continuing Committee; and the handling of Defense
and Security issues beyond the creation of a Security Committee. Linowitz suggested that
Carter use the paper in the upcoming meetings with Begin. (Carter Library, National Se-
curity Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 11,
Egypt: 1980)
