Eastern Europe Region 51 factors are and should be made. To place this assessment in perspective, an evaluation should be carried out of the implications for US of technology transfer to other industrial and Third World countries. • An evaluation of which technologies, and in what form, are most in need of control, together with development of criteria and recommended procedures for carrying out such control. • An analysis of the policies of COCOM and non-COCOM supplier states regarding the transfer of technology to Communist states, including the likelihood of obtaining cooperation by other key supplier countries. • An assessment of the advantages and disadvantages of establishing varying standards of export control for specific Communist states, together with development of criteria and procedures for applying such control. • Identification of the interaction between export control and US policies on related issues (non-proliferation, arms transfers, and North- South technology transfer). The review should draw on existing PRM responses and other studies. It will be chaired by Ben Huberman on behalf of the NSC and OSTP staffs. It should be submitted for discussion by the SCC by November 1, 1977.2 There will be a follow-on interagency study dealing with the use of US technology transfer as a positive influence in North-South relations. Zbigniew Brzezinski 2 No Presidential Decision was drafted out of the PRM. The PRM report, finalized in March 1978, called for the creation of an NSC Technology Transfer group to deal with technology transfer issues and coordinate administration policies. The PRM recommended that the policy continue as set, evolving toward increasing control over sensitive technologies and associated end products. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Putnam Subject File, Box 30, East-West Economic Relations: 3–8/1978) In an August 14 memorandum to several agencies, Ben Huberman of the National Security Council Staff circulated an action plan for implementation of PRM 31. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General Odom File, Box 40, PRM–31 [Technology Transfers to Communist Countries]: 3/74–8/78)
