696 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement State and Defense in their Memorandum did indicate that it would be desirable to review carefully U.S. military requirements prior to renew­ ing the existing agreements with Brazil and the Dominican Republic. It was likewise indicated that certain facilities in the Philippines and Caribbean areas could probably be released because there was no clear military need for them. Similarly, with respect to the Philippines it was planned that areas no longer required by U.S. forces would be released during the current negotiations. Secretary Dillon, who had taken the place of Secretary Herter at the beginning of discussion of this item, said that the State Department had found this review of our base requirements a very useful exercise indeed. In the course of the review, it had become obvious that the State Department lacked important information on a number of bases. Accordingly, the Department was instructing the appropriate embassies and legations to report regularly on U.S. bases within their jurisdiction. The Vice President inquired specifically about the U.S. base at Guantánomo Bay in Cuba. He wondered whether it might not be a good idea for us to withdraw from this base in view of Fidel Castro’s suggestions and the rash statements which he had been making in criti­ cism of the U.S. The Vice President said that he did not imagine that the Guantánomo base was very important to U.S. security. General Twining replied that on the contrary this base was consid­ ered the key to the whole military defense of the Caribbean. We should certainly not abandon the base at Guantánomo Bay if we could avoid doing so. Mr. Gray then raised the question originally posed by the President as to the necessity for the U.S. to continue to maintain base facilities at Sangley Point in the Philippines. General Twining replied that the Department of Defense had a report in response to the President’s question which they would send to General Goodpaster. The President said that it would be sufficient for this report to come to him and that it need not be brought up in the Council. Mr. Gray then inquired about the report requested by the President with respect to the feasibility of concentrating U.S. military installations on Okinawa in a single area. General Twining said that this problem was still under active consideration in the Defense Department and that a report on it would be forthcoming soon. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed the report on the subject by the Acting Sec­ retary of State and the Secretary of Defense pursuant to NSC Action No. 1876, transmitted by the reference memorandum of March 17, 1959. b. Noted an oral report by the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, that: (1) A report was being submitted to the President pursuant to NSC Action No. 2034–­c–­(1), stating that the Sangley Point naval base in the Philippines was still considered militarily important.
