572 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII treaties will be in the best interests of both our countries and will help to preserve world peace. Mr. Minister, I look forward to any response you may wish to make on these matters and any clarification you may care to provide. Sincerely yours, Cyrus Vance 203. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, February 9, 1980, 0818Z 567. Subject: The Afghan Situation as of February 9. 1. (C—Entire text) 2. Begin summary: We have some strong indications that fierce infighting is taking place within the ruling party’s inner circles. It seems quite clear that there is little trust between the party’s Parcham and Khalqi factions. The reported intra-party squabbles may well have resulted in the wounding by gunshot of one or more Cabinet members this past week, including the regime’s number two man, Vice President Keshtmand. There is an unconfirmed report that the Parcham faction may be preparing to go underground if worse comes to worst. There are also indications that disaffection is spreading further in the Afghan military. Afghanistan’s foreign trade suffered another blow when Indian banks reported they required full deposit coverage for letters of credit. End summary. 3. The mood in Kabul: Some of our Afghan sources tell us that there is a growing expectation here that the rebel Muslim forces will soon move on Kabul. One such source, who is believed to have good contacts in People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) circles, says that some of his PDPA Parcham faction contacts claim that President Babrak Karmal is fearful that Gulbaddin Hekmatyar’s Muslim forces will sooner or later oust him. Some of the source’s other contacts say that the Muslim Brotherhood (Ikhwan-ul-Muslimeen), with which 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 7, Afghanistan: 2/9–10/80. Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to New Delhi. Also sent for information to Islamabad, London, Moscow, CINCPAC for POLAD, and USICA. Printed from a copy that was received in the White House Situation Room.
