1977 171 modifications to nuclear weapons employment doctrine generate literally vast adjustments not only in the targeting plans themselves, but in command and control procedures, emergency action procedures, training, intelligence requirements, as well as many other areas. Two years of intense activity elapsed between the signing of NSDM–242 and the effective date of the first SIOP developed accordingly. Consequently, transition to any new or significantly revised doctrine would require an adequate lead time. (TS) Even though no one can say with confidence that the existence of limited nuclear options will either deter a potential aggressor in every case, or that escalation can be controlled through the employment of limited nuclear options, there is no doubt that we would wish to consider alternative options in a serious crisis. Agreement exists that the US should continue to plan for the flexible use of its nuclear weapons. (TS) With respect to general war, we can never be absolutely certain of precisely what or how much will deter the Soviet leadership. Consequently, we cannot be confident that a massive nuclear war will not occur by either design or miscalculation. The concept of focusing our general war targeting objectives on the enemy power structure itself, and on its regenerative capacity, enables the doctrine to be related not only to deterrence, but also to US interests and objectives in a postwar world, should a general war occur. It is believed that the NSDM–242 targeting objectives currently incorporated in the SIOP are adequate for the immediate future. We intend, however, to examine alternative targeting concepts in PRM–10 follow-­on analyses. It is possible that these analyses may result in recommendations for future modifications to strategic targeting objectives and priorities. (TS) The Joint Chiefs of Staff were asked to provide their views with respect to NSDM–242. After review of the doctrine, they concluded that the rationale used in developing current nuclear employment policy over the past several years appears to be valid for the immediate future. They believe the doctrine expressed in NSDM–242 is responsive to the realities of current technology and the relative military power balance between the United States and the Soviet Union. In that its adoption has placed greater emphasis on planning for limited options, they believe it improves the capability for deterrence across the entire spectrum of conflict and provides the NCA with a realistic flexible response capability. For these reasons, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe current doctrine for the employment of nuclear weapons, as embodied in NSDM–242 should be retained. They believe the following additional factors would support this position: —Deterrence remains the principal objective of national policy. Intelligence analyses of current capabilities of the Soviet Union and the
