944  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
B–2 bases. FYI: We are concerned that this language not implicate the 
B–2 rotary launcher or be interpreted as banning that launcher from B–2 
bases. End FYI. Negotiating group should also make it clear that, on 
the basis of reciprocity, the U.S. will expect comparable provisions with 
respect to any Soviet bombers of types some of which are equipped for 
long-­range nuclear ALCMs.
13. During discussions, the Soviets also agreed that the two extra 
attachment joints on the B1B for which no pylons exist shall not be con-
sidered in determining the total number of long-­range nuclear ALCMs 
for which a B1B is equipped. Negotiating group should press the 
Soviets to confirm this interpretation.
Satellite Communications
14. The following text, while not formally accepted by the Soviets, 
provides a summary of their verbal acceptance of satellite communi-
cations. Negotiating group should press the Soviets to implement this 
agreement:
Begin text of U.S. draft elements of common ground on 
communications
1. The monitors of the inspecting party shall have the right to use 
at all times satellite communications via the International Maritime 
Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) commercial satellite system, or a 
system of equivalent performance, between each monitored facility in 
the territory of the inspected party and the telephone communication 
system of the inspection party.
2. There shall be no requirement for backup high-­frequency radio 
communications systems.
3. The inspected party shall provide the satellite communications 
equipment. The installation and maintenance of such equipment shall 
be the responsibility of the inspected party.
End Text
15. In implementing this provision, negotiating group should 
offer to adopt the language used in the TTBT/PNET protocols which 
provide, inter alia, for the provision and maintenance of satellite com-
munications equipment by the inspecting party, if the inspected party 
prefers.
Baker
