Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1153
the Argentinians but there has been minimal activity to date.2 Thus
there does not seem much to preempt there. Our own relations with
Argentina are another question. We do not want to (indeed legally we
cannot) expand these relations unless they accept full-scope safeguards
and ratify the Tlatelolco Treaty. We do have some flexibility though on
whether we should continue to cooperate in marginal ways within the
law. The question is whether we are willing to supply things that at
some future date might be related to a nuclear weapons program.
Bushnell said there is no problem because what we are supplying is
for their research program. The issue is whether we want to break a nu-
clear dialogue with them completely and perhaps turn them to the So-
viets. He hopes that we might be able to make greater progress next
year when there will be a new administration and leadership on nu-
clear matters. Thus he asked, should we break the dialogue now or con-
tinue to do “minor” things.
Keeny said it depended on which items were involved.
Claytor said that the nuclear non-proliferation policy is bankrupt in
general and that we should do absolutely everything we can under the
law to cooperate with Argentina.
Keeny inquired whether that would include the provision of tri-
tium. Perhaps the only thing the Argentinians want are things that
cause no problem for us. We should look at the specifics.
Christopher pointed out that the President has certainly not aban-
doned the nuclear non-proliferation policy.
Claytor countered that the policy had been ineffective and that the
Soviets are always ready to jump in where we are unable to extend
cooperation.
Bushnell observed that there were very few license requests
pending from the Argentinians and there probably would be no
problem over the next six months or so.
Christopher, returning to the general topic, said he believed that the
group should support the middle option. We should give due weight
to positive trends in the human rights area but should not try to repeal
2 On April 17, INR reported that “US countermeasures in the wake of Afghanistan
have stimulated further Soviet efforts to exploit Argentine policy differences with the US,
particularly in the commercial area.” INR further noted that Castro Madero had “an-
nounced that excellent results had been achieved at Argentine-USSR nuclear talks held in
Moscow in late March to explore the possibilities of nuclear cooperation. The Soviets, ac-
cording to one CNEA official, said that if US-Argentine negotiations for enriched ura-
nium were not successful, the USSR would meet Argentina’s enriched uranium require-
ments. Possible Soviet supply of heavy water and heavy water technology may have
been discussed, although Soviet officials have privately reiterated to us Moscow’s oppo-
sition to such transfers.” (Bureau of Intelligence and Research—Analysis: April 17; Ibid.)
