28
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
have little interest in who rules in Kabul. Politics, including coups,
involves only a small part of the population.
The popular reaction—either positive or negative—to a change in
government has never been a critical factor in Afghanistan; control of
key military units has been far more important. The last two successful
military coups depended initially on the control of armored units and
the air base near the capital. Neither coup was particularly well planned
or executed, but in both there was little opposition once the city of
Kabul was in the hands of the coup leaders. The new government will
need to ensure the loyalty of key units. The process may be difficult.
A hastily organized attempt to overthrow the new government
with a small force opposed to the new regime cannot be ruled out, but
somewhat more likely would be a gradual buildup of anti-government
activities among the tribes or among religious conservatives. Some
increase in such activities seems almost inevitable; the seriousness of
the threat from the tribes will depend largely on the actions of the new
government and the extent to which the conservatives win support in
the military.
Several potential problems could affect the new rulers’ ability to
govern the country and cope with its fundamental social and economic
ills. For example, a split could develop between the military and civilian
leaders. In the civil sector, the probable removal of experienced bureau-
crats in a purge of rightists and officials belonging to or closely con-
nected with the family that has ruled Afghanistan since the 19th Cen-
tury could quickly erode the regime’s ability to cope with unfamiliar
problems.2 Within the ruling party itself, longstanding rivalries
between its two factions could resurface, causing tensions or struggles
that would deflect the leaders from government business.
The mechanics of this coup were similar to those of the one in
1973, but the result may lead to a much more fundamental change in
Afghan political, economic, and social life. The killing of Daoud and
members of his family and the immediately stated intention of the
new rulers to eliminate “every member of the family of the autocratic
demagogue” are ominous signs. Even if further violent reprisals are
not envisioned by the government, the removal of traditional elites
from official positions will adversely affect the operation of the bureau-
cracy and government.
The new government lacks the legitimacy derived from tribal status
that reinforced both the monarchy and the republic. Since the early 19th
century—except for a short-lived government overthrown in 1929—
Afghanistan has been ruled by the acknowledged leader of the domi-
2 A reference to the Mohammadzai family.
