592  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Bartholomew: Let us be clear we are not working out a text here, 
we are agreeing to elements that are recorded in the ALCM elements 
of common ground. Akhromeyev: Right, we are agreeing on numbers, 
not language.
Bartholomew: As for your paragraph 3, this is contrary to the 
Moscow agreed elements of common ground, which state that future 
ALCM heavy bombers will be attributed 10 ALCMs and can be 
equipped for no more than 20. Akhromeyev: We disagreed in Moscow 
and still disagree.
Bartholomew: As for paragraph 4, the question in Moscow was 
this: Whatever number of ALCM heavy bombers the US had, the USSR 
could have up to 40% more. There would be no ceiling on the num-
ber of US ALCM heavy bombers. We could set that level according to 
our own force plan within the overall limits with no subceiling. That 
is what Baker was clarifying in his statement to Shevardnadze, and he 
was also reasserting the long-­standing American rejection of any such 
subceiling on ALCM heavy bombers. Akhromeyev: That is the way he 
put it.
Bartholomew: You say you did not say yes or no. I say this was one 
issue which we discussed and then said everything was agreed except 
for range. Now you say on further study you say you want a ceiling 
on ALCM heavy bombers. Our answer has to be what is has always 
been—­no. Such a limit would not be a contribution to stability.
Akhromeyev: Let me be honest. In Moscow we addressed two 
questions. The first question raised by Secretary Baker was that the US 
did not want limit X on ALCM heavy bombers. He said the US could 
have a floating level. We agreed to floating levels on ALCM heavy 
bombers. Then he raised another question—­the floating level should 
not have a ceiling. The US should decide how many heavy bombers 
should be equipped with ALCMs. We did not say yes or no. This is 
purely a military question, Shevardnadze did not intervene. We did not 
answer this point. On further study we give you an answer. We cannot 
agree that the number of ALCM heavy bombers is a unilateral decision. 
There must be a limit. We propose 90–115. If you don’t like this figure, 
say what level suits you.
Bartholomew: It is not a question of level, it is a question of the 
concept itself. We have long rejected a subceiling on ALCM heavy 
bombers. This continues to be our position. We are disappointed to see 
such a major issue coming back to the table.
Akhromeyev: I understand, but there are two of us in these discus-
sions. This is our position on this subject. We’ll have to agree on points 
of disagreement, they cannot be resolved unilaterally.
Bartholomew: I must begin by telling you paragraph 5 is particu-
larly disappointing because we made a real effort to meet your concerns.
