888
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
284.
Memorandum From Guy Erb of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 9, 1977
SUBJECT
PRC Meeting, 2:00 p.m., 11 November 1977: Negotiations on a Common Fund—
Direct Contributions and Other Measures
Attached are a discussion paper prepared by an interagency group
in response to the PRC’s request for more information on possible im-
provement in the US position on a Common Fund (Tab I), and the
agenda for the November 11 PRC meeting (Tab II).2 I also enclose the
earlier discussion paper submitted to the PRC for its meeting of 4 No-
vember (Tab III).3
Direct Contributions
The first issue before the PRC, direct contributions to a Common
Fund, derives from the divergent views of Secretary Blumenthal, on the
one hand, and yourself, Under Secretary Cooper and Ambassador
Wells, on the other. You will recall that Secretary Blumenthal favored
US adherence to the OECD opening position for a pooling arrange-
ment. He was against making any direct contributions to a Common
Fund. The opposing view expressed during the PRC meeting was that a
constructive response to LDC and developed-country interest in direct
contributions, plus the impact which such contributions would have on
the financial viability of a Common Fund, justify a change in the US po-
sition at an appropriate moment.4
My impression is that working-level agency positions conform
roughly to those expressed at the PRC on 4 November. State, OMB, Ag-
riculture, and possibly Commerce, are willing to consider a US indica-
tion of its willingness to discuss direct contributions at an appropriate
point in the negotiations.5 Treasury staff have been very constructive
during the preparations of the discussion paper, but they are con-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 66, PRC
043 11/11/77 Common Fund Negotiations. Confidential. Sent for action.
2 Tab II is attached but not printed.
3 Printed as Tab A to Document 280. For the November 4 meeting, see Docu-
ment 281.
4 Brzezinski highlighted the portion of the paragraph beginning with “that a con-
structive response” to the end of the paragraph.
5 Brzezinski underlined the words “a US” and “willingness to discuss” in this
sentence.
