especially in France concerning the withdrawal of the British objection to the French thesis on trained reservists. Lord Cushendun said that he did not feel that any agreement had been reached on this point but that his Government had indicated that it might be willing to withdraw this objection in case progress could be made on the naval question. He stated in an aside that this objection could probably never be sustained in any case. He pointed out that Great Britain, and he presumed the United States, was not essentially interested in the question of land forces. Marriner then referred to the wording of the Foreign Office telegram to Chilton asking an American reply before September 3rd and questioned this urgency. Lord Cushendun said that he believed the desire for a reply had been in order that all information possible on this subject should be available at the opening of the League Assembly but that he personally felt that this was not in any way important since any information obtained could only be of actual use at the time of the next meeting of the Preparatory Commission although undoubtedly at the forthcoming meeting of the Assembly many questions would be asked of these Anglo-French discussions. In fact Cushendun gave as his preference that no answer be given until more time had elapsed for American consideration and for a simmering down of the press discussions. He added that the British Embassy in Washington would be instructed to judge in this sense. Cushendun then inquired what might be done to correct general press opinion on this subject particularly in the United States. Marriner suggested that if it were possible some form of statement be made either on the part of Lord Cushendun himself or of the Foreign Office setting forth the idea that Great Britain as representing one school of thought at the Preparatory Commission on naval questions had made an effort to reach some compromise proposals with France as head of the opposing school of thought and had requested the reaction of the other powers thereto. Marriner said that the question of the combination of the categories of cruisers and destroyers would, no doubt cause difficulty for the United States which had a great preponderance of destroyers and Cushendun said that the Anglo-French compromise was of course not altogether satisfactory to Great Britain which would welcome any attempt of the American authorities to discuss with France the maintenance of the present categories. He said that he regretted that he had no engagement for a public speech in
