3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 769 trends in the US. He thus was not certain that we could pick up SALT in isolation as a means of rebuilding relations. 11. Despite this pessimism, Arbatov stressed the need for firm agreement between the US and the Soviet Union to begin trying to work the relationship back together. He repeated what he had said in his Pravda article—that the Soviets did not expect us to approve of the “assistance” they were giving Afghanistan but hoped that when the dust settled things might begin to get back on the track. He referred to the possibility of a meeting between Secretary Vance and Gromyko at the anniversary of the signing of the Austrian State Treaty as one possibility for the resumption of a dialogue, though he did not offer any specific suggestions as to what might be on the agenda for such a meeting. 12. All in all, the luncheon which took over two hours was a quiet, unemotional exchange of views with each side claiming to understand the other but with no constructive suggestion on the part of Arbatov or Zhurkin toward a solution to break the impasse. The two points that came through most clearly were that the Soviets will not abide by an indication that they are being punished, and two, that a Vance-Gromyko meeting might be desirable as a departure point for a new relationship. 13. However, since there is no movement in the Soviet position here, I am not hopeful that we as yet have any signal of a direction for sensible movement in the future. Watson 267. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union and the U.S. Mission at Geneva1 Washington, March 15, 1980, 0509Z 68654. Geneva for Ambassador Flowerree2 only. Subject: Sverdlovsk BW Incident. 1. (Secret-entire text). 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P990025–0588. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Mark Palmer (PM/DCA) and Martin McLean (EUR/SOV); cleared by Aaron, Robert Martin (INR/PMT), Brement, Shulman, Earle, Peter Wilson (S/P), Walter Slocombe (DUSD/PP), J. Taylor (S/S–O), John Pustay (JSC), R. McCrory (CIA), Kahan, and Barry; approved by Christopher. 2 Charles Flowerree, U.S. Ambassador to the Conference on Disarmament.
