Chinese declaration. The first purpose was the abolition of likin, which would require about $90,000,000, or possibly $100,000,000. The second purpose was debts. Dr. Yen said that at the time of the Washington Conference the foreign debts of China amounted to only $260,000,000 and the domestic debts about $100,000,000, an amount not at all exorbitant, and which could have been financed from 10 per cent of the 2½ per cent surtax, according to Senator Underwood, leaving a surplus of approximately $35,000,000 to $40,000,000 for governmental purposes. Dr. Yen stated that the total amount of the debts now approximated $800,000,000, an amount which seemed rather startling in view of the comparatively short time which had elapsed since the Washington Conference. He cited the several causes for this increase, one being the difference in the rate of exchange, as instanced by the increase in the value of the Pound Sterling by one third in the last four years. The second cause he attributed to accumulated interest and compound interest. The third was the general practice of increasing by one per cent the rate interest when a loan agreement was renewed after becoming due. He felt that it was very unfortunate for China that the Conference had been so long delayed thus causing the great increase in China’s indebtedness. Dr. Yen then gave an explanation of the view of the Chinese Delegation on Constructive Purposes. He said that while it was true that the duty was paid in the first instance by the merchants, it was really the consumer that ultimately paid, and for that reason he considered it only just and right that the Chinese people should share the benefits to accrue from the increased revenues. He considered it a particularly opportune time to start a constructive program in China and put an end to the destructive forces and to avoid the criticism that China had no constructive program. From the standpoint of intelligent and patriotic Chinese he pointed out, the Conference could be said to be successful only should something be done for the social and economic welfare of the Chinese people. He would not go into details, but mentioned such enterprises as railway construction—the completion of certain trunk lines—national road building, conservancy works and industrial developments. He particularly favored setting aside some money to improve the culture of tea, silk and cotton.
