52  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
 
{ In addition, Rick Burt has suggested considering some new pro-
posals aimed at reinforcing those themes, such as a sublimit on MIRVed 
ballistic missile warheads that would encourage greater reliance on 
single-­warhead missiles. These ideas may well be controversial, given 
internal disagreement on the value and near-­term feasibility (given our 
force structure) of de-MIRVing.
Moscow Ministerial. With the decision-­making process largely geared 
toward a June NST resumption, many of these matters will still be unre-
solved on May 10-11. Nonetheless, you will probably be in a position:
— to agree on an NST resumption date;
— to outline our conceptual thinking on START;
— to reassure the Soviets that we regard the existing Joint Draft 
Text as the basis for future work (even though we may later be propos-
ing some changes); and
— to reaffirm specific elements of the agreed framework on which 
guidance has already been issued and perhaps to preview the direction 
of some modifications we may later propose.
Looking Ahead toward Ratification
The vast majority of the many unresolved START issues are highly 
technical. But issues that appear dry and technical at first have a ten-
dency, as the endgame approaches and the stakes and emotions run 
high, to take on greater political importance.
There’s no way, therefore, to predict when a START treaty will be 
completed. One year is probably the bare minimum; it could easily take 
the rest of the first Bush Administration. It will depend largely on how 
much push there is from the top on both sides. Some considerations 
affecting ratification:
— So far, an “experts” issue (namely, whether START’s reductions 
will make our forces more vulnerable) has dominated debate. But if 
and when a domestic consensus is achieved on ICBM modernization 
and our START position is adjusted to reinforce our programs, this con-
cern should be minimized.
— Verification will then take over as START’s number one substan-
tive vulnerability. Given unprecedented verification tasks and the need 
to deny Soviet inspectors access to sensitive places, we can’t ensure 
foolproof verification of all provisions. This will require persuasive 
public explanations of tradeoffs we’ll be forced to make between verifi-
ability and security of U.S. facilities.
— If history is any guide, ratification will turn primarily not on 
treaty issues but on the public’s confidence in the President’s handling 
of U.S.-Soviet relations. Steady improvement in bilateral ties, with the 
Administration taking a constructive yet responsibly cautious approach, 
could cinch ratification. Unforeseen events (Gorbachev’s ouster; crack-
down on dissidents, nationalities, or Eastern Europe) could doom it.
