National Security Policy 575 that in a general war situation they would probably be initiated with little delay. 110. In addition to participation in initial strategic attacks and supﺁﺝ port of other major Soviet campaigns, the major offensive effort of the Soviet Navy in general war would be the worldwide interdiction of Western sea communications and reinforcement, intended to isolate overseas theaters from the US. The major defensive effort of Soviet naval forces would be to prevent Western carrier strikes and submarine-ﺁﺝ launched missile attacks against Bloc targets. Policy on Size and Types of Forces 111. In assessing the size and types of military forces which would best fulfill their major objectives, the Soviets will almost certainly conﺁﺝ tinue to believe that they must keep a large and diversified military establishment, designed to meet various contingencies, up to and including general war. While they will work to acquire additional capaﺁﺝ bilities with advanced weapon systems, they will at all times maintain substantial forces-ﺁﺝin-ﺁﺝbeing. Nevertheless, there will be increasing comﺁﺝ petition among military requirements of different types, and between military requirements and the demands of highly important nonmiliﺁﺝ tary programs, resulting in part from the cost and complexity of new weapons and equipment. In deciding whether to produce complex new weapon systems in quantity, the USSR will probably apply increasingly severe tests as to whether these would add greatly to current capabiliﺁﺝ ties or tend significantly to alter the world balance of forces, and as to whether costs were justified by likely periods of use before obsolesﺁﺝ cence. There may therefore be a growing tendency in some fields to make do with existing equipment until significantly advanced weapﺁﺝ ons can be acquired. 112. We also believe that for several years the Soviet leaders have been interested in finding ways to reduce the number of men under arms. The reasons for doing this will continue to apply, and in the future may become more compelling. An important factor will be the pressure imposed by a shortage of manpower for the rapidly growing Soviet economy (see Chapter II, paragraph 64). Other reasons include the desire for economies in order to ease the burden of increasing costs of new equipment, and the propaganda value of force reductions. The importance of the last of these factors has been evident in the USSRﻗ°ﻷs well-ﺁﺝpublicized announcements of military personnel cuts over the last three years. Reductions amounting to over 1.8 million men in the 1955ﻗ°±1957 period have been claimed, and in January 1958 a further planned reduction of 300,000 men was announced, bringing the total to more than 2.1 millions.
