288 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Vance: Let’s consider that changed. Brzezinski: You do not get your instructions from comments made at meetings. Vance: I want to emphasize that there absolutely must be no leaks from this meeting. There should be no backgrounding without approval at the highest levels. What do you think about approaching the Security Council concerning Afghanistan? Brzezinski: The President wants other countries to lead in the protest. Vance: We will try to see to that. But at the UN we want to keep our focus on the hostage question. We can consider taking the Afghan question there later but I want to urge you now in the strongest terms not to do so at this time. Brown: Some countries might even welcome the diversion at the UN. Brzezinski: Maybe other countries will raise it. Vance: (Secretary Vance invited comments on the draft cable appended to the discussion paper. This cable was to go to Moscow. There was some general critical discussion.) We will send revised instructions to Watson in Moscow.12 Brzezinski: Concerning the Soviet talking points, we should remind them of the 1972 Joint Declaration of Principles.13 Brown: Shouldn’t we draw a parallel between Iran and Afghanistan? Brzezinski: The other proposed cable should ask our allies and other countries to raise the issue with the Soviets. What are we doing in our own broadcasting? Newsom: VOA says its main problem is finding pegs from which they can develop themes in their broadcasts. We should all remember to get appropriate themes into our public statements. We will circulate a list of themes tomorrow. Brzezinski: Are we sure that we are doing enough in this case? This is the first use of Soviet forces outside the Bloc. Vice President: Wouldn’t it be a good idea to have Bob Byrd summon the Soviet Chargé and point out to them the danger to SALT? Byrd 12 Neither found. 13 A reference to one of the basic statements of détente, or relaxation of tensions, forged between the United States and the Soviet Union, and declared during the 1972 Moscow Summit. See Document 87.
