1180  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
monetary situation of the country, slowly restoring agricultural pro-
ductivity and slowly rectifying the imbalance in international trade. 
Whether it will succeed in doing this sufficiently to win again in the 
November 1962 elections is a moot point and may depend in part upon 
economic development projects in which foreign credit assistance may 
be an important factor. Also, economic progress in the next few years 
depends in large part upon greater agricultural productivity (and luck 
with world prices) and the agricultural potential in Uruguay appears 
rather limited.
Uruguay has had an interesting and unusual economic and social 
development in the past but has tended to stagnate somewhat because 
of inefficient use of manpower, lack of leadership, and lack of pro-
ductivity to pay the bill for social services. Although “welfare-­state” 
services and public ownership of utilities and industries have been 
conspicuous, the economy is surprisingly capitalistic and ownership 
fairly heavily concentrated. While economic stability will probably be 
achieved and economic activity in the country substantially improved, 
there is considerable question about the possibility of Uruguay’s being 
able to equal the future progress of the larger South American countries 
with more varied resources.
The domestic political prospects are largely conjectural, with no 
clear indication of outstanding prospective leaders and as yet no basis 
for predicting which parties may gain more public favor than others. 
In this state of flux, however, the probabilities of continued orientation 
of the Government toward the United States and the Western world 
are good.
Political Relations with the United States
Relations between the Uruguayan Government and the United 
States are very good to excellent. The present (Blanco) Administration 
which came into power on March 1, 1959 is thoroughly convinced that 
international cooperation with the United States and the Western world 
is advantageous to Uruguay, and the only natural and consistent line 
for Uruguay to take in view of its own long political and economic tra-
ditions. This is a notable improvement over the situation that existed 
during the preceding (Colorado) Administration. The main segments 
of both large Uruguayan political parties, as well as the Catholic (Union 
Civica) party all have extremist fringes that are inclined to be national-
istic and to temporize with communism—in the sense that they tend, 
in the Cuban style, to sympathize with efforts to improve the living 
standards of the masses, even at the cost of dictatorship for the prole-
tariat, the subordination of civil liberties, and the ignoring of private 
(particularly foreign) property rights. But the two main segments of the 
Blanco party have far smaller such fringes than the List 15 Colorados, 
the larger of the two main Colorado segments.
