486
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of the states on the west coast. They are keenly interested in all of the
North-South issues. They have taken a leading and constructive role in
the international discussions of these issues. They have had direct dia-
logues with the United States, the European Economic Community,
Japan, Canada, and Australia. In addition, they are reconciling difficult
trade matters among themselves. They are demonstrating by their own
growth the very great potential which exists in the developing coun-
tries. They have received and deserved strong support from us. Their
progress demonstrates that despite the complexity of these issues, dia-
logue can bring positive results for both.
In 1978 relations between the United States and the Third World
remain a significant part of our foreign policy agenda. As much as any
other issue these matters bear directly on your daily life and mine. It is
the hope of those of us who deal with them that, despite the complex
nature of these issues, they will receive the serious attention of those
concerned with foreign affairs. We hope in turn that organizations such
as those represented here today will lend their support for a positive
and constructive role for the United States in this ongoing discussion
with nations which represent three-fifths of the world’s population.
100.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, December 2, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #81 (U)
1. Opinion
On Negotiating
The comments which follow are not meant to be just negative—but
I feel that I should share my concern that the way we have been con-
ducting our negotiations on some key issues may be reducing our cred-
ibility and therefore also our ability to attain our goals.
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 29, NSC Weekly Reports,
6–12/78. Secret. The President wrote the following notation in the top right-hand corner
of the memorandum: “Zbig—You comment as though you’ve not been involved in the
process & that everyone has been wrong except you. J.”
