Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII obtaining SALT ratification, MFN, or other forward movement in U.S.- Soviet relations. Believing that bilateral relations were unlikely to improve during a U.S. election year, they were undeterred by the danger of further damage to those relations. The Soviets were also aware that potential damage to their relations with the Islamic world would be lessened by Islamic attention to growing U.S. pressures on Iran, and that the possibility of driving Iran into a close relationship with the U.S. was foreclosed by the hostage crisis. Also, they have made a deliberate effort to deflect attention in the Arab world away from Afghanistan and onto the Palestine issue where the U.S. is singled out as the true “enemy of Islam”. 9. We have seen no direct evidence that the Soviet move into Afghanistan was part of a larger design to expand Soviet military power to the Persian Gulf, to gain a land route to ports on the Indian Ocean or to encircle China. For the time being the Soviets have their hands full in Afghanistan, but the achievement of a stable Afghan Government subservient to the Soviet Union would create future opportunities for expanding Soviet influence in Southwest Asia and toward the Persian Gulf that must have occurred to Soviet decision makers. 10. The minimal Soviet objectives in sending large numbers of Soviet combat forces into Afghanistan were to prevent an insurgent victory, to replace the unpopular Amin regime with a more representative leader, and ultimately to crush the insurgents and establish a stable pro-Soviet regime. Aside from removing Amin and installing Babrak in power, the principal mission of the Soviet forces was to secure the major population centers, roads and airfields. Babrak would thus be given time to broaden the revolution’s political base, while the Afghan Army carried out counter-insurgency operations under Soviet direction and planning. The Soviets handled the affair clumsily and miscalculated the effect of their action on Afghan nationalism. The invasion has accelerated the disintegration of the Afghan Army, increased the unpopularity of the Kabul regime, and given new impetus to the insurgency. The Soviets equally underestimated the long-term damage to their relations with the U.S. and other countries, particularly the Islamic countries. 11. We see no evidence, however, that basic Soviet objectives have changed as a result of their unexpected difficulties or that they are yet willing to withdraw without leaving behind a secure pro-Soviet Marxist regime. It is interesting that some of our official contacts with lower and mid-level Soviet officials have revealed a sense of miscalculation. For example, they have called the Afghan venture a “snafu”, a “mistake”, a move guided by the Soviet Union’s “pretensions”. However, the reasons which convinced the leadership to make its move are no
