maintenance are fifty per cent higher than in peace time) and
management uneconomic (limitation of speed, slower circulation
of cars and therefore greater requirements of cars). All freight
cars are furnished only with hand brakes; [there is] necessity
therefore of introducing automatic brakes for the whole freight
rolling stock. Reasons: hand brakes require numerous personnel,
especially on mountain lines which are frequent in Austria.
Automatic brakes require no personnel for service. Hand brakes
mean slower speed and therefore greater requirement of rolling
stock and staff. Finally, difficulties with neighboring states which
have introduced the automatic brakes.
3. Federal railways now intend in the first place to bring the
railway lines and rolling stock up to date more quickly than
hitherto and therefore wish first to postpone the electrification of
the line Salzburg-Vienna planned some time ago. The
modernization above described pays very well while the
electrification, because of the present very low price of coal
(twenty schillings per metric ton normal coal of forty-four
hundred calories), is not sure to pay so well.
4. The present new investment plan for the railways: for
electrification second (Salzburg-Buchs nearly completed), instead
of twenty million schillings, fifty million schillings (see exhibit
number 4, my despatch number 1704, February third).
Electrification third, Salzburg-Vienna, is left out of revised
program. Other investments: For railways, instead of 234,000,000
schillings, 364,000,000 schillings. For rails, machines, bridges
and other railway constructions 131,000,000 schillings. For
rolling stock 163,000,000 schillings. For automatic freight train
brakes 
70,000,000 
schillings. 
Besides 
these 
investments
calculated to enhance the value of the railways, the normal
renewal and spare parts purchases will continue to be covered
from the current receipts.
5. Annual report of the Federal Railways for 1926 now ready.
Austrian deficit, because of notoriously unfavorable European
