February 1951–February 1952 B. Strong popular current of anti-foreign nationalism, personified and led by Prime Minister Musaddiq, Kashani and National Front supporters. C. Constitutional monarchy, headed by indecisive and weak though well-intentioned Shah. D. Small oligarchy of landowners and merchants, motivated primarily by self-interest, and currently supporting the constitutional regime. E. Running sore of oil dispute with British, with attendant dislocation of Iran’s economy and politics. F. Security forces in general still loyal to the Shah. G. Moslem religion which affects all phases of Iranian life. H. Depressed economic and social conditions of the majority of the population, with resultant discontent. (Detailed report submitted separately)3 I. Communist exploitation of the situation. J. Decline of western influence. A. There are elements in Iran which wish for good government, honest government, and government for the good of the people. But they are not in control. Corruption and nepotism are rife. Many officials great and small take advantage of their positions to extract money from the people. The result is that there exists a vast gulf between officialdom and the people. In the absence of any effective, really democratic reform party the discontent of the people is bound to attract them towards the extreme of communism. Corruption and nepotism are as prevalent under the Musaddiq Government as under previous governments. Likewise, the general public, accustomed to regarding all governments as oppressive and indifferent to their interests, has little, if any, different feeling for the Musaddiq regime. B. Iranians in general resent and suspect all foreigners. Their national pride was inflated by Reza Shah and deflated by the Allied occupation during the war. The national post-war upsurge was vented first on the Soviets and then on the British against whose oil company in Iran there had long been a latent feeling of resentment. Nothing that is likely to happen in the near future is likely to make the Iranians less nationalist in outlook. Regardless of the possible removal or defeat of Musaddiq and his National Front, the public could almost certainly be induced to support another leader or movement in the future which 3 Presumably a general discussion of the economic and trade repercussions of the oil dispute, which was not found attached.
