124
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
from Arab countries and their claims. The most difficult category
would be the 1948 refugees in Lebanon.
Security/Withdrawal
Secretary Vance pressed Weizman and Dayan for their specific
ideas on what their security requirements in the West Bank would be
during the interim period. Initially, Weizman took the position that Is-
rael would need to retain approximately its present military forces and
positions in the West Bank. He enumerated the categories of Israeli se-
curity requirements as encompassing (a) a military presence in the
Jordan Valley and control of entry to both the West Bank and Gaza;
(b) early warning stations on the West Bank; (c) strong points on the
West Bank heights overlooking the Jordan Valley; (d) control of key
points on East/West access roads in the West Bank plus the building of
some new roads; and (e) prepositioned depots and defense positions on
the West Bank for additional forces that might have to be sent in.
Weizman stressed that, even if there were peace with Egypt, Israel still
had to be prepared against threats from Syria, Iraq and Jordan to the
East.
Secretary Vance made the point that all of this would not take into
account the essential political problem that there needed to be some re-
ductions and redeployment (which could be characterized by the
Arabs as withdrawal) of Israeli forces and a decrease in their visibility
in order to give evidence of the end of the occupation. Secretaries Vance
and Brown and Dr. Brzezinski pressed this point during an extended
discussion. In the end, both Weizman and Dayan acknowledged the
importance of agreeing on concepts which would meet the categories
of Israeli security requirements listed above but would at the same time
reduce the Israeli military visibility. Secretary Vance stressed Israel
should have what it needs for security; at the same time, there could be
withdrawal into encampments. Dayan said he hoped we could say
withdrawal “out of,” rather than “into.”
The Israelis were reluctant to present to us a detailed military plan,
arguing that this could be dealt with in negotiations. They did, how-
ever, suggest a number of ways in which their military visibility could
be reduced: (a) the most important would be the abolition of the offices
of the military government which Weizman said would remove Israeli
military government officials (about 500 personnel) from about 15 mu-
nicipal centers; (b) some service schools now located on the West Bank
could perhaps be relocated in Israel proper; (c) if any troop concentra-
tions were in populated areas, they could perhaps be redeployed to
other points on the West Bank; (d) battalions could be converted into
companies.
Dayan stressed that Israel’s objective was to take itself out of the
daily lives of the local population, even including security functions
