1956 873 5. Wang said in order reach agreement speedily on declaration, two drafts which been put forward by their side were exclusively fair and reasonable proposals. Which of these two drafts was I willing accept? This was the one question to which their side continued seek answer from me. 6. In response, I said as I told him at last meeting, I felt position embodied his govt’s statement of March 4 and which he had set forth our meetings before and again set forth today, was only resulting drag­ ging our talks backwards. Since Oct last year, I been trying find basis for agreement with him on declaration use force. 7. I said US had, in its obligation under UN and in its arrangements for collective self-­defense in Far East as well elsewhere in world, made clear beyond question or doubt it would never initiate use force in set­ tlement international disputes. These not only words, but been fully established by actions US. US has in past and has many times reiterated however that it will never supinely surrender to aggression or initiation of use force by others, and if other nations do use force US is deter­ mined defend itself and its allies. No statement made by any respon­ sible spokesman US Govt has ever been contrary to this and I satisfied none ever will be. 8. I said when we came here it well known to world that one side in these discussions was threatening to initiate use force to resolve situation with which it was dissatisfied. Purpose of proposals which I had made this regard was remove overhanging threat force and make possible peaceful discussion and settlement disputes between our two countries. I thought he shared this purpose. I thought he agreed me as to general character declaration we sought. Obviously such declaration must apply unequivocally to all situations where danger resort force by one side existed. Yet he still persisted in refusing embody in such dec­ laration statement that made clear it did apply all such situations. He refused make it clear that declaration applied precisely to that situation where threat use force been most explicit. 9. I said such declaration I thought we both agreed must not embody any prerequisite conditions. Yet their position, that they had set forth publicly and set forth our meetings here, with respect FonMins meeting I could only interpret as effort establish pre-­conditions. His evasion at our last meeting and again this morning of reasonable and logical questions which I asked him in this regard only further demon­ strated that this the case. I raised these questions he would recall, in order demonstrate that declaration on conditions he laid down would be entirely lacking in any meaningful content as a renunciation force. 10. I said as I pointed out our last meeting his govt seems be pro­ posing these terms almost as ultimata. He had presented two drafts here which met his position. He said that US could choose between
