Sources
XIII
1951 to 1954. Drawn from both the relevant Truman and Eisenhower
administration collections, these documents include the official min-
utes, which are quite short and consist largely of records of action, and
files on the major NSC policy papers relevant to U.S. policy toward Iran
(NSC 107 and NSC 136). These NSC files allow the researcher not only
to follow policy, but also to locate those analytical pieces that played di-
rect roles in the formulation of policy. As the official minutes in Record
Group 273 consist only of records of action, this volume has made use
of the more extensive NSC meeting minutes found in the Truman and
Eisenhower Presidential libraries. Many of these documents appeared
in the 1989 Foreign Relations volume on Iran, albeit with critical redac-
tions which have been restored here. Special attention has also been
given to the CIA files devoted to the NSC policymaking process. The
relevant files here are housed in the Office of the Deputy Director for
Intelligence, who maintained the NSC files for the Director of Central
Intelligence. These files, found in Job 33R00601A and Job 80R01443R,
contain CIA contributions to the policy debates surrounding NSC
papers 107 and 136.
Great use has also been made of the many collections containing
analytical documentation devoted to the evolving U.S. Government
understanding of Mosadeq and Iran. Along with analytical pieces from
the Department of State collections discussed above, this volume draws
heavily on documents produced by the analytical arm of the CIA,
particularly the relevant National Intelligence Estimates (NIEs) and
Special National Intelligence Estimates (SNIEs), housed in the files of
the present-day National Intelligence Council. Special care has been
taken not just to print the relevant estimates, but also to document the
debates and/or evolution of consensus opinion, material for which is
also contained in the NIE files. The most important such collection is in
Job 79R01012A. The Deputy Director for Intelligence files also have ma-
terial that effectively demonstrates the debates over how to understand
Mosadeq within the context of Iranian history, the expected future tra-
jectory of the country, and U.S. Government strategic priorities. These
are found in the “staff memoranda” files (Job 79T00937A). Unfortu-
nately, these memoranda, of which there are many hundreds per year,
are arranged solely chronologically and thus practical to use only for
short projects covering a limited period of time. This volume also made
use of the collections of intelligence memoranda from the Office of Cur-
rent Intelligence and a limited number of longer research reports from
the Office of Research and Reports, both offices of which were in the Di-
rectorate of Intelligence.
In order to document the specific decision to employ covert means
to seek Mosadeq’s overthrow, as well as to document the course of the
operation itself, much greater use has been made of the secret files of
