846 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement evaluation their economic social political problems, their own responsibilities toward solving them, and the extent of past U.S. assistance to LA and burden to U.S. taxpayers, his visit this area may turn into a round of debates in which he will appear be only on defensive and which will serve largely to confirm Central Americans in the irresponsible tendency to blame U.S. for their troubles. One factor which should be brought to Latinos attention is possible adverse public reaction in U.S. to incessant cries for more aid for LA in view apparent ingratitude many Latinos for aid they have received. Among possible measures several policy speeches by Congressional leaders and high officials on themes mentioned above before suitable forums such as OAS might help prepare ground for positive results visit. Reactions to speeches could be used in preparation statements for Doctor Eisenhower during visit. Whelan NI–8. Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs1  Washington, undated. SUMMARY OF DISCUSSIONS DURING DR. EISENHOWER’S VISIT TO NICARAGUA2 July 21–24, 1958 Discussions in Managua were held with President Luis Somoza, members of his Cabinet, General Anastasio Somoza, representatives of various political groups, Government supporters and opposition parties, labor and management, Chamber of Commerce, and others. Similarly, others in Dr. Eisenhower’s party met with various Nicaraguan officials. Neither the President nor General Somoza put forth specific proposals in their talks with Dr. Eisenhower. President Somoza seemed genuinely concerned with the accusations of being a dictator levelled against him and anxious to prove that he was returning the Nicaraguan Government to democratic practices. 1 Source: Department of State, ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 60 D 513, “Eisenhower, Milton-Nicaragua 1958.” Confidential. The source text indicates no date or drafting officer. 2 Dr. Milton Eisenhower, brother of the President and Personal Representative of the President with the rank of Special Ambassador, visited Nicaragua during the course of a three-­week fact finding trip to Panama, Honduras, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Puerto Rico. See Document NI–4, footnote 4.
