Guatemala 649 GT–4. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, February 25, 1958. SUBJECT President Eisenhower’s Breakfast for President-Elect Ydígoras PARTICIPANTS The President Dr. Mariano López Herrarte President-Elect Ydígoras of Guatemala Assistant Secretary of State The Secretary of State Roy R. Rubottom, Jr. The Secretary of Defense Ambassador Edward J. Sparks Chargé d’Affaires Asensio-Wunderlich Dr. Milton Eisenhower of Guatemala Mr. Samuel Waugh, President of Señor García Bauer Export-Import Bank

Mr. George Allen, USIA The guests gathered in one of the drawing rooms. The President entered and, following introductions and greetings, led the guests into the family dining room. Secretary Dulles invited the attention of the President to the fact that he (the Secretary) and President-Elect Ydígoras had both attended the Versailles Conference in 1919. The President during the course of the conversation recalled that he had known some of our military officers who had been connected with the Guatemalan Military Academy which had always maintained a high standard. The President also recalled several of his experiences while serving in Panama and later in the Philippines. The President-Elect took the occasion to mention several of the problems which he faces in assuming office in Guatemala, including that of raising the health standard of his people. The Secretary also engaged in conversation on the same subject with Dr. Mariano López Herrarte, an outstanding Guatemalan physician who was trained in the United States. Attention was called to the very serious problem of parasites, especially hookworm, which affects most of the Guatemalan population, reducing the blood count of the individuals affected on the average by 40 to 50 percent. Both the President and the Secretary asked that prompt attention be given to this problem through the Health Servicio under the Technical Cooperation program, since it seemed to be something that could be attacked vigorously with our assistance. Dr. Lopez acknowledged the great progress that had been made in 1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International File. Confidential.
