588ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1989ŌĆō1992, Volume XXXI
Bartholomew, conferring with Ambassador Burt, stated that the U.S. 
side understood that the Soviet Union was not asking for a specific sub-
limit on bombers.
Akhromeyev stated that this was the crux of the matter. He stressed 
that since Secretary BakerŌĆÖs intention had not been very clear in the con-
versations he was describing, the Soviet side had deliberately avoided 
answering the question. This was reflected in the minutes of the meet-
ing. Akhromeyev stressed that at the time he had not known precisely 
what the the Soviet answer would be.
Burt asked if Marshal Akhromeyev was referring to the question 
of floating limits.
Akhromeyev replied negatively, saying the sides had agreed to that.
Burt said he did not think that agreement had been reached on that 
point.
Akhromeyev asserted that the sides had agreed the level should be 
floating. However, he said, Secretary Baker had asked that the limit not 
only float, but that there be no ceiling at all. The Soviet side had not 
replied to this proposal in Moscow, however.
Burt asked whether the Soviet side had rejected the proposal.
Akhromeyev said noŌĆö┬Łthe Soviet side had said neither yes nor no. 
The Soviet side needed time to analyze the idea, so it had given no 
answer at that time. After subsequent analysis, however, the Soviet 
side had realized that it should not respond positively. Akhromeyev 
emphasized that this was not a departure from the former Soviet posi-
tion; initially the Soviet side had simply not answered. After analysis, 
the Soviet side had realized that if the U.S. took this limit to 200 long-┬Ł
range ALCM-┬Łcarrying heavy bombers, it would have the capacity to 
deploy 4000 warheads. Of those, 1100 would be counted against the 
6000-┬Łwarhead limit in START, and the uncounted numbers would 
come to 2900.
Bartholomew disagreed with Marshal Akhromeyev, stating that 
according to simple arithmetic, each bomber would count as 10 war-
heads; that would amount to 2000 warheads within the 6000 limit, not 
1100, one-┬Łthird of the 6000-┬Łwarhead limit.
Akhromeyev agreed, but noted that if a floating level of bombers 
were allowed with no ceiling or cap, then the warhead numbers might 
go too high. He reiterated that the sides needed to discuss a ceiling.
Akhromeyev went on to address the question of distinguishing 
nuclear and conventional ALCMs by functionally related observable 
differences or by national technical means. Why, he asked, is it so dif-
ficult to solve this problem? Why is it difficult to establish continuous 
verification and monitoring of all heavy bombers? He then concluded 
by stating that he was ready to listed on the ALCM issue.
