200
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
54.
Note Prepared by President Carter1
undated
Settlements in West Bank and Gaza
Late in the evening, Saturday, September 16, 1978, Prime Minister
Begin, Foreign Minister Dayan, Attorney General Barak, Secretary
Vance and I were concluding discussions on the final wording of the
section on the West Bank and Gaza.2
Section 6 referred to the Israeli settlements, and as drafted in the
American proposal, stated:
“6. After the signing of this framework and during the negotia-
tions, no new Israeli settlements will be established and there will be no
expansion of physical facilities in existing settlements unless otherwise
agreed by the parties.”
Prime Minister Begin objected to this language, and began to make
several alternate proposals. They included: (a) a fixed time (three
months) during which no new settlements would be constructed;
(b) prohibitions against civilian settlements only; (c) right to build a
limited number of new settlements; etc. All of these proposals were re-
jected by me.
Finally, we agreed on the exact language concerning the settle-
ments, and that the paragraph would be removed from the West Bank-
Gaza section and included in a letter from Begin to me. I told him it
could not be a secret letter and the Prime Minister replied that the text
would be made public.
The agreed text was:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, 9/10–27/78. No clas-
sification marking. Carter wrote in the upper right-hand corner of the document, “OK. J.”
A draft version of the note, in Carter’s handwriting, is ibid. The note was found attached
to an undated note by Clough, stating that Carter signed the note September 20 and that
copies were sent to Begin, the Department of State, the NSC, and Powell.
2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter, along with Vance and “other
U.S. officials” met with Begin, Dayan, and Barak at Aspen Lodge from 8 p.m., September
16, to 12:20 a.m., September 17. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) For Carter’s ac-
counts of this meeting, see White House Diary, p. 240, and Keeping Faith, pp. 395–397. For
Vance’s account, see Hard Choices, pp. 224–225. For Dayan’s account, see Breakthrough, pp.
181–186. Quandt wrote that Vance briefed the U.S. negotiating team (including himself)
“immediately after” the meeting had broken up. Quandt described this briefing in Camp
David, pp. 249–250, although he concluded “exactly what took place in the meeting be-
tween Carter and Begin on Saturday night will never be known.”
