Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 459 95. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Strategy for Camp David For the talks at Camp David to succeed, you will have to control the proceedings from the outset and thereafter pursue a deliberate political strategy designed to bring about significant changes in both the Egyptian and Israeli substantive positions.2 I strongly suggest that you bear the following points in mind: 1. Sadat cannot afford a failure and he knows it; both Sadat and Begin think that you cannot afford failure; but Begin probably believes that a failure at Camp David will hurt you and Sadat, but not him. He may even want to see Sadat discredited and you weakened, thus leaving him with the tolerable status quo instead of pressures to change his life-long beliefs concerning Judea and Samaria. 2. You will have to convince both leaders, but especially Begin, that failure at Camp David will have directly adverse consequences for our bilateral relations and in terms of Soviet influence in the region. 3. Sadat will define success in terms of substance, and in particular an Israeli commitment to the principle of withdrawal on all fronts. Begin will define success largely in terms of procedural arrangements and will be very resistant to pressures for substantive concessions. 4. You will have to persuade Begin to make some substantive concessions, while convincing Sadat to settle for less than an explicit Israeli commitment to full withdrawal and Palestinian self-determination. 5. Your most important meetings will be with each leader individually, not with both together. You cannot expect Sadat and Begin to reveal their fall-back positions in front of each other, but in private you may be able to move them toward greater flexibility. 6. During the first round of meetings, you will want to reestablish a personal relationship with each leader, expressing your understanding of their concerns and appealing to their statesmanship. During the sec- 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Historical Material, Geographic File, Box 13, Middle East—Negotiations: (7/29/78–9/6/78). Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only. Outside the system. Sent for action. Printed from an uninitialed copy. 2 The talks among Carter, Begin, and Sadat were scheduled to take place at the Presidential retreat at Camp David beginning September 5. Documentation on the Camp David summit is in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980.
