Chapter 6, June–December 1990  873
160.	 Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear 
and Space Talks (Burt) to Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, October 1, 1990
SUBJECT
START: Update for Wednesday’s2 Meeting with Shevardnadze
I have spent several hours with Nazarkin,3 my Soviet counterpart, 
on various START issues, and have the following to report:
First, we have made good progress on putting together a so-­called 
missile elimination package which would allow us to resolve several 
important issues. The package includes the following elements:
— No requirement under START to destroy ICBMs or SLBMs. 
(Soviets previously sought such destruction).
— A limit of 250 non-­deployed mobile ICBMs, which will apply 
to both silo-­based and mobile variants of the SS–24 (Soviets previously 
sought to exclude silo-­based SS–24s).
— Some form of Perimeter and Portal Continuous Monitoring 
(PPCM) for all mobile ICBMs, with details to be agreed.
— A ban on using START ballistic missiles to deploy weapons in 
space. (Our major concession.)
— A reference in the START Preamble to Article XI of the ABM 
Treaty, which refers only to an undertaking to continue active negotia-
tions on strategic offensive arms.
— Dropping the Soviet-­proposed Agreed Statements claiming a 
right to withdraw from START if we violate the ABM Treaty.
There is one big problem, however. We sought to ban only “oper-
ational deployment” of weapons in space. The Soviets object, arguing 
(correctly) that this allows testing ABM weapons in orbit and thus 
requires them to accept the broad interpretation of the ABM Treaty. 
Nazarkin suggested instead that we refer only to “deployment”, thus 
kicking the broad versus narrow issue down the road, as we have 
done on overall ABM issues. The arms control group here accepted 
this approach, but experts in OSD object Thus, for now, we are dead in 
the water.
Second, Nazarkin suggested a possible package deal involving heavy 
missiles and Backfire. He suggested that if we drop restrictions on heavy 
1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D102, Dennis Ross Files, 
New York October 5, 1990. Secret. Copied to Bartholomew.
2 October 3.
3 No memorandum of conversation was found.
