1956 821 in Taiwan area. In first draft which he had put forward Oct 27, it also clearly provided that China and US should hold FonMin conference to settle through negotiation question of relaxation and eliminating tenôÙ sions in Taiwan area. 12. Wang said it could thus be seen that his side was not evading disputes between it and US in Taiwan area though disputes additionôÙ ally included Korean question, implementation of Geneva agreement on Indochina and especially South Vietnam, and US creation of Manila Treaty which aimed against China, and such other questions. However, it was obvious dispute between China and US in Taiwan area is main issue of all. That dispute arose solely as result US occupation Taiwan and interference liberation offshore islands. 13. Wang said his side held that FonMin conference between China and US must be held to settle this grave dispute. His draft of Oct 27 specifically provided for this last point. It merely because my side only willing make declaration of principle and would not agree to declarations specifically mentioning Sino-ôÙAmerican conference of ôÙFonMin. Thus his Dec 1 draft did not concretely mention Sino-ôÙUS disôÙ pute in ôÙTaiwan area. However, just in same way as my side asserted that practical and feasible means did not exclude Sino-ôÙAmerican disôÙ putes in Taiwan area. If my side desired dispute Taiwan area be specifôÙ ically mentioned, then my side must agree to declarations specifically mentioning FonMin conference, without which his side would be left with no assurance whatsoever. 14. Wang said question now before us quite clear and simple: if it desired that declaration mention specifically holding FonMin conferôÙ ence as well as dispute in Taiwan area, their Oct 27 draft is there. If howôÙ ever it not desirous to mention FonMin conference and Sino-ôÙAmerican dispute in Taiwan area, but that concrete problems mentioned above should be left as next step, then their Dec 1 draft stands. As to which of two drafts will be adopted, they not insistent. I might make my choice between either of two. He only wanted state here that in neither these two drafts did his side demand prior commitments nor that I accept his position. This fair and equitable. That was precisely fundamental disôÙ tinction between his drafts and mine. If my side still desirous of makôÙ ing renunciation of force declaration, he saw no possibility outside two drafts which his side had presented. 15. Wang said in interest of arriving at agrement without further delay he had exhausted all clear words available in stating his views and he hoped my side would make careful consideration. 16. I said in early part his statement I thought he struck at heart of one of differences and apparent lack of understanding between us. He referred to this declaration, which we discussed, as only indicating common desire to settle issues between us. Later on he had referred to
