Haiti  759
(3) The ill-­concealed hostility of Castro in Cuba and Betancourt in 
Venezuela is further comforting exiles those countries and opposition 
at home.
(4) December 22 alliance with Trujillo is proving serious liability at 
home and abroad.
Despite all the foregoing it must be recognized that Duvalier has 
skillfully concentrated power including arms and ammunition in 
Presidential guard and secret police with Army practically leaderless 
and powerless. It is obviously impossible forecast how or when his 
overthrow will occur but hostile landing on coast might well provide 
spark leading to mass uprising now only restrained by fear secret police. 
Given his fanatic character and messiah-­like complex I see no chance he 
will abandon reins of government peacefully. Also working his favor is 
absence any one political figure capable holding country together. While 
many names mentioned by opposition there is general feeling that nei-
ther Dejoie, Fignole nor Jumelle could stay in office long and that only a 
junta or committee public safety (U.S. support being assumed) following 
his overthrow could maintain order and hold new elections.
Also strengthening his position are U.S. aid and recent develop-
ments in field foreign investment although generally believed this 
assistance will only delay his inevitable downfall.
Director USOM and [text not declassified] concur.
Drew
HA–12.	
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
Embassy in Haiti1

Washington, March 3, 1959, 8:58 p.m.
335. Embtel 321.2
Department appreciates analysis in reftel and requests country 
team follow up analysis with recommendations for action which might 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.00/3–359. Confidential; Niact. 
Drafted by Warner; cleared with Wieland and John C. Hill, the Special Assistant to the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs; and signed by Rubottom. Robert 
Donhauser, Special Assistant to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for political Affairs, 
was informed of the telegram’s content.
2 See Document HA–11.
