Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
469
But we must also not forget the magnitude of the obstacles that still
remain. The summit exceeded our highest expectations, but we know
that it left many difficult issues which are still to be resolved. These
issues will require careful negotiation in the months to come. The
Egyptian and Israeli people must recognize the tangible benefits that
peace will bring and support the decisions their leaders have made, so
that a secure and a peaceful future can be achieved for them. The Amer-
ican public, you and I, must also offer our full support to those who
have made decisions that are difficult and those who have very difficult
decisions still to make.
What lies ahead for all of us is to recognize the statesmanship that
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin have shown and to invite
others in that region to follow their example. I have already, last night,
invited the other leaders of the Arab world to help sustain progress
toward a comprehensive peace.
We must also join in an effort to bring an end to the conflict and the
terrible suffering in Lebanon. This is a subject that President Sadat dis-
cussed with me many times while I was in Camp David with him. And
the first time that the three of us met together, this was a subject of
heated discussion. On the way to Washington last night in the heli-
copter, we mutually committed ourselves to join with other nations,
with the Lebanese people themselves, all factions, with President Sar-
kis, with Syria and Saudi Arabia, perhaps the European countries like
France, to try to move toward a solution of the problem in Lebanon,
which is so vital to us and to the poor people in Lebanon, who have suf-
fered so much.
We will want to consult on this matter and on these documents
and their meaning with all of the leaders, particularly the Arab leaders.
And I’m pleased to say to you tonight that just a few minutes ago, King
Hussein of Jordan and King Khalid of Saudi Arabia, perhaps other
leaders later, but these two have already agreed to receive Secretary
Vance, who will be leaving tomorrow to explain to them the terms of
the Camp David agreement.4 And we hope to secure their support for
the realization of the new hopes and dreams of the people of the Mid-
dle East.
This is an important mission, and this responsibility, I can tell you,
based on my last 2 weeks with him, could not possibly rest on the
shoulders of a more able and dedicated and competent man than Secre-
tary Cyrus Vance.
Finally, let me say that for many years the Middle East has been a
textbook for pessimism, a demonstration that diplomatic ingenuity
4 The records of Vance’s meetings are in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX,
Arab–Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980, Documents 58–60, 62, and 64.
