Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Possible Mechanisms for a Direct Contribution There are conceptually two approaches to providing contributions for a contingency reserve within the common fund. One approach would define the contribution as some percentage (probably less than five percent) of the financial commitments of each ICA that participated in the fund. Under this approach, we could, at the time membership in an ICA was put to Congress for approval, ask for two authorities in addition to those negotiated in the agreement: (a) authority for the US representative to the agreement to vote for accession of that agreement to the common fund, if and when such a common fund had been constituted and approved by the Congress; and (b) appropriation of the amount required for the contingency reserve of the common fund. Another approach would be a direct contribution not directly linked to membership in specific ICAs. Under this approach the amount of the contribution could be five percent or less of our share in the ICAs in which we expected to participate. We would seek Congressional approval of, and appropriations for, the common fund, separately from approval and appropriations for ICAs. A variant of this approach would be to make a single contribution without attempting to estimate requirements of all possible ICAs. This contribution would probably be smaller than a contribution which was based on an attempt to estimate needs of all potential ICAs participating in a fund. This type of contribution could be supplemented by contributions made through ICAs as they became participants in the common fund. Safeguards Certain safeguards would appear to be essential to protect our interests in the event we were to contribute to a contingency reserve. (1) We should eliminate or minimize the possibility that our contribution would support ICAs in which the US did not participate. (2) A contingency reserve should be related solely to the price stabilization objectives of a common fund. It should not be an aid mechanism, but a stock of cash, callable capital, or loan guarantees held by a common fund and not intended for transfer to members of the institution. (3) The institutional arrangements governing decision-making and operations of a common fund would have to be acceptable to the United States. (4) A common fund, with or without direct contributions, should not control individual ICAs.
