Special Session on Disarmament
1237
forth play a larger role in disarmament issues. Among the significant
achievements we would highlight the participation of France in the re-
structured Disarmament Committee and the higher profile China has
shown in the arms control arena. The decisions to enlarge the Disarma-
ment Committee (DC) and to revive the UN Disarmament Commission
reflect the greater interest by more states in participation in interna-
tional disarmament deliberations. An immediate follow-up problem
will be the selection of the 5 to 8 new members of the DC. An intensive
lobbying campaign by interested states has already begun.
6. Another significant result is the recognition by the international
community of the importance of conventional arms issues, particularly
international transfers. The Japanese deserve considerable credit for
perservering on this issue. We were also able to avoid reference to the
controversial issue of production.
7. In the final text, the urgency of undertaking negotiations in the
area of nuclear disarmament is acknowledged but in such a manner as
to make clear that these negotiations must proceed in a measured and
ordered fashion. Our commitment to the earliest possible completion of
SALT II and CTB as well as our new policy statement on security assur-
ances helped our position at the SSOD. In the end the Indians did not
press for a vote on their draft resolution for a nuclear test moratorium.
8. The Indians also sought to include a call for a binding interna-
tional commitment on the non-use of nuclear weapons. The final text
on non-use was a delicate compromise on this highly sensitive prob-
lem. Indian PermRep Jaipal expressed his appreciation of our readiness
to be forthcoming on this issue in his statement to the ad-hoc committee
on June 30.
9. The non-proliferation section, while clearly not all we wanted,
give clear expression to the importance of international action to pre-
vent further proliferation of nuclear weapons. The underlying differ-
ences of view between US and key non-nuclear states (Brazil, Pakistan,
India) inevitably remain.
10. By working out the final consensus we headed off a number of
unacceptable proposals including: the Indian characterization of nu-
clear weapons use as a crime against humanity, the Non-Aligned de-
mand for withdrawal of foreign bases, and the Soviet texts on the neu-
tron bomb and the non-stationing of nuclear weapons on territories of
states where they are not now present. The two Indian resolutions and
the Iraqi-inspired resolution against Israel were withdrawn, enabling
US to avoid confrontations on several highly contentious issues. There
was also a plethora of other issues and proposals on which consensus
was not possible and which were handled by a decision to refer them
to the appropriate deliberative body (Disarmament Commission or the
33rd UNGA).
