484 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (b) we develop a more effective alternative to DISC (which will likely be illegal under international trade rules) and we then become obligated to renew our fight on DISC next year—that is a decision which we should preserve for 1979. In any case, our major exporters are unlikely to have their confidence and certainty enhanced if we tell them that we are undertaking a study to develop a substitute for DISC which will channel DISC benefits from them to smaller companies. We recommend that you disapprove this proposal. 3. Increased Eximbank Funding. Commerce proposes that you increase Eximbank’s direct loan authority from the FY 1980 budget mark of $3.9 billion (up from $3.6 billion in FY 1979) to $4.1 billion. Of the various financial incentives for exports, Eximbank is probably the best vehicle. A $500 million increase over FY 1979 would be a substantial initiative for which the Administration could take considerable credit. We recommend that you approve this proposal. 4. Taxation of Americans Abroad. The Administration has already made a proposal in this area (which you personally approved last February), which would cost about $245 million.4 The Ribicoff bill, which has passed the Senate and which is also a responsible approach to the problem, would cost about $310 million.5 There is no House bill and the Ways and Means Committee has not yet even reported out a bill. Joe Waggonner’s subcommittee has recommended a bill to the full Committee which would cost about $590 million. Commerce proposes that the Administration drop its own proposal and support the Ribicoff bill. While we would be willing to state in the export policy announcement that the Ribicoff bill is a responsible approach, we do not think the Administration should change its position before conference and before the House even has a bill. That would merely up the ante by $65 million and encourage a more expensive bill in the House. Treasury’s Congressional liaison staff and Frank Moore’s shop agree that it would be unwise legislative strategy to drop our proposal at this time. Accordingly, we recommend that you disapprove this proposal. 5. SBA Targeting to Exporters. We recommend that you approve this proposal. 6. Export Consequences of Regulations. Commerce proposes that agency and department heads be required to take into account the ef- 4 The Tax Reform Act of 1976 contained provisions designed to augment the amount of taxes collected from Americans working overseas. The Carter administration’s February 1978 proposal on this issue is described in “New Income-Tax System for Americans Who Work Abroad is Proposed by Carter,” The Wall Street Journal, February 24, 1978, p. 12. No other record of Carter’s approval of this proposal was found. 5 The Senate bill, which was passed in May 1978, is described in “Senate Votes to Give Americans Abroad Break on U.S. Taxes,” The Wall Street Journal, May 12, 1978, p. 48.
