24 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV —Outlining the military strategies being examined; —Outlining the alternative force structures under consideration; and —Providing a status report on the military contingency assessments (specified in Part II, paragraph B (2)). 2. Each task force should submit a preliminary version of its final report by May 1, 1977 and the final version on May 15, 1977. The Working Group will submit its final report to the PRC by May 25, 1977. III. COMPREHENSIVE NET ASSESSMENT A. Purpose. The purposes of the net assessment are: —To review and to analyze past, present, and probable future trends in the evolution of the principal capabilities of the United States, its allies, and its principal potential opponents; —To analyze the objectives and strategies of our principal opponents; and —To develop and make recommendations concerning alternative national objectives and strategies for the United States. B. Substance 1. General Questions. The overall net assessment will include topical and regional net assessments. Each of these will attempt to answer the following general questions with respect to its subject: —What have been the most significant trends for this topic or region in the evolution of the relative capabilities of the U.S. (and its allies, as appropriate) and the Soviet Union (and the Warsaw Pact and other potential adversaries as appropriate) over the last 15 years? —What is the present situation with respect to these capabilities for the topic or region? —How do our principal opponents appraise U.S. capabilities and objectives with respect to this topic or region? How do they estimate their own strengths and weaknesses? —What are the recent, current, and most probable future objectives and strategies of our principal opponents for this topic or region? What threats do these pose to U.S. national interests? —What factors are most likely to affect the evolution of the capabilities on both sides during the next five years; the next 10 years? —What are the alternative national strategies which the U.S. might reasonably follow with respect to the topic or region? What are their costs, risks, and benefits? —What will be the probable impact of these alternative U.S. national strategies on the relative capabilities of the U.S. and its principal opponents over the next 10 years and on the ability of the U.S. to achieve its national objectives? 2. Regional Net Assessments. Net assessments will be undertaken to provide answers to the general questions listed above with respect to specified regions. Each regional net assessment will involve a comprehensive analysis of the goals, strategies, position, influence, and
