1955  405
as to just what aspects of the so-­called “embargo” they are complaining 
about. We are troubled by the pressure from the British and the French, 
and to a much lesser extent the Japanese, for relaxing the COCOM con­
trols and abolishing the differential altogether between CHINCOM and 
COCOM. Kalijarvi and Barbour met with Robertson on this yesterday. 
EUR and E are more pessimistic than FE on the possibility of maintain­
ing the higher level of Chinese controls for the present. It is clear that 
it would be very poor tactics for us to throw away our China control 
cards now without getting anything in return. We believe we can hold 
the Japanese in line and we are going to urge the Secretary to make a 
strong approach to ­Macmillan and Pinay in the tripartite talks preced­
ing Geneva. Probably the Secretary is the only one who would be able 
to prevail on the French and British to stay in line. If this can be done 
our hand will be much strengthened with the Chinese Communists. 
Undoubtedly the trade controls are the one really effective pressure we 
are able to exert. We are convinced that those who minimize the value 
of the higher level of China controls are mistaken. FE is making its own 
recommendations to the Secretary on the subject. They differ somewhat 
from those of EUR and E.
We are glad that you expressed your views with complete frank­
ness on the various draft documents on the question of the unaccounted 
for military personnel. It goes without saying that complete candor 
both here and in Geneva is essential. There is no hypersensitivity here 
or among the Pentagon people who are working on this subject, and 
we know you do not suffer from this affliction either. We want you to 
react with complete candor and we are doing the same. It is natural that 
somewhat more weight should be given to the importance of the record 
here than you would give it in Geneva. While there is plenty of room 
for argument as to what is the best tack from the standpoint of getting 
a cooperative response out of the Chinese Communists, I do not think 
the final version telegraphed from here is actually provocative. Since it 
is probably a sad fact that we are not going to get any satisfaction out of 
the Chinese Communists in any event on a single one of these names, it 
may be just as well to adhere to the stronger text.
We were glad to get Ralph Clough back on the 10th. He has already 
been of inestimable help to me in the regular work of the office as well 
as on Geneva matters.
I am surprised to learn that Colonel Ekvall’s new orders have not 
gone out yet. We had understood from Bill Godel and from Colonel 
Rasmussen that everything was all squared away for him to be detailed 
as Assistant Military Attache. We wrote a letter some time ago confirm­
ing the continued need for his services and requesting an extension of 
his assignment. We were assured that this was all that was needed. I 
will have Ralph check again with the Pentagon today.
