1955 307 I briefed them both in detail on the subject of our talks with the Red Chinese in Geneva. I explained the positions we had taken up to the present and planned to take in the future. Both gentlemen expressed unqualified approval of the course we were following. Both stated that in their opinion we should not proceed to a discussion of “practical matters” under item 2 until we were satisfied that our jailed citizens in China had been notified of their rights under the agreement of Sep­ tember 10th and further that the British Chargé in Peiping had been allowed personal communication with them. They both agreed that we should insist that the Communists carry out their agreement for the discussion of “practical matters” at issue at the Ambassadorial level. Both agreed that the renunciation of force was a proper subject for discussion under item 2. Senator George emphasized that we should not consider a confer­ ence between you and Chou En-­lai until the Communists had publicly renounced the use of force in the settlement of the Formosa problem. I inferred from Congressman Richards’ conversation that he did not consider that a foreign ministers conference was called for under any conditions. 233. Letter 15 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 15 Washington, September 23, 1955 Dear Alex: The threat of hurricane Ione caused the last courier plane to leave Washington ahead of schedule and knocked out our September 19 pouch. Hence the long interval. Despite the uncertainty as to when you will get into the substance of Item Two, we are going ahead with work on our two items. Bill Godel and Kelleher of Defense have worked up a draft letter from you to Wang on the 450 missing servicemen which they are to submit to us for our comments today. They say it is a forthright and fairly strong presentation although it carefully avoids alleging that we have evi­ dence that any of the men are presently alive and in Communist hands. Enclosed is a memo on this subject which we received from Defense 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official– ­Informal.
