10
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—the possible need, independent of Soviet ASAT capabilities, for a
U.S. ASAT system to counter threatening Soviet satellites.
—the existence of a current Soviet orbital ASAT, noting that the
U.S. has none.
—the difficult verification problems in a realm where incentives to
cheat may be greater than under previous agreements such as SALT
One.
(S) Since each side has only a small number of critical operational
satellites (6–15), small numbers of ASAT’s could have a decisive signifi-
cance. This is in contrast with SALT and ABM issues where stability is
not affected by small numbers of weapons.
C. The Baseline: Current Circumstances and Projections
1. U.S. and Soviet Dependence on Space
(S) There is a tendency to think of space as “peaceful”, in part be-
cause some [less than 1 line not declassified] compliance with stabilizing
treaties which would not otherwise be possible, warning satellites con-
tribute to our strategic and space exploration, and international com-
munications. Furthermore, there has never been a confrontation in
space, treaties have given space a special status, and space has been
used as a peaceful area where the U.S. and USSR can work together
cooperatively.
(S) On the other hand, space systems are becoming increasingly
important for battle management on both sides. Table One lists some of
the applications which military [less than 1 line not declassified] satellites
have now or could have within ten years.
Table One (TS)
Examples of Military Use of Space Now or in 1980’s
Tactical Operations
—real-time surveillance with readout to battlefield commanders5
—all-weather broad ocean surveillance of surface combatant; and
convoys providing real-time targeting data to submarines, surface
ships and aircraft6
—[1 line not declassified]
—antisubmarine warfare (e.g., relay reports from sonobuoys)
—real-time weather data7
5 Operational now or in the near future—U.S. [Footnote is in the original.]
6 Operational now or in the near future—U.S. [Footnote is in the original.] [Footnote
in the original not declassified.]
7 Ibid.
