134 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tional economic issues by seeking to further its human rights objectives in international financial institutions whose charters call for loan decisions to be made strictly on the basis of economic considerations. The “North-South” dialogue, moreover, could become considerably more contentious generally if controversy over human rights were to severely damage US relations with nations (like Brazil) that have played significant moderating roles in the articulation of LDC demands. 43. Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to President Carter1 Washington, May 12, 1977 I have just reviewed the proposed ten goals for foreign policy suggested by Zbig2 and would like to make the following points. The proposals make a good deal of sense to me and I think will be of great value in guiding our policies and measuring our success. I believe they ought to be stated in public very generally, because they are ambitious goals and it will be difficult to fully succeed on all of them within the four-year time span. I think it is important that our pursuit of human rights stand on its own ground. We pursue that course not for other political reasons, but because we believe in human rights. In Objective 4, we say, “We should match Soviet ideological expansion by a more affirmative American posture on global human rights,” and on Objective 7, we propose progress on human rights “in order to stem continental radicalization and to eliminate Soviet-Cuban presence from the Continent.” Both formulations suggest that a major motivation for our espousal of human rights is based on a tactical advantage against the Soviet Union. I think 1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Mondale Papers, Office of the Vice President, Box 205, Memos from the VP to the President [2/3–6/30/77]. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Brzezinski. 2 According to Brzezinski’s memoirs, he had suggested to Carter in January 1977 that the NSC Staff produce a briefing book containing the 4-year goals of the Carter administration. Throughout the spring of 1977, the NSC Staff began preparing extensive documentation outlining the 10 primary foreign policy goals of the Carter administration, culminating in a 43-page paper. (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 52–53) The paper is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy. In an undated memorandum to the President, Brzezinski summarized the overall concept of the activity and listed the 10 major objectives. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 27, Goals/Initiative: 4–5/77)
