National Security Policy 1181 the strategic air retaliatory forces to ICBM attack. Effective continental defense requires that the United States be constantly on guard against “technological surprise” and that it continually strive for technological superiority. International Collaboration and Coordination 9. Continental defense requires continued close collaboration with certain allies. The principle of joint defense of the North American Continent by the United States and Canada, begun in World War II and developed progressively in subsequent years, should be fostered. The highly satisfactory arrangements with Denmark for maintaining defense installations in Greenland should be continued. Efforts should also be made to continue, or to create or improve as necessary, collabo­ ration with other countries concerned with the defense of this continent. Warning 10. Strategic. With the Soviet acquisition of an operational missile capability and the intensification of Soviet efforts to deny warning information to the United States, it has become increasingly important, as well as more difficult, to acquire timely strategic warning of Soviet Bloc attack against the United States. However, barring an extremely fortuitous break, intelligence warning can be expected only to point to a period of sharply heightened risk of hostilities. Therefore, for plan­ ning purposes it cannot be concluded that the United States surely will, or surely will not, have strategic warning. Responsible officials must recognize that they may have to accept intelligence warning judgments based on limited, evidence. In this situation it is increasingly important that: a. The United States have accurate estimates of (1) Soviet military capabilities, (2) their view of their power position in current critical or potential critical situations, (3) their willingness to accept risks, and (4) their progress toward maximum combat readiness. These assess­ ments will also assist in determining requirements for strategic warn­ ing and in indicating areas in which new and improved intelligence collection techniques must be developed. b. It be recognized that, if any reasonable degree of success in obtaining adequate strategic warning is to be achieved, risks are inher­ ent in the execution of high priority collection programs. These risks should be weighed against what may be even graver risks inherent in failure to obtain strategic warning. c. Vigorous efforts be made to develop improved techniques for the processing, analysis and evaluation of possible indications of hos­ tile enemy intentions. 11. Tactical. Every effort should be made to achieve effective tactical warning of aircraft or missile attack to assure adequate time for retal­ iatory forces to take action, for other military forces including defense
