893.113/818
[Document 486]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, March 12, 1925.
No. 252
SIR: With reference to the Honourable Charles E. Hughes’ Note of the 24th of December
last68 and previous correspondence respecting the suggested prohibition of export of
aircraft to China and the possibility of strengthening the Arms Embargo Agreement of
1919,69 I have the honour to state that I have received instructions from His Majesty’s
Principal Secretary of State to submit to your attention the following observations.
His Majesty’s Government do not consider, after an exchange of views with the French
Government, that there is any hope of success for a tripartite agreement prohibiting the
export of aircraft to China, but Mr. Chamberlain70 would be glad to instruct His
Majesty’s Ambassador at Paris to support his United States Colleague there in any steps
that the latter may be instructed to take to that end. I am further desired to state that Mr.
Chamberlain is consulting the French Government as to the general question of the
export of munitions of war to China.
As regards this latter question Mr. Chamberlain however agrees with the views of the
United States Government as expressed in Mr. Hughes’ note to me of December 24th
last, namely, that it is now doubtful whether further progress can be made in
strengthening the China Arms Embargo on the lines contemplated at the Washington
Conference. He also agrees that what has been effected is not wholly unsatisfactory.
His Majesty’s Government intend, for the present at any rate, to continue their policy of
doing all that lies in their power to make the embargo a reality. They will continue to
maintain, for instance, the stringent administrative measures which penalize British
merchants and manufacturers for the benefit of their continental competitors who
supply China with weapons and explosives; and they will continue to discourage
British Subjects from participating in any way in such transactions even though this
involves the loss of much profitable business to the London insurance market. To this
end His Majesty’s Government have published a declaration explaining their attitude
and the Administrative measures by which their policy is enforced.
I have [etc.]
ESME HOWARD
