Yugoslavia
985
Yugoslav economic situation, the Markotic case, and Assistant Secre-
tary Derian’s testimony on human rights. End summary.
3. The meeting lasted from 4:30 p.m. until 6:10 p.m. on September
23. U.S. attendees were the Secretary, Under Secretary Newsom, Under
Secretary Nimetz, and Deputy Assistant Secretary Barry. Yugoslav
attendees were Foreign Minister Vrhovec, Ambassador to the U.S.
Loncar, Ambassador to the UN Komatina, and Vrhovec’s Chef de
Cabinet.
4. Secretary Muskie opened the conversation by expressing regret
that he had not been able to accompany the President to Yugoslavia in
June. Vrhovec commented that the President’s visit had been extremely
successful, particularly because of the President’s statements while in
Yugoslavia. He noted that Pravda had commented critically on what
the President had said, but that a “very high Eastern European official”
had recently asked Vrhovec for a Yugoslav assessment of the visit.
When Vrhovec responded that the Yugoslavs considered the visit con-
tributed to detente, the “EE official” said that he had thought so too
but had wanted to hear this directly from the Yugoslavs.
5. U.S.-Soviet relations. The Secretary and Vrhovec discussed the
Gromyko UNGA speech which Muskie described as defensive. Vrho-
vec said that while the speech had been tough, it was also businesslike
and kept doors open. Muskie commented that Gromyko had very little
to say on Afghanistan and seemed to be trying to indicate that events
there had nothing to do with U.S. and Western attitudes toward the
USSR. This clearly does not represent the serious view of the Soviet
leadership but we can not tell whether they consider that they made a
mistake in Afghanistan by underestimating Western reactions. Muskie
said that in his discussions with Gromyko in Vienna and correspond-
ence since then Gromyko has shown no flexibility but has not been
hostile or abrasive. The Soviets may be looking for an open door, but
they clearly don’t know where it is. Vrhovec opined that the Soviets
may actually be ready to talk about a way to get out of Afghanistan,
but it was not reflected in Gromyko’s speech. It could be that the
Soviet’s are prepared to talk business with the U.S., but at times like
that they always play their cards very close to their chest and display
a more rigid public image than usual.
6. Iraq-Iran. In response to the Secretary’s query about a non-
aligned role in Iraq-Iran hostilities,2 Vrhovec suggested that neither
side would ask for NAM assistance until it became clear that one side
or the other was prevailing militarily. On the question of motivations,
2 Iraq invaded Iran on September 22, 1980, marking the start of the Iran-Iraq War,
which ended August 2, 1988.
