364 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement CO–29. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1  Washington, April 6, 1960. SUBJECT Call on the President by President Lleras Camargo PARTICIPANTS The President President Lleras Camargo of Colombia The Secretary Ambassador Carlos Sanz de Santamaría Ambassador Dempster McIntosh Assistant Secretary Rubottom President Lleras Camargo greeted the President and thanked him for the pleasant occasion of the dinner and musical program the night before. The President thought that Bernstein’s music had been very good, especially his rendition of Gershwin’s Rhapsody in Blue, a favorite of the President’s entire family. The President said that he had just been talking to the Secretary of Commerce and members of the latter’s staff about certain problems connected with the enormously expensive public highway construction program in the United States. He referred to certain misunderstandings on the part of the Congress regarding that portion of the cost to be borne by the municipalities through which the highways will pass. He made joking reference to the problems of the Executive’s relationships with the Congress “in any real democracy.” President Lleras agreed and added that he had the same problems with the additional factor of having to obtain a two-­thirds majority for his programs, in a Congress which under the “parity” plan was fifty percent Liberal and fifty percent conservative. Ambassador McIntosh referred to the great prestige of President Lleras as being the principal reason why the “parity” plan was functioning. President Lleras seemed to doubt that the plan would last the full 16 years foreseen in its inception since the country may insist on returning sooner to the rule of the majority. The President recalled his philosophical discussions with Secretary Dulles on how our own system of government might be changed constructively, incorporating some of the best in the parliamentary system. They had finally decided that they would have to start fresh, it being very difficult to graft on any changes to our system. President Lleras thought that the universities should fill the role of philosophical review of the function of government, except that nobody listens to their 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files, Lot 64 D 1, “Colombia 1960.” Confidential; Limit Distribution. Approved at the White House on April 19.
