3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
834
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
281.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, June 5, 1980
SUBJECT
US-Soviet Relations
PARTICIPANTS
Alexander A. Bessmertnykh Minister-Counselor, Soviet Embassy
Marshall D. Shulman Special Adviser on Soviet Affairs to the Secretary of State
Muskie-Gromyko Meeting at Vienna2
Bessmertnykh said that before the meeting took place the Soviet
side had been following with some apprehension the things that were
said about the meeting beforehand. However, Bessmertnykh said that
Gromyko had come away from the meeting itself with a good feeling
and with a favorable impression of Muskie. He had found him an ex-
tremely intelligent man who presented the US positions in a very effec-
tive, reasoned, and non-irritating way.
Watson-Gromyko Meeting3
Bessmertnykh said there had been some puzzlement in Moscow as
to why Ambassador Watson had been sent in to see Gromyko so soon
after the Vienna meeting. It seemed to them that the Watson message
reflected a hardening of the US position and they wondered if some-
thing had happened in the interval to produce this hardening.
I indicated that one of the purposes of the Watson meeting with
Gromyko was to be sure that Gromyko did not have the impression
that the American reaction to Afghanistan was primarily a function of
the election season; Bessmertnykh assured me that neither Gromyko
nor other high officials in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs believe that
this was so or thought that their troubles on this issue would be over
after the election.
Negotiating Process
Bessmertnykh said that they had noted what the Secretary had
said about the need to keep the channel open and they agreed with this,
although it might be a while before the Afghanistan problem can be re-
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser
to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot
81D109, Box 5, MDS–Bessmertnykh Meeting, 6/5/80. Confidential; Sensitive. Drafted by
Shulman.
2 See Document 278.
3 See Document 279.
