894
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The $106 million pledged by the United States includes the
following:
$25 million P.L. 480, Title II food commodities
5 million cash grant to ICRC/UNICEF for start-up costs
15 million UNHRC
30 million new funds, not yet appropriated
30 million reprogramming authority in Foreign Assistance bill
In addition, another $925,000 has been granted to ICRC and Cath-
olic Relief Services from fiscal year 1979 funds.
It is important to restate that the funds now available are not new
money made available for relief. The funds will have to come out of
other assistance programs, unless new appropriations are enacted.
Similarly, one should note that even with the recent supplemental
appropriation of $50 million for the Food for Peace program, Title II is
still underfunded in terms of the 1.6 million tons mandated by the
Congress. If the Kampuchean assistance must come from the regular
Title II program, then another $46 million are needed to meet the man-
date. If the Kampuchean assistance is a special additional program,
then another $73 million are needed.
The Commission therefore recommends that the Congress enact the re-
maining supplemental appropriation for Title II of P.L. 480.14
P.L. 480 is not tied to the Foreign Assistance bill, but rather is com-
plicated by its relation to domestic farm legislation. That legislation sets
a budget cap for Title I and Title II of P.L. 480. The cap has been calcu-
lated to be about $98 million short of sufficient funds at present prices
to provide the 1.6 million tons of food mandated in legislation. The
dollar shortage totals $123 million if the Kampuchean effort is a special
program instead of part of the general program. The recent supple-
mental appropriation bill provided $50 million of the needed funds.
The remaining funds could be provided through the additional supple-
mental appropriation and by removing the caps from Title I and Title
II and allowing the Administration to shift funds between programs.
As has been stated, the Kampuchean relief assistance taken from
present programs means that other deserving Title II programs will
have to be drastically reduced. It also places a strain on funds that
may be needed for other purposes, such as aiding refugees from
Afghanistan.
14 Bloomfield, in his December 20, 1979, briefing of the PCWH (see footnote 13
above), also encouraged the Commission members to lobby Congress to enact the re-
maining P.L. 480 Title II supplemental. (Ibid.)
