National Security Policy 331 The Director of Central Intelligence noted that each time this ques­ tion came up in the Council, it was his suggestion that our Government work toward an international agreement which would restrict the size of diplomatic pouches. He could not see, for example, why it was nec­ essary that household furnishings of an incoming diplomat be intro­ duced via diplomatic channels. The President observed that an agreement to reduce the size of such pouches might adversely affect our interests in getting cod­ ing machines into the Bloc countries via the U.S. diplomatic pouch. Mr. Allen Dulles agreed with this point but added that, if necessary, this Government could revert to the use of the one-time pad for coding purposes although, admittedly, this would effect substantially the time of delivery of such messages. The Chairman, ICIS, Mr. J. Walter Yeagley, in response to Mr. Gray’s inquiry, advised that he had no comments to add to those which had already been made on this subject. The President concluded the discussion on this item with the thought that the modification of NSC Action No. 1868 contained a sat­ isfactory statement of policy on the subject. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed the draft NSC Action on the subject (trans­ mitted by the reference memorandum of September 22) prepared by the NSC Planning Board, with the assistance of representatives of the Inter­ departmental Intelligence Conference and the Interdepartmental Com­ mittee on Internal Security as an amendment of the procedure states in NSC Action No. 1868, in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (transmitted by the reference memorandum of September 29). b. Amended NSC Action No. 1868 by deleting the first paragraph of the procedure stated therein and substituting the following: “If a detection device indicates the presence in a diplomatic ship­ ment of plutonium (or other neutron source) or uranium, the shipment will be detained and the Department of State will request the appro­ priate foreign diplomatic mission in Washington to have one of its offi­ cers appear at the port of entry to remove the objectionable object for examination.” NOTE: The amendment in b above, as approved by the President, subsequently transmitted to the Secretary of State for appropriate implementation in coordination with the Interdepartmental Intelli­ gence Conference and the Interdepartmental Committee on Internal Security. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] S. Everett Gleason
