1178
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
lead to a threat to peace, then Israel could say that it has to be on every
block in Jerico and Nablus. Thus he is concerned.
Prime Minister Begin said that with all respects, he did not refer to
the Army with any of this—as it is written. The President will know
how many there will be in Judea and Samaria and the Gaza District. He
will give numbers and numbers on a map.11 The rest will be redeployed
to specified security locations. (The President said: yes). He will give the
President a map. Secretary Vance knows that they changed “agreed” to
“specified.” This is a matter of Israelis’ lives. Therefore, it is not written
down, but Israel will show it on the map. When the Self-Governing Au-
thority is inaugurated—or even earlier—Israel will take some forces
out. A number will stay, and be redeployed to specified security loca-
tions as on the map. This is a question of the Army. The question of in-
cursions is wider. It is a daily problem. And there will not always be the
Army there to deal with it.
Secretary Vance said that in the call to the Camp David Accords, it
says: “A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there
will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified se-
curity locations. The agreement will also include arrangements for as-
suring internal and external security and public order.” Therefore, this
is to be worked out between Israel, Egypt and Jordan—if it is in; it is not
specified how it is to be worked out.
Prime Minister Begin said that is a separate sentence—but he ac-
cepts Secretary Vance’s reading. Therefore, Israel will make proposals
(on external and internal security and public order), and agreement
will come. But not on the specified security locations.
The President and Secretary Vance agreed.
Prime Minister Begin said that arrangements on the rest will be
agreed. Now on the Continuing Committee: it is in Camp David. He
saw the U.S. words—in the seven points. In the Camp David Accords,
the Continuing Committee is only given one task—“to decide by agree-
ment on the modalities of admission of persons displaced from the
West Bank and Gaza in 1967 . . .”
The President asked Prime Minister Begin to read the rest.
Prime Minister Begin said: yes. “. . . together with necessary meas-
ures to prevent disruption and disorder.” Judea and Samaria are not
in it.
The President asked if that is all. Please read it.
Prime Minister Begin read: “Other matters of common concern may
also be dealt with by this committee.”
11 Not found.
