North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
883
Tab B
Summary of Interim Report Prepared by the
Brookings Institution37
Washington, undated
Brookings Interim Report: An Assessment of
Development Assistance Strategies
Summary
The study is based on the premise that although development
must occur primarily through self-help, increased concessional aid for
the poorest and non-concessional aid for the middle-income countries
is needed and can play an important role in hastening growth with eq-
uity. Furthermore, the continuous development of new knowledge is
critical to development and is a field where the US has a unique ca-
pacity, drawing extensively on the US private sector, to build indig-
enous LDC capabilities.
In its consideration of the effectiveness of current programs, the re-
port concludes that most bilateral foreign aid vehicles need substantial
improvement.
1. AID: AID has over-narrowly interpreted the New Directions
mandate,38 thereby missing areas important to development—such as
regional development and research. Managerially, it has been hobbled
by unnecessary paperwork, overly restrictive legislation, and insuffi-
ciently qualified personnel.
2. PL–480: With insufficient stress on promoting economic devel-
opment, PL–480 aid has not fulfilled its potential, and has occasionally
acted as a disincentive to LDC agricultural production.
3. Security Supporting Assistance does not go to the countries that
most need development aid, and cannot be readily used to influence
the receiving countries’ economic policies; has little development im-
pact, and detracts from the amounts otherwise available for develop-
ment assistance. Its benefits are largely political.
The report expresses a different view on multilateral assistance:
The International Financial Institutions, particularly the World Bank
Group, have been effective and efficient, have mobilized other donor
37 No classification marking.
38 Reference is to the changes in U.S. foreign aid programs mandated by the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1973 (P.L. 93–189).
