Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 11. Derian testimony.4 Ambassador Loncar raised a point about which he said he had not had an opportunity to brief Vrhovec in detail. He objected to the inclusion of Yugoslavia in Assistant Secretary Derian’s testimony on human rights in Eastern Europe, to some of the specifics in the statement, and to the fact that the statement was circulated by the U.S. Embassy in Yugoslavia. Mr. Newsom stressed there had been no change in U.S. policies toward Yugoslavia and pointed out that our policy had been clearly and authoritatively enunciated by the President and the Secretary of State. 12. Global negotiations. Vrhovec asked Newsom if he saw any possibility of a breakthrough in negotiations at the UN. Newsom pointed out that Ambassador McHenry believed that a solution could be found once the overheated atmosphere of the Special Session cooled off. Newsom pointed out that the U.S. could not agree to any formulation which detracts from the authority of UN specialized agencies or international financial institutions, especially in view of the difficulty the U.S. was having in getting congressional funds for these institutions. Vrhovec said that the Yugoslavs and others had hoped that a vague formulation would enable the U.S. to agree since this would only result in the beginning of talks at which all issues would be discussed in detail again. Newsom pointed out that Washington agencies were not prepared to accept vagueness of this kind and required recognition of UN specialized agencies’ roles and independence. However, he said that no one was more anxious than Ambassador McHenry to find a solution to the problem. Muskie 4 On September 16, Derian testified before the Subcommittee on International Organizations of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs on the status of human rights in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. (Current Policy, No. 204, U.S. Department of State, October 1980) Responding to a congressional inquiry, Derian included Yugoslavia in the presentation, and discussed the Markotic case, eliciting a protest from the Yugoslav
