988
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
11. Derian testimony.4 Ambassador Loncar raised a point about
which he said he had not had an opportunity to brief Vrhovec in
detail. He objected to the inclusion of Yugoslavia in Assistant Secretary
Derian’s testimony on human rights in Eastern Europe, to some of the
specifics in the statement, and to the fact that the statement was circu-
lated by the U.S. Embassy in Yugoslavia. Mr. Newsom stressed there
had been no change in U.S. policies toward Yugoslavia and pointed
out that our policy had been clearly and authoritatively enunciated by
the President and the Secretary of State.
12. Global negotiations. Vrhovec asked Newsom if he saw any
possibility of a breakthrough in negotiations at the UN. Newsom
pointed out that Ambassador McHenry believed that a solution could
be found once the overheated atmosphere of the Special Session cooled
off. Newsom pointed out that the U.S. could not agree to any formula-
tion which detracts from the authority of UN specialized agencies or
international financial institutions, especially in view of the difficulty
the U.S. was having in getting congressional funds for these institutions.
Vrhovec said that the Yugoslavs and others had hoped that a vague
formulation would enable the U.S. to agree since this would only result
in the beginning of talks at which all issues would be discussed in
detail again. Newsom pointed out that Washington agencies were not
prepared to accept vagueness of this kind and required recognition of
UN specialized agencies’ roles and independence. However, he said
that no one was more anxious than Ambassador McHenry to find a
solution to the problem.
Muskie
4 On September 16, Derian testified before the Subcommittee on International Orga-
nizations of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs on the status of human rights in
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. (Current Policy, No. 204, U.S. Department of State,
October 1980) Responding to a congressional inquiry, Derian included Yugoslavia in
the presentation, and discussed the Markotic case, eliciting a protest from the Yugoslav
Government. (Telegram 7453 from Belgrade, September 19; National Archives, RG 59,
Central Foreign Policy File, D800447–0459) While in West Berlin, Eagleburger wrote that
it was unwise to lump together Yugoslavia with the other Warsaw Pact countries as
doing so does not serve U.S. foreign policy. “We are dealing with an uncertain and
therefore neuralgic post-Tito leadership,” he cautioned, and “how we handle that fact
can have a substantial impact on the future of our bilateral relations.” (Telegram 1996
from West Berlin, September 17; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800444–0096) Hoping to resolve the issue prior to the Muskie-Vrhovec bilateral, the
Department instructed the Embassy to deliver the U.S. response, emphasizing that the
administration “make a very clear and fundamental distinction between nonaligned
Yugoslavia and the countries of the Warsaw Pact” and stress that there was no change
in U.S. policy toward Yugoslavia. (Telegram 251422 to Belgrade, September 20; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800450–0059) The Embassy delivered the
U.S. response to the Foreign Ministry on September 22.
