3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
468
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
concerning the results achieved and would not associate itself with the
process and methods used. The Soviets were against separate “deals.”
Gromyko would say that the United States had acted rudely toward the
Soviet Union despite the common understanding achieved last year, to
the effect that we would take concerted action with respect to the
Middle East. He noted that the United States had gone a separate way,
demonstratively disregarding the previous understanding with the So-
viet Union.
As for Camp David, if anything was accomplished there, it was
that Israel had obtained what it had been striving for from the very be-
ginning, while Sadat had received nothing and had in fact lost every-
thing he had. At the same time Syria and Jordan and the Palestinians
had been completely circumvented, producing great disarray in the
ranks of the Arabs. Was this really the path to peace and calm in the
Middle East? The Soviets did not believe so, and no one could convert
them to the views of the United States or Sadat or Begin on this score.
They had their own assessment and views. That the Soviet Union
wanted peace in the Middle East was well known throughout the
world. It wanted to see the states in the Middle East live in peace as in-
dependent sovereign states, and this, of course, included Israel. The So-
viet Union had stated this hundreds of times for all the world to hear,
and its position was well known. It was equally well known that the So-
viet Union wanted to do all in its power to safeguard the legitimate
rights of the Palestinians. Now he could only say that they would have
to wait and see how events developed in the future.
Gromyko asked the President not to consider him a pessimist. The
Soviets were optimists and firmly believed that eventually all the
problems would be resolved for the people of the Middle East. The So-
viets had never had any idea of pushing Israel into the sea. On the con-
trary, they had upheld Israel many times in the international arena, cer-
tainly to a much greater extent than the Israelis themselves were doing
by their ill-considered extremist statements. Gromyko concluded his
discussion of the Middle East by saying he supposed each of us would
retain our own concepts with regard to the Middle East.
MBFR—Negotiations in Vienna
Gromyko said that, of course, he, too, was disappointed that no
real progress had been achieved in Vienna so far, although he would
point out that when these negotiations first began, he had not thought
that agreement was just around the corner. He thought that these nego-
tiations would be lengthy, because the matters dealt with were impor-
tant and sensitive for both sides.
Gromyko wanted to draw the President’s attention to one partic-
ular aspect of this entire subject. Statements were being made to the ef-
