Attachment

Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter3 Washington, undated SUBJECT FY81 Presidential Review, Department of Defense I am concerned that the OMB paper, subject as above, does not by itself provide an adequate basis for your consideration of the FY81 DoD budget and FY81–85 program. In particular, the first two sections (“Overview” and “Issue #1: Level of the Defense Budget”) represent a perception so different from my own, and bear upon matters of such fundamental importance to the security of the nation, that I believe you are entitled to these additional views as a matter of fairness to you in the decision-­making process. It is of course true that the level of the Defense budget always has been, and always will be, decided in the light of other demands that compete for our national resources. But, it is just as true that the choice—­unlike much of the rest of the federal budget—­must also reflect demands over which we have little control because they are imposed on us by the Soviet Union and its allies. In my opinion, the treatment in the OMB paper of this latter factor—­the Soviet threat, the balance, and the trends in that balance—­is inadequate and misleading. The situation we face today is the result of 15 years or more of failing to match a steady, resolute, and comprehensive growth in the Soviet Defense program. During each of those years, when the budget was being formulated, similar arguments to those contained in this week’s OMB analysis could be and were made. They were made successfully, and the present situation is in part the result. While we were spending hundreds of billions of dollars in Vietnam at the expense of building our forces for the future, the Soviet Union was building the unprecedented force we face today. While we have stopped the decline in Defense spending and—­much to your credit—­have even turned it around to real growth, it is important to understand that the results of a 15 year trend cannot be repaired in one, or even five years. In my view, the OMB paper does not address that key point satisfactorily; the 3 Secret. Carter initialed the upper right corner of the memorandum.
