March–August 1953
619
fronts”. The much promised “oil solution”, which was constantly dan-
gled before the people, failed to materialize. More and more demands
for dictatorial powers were made, and more and more the Prime Min-
ister was compelled to employ arbitrary and high-handed methods to
keep himself in power.
For months Mosadeq failed to leave his residence for fear of his
life. He admitted fear of crowds. No longer was he able to address “the
people” in parliament square. His speeches were delivered from his
bed into a recording machine and played back over Radio Tehran. He
did not dare make a public appearance. Mosadeq was no longer the
popular hero.
The Prime Minister finally made it clear that he intended to remain
in office regardless of popular support. With the backing of a minority
of deputies, it was now he who could use the threat of obstructionist
tactics. He warned that he would remain in office as long as he had a
simple majority in parliament of one-half plus one. He no longer de-
manded overwhelming votes of confidence. It was clear as well that, if
he were not sure of obtaining one-half plus one, his faithful group of
deputies could simply hold up proceedings by merely walking out of
the parliamentary assembly. He has now gone a step further and
threatened the dissolution of the Majlis.
The Shah and Mosadeq
To divert public attention from his failure to solve the oil problem
or to consolidate his hold on office or for these, as well as other reasons,
Mosadeq precipitated a crisis over the position of the Shah. There
seems to be no doubt that the Prime Minister did in fact “suggest” that
the Shah leave Iran. There seems to be little doubt also that he had un-
derestimated the Shah’s popularity. Whereas the person of Mo-
hammed Reza Shah has relatively little significance in Iran, the mon-
archic concept is deeply impressed on the minds of the Iranian people.
Without here going into details, it is sufficient to note that his failure to
rid himself of the Shah represented a major defeat for the Prime Min-
ister. It was the first time since he had come to power that he failed to
accomplish, on a domestic issue, that which he had set out to do.
The manifestations of protest against the Shah’s departure un-
doubtedly caused Mosadeq and his entourage to reappraise the posi-
tion of the Shah, and their efforts to find a modus vivendi resulted in
the now well known “Majlis eight-man committee report” limiting the
Shah’s powers. The Shah’s attitude toward Mosadeq has been inter-
preted by the latter’s opponents as “weakness”, and the Shah does ap-
pear to have discredited himself with some of those who wished him
well. However, the opposition now appears to fear the consequences to
it of a Shah completely subservient to and a weapon in the hands of
