232 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement aid. It is possible that such aid in any given instance could be signifi­ cant, particularly if the recipient forces were applied exclusively against local allied forces. 3. While employment of chemical and biological capabilities has not been reflected in the studies, it should be noted that limited sup­ plies of standardized chemical and biological capabilities are currently in the U.S. stockpile; much greater quantities of these could be pro­ duced before 1961 without further development. 64. Briefing Note for 369th NSC Meeting1 Washington, June 19, 1958 1. The next item is to report on a review which the President directed of a paragraph in another security policy statement—Par. 27-­d on Page 12 of the draft Basic National Security Policy discussed at the Council Meeting on May 1. 2. This paragraph—­which appeared in the economic section of the basic policy paper—­proposed, in recognition of the problems of “one-­ crop” countries, that, for political reasons, the U.S. might “on occasion, join in multilateral examination of price, production, and demand trends” for basic commodities “which might help to promote readjust­ ments between supply and demand and reduce price fluctuations”. Treasury and Commerce wished to add that the U.S. should not discuss the making of, or participate in, any international commodity agreement without Presidential approval. 3. Mr. Randall called attention to the fact that this paragraph, as proposed by the Planning Board, did not reflect existing CFEP policy of general disapproval of international commodity agreements, or the requirement that CFEP give its advance approval to any participation by U.S. representatives in international discussion of any such agree­ ment, or to U.S. participation in any such agreement. 4. At the Council Meeting on May 1 it was agreed to delete Paragraph 27–­d and to refer it, and an alternative proposed by the Secretary of State, to the Council on Foreign Economic Policy to con­ sider in reviewing the existing CFEP policy on international commod­ ity agreements. 1 Source: Draft basic national security policy paper. Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
