1955  383
upheld principle of negotiation for peaceful settlement of disputes 
between China and United States. Cooperation between these two 
countries would not only benefit peoples of two countries but also 
serve cause world peace. Chinese people were friendly to Americans 
and they did not want war with American people.
18. He said if renunciation of force was to be subject discussion it 
was clearly known Chinese never applied any force to American terri­
tory. China had never sent armed forces to Honolulu or San Francisco. 
On contrary Americans had sent armed forces to Taiwan which was 
Chinese territory.
I had said US as member of UN adhered to principles of Charter 
and I had also listed a number of other international treaties. China had 
always fully supported principles of UN Charter despite fact China still 
obstructed from being restored to her rightful place in UN. However, 
there was no provision in Charter of UN or in international law for 
one state to interfere in internal affairs of other states or to use force to 
occupy territory of other states.
19. He said there was a distinction between international disputes 
and civil conflicts. Taiwan was Chinese territory and liberation of Tai­
wan was an exercise of sovereign and territorial rights. All actions 
which involved forceful occupation of Taiwan and used force to inter­
fere with liberation of Taiwan by Chinese people violated principles 
of UN and international law. Chinese people would continue oppose 
any such action. He concluded saying he would comment on remain­
der my statement later.
20. I said with respect to implementation agreed announcement I 
had today again set forth my government’s views and would not take 
time to repeat them. I simply wanted to say that matter could have been 
disposed of in few minutes if I could have received answers to few sim­
ple questions I had asked. To best my knowledge UK Charge in Peking 
had also received no answers to these questions.
21. I said he had asked whether or not I was willing to discuss 
subjects under agenda item two. The answer was certainly yes. I had 
given him at some length and several times my opinion on one of his 
subjects. I had indicated my willingness to discuss his other point as 
well. This morning I had given him a very carefully prepared and very 
carefully considered statement with respect our point on renunciation 
of force. I wanted to emphasize this was very important statement. It 
was made in most earnest desire that it would contribute to progress 
our discussions here. I wanted point out my statement had made no 
charges against his government, also it did not propose his government 
should say anything which my government was not prepared to say. It 
was put forward as constructive and earnest effort to deal with prob­
lems we were called upon to deal with here. I hoped his government
