716
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
starts four years later, then there is a problem. Why should we mention
it at all?
President Carter: We understand. Let’s try to work it out.
Secretary Vance: I gave a memorandum of agreement to Dayan. It
covers all the points you want covered.
Prime Minister Begin: I have read it and will have to consult with
my colleagues. At the end of page two, it says the United States will not
supply arms for “unlawful” armed attack. There cannot be such a thing
as “lawful” attack on Israel.
President Carter: We’ll be the judge of that, Mr. Prime Minister. We
will leave out the word “unlawful”. We are trying to be accommodating.
Prime Minister Begin: On the first page, we want no reference to the
possibility of a violation of the agreement by Israel. It says either party.
This should not be in a bilateral agreement. You can say the same thing
to Egypt if you want. But Israel cannot sign a document that says Israel
might violate the agreement. It is a good document, Mr. Secretary.
President Carter: Let me summarize before the recess. If Israel and
Egypt want a peace treaty in the context of a comprehensive peace, it is
important to conclude the treaty during this visit. There is a limit on my
time. I have SALT negotiations and other matters to attend to. If we fail
to reach an agreement, it will be difficult to revive the momentum. We
hope to resolve all of the differences today. We are trying, representing
Egypt within the limits of our ability, to resolve the wording on Article
6, paragraphs 2 and 5. Sadat has no aversion to saying that this treaty
takes precedence over the commitments to destroy Israel. But the word
derogate is one that they object to. In my opinion, the word is okay. We
hope you can find a synonym to say the same thing. I have no objection
to derogate, but they have a problem with it. The Egyptians are not
pushing for Gaza first. They put this idea forward to break a deadlock.
If both of you see it as necessary, you can proceed in Gaza alone. In
Gaza, I see the sensitivity about liaison for Egypt and Gaza. But I don’t
want the agreement between Egypt and Israel to be just a piece of paper
marked by distrust. I have seen the euphoria of Camp David and of the
Jerusalem visits. If we have the treaty signed, Israel will have to treat
Egypt with the same respect that you show the United States and vice
versa. We have to have a sense of working for common goals. We’ll do
our best. There is a question of oil. I can assure that if the other matters
are resolved, we can find a solution to this. The same is true on ambas-
sadors. But in Sadat’s mind, it is tied to the early withdrawal to the in-
terim line. On that basis, I went to Sadat and he gave me his commit-
ment. He has not reversed. I want an Israeli commitment to a faster
withdrawal, in return for which I can get the exchange of ambassadors
after one month of the interim withdrawal. The memorandum of agree-
ment is very important. There will be new relations and advantages for
