546 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 27. Space Programs. We believe that the USSR is presently capable of orbiting earth satellites weighing on the order of 5,000 pounds, of launch­ ing lunar probes and satellites, and of launching planetary probes to Mars and Venus. Its space program could also include: surveillance sat­ ellites and recoverable aeromedical satellites (1958–1959); “soft landings” by lunar rockets and recoverable manned earth satellites (1959–1960); a manned glide-­type high altitude research vehicle (1960–1961); earth sat­ ellites weighing as much as 25,000 pounds and manned circumlunar flights (1961–1962). While each of these individual achievements appears feasible as to technical capability and earliest date attainable, we doubt that the USSR could accomplish all of these space flight activities within the time periods specified. If the Soviets desire to do so, an earth satellite could be launched from the territory of Communist China within the next year or so. Soviet Scientific Achievements 28. The USSR’s achievements during the last year, including earth satellite launchings, weapons development, and the scale of its efforts in the IGY program, have strikingly demonstrated that the USSR has acquired a scientific establishment of the first rank. As a result of a sus­ tained effort over the last three decades, the number of graduates in scientific and technical disciplines has steadily increased, research facil­ ities have been greatly expanded, and the quality of Soviet scientific training has improved. Soviet scientists have made marked progress in many areas of fundamental and applied research and in some fields rank among the best in the world. We believe that significant Soviet advances in science and technology are likely to occur in the future with greater frequency than in the past. DISCUSSION I. INTERNAL POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS Ascendancy of Khrushchev 29. Khrushchev’s position as the dominating figure on the Soviet scene appears to be well established. There does not appear to be any other leader or any group able or willing seriously to challenge his posi­ tion. The Twenty-First Party Congress, scheduled for January 1959, may install still more of his followers in the highest Party organs and further dramatize his personal and ideological authority. Thus, it is likely to be Khrushchev who will preside over the Soviet regime throughout the period of this estimate, assuming that he retains his health and vigor. However, Khrushchev’s policies will probably continue to arouse con­ cern among certain elements of the Party, and an attempt to reduce his authority cannot be entirely excluded.
