North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
777
There are four options which touch on these issues:
Option 1: Oppose any significant movement in the commodity
field (i.e. continue our case-by-case policy in individual commodities,
reflect a disinclination to agree to any international stabilization meas-
ures, including any buffer stocks, and oppose all versions of common
funding). This would reflect the low priority we attach to commodities
as opposed to other aspects of North-South relations, and may induce a
greater sense of realism in other countries; but it runs a strong risk of
provoking a major blow-up in North-South relations, will be opposed
by our developed country allies and get the Administration off on a
sour international note.
Option 2: Continue case-by-case approach combined with initia-
tives on several selective commodities, including a clearing-house ar-
rangement to allow one commodity buffer stock to lend to another.
This demonstrates a bit more flexibility and avoids the need to seek
Congressional appropriation of funds prior to, and in the absence of,
agreement on individual buffer stocks, but it falls far short of the LDC
desires, and will probably produce a blow-up.5
Option 3: A more integrated approach involving the establishment
of a “central depository” into which individual buffer stocks could de-
posit funds and borrow money, along with a more active effort to
identify possibilities for negotiating commodity agreements, including
buffer stocks. (This could also include the variant of putting the “cen-
tral depository” within the IMF-World Bank framework.) This would
be a more integrated program than Options 1 and 2, provide a
Common Fund type feature by allowing individual buffer stock facil-
ities to borrow from the IMF if funds were required and would thus be
reasonably well received by the developing countries and would still
enable the US to exercise control over individual commodity negotia-
tions; but it would be criticized as inadequate by the more militant de-
veloping nations, be criticized in the Congress as turning the IMF into a
development institution, and would be non-negotiable in UNCTAD.
Option 4: Accept the Common Fund and its “anti-market” ap-
proach. This would be well received by the developing countries, ease
pressure on the US and enable us to make trade-offs in other areas of
North-South relations; but by reducing financing constraints, it in-
creases the possibility of ill-conceived buffer stock arrangements, re-
duces our negotiating leverage with respect to individual commodities,
and will be strongly opposed in the Congress.6
5 In the margin adjacent to and between Option 1 and Option 2, Brzezinski wrote:
“unites radicals/moderates.”
6 In the margin adjacent to Option 3 and Option 4, Brzezinski wrote: “1—consider
with JC, explain; 2—political need; 3—divides radicals/moderates; 4—pt. toward a more
comprehensive long-term N–S strategy.”
