Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks ment is in sight, the Delegation should report to Washington so that appropriate consultations can be held with the Allies and so that the Delegation can receive instructions on how to relate such an agreement to the positions of the other suppliers.] The Delegation should deal with the anticipated Soviet suggestion of holding a multilateral suppliers meeting by arguing that serious and systematic bilaterals between the US and the USSR and between each of us and our major allies would be the best way to proceed in the near term. These consultations would help ensure that suppliers would bring a reasonably consistent position into joint supplier-recipient conferences, build suppliers’ support for interim restraint measures, and develop a comprehensive framework for restraint based upon criteria and consultative mechanisms. (The Delegation should not rule out the possibility of a multilateral suppliers’ meeting following intensive bilaterals as a prelude to supplier-recipient consultations and a supplierrecipient conference.) D. Further Negotiations [Over the near term, we wish to sustain the momentum of US- Soviet negotiations during the coming year, so long as CAT is not exploited by the Soviets to disadvantage our sensitive relationships in East and West Asia. The Delegation should seek prior Washington approval before agreeing on a schedule for further negotiations, either at the Delegation or working level. In determining a future schedule, we should be mindful of the unique and difficult character of the initiative and should not establish unreasonable expectations for progress in the CAT IV round.] II. REGIONAL GUIDANCE A. Latin America 1. Objectives. As a general strategy, the Delegation should discuss with the Soviet Union the emerging regional initiative, including: (1) Mexico’s key role since the merger of the two initiatives2 and the apparent development in Latin America of a consensus on the need for wide regional participation, (2) elements of restraint concepts devel- 2 Reference is to the June 17 pledge by Carter and Presidents Lope´z Michelsen of Colombia, Quiro´s of Costa Rica, and Pe´rez of Venezuela, the Chief of Government Omar Torrijos of Panama, and Prime Minister of Jamaica Manley to combine their support for the Treaty of Tlatelolco with their support for the Ayacucho Declaration to limit the supply and purchase of conventional arms. (“Joint Statement by the United States and Latin America: Treaty of Tlatelolco, the Organization of the American states, and Arms Transfers [Extract],” Documents on Disarmament, 1978, p. 391)
