1558  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
yet occurred as a result of the recent demonstrations of growing nuclear 
capabilities. In fact, the evidence available indicates that peoples and 
governments are becoming more steady in their reactions to technolog­
ical advances in the nuclear weapons field. In general, there appears to 
be a greater degree of fatalism and a greater realization that there are 
no quick and easy solutions, and that it is necessary to work within the 
context of familiar institutions and methods for an easing of the nuclear 
threat.
II. POPULAR REACTIONS AND ATTITUDES
A. The Non-­Communist World
11. There is considerable unanimity in world opinion on several 
general propositions with respect to the implications of growing nuclear 
capabilities. For example, the popular belief in the non-­Communist 
world is that the testing of nuclear weapons involves some degree 
of risk to the human race; the general assumption around the world 
now is that large-­scale hostilities between the two great powers would 
almost certainly mean nuclear war; and practically all people believe 
that a general nuclear war would be a disaster to mankind. Despite 
this unanimity on certain general propositions, the revulsion against 
nuclear weapons is not a dynamic force of even strength throughout 
the world and there are widely differing views as between regions and 
even within many individual countries with respect to the measures 
necessary or possible to deal with the problems of the nuclear age.
12. Broadly speaking, however, it is possible to distinguish between 
two major trends in popular attitudes toward nuclear weapons. In 
the Western world and in a few nations in Asia the dominant trend is 
toward reluctant acceptance of the fact that nuclear weapons are nec­
essary for the common defense. In much of Asia and the Middle East 
the dominant trend among those who hold any opinions on nuclear 
weapons is to emphasize the dangers inherent in their existence and 
to press for their control or outlawing without particular regard to the 
complicated problems of Free World defense and security.
13. In Western Europe and the Americas there continues to be 
some opposition to the testing of nuclear weapons on the ground that 
it constitutes a danger to human life. Nevertheless, this concern has 
not produced wide-­spread and strong pressures for an immediate and 
unconditional ban on tests. This may be due in part to apathy, but it also 
reflects a fairly widespread acceptance among informed people of the 
view that some risks in testing are essential to Western defense and of 
the proposition that a permanent test ban should be made effective by 
measures of inspection and control.
14. Attitudes towards other aspects of the nuclear weapons control 
problem follow a similar pattern in the West. There is great interest in
