802 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 187. Letter From Furnas to Smith (S/P)1 Washington, July 30, 1959 Dear Gerry: The military paragraphs of Basic National Policy were disposed of by the NSC this morning in a way which I think should please you. There was practically nothing new or interesting in the discussion, and the Acting Secretary took the line set forth in the exchange of telegrams you’ve seen. Paragraph 12–­a stood as written with McElroy’s note as a footnote. Twining commented that the language is all right with him so long as it is not a change of policy. He said he would have preferred the old but if the new one is agreed to he will not object. Paragraph 16 as agreed to in the Planning Board was amended only slightly and should cause us no serious trouble. Its main feature is that it leaves open the possibility of non-­general war engagements between US and USSR forces so long as “sizeable” forces are not involved. Everyone agreed that the determination as to what is a sizeable force must be a question of judgement and needs to be looked at in individual circumstances. The “Radford Doctrine” is now out. Since paragraph 16 as now agreed to invalidates the present strategic concept and is satisfactory to the Department, Mr. Dillon withdrew our proposed definition of general war in paragraph 10. The problem in the paragraph on enhancing the nuclear capability of selected allies is not yet fully resolved but will probably be settled before the end of the day. Only JCS is opposed to the version you last saw, and I believe they are coming around. Attached are copies of paragraphs 12–­a and 16 as they came out of this morning’s meeting. Sincerely, Howard Furnas P.S. Sorry to miss you next week, but I’m off to Georgian Bay. Glad this ball-game didn’t go into extra innings. I feel that we just pushed over that winning run in the last of the ninth. Regards, HF. 1 Source: Transmits approved revised military paragraphs of NSC 5906. Top Secret. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, Military and Naval Policy.
