340 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Nazarkin, referring to the U.S. paper, said that the U.S. side favored limiting the size of rail garrisons, whereas the Soviet side favored declaring their sizes. Khromov added that they were not against having dimensions mentioned, but those dimensions could vary from case to case. Koltunov asked whether limits on size would be expressed in terms of square kilometers. Burt said some alternatives might be considered, such as kilometers of track within a garrison or the distance between any parking site or maintenance facility and a geographic coordinate or reference point within the garrison. But the two sides seemed to have different concepts, with the U.S. talking about a limit and the Soviet side only talking about stating the size of garrisons. Khromov, interrupting, asked rhetorically whether the U.S. intended to limit the size of its submarine bases or only declare their size. Brooks replied that the area of submarine bases would be specified in site diagrams, but that the parallel was not relevant. Mobile ICBMs were difficult to count. As an aid to counting, they would remain in specific locations except under certain circumstances. If those locations were unlimited in size, the rationale for having them would be negated. This situation did not exist for other strategic offensive arms. Koltunov said he wanted to address a hypothetical case. Assuming a side had three rail garrisons—­with lengths of 20 km, 40 km, and 100 km—­adopting a limit of 30 km would require that side to alter arrangements already established. This would be a problem. Burt said that, if he understood properly, there was no objection in principle to a limit. There was a concern about ensuring that existing deployment plans were accommodated. Koltunov said that introducing limits brought this sort of problem. Daniel noted that the U.S. had not specified a size. They might be large. Burt suggested that the Soviet side indicate what kind of size would accommodate its plans—­whether in terms of area or kilometers of track. The U.S. interest was to ensure that rail launchers could not move long distances without notification. Koltunov then turned to the U.S.-­proposed element that “upon return of a dispersed force to restricted areas or rail garrisons, the other side would have the right to designate a percentage of the total deployed roador rail-­mobile force for on-­site inspection, enhanced NTM measures or both.” He asked whether the percentage applied to the entire number of launchers in the force or the number dispersed. Brooks responded that it applied to the entire force because there would not be a limit on the percentage of the force that could be
