Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 types of projects consistent with our desired policies. We will be working closely with Congress to develop procedures which permit the United States to express its views about multilateral lending policies as effectively as possible. But in doing so, we must recognize the damage that would be done if the international character of these institutions were lost. Second, our foreign assistance programs must be consistent with our determination to improve the conditions of political, economic, and civil rights worldwide. Over the past year we have reviewed all of our aid programs for their impact on human rights. In some cases we have reduced assistance to governments with consistent records of repression. We have also increased aid to others with good or improving human rights policies. We face a dilemma when applying human rights considerations to foreign assistance. We do not want to support governments which consistently violate human rights. On the other hand, we do not wish to deny our assistance to poor people who happen to live under repressive regimes. We must resolve this dilemma on a case-by-case basis. In general, we have approved aid programs when they would directly benefit the poor since we recognize that people have economic as well as political rights. Third, there is the question of which countries should receive our aid. The President has decided that our concessional assistance programs should focus primarily but not exclusively on the poorest countries. In the more advanced developing countries we do not want to substitute our own support for the assistance those governments should be giving. On the other hand, we cannot be indifferent to the plight of people who are no less poor because they live in middle income countries and who need our help. We are resolving this problem by insisting that our efforts to mount programs in middle income developing nations be matched by efforts of the host country. Fourth, it is sometimes argued that we cannot afford to spend large amounts of money to help solve problems abroad when we have many pressing domestic needs. But I firmly believe that it would be a serious mistake to try to trade off international obligations for domestic priorities. Both need to be addressed. The health of our nation is increasingly dependent on the world economy. If we neglect international progress, we undermine the welfare of our own society. As a nation we have a major concern with improving the lives of poor people. I do not believe this is a credible commitment if made only domestically. And as a percentage of the Federal
