Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
383
types of projects consistent with our desired policies. We will be
working closely with Congress to develop procedures which permit
the United States to express its views about multilateral lending pol-
icies as effectively as possible. But in doing so, we must recognize the
damage that would be done if the international character of these insti-
tutions were lost.
Second, our foreign assistance programs must be consistent with
our determination to improve the conditions of political, economic, and
civil rights worldwide. Over the past year we have reviewed all of our
aid programs for their impact on human rights. In some cases we have
reduced assistance to governments with consistent records of repres-
sion. We have also increased aid to others with good or improving
human rights policies.
We face a dilemma when applying human rights considerations to
foreign assistance. We do not want to support governments which con-
sistently violate human rights. On the other hand, we do not wish to
deny our assistance to poor people who happen to live under repres-
sive regimes. We must resolve this dilemma on a case-by-case basis. In
general, we have approved aid programs when they would directly
benefit the poor since we recognize that people have economic as well
as political rights.
Third, there is the question of which countries should receive our
aid. The President has decided that our concessional assistance pro-
grams should focus primarily but not exclusively on the poorest coun-
tries. In the more advanced developing countries we do not want to
substitute our own support for the assistance those governments
should be giving. On the other hand, we cannot be indifferent to the
plight of people who are no less poor because they live in middle in-
come countries and who need our help. We are resolving this problem
by insisting that our efforts to mount programs in middle income de-
veloping nations be matched by efforts of the host country.
Fourth, it is sometimes argued that we cannot afford to spend large
amounts of money to help solve problems abroad when we have many
pressing domestic needs. But I firmly believe that it would be a serious
mistake to try to trade off international obligations for domestic prior-
ities. Both need to be addressed.
The health of our nation is increasingly dependent on the world
economy. If we neglect international progress, we undermine the wel-
fare of our own society. As a nation we have a major concern with im-
proving the lives of poor people. I do not believe this is a credible com-
mitment if made only domestically. And as a percentage of the Federal
budget for 1979, our economic assistance is only 1.47%. Adding our se-
curity assistance programs does not increase this figure substantially.
