216
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
or fails adequately to support the individual in meeting basic needs
(‘the Second Group’).4
“Third, the right to enjoy civil and political liberties: freedom of
thought, of religion, of assembly, of speech, of the press; freedom to
take part in government (‘the Third Group’).”
The First Group should be those which are universally applicable.
To my mind therefore it should not include the last two items. Denial of
a fair public trial is not tantamount to a denial of justice, and invasion of
the home is of questionable meaning and applicability to certain so-
cieties—particularly Asian. Both these two items belong in Group
Three.
More fundamental, is the question of whether the Third Group of
rights can be globally applied. Why do we assume that these rights which
we hold so dear are equally valued in other cultures? The PRM’s ration-
ale does not even pretend to grapple with the issue:
“We do not accept the charge that by promoting these rights we
seek to impose 18th century western ideas on non-western societies
where they have no roots or relevance. These rights have been es-
poused in principle by virtually all governments and are of world-wide
significance as a matter of practice.”
To say that “we do not accept the charge” is not to meet it. And to
appeal to the UN Charter which includes every right that anyone can
think of, does not take us much further. There are major questions to be an-
swered as to where and when and how Group Three rights are relevant and ap-
plicable. They should be addressed.
4. Priority Among the Different Groups of Human Rights
The PRM states only that “the three groups of rights should be consid-
ered equally important”. This is not self-evident. Among other options
are that Group One should be considered primary, or that Groups One
and Two should be considered as equally important with Group Three
being applied only in certain cases.5
A related issue is the question of which tools—including both sanc-
tions and incentives—are applicable and appropriate to each of the
three groups. Most sanctions, for example, seem inappropriate to en-
force or punish violations of Group Two rights. But if we do not react to
violations of these rights, are we then relegating them to a lesser impor-
tance? There are many other related questions to be answered.
4 Aaron wrote in the margin next to this paragraph: “Basic Human Needs.”
5 Aaron wrote in the margin next to this paragraph: “Categorization by type of ac-
tion or how we intend to act.”
