1138
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
tine facilities. This matter has the potential for developing into a
problem in U.S.–FRG relations. I suggest you call in Ambassador
Hermes for discussions on the Argentine deal. End summary.
4. As you know, the U.S. has been pushing very hard to get the
FRG to require full-scope NPT-type safeguards (over all Argentine nu-
clear facilities) in its sale of a nuclear power plant (Atucha II) to
Argentina.
5. This effort has been underway for some time. In addition to the
demarche´s by the Embassy, there have been several visits by Ambas-
sador Gerard Smith and Assistant Secretary Tom Pickering and many
by other representatives of the Department and of ACDA during which
this subject has been discussed and the U.S. position reiterated.
6. The U.S. originally asked Canada, the FRG and Switzerland,
who were bidders on the reactor and heavy water manufacturing plant,
not only to require full-scope safeguards on the sale of both of these fa-
cilities but also to require Argentina to postpone indefinitely the repro-
cessing of nuclear fuel.
7. While the bidders were unwilling to tie reprocessing to these
sales, the U.S. was given to understand that Canada and the FRG
would require full-scope safeguards. Further, the FRG repeated many
times that it would “not undercut” the Canadians by offering softer
safeguards to Argentina.
8. Late last July, we heard a new theme from the FRG,3 namely that
it would require full-scope NPT-type safeguards if it sold both the re-
actor and the heavy water plant to Argentina, but if the order were split
and the FRG sold only the reactor (which turned out to be the case),
then Germany would consult with its partners (U.S., Canada and
Switzerland) before defining the safeguards package to be offered to
Argentina.
9. With this change in tone and the deviation from what we and the
Canadians had been led to believe, namely that the FRG would adhere
to the same position as Canada and require full-scope NPT-type safe-
guards in connection with even a reactor-only sale, both the U.S. and
Canada initiated another series of demarche´s.
10. We and Canadians were then told that the FRG would again
approach Argentina and request full-scope NPT-type safeguards but if
these were not accepted by Argentina, the FRG had developed a “prag-
matic solution” to the problem which would avoid the objectionable (to
Argentina) full-scope NPT-type safeguards terminology but would be
a de facto equivalent. The FRG expressed confidence to Ambassador
3 Not found.
