Comprehensive Test Ban
609
garding the three technical characteristics of borehole seismic equip-
ment deferred from last round.3 OSI working group also met fre-
quently. The outlook for the next round is for further lack of progress,
unless the general political climate improves so as to allow a concerted
effort to reinvigorate negotiations. End summary.
1. This message contains Del’s final assessment of Feb. 4–April 5,
1980 round of CTB negotiations.
2. Since the Interim Assessment of March 7 (CTB 548), the negotia-
tions moved forward somewhat. Nonetheless, negotiations during the
round as a whole proceeded at a very slow pace and little progress was
made on substantive matters.
3. Ad hoc working group: The major negotiating activity was con-
ducted in the reconstituted ad hoc working group on NSS technical
characteristics, which met between March 19 and March 26. The U.S.
and UK Dels had repeatedly urged that the Delegations address the
three technical characteristics deferred in the group’s report to the
heads of Del last round (CTB 499).4 During this round, the group essen-
tially completed consideration of all the technical characteristics pro-
posed by U.S. Del concerning the seismic component of NSS borehole
equipment. U.S. Del has also urged that reports of this group be
promptly converted into composite ad referendum text of Article I of
the technical annex to the separate verification agreement, and that the
Dels begin negotiation of other outstanding NSS technical matters. Del
notes that the group became somewhat less “ad hoc” in nature this
round. This round, participants of all three Dels were led by spokes-
men who have been on Dels for some time, instead of by special experts
brought in from capitals. This trend is in U.S. interests. Soviet Del has,
however, been unwilling to go so far as to call this group the NSS
working group, in line with its policy that it will not institute NSS
working group discussions until UK NSS issue is resolved.
4. OSI working group: The OSI working group continued to meet,
addressing two topics. Bulk of time was devoted to consideration of
text regarding technical characteristics of basic equipment to be used
on an OSI. At Soviet suggestion, group also took up questions of local
orientation of designated personnel within inspection area, particularly
those concerning scale and stereoscopic nature of aerial photographs;
these topics will be addressed further next round. Soviets continue to
profess to want progress in OSI area, but have not put forward new ne-
3 Equipment that drills hole into the earth where seismometers are installed to
measure seismic activity.
4 CTB Message No. 499, or telegram 17760 from Geneva, November 2, 1979, is in the
National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790509–0695.
