3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 872 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI by using the Sverdlovsk incident. Charge said this was definitely not the U.S. objective, regardless of how the chronology of events may appear. While it is regrettable that the Sverdlovsk question had leaked to the press before it was resolved through confidential bilateral discussions, this simply illustrates that problems of this nature must be dealt with forthrightly and cannot be swept under the rug, because it is a fact of life that information on matters of such great import will sooner or later become public in the U.S. 10. Department repeat to Geneva and elsewhere as desired. Garrison 298. Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter1 August 21, 1980 Distinguished Mr. President, I deemed it necessary to address myself to You on the issue which deeply concerns and affects the peoples of the European continent and has also a substantial bearing on the prospects of USSR and USA relations. I have in mind the issue emerged in connection with plans to develop and deploy in Western Europe new American medium-range missiles. As is known, seeking to prevent a new round of nuclear arms race on the European continent, we approached, as far back as last fall, the United States and other NATO countries with a proposal to initiate negotiations on the medium-range nuclear systems, while readiness was expressed on our part even to cut the number of these systems deployed in the western regions of the USSR, provided there is no additional deployment of nuclear missiles of that category in Western Europe. At the present time too, we believe that it would be the most correct and radical solution of the question of medium-range nuclear 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 61, Soviet Exchanges: 1/79–10/80. Secret; Sensitive. Printed from a Soviet translation and received on August 25. Brzenzinski wrote in the upper-right hand corner, “JT [presumably James Thomson], MB [Marshall Brement] 1) need quick assessment 2) reply. ZB.”
