Summaries of Compilations  LVII
Colombia
U.S. Relations With Colombia
Note: The parenthetical citations to the numbered documents in the 
text.
During the last 3 years of the Eisenhower administration, the 
United States maintained cordial relations with Colombia. In 1958, the 
reopening of Protestant churches in Colombia was the main U.S. con-
cern, while in 1959 and 1960, the United States listened sympathetically 
to Colombian requests for economic assistance Throughout the 3-­year 
period, high-­level visits by officials of both countries figured promi-
nently in the relationship.
On January 16, 1958, Ambassador Cabot tailed on Colombian 
Minister of Government Rengifo primarily to discuss the question of 
the Protestant churches which had been closed. Cabot stressed that 
he realized this was a delicate matter, but emphasised that every time 
the Eisenhower administration tried to obtain loans for Colombia, 
Protestants in the United States raised the question of the churches in 
Congress, and the aid could not be secured. Rengifo promised to do 
what he could (CO–1) Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom also raised 
the question during a visit to Colombia, March 1–4, 1958. In a conver-
sation with the Colombian Foreign Minister, Rubottom said that it was 
disappointing that only two churches had been reopened. When the 
Foreign Minister replied that, while it had been dangerous, Colombia 
had allowed additional churches to open, Ambassador Cabot informed 
him that this was not the case. (CO–4)
Ambassador Cabot reported in July that the situation had not 
improved. He suggested that attacking the problem head on would 
probably not succeed, and the new Colombian government should be 
allowed to improve its record on the question gradually. (CO–11) By the 
end of the year this approach seemed to be working. (CO–16)
The Colombian Minister of Foreign Relations had raised 
the question of economic assistance during a visit to Washington 
in 1958 (CO–8), but it was not until 1959 that President Lleras 
Camargo approached Ambassador Cabot. (CO–20) In commenting 
on the President’s proposal for a $200-­million loan to Colombia, the 
Department of State and the Export-Import Bank both indicated 
their sympathy for Colombia’s economic problems, but stated that 
the sum was overly ambitious in terms of the resources available in 
the United States. (CO–21)
The initial 1959 request was supplemented in 1960 by an approach 
from Colombia for assistance with a major land reform program. In
