576 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI fundamental issues had been resolved in 1987 and that it was therefore important to go back to that document. Shevardnadze went on to say that in Moscow the Soviets had made a major concession that made it possible to discuss a final solution to the SLCM question. Specifically, they had agreed that the SLCM accord could be drawn up as unilateral declarations outside the treaty framework. For the Soviet side this was the most difficult and complex decision. It was a step that had been taken by the Soviet side unilaterally. He suggested that our experts reach an agreement on the text of politically binding declarations on SLCMs that the sides would exchange when signing the START treaty. He added that when he spoke of politically binding statements he did not have in mind empty phrases, but rather specific commitments regarding the number and qualitative mix of SLCMs. The Secretary said our experts could engage on this question. But he would ask that the U.S. experts give the Soviet side a copy of the Joint Statement that had been agreed in Moscow in February. He saw some of Shevardnadze’s suggestions as inconsistent with the agreements reached in Moscow. It was our understanding that the Soviets were now proposing legally binding SLCM limitations in a protocol to the treaty, and that they were also proposing verification measures as well as a provision whereby all current SLCMs would be treated as nuclear-­armed. They were also now proposing limits on the number of SLCMs per type of ship. All these issues had been thrashed out in discussions on the proposed declarations during the Moscow ministerial. These were issues that had separated us for a long time and they were all fundamental questions as far as the U.S. was concerned. The U.S. position had not changed; it probably could not and would not change. Our experts could engage on these proposals. But he would repeat that he was worried whether we could do what we needed to do in the seven weeks before the summit. It would be hard to solve these problems if we had to revisit issues that had previously been divisive, particularly when we felt we had resolved them in Moscow. Nevertheless, we should see if there was any way through this minefield at the expert level. Shevardnadze said he wanted to emphasize again that the Soviets did not want to see any retreat from the Moscow agreed elements of common ground, but certain conditions had to be met. The elements of common ground did not actually reflect the Washington Summit Joint Statement. That document contained very important provisions, especially with regard to verification. Soviet society and the Supreme Soviet, like the U.S. public and the U.S. Congress, were very sensitive to verification issues. Verification had been a difficult problem for the Soviets in the past, yet over the previous year they had made a 180-­degree
