1284
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Nicholas Veliotes, U.S. Ambassador to Jordan
Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for Middle
East Peace Negotiations
Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian
Affairs
Robert Hunter, National Security Council Staff Member (notetaker)
His Majesty Hussein I, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
His Excellency Sharif Abdul Hamid Sharaf, Prime Minister and Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
His Excellency Ahmad Lawzi, Chief of Royal Court
Lt. General (Ret.) Amer Khammash, Minister of Court
Lt. General Sharif Zaid Bin Shaker, Commander in Chief of the Jordan Armed
Forces
His Excellency Fawaz Sharaf, Ambassador of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
to the United States
Secretary Muskie began by asking His Majesty if he had enjoyed his
visit to the Air and Space Museum.
King Hussein said yes; it had been his first visit.
The President said that His Majesty had had a good guide. Senator
Glenn2 had taken King Hussein and Queen Noor to the Space Museum
after last night’s dinner.
King Hussein said that it was extremely interesting.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the capsule was interesting.
The President said that now we are working on the space shuttle. It
will carry a large payload, and is very flexible. Space on it will be leased
to private corporations and governments. It will help with repairs to
machinery in space and satellites.
King Hussein said that it meant a new era.
The President agreed. It is complicated to build one that can go out
and back repeatedly. There is the problem of heat damage. He would
be glad for His Majesty to go up in it sometime. We would try it out
well, first (laughter)!
The Prime Minister said that next they should go to a naval mu-
seum; he had a preference for it.
The President said that this morning’s meeting could be brief, here,
and then they could talk in the Oval Office while the others continued
their talk here. He apologized for keeping His Majesty so long yes-
terday—he only realized how long when he read about it in the news-
paper! It was so fruitful, and he had been enjoying it so much. So he
apologized for keeping His Majesty. He presumed His Majesty would
be discussing with Harold Brown on defense matters, which are impor-
2 Senator John Glenn (D-Ohio) was one of the Mercury Seven astronauts. He was
the first U.S. citizen to orbit the Earth on February 20, 1962.
