Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
727
tions of such ambiguous documents as the UN General Assembly’s
Definition of Aggression6 and Declaration of Friendly Relations.7
The US side argued that while appropriate political and legal prin-
ciples might be developed, it also is necessary to develop functional
guidelines such as those which make up US unilateral arms transfer
policy (The Soviets characterized these as “military/technical guide-
lines”). These rules would provide specific practical guidance for sales
decisions based on the nature of the weapons involved and the local
military situation, and would also deal with specific problems such as
co-production arrangements and re-exports.
By the end of the round, both sides referred to “criteria for arms
sales” which, it was understood, would include both political/legal
and military/technical factors. The US side insisted, however, that
drawing up such a list of criteria—no matter how inclusive—was not
sufficient. To be effective in restraining arms, we argued, these criteria
had to be applied to the situations in specific regions. Consequently,
the agenda proposed by the US side for the next round included the es-
tablishment of working groups on political/legal criteria, military/
technical criteria, and regional situations—specifically, Latin America
and Africa south of the Sahara. The Soviets cautioned us not to expect
their agreement to this complete agenda the next round. They would at
best agree to discuss one region, they said, and only under the rubric of
a general discussion of the “regional approach.”
This will be the next test of Soviet “seriousness.” While we should
not expect them to accept our proposed agenda in toto, there should be
appropriate progress toward regional discussions in the next round.
3. Next Steps
The next round would probably be held in early July, and hence
we need to move quickly to prepare. We also will have to move consid-
erably beyond our previous work into the preparation of specific pro-
posals, rather than general considerations, that can be laid on the table.
6 UN General Assembly Resolution 3314 (XXIX), December 14, 1974, defined ag-
gression as “the use of armed force by a State against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
or political independence of another State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
Charter of the United Nations.” (http://www.un-documents.net/a29r3314.htm)
7 UN General Assembly Resolution 2625 (XXV), October 24, 1970, proclaimed that
states “shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity of any State;” “shall settle their international disputes by peaceful
means;” had “a duty not to intervene in matters within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State;” had “a duty to cooperate with one another in accordance with the Charter;” re-
spected the “principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples;” and uphold the
“principle of sovereign equality of States.” (http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/RESO-
LUTION/GEN/NRO/348/90/IMG/NRO34890.pdf)
