912 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 217. Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to President Carter1 Washington, December 2, 1980 SUBJECT Defense Strategy Paper I agree with the central arguments of Harold Brown’s paper on U.S. strategy for dealing with the Soviet Union.2 My understanding of these arguments is that: —­the danger of conflict is increasing; —­the U.S. must intensify its defense effort; —­the Allies must do more; and —­our economic, energy, and foreign policies should be geared to support our increasingly difficult national security requirements. However, I believe that in a number of areas these points are carried to far-­reaching conclusions unsupported by the analysis. Before addressing the specific issues Harold raises, here are three broad questions which should be raised: First, a question of process. I do not believe that Harold’s paper contains sufficiently detailed analysis to justify making decisions involving basic security issues and billions of dollars. Second, the budgetary implications. What is the analytical basis for arriving at a figure of $250 billion? Where would these funds come from: In an increased deficit? In reductions of domestic programs or foreign assistance? What would be the inflationary impact? The positive as well as negative affects on our industrial base and civilian R&D? And third, I would like to see closer examination of the view that we may be faced with the prospect of simultaneously fighting one and two half wars. I join with Harold in hoping that any conflict or conflicts with the Soviets could avoid the use of nuclear weapons. We should by all means provide the President with sufficient options to enable him to avoid that dreadful decision. But what is the prospect that three simultaneous wars with the Soviets in different parts of the world could under almost any foreseeable circumstances not lead to a general nuclear war? And if this is so, what are the implications for the force buildup and dispositions Harold suggests? 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Executive Secretariat, Official Working Papers of S/P Director Anthony Lake, 1977–January 1981, Lot 82D298, Sensitive Dec. 80. Secret. Sent via Alpha Channel. An unknown hand wrote at the top of the memorandum: “TS + RB drafters. S/P did final.” 2 See Document 214.
