326 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 109. Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 21, 1979 SUBJECT Proposal to Negotiate a New Claims Settlement with Czechoslovakia The Department of State has prepared a new proposal for an agreement with Czechoslovakia to settle the outstanding claims of American citizens and to effect the return of the Nazi-looted gold to the Czechoslovak Government as mandated in Presidential Directive 21.2 We plan to present the proposal to the Czechoslovaks early this fall after consulting with interested Members of Congress and the claimants.3 We believe that moving now to resolve this longstanding issue is in the best interest of the claimants and our own foreign policy interests and has reasonable prospects for success. The several thousand American claimants who will benefit from the agreement have been waiting for just and adequate compensation for their nationalized properties for more than thirty years. Many of them are elderly and of limited financial means and, in their contacts with the Department of State, they have stressed their need. Representatives of Czechoslovak-American organizations also support the negotiation of a new claims settlement agreement as soon as possible. We do not anticipate significant domestic political opposition to such action and we will be able to defend the negotiation of a new agreement strongly since it is clearly in the interest of the claimants and in our own national interest. We are also being urged to move promptly by the British Government which is understandably impatient to bring into force its own 1964 claims settlement with Czechoslovakia which is contingent on the return of the gold. On September 11, the British informed the Depart- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country Files, Box 17, Czechoslovakia: 1/77–1/81. Confidential. A copy of the memorandum indicates it was drafted in EUR by Johnson and Glenn and cleared by Nimetz, Vest, Barry, Walker (S/P), Crook (L/EUR), Schmidt (EUR/EE), Peters (EB/IFD/OMA), Weston (H), and in the Department of Treasury by Solomon and the Department of Commerce by Jenkins. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for European Affairs, Country Files, 1950–1986, Lot 89D336, Box 11, Czech: Gold 1979– ) 2 See Document 16. 3 A meeting between Department officials and congressional staff members took place on Capitol Hill three days later. (Memorandum of conversation, September 26; National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for European Affairs, Country Files, 1950–1986, Lot 89D336, Box 11, Czech: Gold 1979– )
