Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
789
Fault found with U.S. policy “weakness” whenever unfavorable change
occurs: recall radical changes which occurred during period of prepon-
derant U.S. power (Nasser, Iraq, Castro etc.) (P).
Strategic balance: selective use of “how does it look from Moscow”
(P); sober respect for Soviets but not all-powerful, long run mutual in-
terests (PM, PA).
Refugees, immigrants: historical success stories, always adjustment
problems (RP); need to share burdens (PA).
Congressional relations: agreement on policies takes work but
strengthens policy; legislated constraints can be costly (H).
Intelligence: stress role of intelligence community in digestion of
mass of data needed for modern policymaking (INR).
Energy: challenge myths, e.g. no energy problem, U.S. deserves
subsidized oil, can break cartel with wheat. Stress collateral role of
allies, LDC’s (EB).
Trade: economic/political costs of protectionism, injury alterna-
tives available, effective competition not unfair, LDC’s offer markets
(EB).
Narcotics: example of modest assistance program with direct do-
mestic benefit (INM).
Human Rights: grounded in U.S. and international law, pragmatic,
promotes security, strong card in ideological competition, long term so-
lution to refugee problems (HA, PA).
Arms Control: preserve base; push SALT without catalyzing
business as usual attitude; SALT in our interest, not “favor” to Soviets;
TNF—keep low visibility/freedom of action (PM, PA).
Terrorism: decade of violence likely—need to attack root causes
(D/CT).
Latin America: Unsung success story; convey sense of changing
scene and our confidence that we advance U.S. interests by promoting
LA democracy; coolness with southern cone only temporary. (ARA)
II. How can the problems confronting U.S. foreign policy be best presented
to the American people?
—Use an overall framework or strategy statement; perhaps revive
annual foreign policy statements3 (H).
—Need quicker adaptation of speaking engagements to changing
foreign policy priorities, more aggressive use of FSO visits to home-
towns (EUR).
—The Secretary should make a Report to U.S. People on U.S. for-
eign policy goals and responsibilities. Work in foreign service role in
conceiving and carrying out U.S. foreign policy (PER).
3 The Nixon administration issued annual reports on foreign policy; for information
concerning the 1970, 1971, and 1972 reports, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. I, Foun-
dations of Foreign Policy, 1969–1972, Documents 60, 85, 86, and 104. For a portion of the
text of 1973 report, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVIII, Part 1, Foundations of
Foreign Policy, 1973–1976, Document 9.
