220 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 64. Memorandum of Conversation1 Amman, September 20, 1978, 5:30 p.m. PARTICIPANTS U.S. Side Jordanian Side Secretary Vance King Hussein Ambassador to Jordan Crown Prince Hassan Nicholas Veliotes Prime Minister Adnan Badran Ambassador Alfred Atherton Chief of Royal Court Abdu Sharaf Ambassador Michael Sterner Minister of Court Assistant Secretary for Public Amer Khamaash Affairs Hodding Carter Minister of Education DCM Roscoe Suddarth (notetaker) Abdul Salem Majali Minister of Information Adnan Abu Odeh Commander-in-Chief Lt. General Zayd Bin Shaker I King Hussein: I would like to seize the opportunity to welcome you to Jordan. It is a personal pleasure to meet you at any time as a friend. I very much appreciate the fact that President Carter was kind enough to ask you to come to Jordan to speak about the current important issues. Needless to say, I have always held the highest regard for President Carter’s sincerity and determination for a just and durable peace. He has spent many hours on this fundamental problem. Recent developments have taken us by surprise, not only in terms of the results at Camp David but also because of the unexpected positions of Egypt. We have looked at President Carter’s letter2 describing Camp David and held a meeting with the Cabinet. At every level in Jordan and in the area people are preoccupied with these developments and also in terms of the meaning of the Camp David documents. We are not able at this stage to adopt any final position before getting the details on what happened at Camp David and the meaning of the words of the documents. We hope you can cover some of the gaps. I 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 6, Action/Future Stops. Secret; Nodis. The meeting took place in the Hashamiya Palace. The Jordanian Prime Minister was Muhdar Badran, not Adnan Badran as indicated in the list of participants. On September 21, Vance cabled a summary of this conversation to the Department of State for distribution to Carter and Brzezinski. (Telegram Secto 10015 from Amman, September 21; Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Foreign Countries, Box 60, Foreign Countries—Middle East [9/16–30/1978]) Vance arrived in Amman on September 20; he departed to Saudi Arabia on September 21. 2 See Document 61.
