Afghanistan 823 also the least important to the Soviets and the Afghan Government, and no serious counter-insurgency operations have been attempted in some of them. Even less remote areas where the insurgents have eliminated government authority, government garrisons still hold the main towns. On the other hand, there is resistance in areas where Soviet troops are concentrated and the government has a fair degree of control. The insurgents have not taken over a major Afghan city or even a provincial capital for more than a few days, although they are a pervasive presence in most urban areas. The Soviets have shown in Kabul that they will deal firmly with any popular uprising, and the threat of Soviet reaction has almost certainly been important in keeping the urban areas from getting totally out of control. There is some evidence that the Soviets believe the situation is improving in Afghanistan—perhaps stabilizing—and they clearly show no sign of withdrawing from Afghanistan. The evidence shows that they are there for a long haul and are beginning to emphasize political consolidation as well as military operations. Although only a very small part of the population supports the government and insurgency continues at a high level, the Soviets may have been successful, at least temporarily, in keeping the insurgence from getting worse. (In Annex B, we discuss the level of insurgency province by province.) Insurgent Organization The insurgents in Afghanistan are organized into a large number of distinct groups, probably several hundred. [less than 1 line not declassified] reports that there are 79 insurgent leaders among the Pathan tribesmen alone, each presumably heading an independent band. There are probably as many more in the remainder of the country. A few of these insurgent groups—primarily in urban areas—are based on political ideologies or programs. The overwhelming majority, however, represent tribes or geographic areas, and ridding their areas of the foreign invader is their principal motivation. The first loyalty of most Afghans is to their villages or extended families. The basic insurgent unit is headed by a village or family leader and rarely consists of more than 50 men. Such units, however, seem to cooperate closely when necessary with others from neighboring villages and frequently coalesce in large insurgent groups numbering several hundred men. The membership in the basic units fluctuates; men leave the battlefield because they have more important business at home, but may return when fighting becomes more intense. One insurgent leader in Konarha province, for example, reportedly has 200 to 300 men under his command most of the time, but for a major operation can count on 1,000.
