394  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
(3) Exiles Residing in Costa Rica:
Since President Figueres has been noted for his leniency with 
regard to permitting entry of political exiles into Costa Rica, and since 
Costa Rica has been considered by President Somoza as a sanctuary for 
Nicaraguan exiles plotting to overthrow his government, it would be of 
interest to sound out Mr. Echandi as to what his policies will be regard-
ing admission and activities of political exiles. It is understood that 
Echandi, on his recent visit to Nicaragua (March 10), assured President 
Somoza that he would control the activities of Nicaraguan exiles in 
Costa Rica. It could be indicated that strict control of exile activities 
would tend to create harmony and political stability among the Central 
American countries.
(4) Communism:
Mr. Echandi has indicated to our Embassy that he will express an 
interest in hearing any suggestions the United States has for combat-
ting Communism. It could be pointed out that Communists are permit-
ted to travel freely in and out of Costa Rica and suggested that more 
control exercised over their freedom of movement would be effective in 
reducing their activities. The effectiveness of Communist propaganda 
could also be counteracted by anti-Communist propaganda forthcom-
ing from leading business groups, teachers and the clergy.
Effective implementation of the provisions of the Caracas 
Resolution,5 particularly those concerning the exchange of information 
on Communist travel and activities, would be one of the best means 
of combatting Communism. The presidents of other Central American 
countries have recently indicated their desire for increased cooperation 
in controlling Communism. Emphasis should be placed on each coun-
try getting its own house in order and establishing effective internal 
controls.
Communism in Labor Unions:
The Pacific banana zone, the largest concentration of workers in 
any one enterprise in Costa Rica, presents the continuing problem 
of a Communist-­dominated labor union (Federación Obrera Bananero 
y Anexos—FOBA); enjoying the strongest position, with a member-
ship of about 3,500 members, among the farm workers of the United 
Fruit Company. Another union (Federación de Trabajadores Bananeros y 
Anexos—FETRAPA) with about 1,050 members among the Company’s 
5 Reference is to Resolution XCIII adopted by the Tenth Inter-American Conference, 
March 28, 1954; for text, see U.S., Department of State, Tenth Inter-American Conference, 
Caracas, Venezuela, March 1–28. 1954: Report of the Delegation of the United States of America 
with Related Documents, p. 156.
