Human Rights a senior officer to serve as the Agency’s representative at these meetings, and to coordinate Agency participation in preparation of the PRM and subsequent intelligence support.) The Discussion 3. Discussion at the meeting centered on three problems: how to proceed organizationally, signals to the Congress versus effective action abroad in promoting human rights, and the necessity of making a distinction in our human rights policy between Communist and non- Communist states. How to Proceed 4. A key consideration determining the need for prompt action is that final decisions on the FY 78 FMS (foreign military sales) budget— the most convenient and obvious means to signal both the Congress and foreign countries of Administration intentions vis-a`-vis human rights—must be made within two weeks. Therefore, there was general agreement that any study must involve examination both of short-term options and a longer-range, comprehensive review of the problem. Brzezinski and Tuchman left us with the impression that a PRM will be issued in a day or so calling for proposed options for action within five to ten days. The PRM will also call for a longer range study of the problem to be due later in the spring. Signals to Congress Versus Effective Action Abroad 5. This subject dominated the meeting, with the NSC Staff more concerned for the near term with signalling the Congress of serious Administration intentions than with effective action abroad. The most obvious means proposed to send such signals immediately is to cut the FY 78 FMS budgets of offending countries, although Brzezinski was interested in other options. State informed the other participants that Secretary Vance has decided, on the basis of human rights considerations, to recommend reduction of FY 78 FMS to Argentina by 50 percent, elimination of FMS assistance to Uruguay, and elimination of MAP to Ethiopia. He did not cut Zaire or Korea, the latter because it will be severely attacked by so many others. The Department of State participants added, however, that this represents a very weak signal inasmuch as only one country—Argentina—out of 79 reported “sinners” is being cut. (Uruguay had already been tapped for loss of FMS and Chile had earlier been cut; other considerations as well as human rights influenced the decision on Ethiopia.) 6. Brzezinski said he was uneasy about singling out one or two countries for cuts. A State Department participant expressed particular concern that Latin America is being singled out because there are so few conflicting US interests and the decision therefore seems easy. Sev-
