valid reason for the shipper’s refusing to demonstrate the existence of such good faith
by exhibiting a record of sales in his home market.
If, however, the shipper refuses to make such documentary proof available to the
Customs Attaché there are only two courses open to the appraiser at the port of entry.
He may resort to the United States value, which in almost every case, will be higher
than the export or the foreign value, and, in some cases, will be difficult of
ascertainment. In case there were an appeal from the appraiser’s valuation, the case
would come before the Board of General Appraisers for review. This Board sits as a
court and its records and proceedings are public. This court would normally require
affirmative proof of the foreign value or export value, which would necessitate the
production of the exporter’s books and records or of extracts therefrom in court. In
such a case the data to which the shipper had denied the Customs Attaché confidential
access would be made available to the public and would lose their confidential
character.
The other alternative, in case of a refusal or failure of a shipper to allow an examination
of his books to determine the foreign value or export value, is for the Secretary of the
Treasury to prohibit the importation into the United States of merchandise
manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by the foreign shipper.
Section 510 of the Tariff Act of 1922 is as follows:
INSPECTION OF EXPORTER’S BOOKS.—
“If any person manufacturing, producing, selling, shipping, or consigning
merchandise exported to the United States fails, at the request of the
Secretary of the Treasury, or an appraiser, or person acting as appraiser, or a
collector, or a general appraiser, or the Board of General Appraisers, as the
case may be, to permit a duly accredited officer of the United States to
inspect his books, papers, records, accounts, documents, or correspondence,
pertaining to the market value or classification of such merchandise, then
while such failure continues the Secretary of the Treasury, under regulations
prescribed by him, (1) shall prohibit the importation into the United States of
merchandise manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by such
person, and (2) may instruct the collectors to withhold delivery of
merchandise manufactured, produced, sold, shipped or consigned by such
person. If such failure continues for a period of one year from the date of
such instructions the collector shall cause the merchandise, unless previously
exported, to be sold at public auction as in the case of forfeited merchandise.”
Under an opinion of the Attorney General of the United States the Treasury Department
considers that the provisions of this section of the Tariff Act of 1922 are mandatory
