El Salvador 605 ES–20. Telegram from the Ambassador in El Salvador (Kalijarvi) to the Department of State1  San Salvador, September 16, 1960, 8 p.m. 148. Saw Foreign Minister at 10:30. He trying muster 14 family support, [text not declassified].2 Liked idea of requesting IAPC investigation. Agreed Lemus should take firm action, but felt that he should at same time indicate readiness reconsider electoral and other recent laws, and change his cabinet to get rid of Sub-­secretary Justice (Julio Fausto Fernandez, former secretary Communist party). Needed to get government side to people. President received me alone 12 noon. Lemus tired but relaxed. Said he had been waiting for me. Agreed government confronted by grave problem. While support indicated from many quarters he had received few telegrams of congratulation but not a single friend had come to say he supporting Lemus. This discouraging. Reminded him presidents stand alone, must take decisions regardless of professions of friendship and support. Placing hand on statue Lincoln I had presented him he commented, “Yes, I think of him often at this time. I realize fully what is involved.” Suggested he might wish consider submitting memo to and requesting investigation by IAPC. Liked idea and said would discuss with Foreign Minister. Recognized pattern street fighting yesterday importation from abroad. Discussing yesterday’s ceremony said provocation [illegible in the original]. At the end of procession of school children came disorderly procession led by University ex-Chancellors, Perla and [illegible in the original] followed by 500 students and ten groups roughnecks. Subsequently determined many of these from neighboring countries. National Guard with fixed bayonets prevented roughnecks breaking into gathered group and confined demonstrations to marching down street singing International and crying support for Castro. Similar group on opposite side park similarly contained. We both agreed a miracle no incident occurred. Suggested exiling agitators no punishment. Jail sentences would have more deterring effect. President said unfortunately present laws of country do not permit, but military tribunals under state of siege can and will imprison disturbers. He recognized non-­democratic nature tribunals but felt no other alternative for controlling situation. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 716.00/9–1660. Confidential; Niact. 2 Reference presumably is to a beating the Rector received at the hands of the police who also arrested him during a raid on the University, September 2, 1960. Documentation on this incident is in decimal file 716.00 and in ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 62 D 24, “El Salvador, 1960.”
