Human Rights
313
structed our posts abroad to give top priority to the negotiation of these
agreements. Senator Talmadge said he was pleased to hear this.
Mr. Christopher went on to say that in view of the new statute, we
were asking four of the 12 countries as to which negotiating instruc-
tions have already been dispatched to agree to a new provision in the
PL 480 agreement. Mr. Christopher explained that we had attempted to
streamline this new provision and to make it as inoffensive as possible
to the countries that had been asked to agree to it. He pointed out that
these countries might be quite sensitive to being asked to agree to this
new provision but that we were very conscious of our responsibility to
implement the new statute and felt this was the appropriate way to do
it. He reiterated that we had attempted to make the provision as accept-
able as possible, consistent with our obligation to apply the statute
faithfully.
Mr. Christopher then handed Senator Talmadge a letter setting
forth the facts he had just given orally (a copy of the letter is attached
under Tab A).3 I also gave a copy of the letter to Messrs. Denlinger and
Wade. Senator Talmadge and the others read the letter. He then com-
mented that he very much appreciated Mr. Christopher’s coming to see
him and was grateful for the information that had been provided.
Mr. Christopher then handed Senator Talmadge a copy of the
latest version of the new contractual provision we are asking certain
countries to agree to (a copy of the provision given to Senator Tal-
madge is attached under Tab B).4 I also handed copies of this new pro-
vision to Messrs. Denlinger and Wade. Senator Talmadge read the pro-
vision and said it seemed quite sound. Mr. Denlinger commented that
this language was less extensive than the provision we had originally
sent out. Mr. Christopher agreed and explained that this reflected our
efforts to streamline the provision as much as possible. Mr. Denlinger
said he thought it was a considerable improvement.
Mr. Denlinger then turned to the question of CCC credits. He said
there was a good deal of concern about bringing human rights consid-
3 Attached but not printed is a November 30 letter from Christopher to Talmadge.
4 Attached but not printed is an undated copy of the provision, which states: “The
importing country undertakes to use the commodities provided hereunder (other than
any part of such commodities excluded herefrom by subsequent agreement of the
parties), or the proceeds generated by their sale, for specific projects or programs which
directly benefit the needy people of that country, and to furnish to the exporting country
information that demonstrates how such projects or programs will benefit such needy
people. Such information shall be furnished, with respect to the commodities covered by
each purchase authorization issued hereunder by the exporting country, prior to the is-
suance of such purchase authorization. Such information shall be deemed to be incorpo-
rated in, and to be part of, this agreement. A report on such use shall be submitted by the
importing country within six months after each delivery of commodities to the importing
country hereunder.”
