United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 3 Problem To analyze United States policy toward Latin America in the light of present-­day economic trends. Discussion 1. Trade is the cornerstone of our relations with Latin America. When high-­level trade is sustained with resulting good prices, most facets of our relations with the area are good. In 1955 and 1956 total trade between the United States and Latin America reached an approximately 7½ billion dollar annual figure, almost balanced in each direction. 2. In the last quarter of 1957 Latin American total exports to the United States began to slump, with prospect of a decline in 1958 of at least seven percent. The problem has been especially critical in lead, zinc, tin and copper. Coffee, the most vital commodity of all, started to decline but this was stopped by the main producers holding coffee off the market; most experts are predicting serious trouble ahead for the coffee market. Although we assisted financially Mexico, Bolivia, Chile and Peru, which were affected by the metals decline, this was offset by the profoundly negative impression created by the Administration-­sponsored Bill last year for increased tariffs on lead and zinc. The one country where we have had a serious trade problem for generations—Argentina—­because our products are not complementary, may very likely slip back into its traditionally anti-United States position unless we are able, through large loans and other means, to overcome this fact-­of-­life situation. 3. While in the past we have opposed vigorously any trade between Latin America and the Soviet bloc in strategic materials, we have not opposed other trade. Although Latin American trade with the Soviet bloc, about one percent of the area’s total trade, decreased about 12 percent in 1957 as compared with 1956, it is inevitable that Latin America will attempt to sell more to the Communists if the present decline in exports to the United States continues. We should not and do not oppose such trade in non-­strategic items, except with Red China, although we would expect Latin American Governments to be wary and to avoid political pitfalls. Brazil is now considering whether to resume diplomatic relations with the USSR, undoubtedly as a part of the price for increased commercial relations, with the outcome uncertain. The resumption of relations with the USSR by Brazil would certainly be a political setback for the United States but it may be unavoidable. 4. In addition to trade, our economic policy toward Latin America has been based on private investment and loans, with grant aid only for emergencies. This policy, while never wholly palatable to Latin America, was sound and the results paid off to Latin America’s benefit
