January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1325
(S) Congressional Approval of Preferred Construction/Funding Profile.
Getting Congressional approval and funding of expedited construction
will be difficult. Beyond this, accelerated funding, design and construc-
tion will present special problems. Three options are presented below:
OPTION “A”—Normal Procedure. This would involve seeking con-
struction funding in the FY 82 budget, or perhaps an FY 81 supple-
mental, with hearings beginning in January.
Perhaps we could reprogram modest funds now to begin design
work, since Congress usually turns down any construction project on
which design work is not 35% completed. While we doubt that 35%
will be finished by January, Congress might relent if we can show that
the project is vital and that the architects/engineers are hard at work.
We estimate that Phase I construction can be completed by the fall of
1983, and Phase II by fall 1988.
OPTION “B”—Fast Track. This would involve combining the de-
sign and construction stages, as we’ve done in building Israel’s new
Negev bases. On an optimistic schedule, if all went well with Egypt and
with Congress, we could award a planning and design contract by the
end of this fiscal year (technically we can do this without Hill approval
but it is prudent to advise Congress). If Congress then approved an es-
timated $35m. we could begin runway upgrade by 1 June 1981 and
complete Phase I by mid-1983 provided follow-on programming ap-
proval with FY 82 funds. However, we see many potential pitfalls in
this expedited procedure, not least getting Hill approval. Moreover,
these extraordinary actions would at best save perhaps six months in
the construction cycle by permitting selection of a contractor(s), estab-
lishing a mob camp, ordering aggregate, finding a labor source, etc.
OPTION “C”—A combination of military construction funds and Secu-
rity Assistance (FMS Credit). By this means we could, with the coopera-
tion of the Egyptians, initiate construction in FY 81. Since upgrade of
the airfield and port facilities are improvements to what are essentially
Egyptian facilities, there is some good rationale in involving the Egyp-
tians in these improvements through Security Assistance funding. Spe-
cifically, in FY 81 the Egyptians could undertake a portion of the Phase
I airfield upgrade, the highest priority improvement, for about $50m.
One of two strategies could be followed.
—Request, in an FY 81 Supplemental, additional FMS credit funds
(or possibly Security Supporting Assistance) for Egypt.
—Use FMS Credit funds already programmed for Egypt in FY 81,
working out an agreement with Sadat to transfer some of these funds
from projects already agreed upon with the promise of like, or in-
creased, funding in FY 82.
US planning and design work to support, first, the projects which
the Egyptians would execute could begin immediately by drawing on
