254 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 194. Letter 8 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 8 Geneva, September 15, 1955 Dear Walter: Thank you very much for your letter of September 12 which arrived here yesterday. We get most excellent pouch service on your letters to me and they are most timely and helpful. However, I am discouraged at the time it seems to take my letters to reach you. I fear that most of them are out of date and overtaken by events by the time they do arrive. I am going to see what I can do from this end, but fear that there isn’t much as we are up against complicated courier schedules. Wang moved yesterday under item 2 much more decisively than might have been expected. It is quite clear that by offering only the two topics they hope to get out of this stage very quickly in order to pass on to the Foreign Ministers’ meeting. With the exception of “no force” the two items that we have to propose are of a very miniscule nature as far as the length of the negotiations here are concerned. Chou’s proposal for a Foreign Ministers’ meeting is their answer to our “no force” point, and they will probably reply to “no force” proposals by saying that this would be something for the “higher level” and attempt to avoid discussion. Of course we can counter by making something acceptable to us in the field of “no force” pre-condition for even discussion of a higher level meeting. This, of course, carries with it the difficulty of the more or less implied commitment to a higher level meeting if they come through with anything remotely responsive to our request. Related to all this, of course, is what we really want and expect to get under “no force”. I would hope to be very clear on this before I would start. I find it entirely impossible in my own mind to think through to any logical demand on the Communists that would have effect of at least a promise of a cease fire in the Formosa area without relating it to what we could ask or obtain from the PRC in the same sphere. With the paucity of subjects suggested by the PRC as well as the paucity on our side, I wonder how much scope there is actually going to be for discussions on what we are going to discuss under item 2. We are faced with some real dilemmas. A flat refusal even to con­ sider a meeting at a higher level as a subject for discussion under item 2 would, it seems to me, not be consistent with our tactics. On the other hand, the longer it is left alive without challenge, the greater the implication that we may agree to it. Eventually we have only two 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
