Human Rights
251
termine the degree of effectiveness which can be expected from using
the Title I program to affect the human rights situation in that country.
USDA and AID/Food for Peace stressed that planning Title I sales
was a lengthy and involved process which could not be turned on and
off very easily; they also stressed that the success of the program rested
in part on the ability of customers to be able to rely on the program
from one year to the next, and that the program also had an important
domestic constituency. Longstanding group members, including EB
and D/HA, responded that implementing the link between human
rights and our bilateral and multilateral assistance programs had
created planning and continuity problems for other parts of AID as
well as for the international financial institutions; that we were actively
and continuously seeking ways to improve our procedures; and that
the group endeavored to take operational program requirements and
constraints, and other relevant factors, into account without sacrificing
progress towards our policy goals. The point was also made that our
human rights policy would be viewed as arbitrary and inconsistent,
and therefore be jeopardized, if, for example, we were exerting pres-
sure on a country in the IFIs and through non-PL–480 bilateral aid at
the same time that we were allowing to proceed without hindrance
highly concessionary program aid through PL–480 Title I.
It was pointed out that introducing the Food for Peace program
into our human rights policy might not satisfy human rights-related re-
quirements of the new Food for Peace legislation. AID/Food for Peace
assured the group that it was in the process of drawing up comprehen-
sive regulations which would meet all the requirements of the legisla-
tion. After reviewing the new legislation and a verbal summary of
AID/Food for Peace’s plan to implement it, the group was satisfied
that it need consider only how to tie implementation of our human
rights policy to PL–480 Title I.
The group decided to recommend to the Interagency Group that
the following procedure be adopted with respect to PL–480 Title I:
When AID/Food for Peace and USDA, along with other agencies,
begin the process which eventually culminates in a Title I agreement
with a country, AID/Food for Peace will inform D/HA and EB that the
process is underway. D/HA and EB, in consultation with other inter-
ested offices and agencies, will be able to determine whether the antici-
pated PL–480 program might become a useful tool of our human rights
policy in the relevant country, and will inform the group, whenever it
is considering actions to improve the human rights situation in a
country, of any pending PL–480 Title I activity in that country.
AID/Food for Peace requested some indication of countries in
which it might expect its Title I activities to be affected by human rights
policy. EB and D/HA responded emphatically that any such list could
