Human Rights
203
cieties, we assume that we still want a pluralistic world in which there
is room for societies which are not modeled after our own.
The objective to make “pariahs” out of “gross violators of human
rights” raises the question as to whether goals are best achieved in in-
ternational relations through ostracism or through having a presence
by means of which some influence could be exerted. Moreover, seeking
to normalize relations with human rights violators such as Cuba, the
PRC and Vietnam would be excluded if we took the position that we
should treat them as “pariahs”.
Some further effort should be made to define what comprises “a
consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized
human rights” together with some examples. However, care must be
taken not to adopt too rigid or legalistic an approach which could re-
strict unduly the USG’s flexibility in dealing with human rights
problems on a world-wide basis.
In this connection, it would be most useful to provide a list indi-
cating which countries have and which have not signed the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as well as the various covenants dealing
with economic and social rights, civil and political rights, etc. If a nation
has signed and ratified the various covenants, etc. this fact should make
it more vulnerable to international criticism if it is guilty of violation in
the human rights area.
In discussing carrots or sticks to be used in encouraging improve-
ment in the observance of human rights, (page 26), care must be taken
to ensure that by cutting off food aid, for instance to an offending
country because of its use of torture or ill-treatment of political pris-
oners, the punitive action does not result in the starvation or depriva-
tion of food to thousands of innocent hungry people who are helpless
victims of their own government.
Security Assistance as either a carrot or a stick may also have its
pitfalls. A recommendation to cut off or lower security assistance levels
to a particular country must take into account during the decision-
making process the effects such an action might have on other imme-
diate interests such as, for example, the search for a peace settlement in
the Middle East.
The suggestion to emphasize “our human rights concerns in all
training programs that we conduct for foreign military personnel”
(page 31) could easily be interpreted by a country as a roundabout at-
tempt to “destablize” its government by the encouragement of “sub-
version” among its military personnel.
Our recent experience in the International Labor Conference (June
1–21, 1977) indicates that whatever legal view we may hold concerning
