Romania 695 the interest of both countries and of worldwide peace. The Secretary noted that the President wished to extend his greetings to Andrei and to President Ceausescu and to stress our desire to work with Romania on bilateral matters and on solving pressing international problems. 4. Secretary’s visit. Secretary Vance said he looked forward to visiting Bucharest and would ask his staff to work out proposed dates within the coming week for a visit either at the beginning of December or immediately after a meeting he would attend in Brussels later that month. Andrei said he was authorized by Ceausescu to fix the visit at any time except during the November 10–25 period. He explained that Ceausescu wished to meet with the Secretary during his visit but would be busy with the Romanian Party Congress during the period he had specified in November. Andrei said he was certain the Secretary’s visit would contribute significantly to US-Romanian relations and to bilateral cooperation on international issues. He proposed, and the Secretary agreed, that an important area for an extensive exchange of views during the visit would be the “new economic order” and other North-South issues. 5. Trade and export licenses. Andrei said he had only two bilateral matters to raise with the Secretary. Both were economic and on each he wished to request the Secretary’s personal support. The first was the matter of US export licenses. For the first months of 1979, the US had enjoyed an active balance of trade with Romania, and his government did not see this as a problem. (Nimetz noted that in 1978, Romania had enjoyed a trade surplus with the US, which had aroused some questions during the congressional review of MFN.) On the other hand, Andrei said, he requested the Secretary’s continued support in efforts to expedite the issuance of US export licenses. Romania was grateful for what had been done already in this regard, in the spirit of President Carter’s letter to President Ceausescu, and would like to see these efforts continue. Andrei indicated that a list of pending license requests would soon be transmitted to Counselor Nimetz via the Romanian Embassy. In response to the Secretary’s query concerning the status of this question Nimetz said the problem had been more in the length of time required to process license applications rather than in large-scale denials of licenses. The executive branch had made serious efforts to expedite processing of applications, and good results had been achieved. He indicated that we were well disposed to continue these efforts. He said there had been no recent requests from Romanian Embassy here to expedite specific applications, but we would be glad to act on such a list when it was received.
