International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1147 “Sadly, our mutual efforts have fallen far below their potential accomplishments. Those efforts have been subverted by those with a different agenda. The focus on women here was pushed aside and became a victim of those who choose instead to focus on the political polemics of the Middle East situation. We are denied a consensus not by questions of how to help women in developing areas, not by questions of what education women need, not by questions of how to support women who are discriminated against on the basis of race and sex, not by any question uniquely pertaining to women or issues viewed from a woman’s perspective. We are denied a consensus by those who want to focus a statement against Zionism, by those who want to advance their special interests in the Middle East—knowing full well that a special session of the U.N. General Assembly is already working on the highly complicated and difficult problem involved. They have not compromised as they claim; they have denied women whatever their race, religion, or national origin a unique opportunity to contribute solutions to their own issues in their own way. And the intemperate and abhorrent attacks against Israel and the Camp David process are completely false and regrettable.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 1980, page 64) The text of the Program of Action, entitled “Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,” is printed in ibid., pages 64–85. On October 28, 1980, the White House released a statement indicating that Carter intended to send the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women to the Senate in early November. (Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents, November 3, 1980, page 2477). Weddington circulated copies of the White House statement under cover of an October 29 memorandum, noting that “The President and I hope the Senate will give early and favorable consideration to the Convention. I am heartened by this positive step by the United States to move the equality of women to the forefront of international issues.” (Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs 1980 Subject Files, Lot 82D180, SHUM Women 1980) The Senate received the Convention on November 12, and referred it to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by unanimous consent. Although the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held hearings on the Convention in 1988, 1990, 1994, 2002, and 2010, it has yet to be ratified by the full Senate.
