National Security Policy 823 objective shall not be less than six months’ usage by industry in the United States in periods of active demand. Defense Mobilization Order V–7, issued on June 30, 1958, provided for reducing all stockpile objectives from a 5-­year to a 3-­year basis. The period applies to various national emergencies during which deficien­ cies of the supply of basic materials for industry may occur. This action was taken after a review by the Pettibone Committee, Interdepartmental Materials Advisory Committee, Defense Mobilization Board and National Security Council. The period is being restudied by the National Security Council and is subject to change. Pending a determination of needs after a nuclear attack on the U.S., the planning period would be limited to 3 years, but a shorter period would be used where an anal­ ysis would lead to the conclusion that supplies could feasibly match requirements in less than 3 years. (Some of the stockpile objectives cur­ rently assume a deficit of supply only over a period of 6 months to 2 years until capacity can be restored to adequate levels or alternate materials can be utilized.) The recommendation also recognizes that a deficit of materials supply may occur after a nuclear attack on the U.S. Such a deficit, of course, could never be larger than the consuming capacity of indus­ try as rehabilitated and would need to take into account also rehabil­ itated supply capacity. After a devastating attack, some stockpiles of basic industrial materials in or near consuming areas doubtless would be needed. Generally stockpile objectives established for an emergency short of an attack on the U.S. would be adequate for an emergency after an attack. In some cases, however, the objectives calculated to meet the first contingency are so small that their adequacy for the second con­ tingency may be questionable. The recommendation provides, there­ fore, that until the needs after a nuclear attack, including those for reconstruction, have been determined, the maximum objectives shall be not less than 6 months’ usage of the materials by industry in peri­ ods of active demand. This level of the maximum objectives would not require any new purchases but would require retaining some materials that otherwise would be regarded as surplus. “In establishing requirements of specification-­grade nondeterio­ rating materials, which are mostly metals and minerals, consideration may be given to such factors as increasing essentiality in the light of tech­ nological change, special usefulness for reconstruction after a nuclear attack, depletion of reserves, and other pertinent factors.” Recommendation #2. Disposal of Excesses “Dispose of excesses whenever possible under the following conditions: (a) approval of Departments of Interior, Commerce, State, Agriculture, Defense, and other agencies concerned, (b) appropriate consultation with the industries concerned, (c) avoidance of serious disruption to usual markets
