1956 857 of Garnish whether anything to charge. Garnish unattributedly dis­ counted charge as unfounded Chinese Communist effort cover up own failure implement, suggested [garble] read too much significance into it. Gowen 530. Telegram Secto 43 from Colombo1 Colombo, March 11, 1956, 10 p.m. Secto 43. Reference Secto 41. Following is summary of Chou En-­lai memorandum to Nehru, dated March 2 for discussions with Secretary. Johnson-­Wang talks con­ cern two principal questions, one implementation of agreement on Nationals, two declaration on peaceful settlement disputes. As regards American Nationals out of 40 prisoners only 13 remain. Cases of remain­ ing are under review. No difficulty exists in case of prisoners. However, as regards Chinese Nationals in US many difficulties have arisen. Out of 5042 students only 156 have so far returned. PRC have list of 3477 names of which 628 wish to come back. US however, have told them permission to return has been given to only 103 students. Of these 31 have still not returned and 3 are missing. Names and addresses of all have been given to Indian Embassy. Chou En-­lai mentioned following specific US obstructions: (a) US has taken no action communicating text agreed announcement to Chinese prisoners; (b) have refused to give list of prisoners; (c) Indian Embassy has no facility for communicating agreed announcement to Chinese prisoners; (d) Formosa entry permits and permanent resident permits. As re declaration on peaceful settlement of disputes the text of the four drafts have been made available to Indians. Last American draft raised two fundamental questions: (a) right of self-­defense; (b) specific mention of Formosa area. Under no circumstances could PRC agree to any statement regarding US so-­called right of self-defense in Formosa area. Chou En-­lai intimated that US might withdraw clause re self-­ defense in order to insist that Formosa area be specifically mentioned in text. PRC would not object to Formosa being specifically mentioned in draft as one of existing disputes provided Foreign Ministers’ con­ ference also mentioned as agreed method of settling these disputes. Unless US willing accept this compromise declaration should be in 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/3–1156. Confidential.
