590
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The program threatened to make government assistance dependent on
an enterprise’s ability to show a profit. We believe that the policy of
“self-financing,” as announced by Ceausescu, if implemented, would
place enterprise managers in a precarious position. The central authori-
ties demand increased productivity, even though the workers’ capabil-
ity of providing it is already strained. There are indications, however,
that when it is implemented, the program may turn out to be less
drastic than originally presented.
9. Workers’ unrest last year was caused by the requirement to
perform overtime work without pay, a reduction in retirement benefits
and experiments with the unpopular productivity-wage linkage. Under
the new program, underfulfillment of production targets by enterprises
would result in wage cuts for workers. Despite the regime’s hopes to
the contrary, this could again foment instances of unrest.
10. In an effort to facilitate the program, Ceausescu undertook a
major reshuffle of the hierarchy last month. The shifts involved mainly
the top officials of the planning, foreign trade, finance and industrial
construction sectors. The scope of the transfers, which included some
of Ceausescu’s closest associates, suggests that he is making an all-out
attempt to put the economy on a better footing.
11. Ceausescu’s principal foreign policy objective is to retain as
much independence from Moscow as possible, given geopolitical reali-
ties. In line with this goal, Ceausescu has been trying to build a “special
relationship” with Washington as he believes that closer political and
economic ties will help Romania fend off pressures from the Soviets
for closer integration with the Warsaw Pact and CEMA. At the same
time, Ceausescu seeks to keep balanced relations with all of the major
powers, and his visit here next week is expected to be followed by a
trip to China later this spring. He probably also plans to go to Moscow
this year although apparently no date has been set.
12. Ceausescu recently named Stefan Andrei his new foreign minis-
ter, replacing the ailing George Macovescu. The appointment is not
likely to alter basic Romanian foreign policies. Andrei has been Ceau-
sescu’s personal foreign policy advisor for some years, and he is
expected to accompany him to Washington.
13. Ceausescu is anxious to retain his country’s active participation
in world affairs, but Romania’s recent foreign policy performance has
been unspectacular. Bucharest has been unsuccessful in making an
imprint on the CSCE proceedings and its suggestions were not reflected
in the final document. The Romanians probably would like to play a
leading role in the non-aligned movement, but are finding it difficult
even to put a foot in the door.
14. Ceausescu has a deserved reputation as a behind-the-scenes
arbitrator of international disputes and did help arrange the Sadat-
