3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
354
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
and the Secretary would have to sit down and try to unravel this knot,
although he felt there should have been no need to do that at all.
Further, he and his authorities in Moscow had noted that the US
Government recently appeared to be of two minds about the very idea
of a new accord. Sometimes, it seemed, the US Government simply left
matters to drift, to be driven by the wind. Some sort of a passive atti-
tude was displayed toward the new agreement. At times it was difficult
to understand whether a statement by a US official spoke in favor of the
new agreement or against it. When he and the Secretary had discussed
SALT matters in Moscow, it had appeared that the United States was in
favor of concluding a new agreement, and the same had been true last
year in Washington, when President Carter had spoken in favor of
doing so. On the other hand, it was very difficult to regard recent offi-
cial statements of the US as arguing in favor of the new agreement.4 He
would ask the Secretary to clarify the true position of the US Govern-
ment. In this connection, he would note that Vice President Mondale’s
speech in the General Assembly yesterday5 had caused some dismay
on the Soviet side. He did not want to go into detail now, since he
would speak in the General Assembly tomorrow, and would take into
account the Vice President’s speech, but without indulging in emo-
tions, unlike yesterday’s speaker. Our two countries had interests that
were much more important than some of the issues mentioned yes-
terday. These interests had to be taken into consideration, applying
logic and reason. Surely the Secretary understood that peace could not
be built without the participation of the United States and the Soviet
Union. Gromyko’s authorities understood very well that ensuring gen-
uine world peace and security required the participation of both our
countries. As for war, neither of our nations wanted or needed a war.
Both sides realized full well what a war would mean today, taking into
account the development of modern technology. Therefore, it was quite
unnecessary to build up some sort of artificial myths and fears and then
put stock in them. What was needed was a calm, considered and
thoughtful approach, one that applied reason. He would point out,
therefore, that if yesterday’s speech had been aimed at putting pressure
on the Soviet Union, and if some other statements pursued the same
objective, nothing would come of it. Attempts had been made many
4 During Carter’s May 4 news conference, he indicated that a new SALT treaty was
not imminent. For the text, see Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, p. 852.
5 On May 24 Mondale addressed the U.N. Disarmament Sessions and outlined
what he hoped would be the future of arms limitation. For the text of his speech, see “Ex-
cerpts From Vice President Mondale’s Address to the U.N. Disarmament Session,” The
New York Times, May 25, 1978, p. A16. For more information on the decisions made at the
special session of the General Assembly, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1978, pp.
17–49.
