continuing nature of the allocation to which assent was requested. The same principle is raised in the hypothecation of the customs revenues for the service of bonds. I venture to quote below the observation to which I have referred: “The note of July 14 from the Wai Chiao Pu introduces an innovation which appears to me to be fundamental, in that it requests not merely the release of an ascertainable balance but a commitment to assent to releases33 month by month for an indefinite period, without the possibility of foreseeing whether the balance requested will be available in any given month in the future. In my understanding of the matter, so long as the 1912 agreement remains in effect, the body of interested Ministers have a fiduciary obligation to assure that the indemnities and specified loan services are duly met; and although they have no discretion as to the uses to which the Chinese Government may put any balances in excess of the funds necessary for the indemnity and loan services, it is their function to assure that no releases are made until satisfied of the existence of such surplus at the time. I cannot escape a feeling that by consenting to the present request they would vitiate this principle and forego what is both a right and a duty to protect the security of the indemnities and foreign loans specifically charged upon the customs revenue.” It is an unlooked for situation that has now arisen out of the international action taken in 1912. The Powers acquired, and still exercise, a trusteeship over the whole customs revenue, but in respect to obligations that require only a portion of the whole. In regard to the disposition of the remainder, they have informed the Chinese Government most emphatically that they exercise no control whatsoever. They have, in fact, latterly refused even to express an opinion as to the way that it should be used. But at the same time they continue to insist upon an arrangement that places the control of this surplus in the hands of a particular officer of the Government of foreign nationality. The Department will have noted in the Senior Minister’s memorandum to the Chinese Foreign Office of May 12, 192634 (see Diplomatic Circular No.
