786  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
HA–25.	
Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State1

Washington, August 31, 1960.
SUBJECT 
United States Assistance to Haiti
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.5-MSP/8–3160. Confidential. 
Drafted by Warner.
2 Robert Newbegin was appointed Ambassador to Haiti on August 27.
During a conversation at the White House on July 11, Secretary Herter had informed 
the President that President Duvalier had recently requested the recall of Ambassador 
Drew. Herter explained to the President that Ambassador Drew had done a fine a job 
in Haiti, was of retirement age, and had requested retirement. Herter also reminded 
the President that Haitian governments had requested the recall of the last four United 
States ambassadors sent there and that the situation was essentially chaotic. President 
Eisenhower agreed to replace Drew. (Memorandum of Conference with the President; 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries).
ARA - Mr. Mann 
Mr. Mallon
Ambassador Newbegin2
DLF - Mr. Perry
ICA    - Mr. Atwood 
Mr. Harrison
CMA - Mr. Wieland 
Mr. Vallon 
Mr. Warner 
REA - Mr. Sinn
The meeting was called on short notice to take advantage of 
Ambassador Newbegin’s brief visit to Washington to consult on devel-
opment assistance problems prior to the departure of Mr. Mann and 
Mr. Atwood for Bogotá.
The meeting began with a discussion of the present political situa-
tion in the Caribbean and the desirability of keeping Haiti in a neutral 
position between Cuba and the Dominican Republic. There was general 
agreement that if the Trujillo Government should fall, Haiti would be 
concerned primarily with defending herself from any spilling over into 
Haiti of revolutionary situation in the Dominican Republic. Mr. Mann 
recommended that Ambassador Newbegin take a suitable occasion 
soon after his arrival to let the Haitian Government know that in case 
Trujillo’s fall we would want to see a responsible government assume 
power in the Dominican Republic, one which is prepared to live up to 
its inter-American commitments, and that we would not view favor-
able any action by the Haitian Government which might impede the 
attainment of this objective. The principle danger in a Dominican
