1956 921 I have interpreted your titling of the draft as “the second United States revision of Chinese Communists December 1 counterproposal” as a title that would be used if and when there were a public unilat­ eral release by us of the text. In my opening statement I am therefore, although I find it somewhat awkward, laying the groundwork for that terminology. However, in the piece of paper that I am actually handing him I am sticking to the former form of simply showing the date of the draft and entitling it as previously, “Agreed Announcement of the Ambassadors of the United States of America and the People’s ­Republic of China”, and as he has always laid considerable store upon such nice­ ties, reversing the order of the names from that which appears in your 1892 so that my name appears first. Thanks for the corrected information from Defense on the list of missing military personnel. It is certainly a complicated situation when one gets down to the details and you can be sure that I will be happy as long as they continue to handle it at Panmunjom. We have located the “Prisoner Book” and I am sending it to you by air pouch. Sorry for the delay. As far as the note from the Chinese Communists to the British on the NNSC is concerned, I have no special light to shed on it from this end. It appears to me to be largely an effort to enlist the interest of ­Sweden and Switzerland in reducing the NNSC as an additional fac­ tor in support of the long-­standing Chinese Communist position on a Korean conference. A renewal of this at this time of course also fits in well with the whole Communist Bloc peace strategy, to the extent that they are pursuing that strategy probably inhibits them from taking mil­ itary action against the offshores. I am hoping that we will shortly get from INS some of the back­ ground data we have asked for on the names given me by Wang, as it will certainly help me in knowing how best to handle the matter better in the future here. I am very pleased at Holdridge’s arrival. I have talked to Frank Gowen with regard to your thought of their loaning me a man one day a week to keep the record of the meetings in exchange for Osborn doing some work for the Consulate. With the GATT meeting here now wind­ ing up, Gowen says that he would be able to carry it out and is agree­ able to such an arrangement. I am, therefore, suggesting that Holdridge stay through the meeting next week which will give him a good cross section of the situation here to carry back to Hong Kong with him, and the arrangement with the Consulate will then go into effect with the first meeting in May. I very much feel with such an arrangement some way should be found of sending Helenka back here and I hope that this can be done. This would enable Miss King to get away for her home leave and on her way to her next assignment where she is undoubtedly
