3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
116
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
United States. Brezhnev had to tell the Secretary that the considerations
the US side had set forth had been very carefully considered by him
and his colleagues, and what he had to say here represented their
common opinion.
That which Secretary Vance had set forth in his talks with Foreign
Minister Gromyko was a repetition of a previous US proposal, re-
garding which the Soviet side had already informed President Carter
and the Secretary that it was completely unacceptable; as for the new
variant presented by the US side, it was equally unacceptable for the
Soviet Union because of its one-sided nature. The United States was
proposing things which, if one got to the bottom of them, objectively,
and without indulging in propaganda were advantageous to one side
only, i.e., the United States, and would harm the security of the USSR.
Brezhnev said that he had carefully followed the entire course of
the current talks, and he had to point out that, just as earlier, we were
here witnessing manifestation of a desire to pretend that there was no
Vladivostok understanding; and yet, that understanding had been
achieved as a result of the immense efforts of both sides, involving a
great deal of hard work. How could one discard that to which the
United States had given its consent at the very highest level? The Soviet
leaders had wanted to believe the word of the United States as a state.
By way of another example of a one-sided, non-objective position
at the talks, Brezhnev wanted to refer to the course taken by the United
States and its NATO Allies at the Vienna negotiations on the Mutual
Reduction of Armed Forces and Armaments in Central Europe. He
knew that the Secretary and Gromyko had discussed this question as
well. Indeed, the NATO countries did not even try to conceal the fact
that they wanted to use these negotiations to improve their military po-
sitions in Europe, to the detriment of the Soviet Union and its allies. Did
the US side really consider the Soviet leaders to be naive simpletons?
Had the Secretary believed that the Soviet Union would agree to this?
The answer was no; no indeed. It would be much better in a business-
like way to consider the possibilities of reducing the armed forces of the
two sides, while still retaining the existing correlation of forces. This
was the only reasonable and realistic way out of the present situation,
and was in fact why these negotiations had been started in the first
place. Brezhnev would most sincerely and insistently call upon Secre-
tary Vance and President Carter to approach the major and important
issues being discussed here, above all the problem of limiting strategic
arms, in a less one-sided manner, and with an account for the legiti-
mate interest of both sides, so as not to discard what had already been
achieved.
Naturally, the Soviet leadership did not believe that, because the
two sides had not been able to agree on the question of strategic arms
