Human Rights
63
The President then acknowledged difficulties with the aid program
in the past which have become important symbols: World Bank sal-
aries, the fact that 40 per cent of IDA funds go to India alone, the
over-concentration of administrators who live in relative opulence in
Washington and other capitals. The Administration is seeking to ad-
dress each of these issues.
Congressman Reuss agreed on the need to support IFI’s. He volun-
teered the desirability of a “Congressional declaration supporting the
Administration view that human rights are important and that we will
use our vote and any other leverage in the IFI’s to advance human
rights.” The Administration faces a moment of truth tomorrow on two
multilateral loans to Argentina.
The President replied that the Administration would “err on the
side of human rights” decisions involving multilateral loans. He stated,
however, that there can be no absolute standards as the Korean case
shows.2 A declaration by Congress with regard to human rights in the
IFI’s would be fine, the President said, as long as it left the Administra-
tion some flexibility.
The President noted that the IFI’s have exerted “conservative
lending pressure” on borrowers which has been healthy for inflation
control.
Senator Humphrey noted that while India gets 40 per cent of IDA
loans, it is not at the top of the list on a per capita basis. The President
stated that India had made remarkable progress recently not only be-
cause of good crops, but in human rights as Mrs. Gandhi has taken
steps away from totalitarianism.
Senator Case switched the discussion to his concern that foreign
assistance decisions should not be contingent upon any U.S. domestic
pressures. It has been argued, he said, that U.S. assistance is actually
spent in the U.S. and benefits American industries, that P.L. 4803 helps
American agriculture, and so forth. In the long run, it would be better
to separate our parochial interests from our foreign policy objectives to
achieve flexibility in meeting the latter. Congressman Long nodded ap-
2 Presumable reference to Vance’s February 24 testimony to the Senate Appropria-
tions Subcommittee on Foreign Operations. During the course of his testimony, Vance in-
dicated that while the United States had recommended cuts in military aid to Argentina,
Ethiopia, and Uruguay, the administration would not reduce aid to South Korea “despite
the fact that we have great concern about the human rights situation in that country,”
noting that security concerns remained paramount. (Don Oberdorfer, “In Rights Push,
Vance Asks Cuts In 3 Nations’ Aid,” The Washington Post, February 25, 1977, p. A–1) See
also Bernard Gwertzman, “Security Links Cited: Assistance Is Reduced for Argentina,
Uruguay, and Ethiopia, Vance Says,” The New York Times, February 25, 1977, p. 1 and
Hedrick Smith, “Aid Cut to Rights-Violating Nations Is Break With U.S. Pragmatism,”
The New York Times, February 25, 1977, p. 3.
3 See footnote 6, Document 4.
