Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 727 with many of you in the foreign policy debates of the past decade—indeed, the past generation. Through these trials our society has been moved to strengthen and vigorously exercise our machinery for dissent and disagreement. That is all to the good. We are better for it. But our challenges call on us to focus as intently upon another part of our national character—our ability to pull together and respond as Americans when our interests are under attack. I do not believe there can be unanimity on the great and complex questions before us. But there can be a spirit of cooperation as we address them. I appear before you today in that spirit. 147. Address by President Carter1 Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, May 9, 1980 Chairman Yarnall and President Bodine,2 Members of Congress, ladies and gentlemen: [Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.] For the past 6 months, all of our policies abroad have been conducted in the glare of two crises: the holding of American hostages in Iran and the brutal invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. In meeting these crises our tactics must change with changing circumstances. But our goals will not change and have not wavered. We will not rest until our fellow Americans held captive in Iran— against every tenet of law and decency—are safe and home free. Along with other nations who have condemned Soviet aggression, we will continue to impose economic and political costs on the Soviet Union until it withdraws its armed forces and restores the independence of Afghanistan. These two crises underline the reality that our world is indeed a dangerous place, but what I want to emphasize today is that amid the crises of the moment, no matter how profoundly significant they are, 1 Source: Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 873–880. The President spoke at 1:02 p.m. in the Grand Ballroom of the Fairmont Hotel before the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia. 2 Reference is to D. Robert Yarnall, Jr., Chairman of the Board of Directors and William Bodine, Jr., President.
