986 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Accept, Excellency, the renewed assurances of my highest consideration.” “I am happy to announce that President Eisenhower has, as a voluntary and unilateral decision on the part of the Government of the United States, approved the flying of the flag of the Republic of Panama together with the United States flag on a daily basis in Shaler’s Triangle in the Canal Zone. This decision is in reflection of the genuine friendship that exists between our Governments and peoples, and symbolizes the close ties that unite us.” PM–59. Telegram from the Ambassador in Panama (Farland) to the Department of State1  Panama City, September 17, 1960, 1 p.m. 156. President informed and note delivered simultaneously Acting Foreign Minister 9:00 EDT. President elect Chiari informed 10:35 EDT and statement issued press 11:00 EDT.2 President De la Guardia expressed great satisfaction U.S. decision, stating his faith in President Eisenhower and in latter’s understanding Panama’s problems had always been basis his firm belief flag issue would be favorably considered and resolved satisfactorily. President added he felt U.S. decision would assist create climate for discussions on subject construction sea-­level canal which he foresaw a certainty near future. He expressed some worry over-wording of note on grounds extremist elements might seize upon try make further trouble but did not specify that which created concern. Embassy believes he had reference to statement that decision in nowwise be considered as modifying treaties and agreements in force between U.S. and Panama. President-­elect delighted news and promised with flag issue out of way full cooperation re-­establish friendly and cooperative atmosphere for moving ahead together. I took occasion point out primary obstacle to close and fruitful cooperation was communist subversion spearheaded now in Panama by Cubans. President-­elect said his government prepared take action but information activities Cubans in Panama lacking 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 719.04/9–1760. Secret; Niact. 2 For the text of the White House press release, see the Department of State Bulletin, October 10, 1960, p. 558.
