Peru 1081 housing program by sponsoring community action on this subject. In general we should seek to have the Church throughout Peru carry out a program along the lines now being pursued by the Maryknoll Fathers in Puno. At the same time we should encourage the Church to take a vigorous stand against communism. 9. We should encourage the military in Peru to support a positive program to improve the standard of living of Peruvians, including the necessary social and economic reforms. We should support the general desire of the Peruvian Government and the military to have the military take a more active role in the economic development of the country and agree to the use of MAP furnished equipment for this purpose provided this can be done in keeping with commitments under bilateral military arrangements. We should lend our support to the announced desire of the military to indoctrinate recruits in civism and against communism and to provide them agricultural, mechanical and trade training. Within available resources, we should provide material and technical resources toward that end. The military should be encouraged to carry out its anti-­communist policy with more vigor. 10. We should keep in mind that anti-­communist legislation is required in Peru and bring it to the attention of the Government at appropriate opportunities, but until the Beltran Cabinet has made an effective start on its program and has solidified its position better, we should not press on this point. When this subject is discussed with Government officials we should seek legislation in terms of strengthening the Penal Code, and not a separate anti-­communist law which would be an open target for the communists and easily repealed. 11. We should encourage the Government to eliminate communists from the Government. Wherever possible we should identify such persons, but this should always be done on the basis that the Peruvian Government itself must investigate to determine the facts. 12. We should seek termination of Government support, in whatever form, to communist-­led labor unions. (It is not sound practice in any case for the Government to be subsidizing labor unions, but it is especially wrong when this involves communist-­led unions.) For the Ambassador: Robert M. Sayre Second Secretary of Embassy
