20  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Soviet economic offensive. Following an intensive re-­examination we 
have prepared the following brief summary of the principal current 
facets of our economic relations with Latin America. We should like the 
opportunity of reviewing these matters with you as we share your con-
cern at certain aspects of our economic relations with Latin America, 
and believe that the short review which follows represents the begin-
nings of some new directions which could ultimately improve these 
relations substantially.
Commodities and Trade:
The economies of many Latin American countries, and their bal-
ance of payments, depend upon the export markets for primary prod-
ucts. Coffee, copper, oil, lead and zinc are important export industries 
which are in difficulty. Our traditional aversion to international com-
modity agreements, [illegible in the original] international discussions 
of commodity problems which might imply a willingness to [illegible 
in the original] participating in such agreements, has given an impres-
sion of lack of sympathy for the economic problems of countries depen-
dent upon primary products. It is important that the U.S. take steps to 
[illegible in the original] this impression. In the case of coffee, and lead 
and zinc, recommendations have been made that we seek agreement 
within the Government for the U.S. to participate in the multilateral 
examination of [illegible in the original] and demand trends in these 
commodities. This should have important psychological and political 
advantages, and might in the long-­run promote [illegible in the original] 
readjustment between supply and demand.
In the case of lead and zinc we are also exploring within the 
Government various measures for assisting the domestic industry, 
including [illegible in the original] payments to producers. In the case 
of coffee, the producing countries have withheld substantial stocks 
from the market; current prices are still well above producers’ break-­
even points and should probably come down still further so as to 
reduce the incentive for expanding production. Unless and until there 
is a [illegible in the original] price break, Latin American pressures for 
such extreme [illegible in the original] import [illegible in the original] 
should, we think, be resisted, although we will continue to examine 
the legal and other questions involved [illegible in the original] to be 
prepared to set quickly in case of emergency. The long term question of 
whether commodity stabilization agreements are desirable in the case 
of these commodities is [illegible in the original] that can be reviewed in 
the light of future developments and of the results of our participation 
in the above mentioned international study groups.
Oil and copper present somewhat different problems. As you know, 
we have successfully resisted the imposition of mandatory controls 
over oil imports. Our consultations with Venezuela and Canada prior
