March 1952–February 1953 had made. I said that it had been difficult for me to believe that Hakimi was really 82 years old. He seemed to me to have energy and alertness of well-preserved man of 65. Ala said Hakimi was continual surprise to his friends because of his excellent physical condition and mental alertness. During recent trip of Shah to Shiraz Hakimi had shown more stamina than most younger men in Shah’s party. For first time Ala spoke in rather favorable way of Qavam. He also said Shah had been impressed by Mansour during his recent convs with latter. Altho Mansour had been charged with public dishonesty in his past career these charges had never been proved. Ala asked what my impression had been of Mansour during my various convs with him. I said that I not (rpt not) in position to adequately judge but if Mansour had ability to put into practice what he preached he shld make excellent PriMin. I cld not (rpt not) but wonder however why in his last term as PriMin he had not (rpt not) accomplished what he now said shld be done. I asked Ala if Shah was still considering Saleh as possible successor to Mosadeq. He said Saleh had made excellent impression on Shah and Shah had not (rpt not) as yet dismissed him as possibility. I remarked if Shah and his advisers wanted new PriMin to be of natl stature I had some doubt that Saleh had requisite standing in the country. Ala agreed but said in view Shah’s liking for him Saleh cld not (rpt not) as yet be dropped from running. I asked Ala if he might not (rpt not) be willing reconsider his own decision not to accept PriMin job. Ala said no (rpt no). He said he did not (rpt not) believe he had qualifications for shouldering difficult and delicate responsibilities which new PriMin must face. 4 [sic]. I asked Ala whether Shah had yet tentatively worked out manner in which change of govt might be effected. Ala said no (rpt no). Great pressure was being brought to bear on Shah however to decide at once who new PriMin was to be and to permit several of his most trusted advisers know what his decision was so that plans cld be made in advance for selection of new cabinet and so that feelers cld be sent out re solution of oil dispute. Ala said he wld talk to me again within next few days in case any kind of definite decision was made. Altho Shah is apparently seriously toying with idea of making move to get rid of Mosadeq and altho he is beginning to realize that his prestige is suffering because he has permitted sit of country to deteriorate over such long period without intervention, nevertheless he has in past shown himself to be so indecisive and cavillating that we cannot (rpt not) assume in advance that he will not (rpt not) find some excuse for failing to take action. 5. For last two months supporters Qavam have been trying make arrangements for us to meet. They have made numerous suggestions
