710.C2/166
[Document 202]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)
WASHINGTON, January 15, 1925.
No. 966
SIR: The Department has received your … despatch No. 2270 of October 28, 1924,27
stating that Doctor Guillermo A. Sherwell, Secretary General, Inter-American High
Commission, was informed by Minister Pacheco28 that it was the latter’s desire that
Doctor Leo S. Rowe, Director General of the Pan American Union, should visit Rio to
confer with him regarding the meeting of the International Congress of Jurists which
should assemble at Rio next year. You add that Doctor Pacheco advised you that one of
the subjects he wishes to discuss with Doctor Rowe was the propriety of inviting the
Secretary General of the League of Nations to assign a representative of the
International Law Section of that body to attend the Rio meeting in order to bring the
members of the Section into relation with that committee from whose advice and
experience they might benefit.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
In reply you are informed that the Department understands that it is not Doctor Rowe’s
intention to visit Rio at this time but rather to visit the Central American States on
returning to the United States after the termination of the Third Pan American
Scientific Conference at Lima.
The Department however desires that you should, should you perceive no reason for
not doing so, make known to Doctor Pacheco informally and confidentially the
Department’s views regarding the participation of the League of Nations, or Sections
thereof, in American conferences.
It should be understood that no disparagement or criticism of the League of Nations is
intended when it is observed that the International Conference of American States, and
the subsidiary, technical and specialized Pan American Conferences, are organized
upon a distinct and separate basis. The scope of the League of Nations is intended to be
world wide and a number of American States are members of the League and are thus
able to express their points of view on matters of world wide import which come before
the attention of the Council and the Assembly of the League respectively. The Pan
