Romania
573
191.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Romania1
Washington, February 16, 1978, 0212Z
40781. Subject: Secretary’s Meeting With Romanian Emissary
Pungan.
1. Romanian Emissary Pungan met with the Secretary on February
14 for an hour to exchange views on the outcomes of Sadat’s visits to
the U.S. and Romania.2
2. The Secretary said that Sadat had arrived in a gloomy mood,
believing that Israel had not reciprocated his Jerusalem initiative. He
was questioning whether progress could be achieved. After his talks
with the President, with members of Congress, and with citizen groups,
he left Washington reassured. He reached basic agreement with us that
the peace process should go forward and he agreed to do his part. The
White House statement following the President’s final meeting with
Sadat set out our fundamental positions on all major aspects of the
negotiations, including the applicability of 242 to all fronts, resolution
of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects, and the view that Israeli
settlements were contrary to international law and constituted an obsta-
cle to the peace effort.
3. Continuing, the Secretary said that Sadat had also agreed that
Atherton should go to the Middle East to help stimulate progress on
a declaration of principles, among other things.
4. The Secretary then described the administration’s decisions
announced earlier in the day for the provision of aircraft to Egypt,
Saudi Arabia, and Israel. The decisions reflected long-standing commit-
ments in principle made to Israel and Saudi Arabia. All parties will
receive less than they would have liked except the Saudis.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-
tary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, Vance EXDIS MemCons, 1978. Secret;
Exdis. Drafted by Draper; cleared by Luers and Nimetz; approved by Atherton. Sent
for information to Cairo, Damacus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, and Amman.
2 Sadat visited Romania February 11–12. In telegram 977 from Bucharest, February
14, the Embassy reported that the Syrian Ambassador wondered aloud if the Romanian/
Egyptian communiqué “represented new resolve of Egypt to ‘abandon’ bilateral talks
with Israel in favor of wider discussion.” While Syria would not participate in a Cairo
meeting, he added that “it had not ruled out meeting under Waldheim’s auspices.” The
Embassy also noted that Sadat’s time in Romania was very limited, making any meeting
with a third party highly unlikely despite rumors of a senior PLO representative being
in Bucharest at the same time. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D780067–0878)
