August 8–September 17, 1978 181 on the U.S. role. They have an interest in assuring the success of the American effort. They believe that the American side wishes to be even-handed and fair. The American paper has been studied in this light. Points of agreement between us have been sought. So has the answer to the question: what is the main purpose of the United States in presenting the proposal? It is intended to be a compromise between the Israeli and Egyptian positions or is it a formulation of U.S. views on controversial issues involved in the dispute. The Secretary said that the purpose of the U.S. proposal is to set forth a fair and even-handed method and framework which will allow a comprehensive settlement to be achieved. It also takes into account practical and other related aspects of the problem. El-Baz said the Egyptian side has some problem with the structuring of the American paper, but that this is not overly important. He wished to make some general comments about the American paper. First, the Egyptians do not get a clear definition from our paper of corresponding obligations that the parties should have to each other pursuant to UN Resolutions, which are the basis for settlement. He specifically mentioned UN Resolution 242. The recurrent theme in the American paper, as the Egyptians see it, is that the main obligation is to negotiate. The obligation to “act” has been subordinated by this emphasis. Negotiations, he contended, are a process; they are not a basic obligation. They must also be put in the framework of how the Arab-Israeli situation has evolved. Our approach only defers dealing squarely with the problems. The U.S. paper suggests that the parties negotiate on the basis of such and such resolutions. The history of the dispute, el-Baz argued, makes it clear that the Israelis conduct their litigation without a full recognition of the mutuality of obligations. Egypt believes it is essential that there be a clear definition of the obligation of both parties. The negotiations should focus on how to implement obligations. Second, el-Baz noted, the American paper appears to de-emphasize mutuality and reciprocity, especially in its provisions concerning security. The Egyptians realize that security is for both parties. “For certain reasons” Egypt accepted the “notion” that the Israelis are more sensitive on this point. But this should not be a general rule. Security is a right and an obligation for all. When Egypt presented its draft proposal, el-Baz continued, it believed that the proposal contained many ideas. The Egyptians were surprised to find that the American paper did not draw much on the Egyptian paper. There were some serious omissions in the American paper, e.g., (a) any reference to the declaration of human rights, (b) a declaration to the principles of international law, (c) any reference to compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. The Egyptians had thought that this last
