1202 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 487. Memorandum of Conversation1 Moscow, April 21, 1978, 6:30–8:00 p.m. SUBJECT Vance-Gromyko Meeting PARTICIPANTS U.S. U.S.S.R. Secretary of State Vance Foreign Minister Gromyko Ambassador Malcolm Toon First Deputy Foreign Minister Ambassador Paul C. Warnke Korniyenko Ambassador Ralph Earle, II Dep. Foreign Minister Semenov Mr. Leslie H. Gelb Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin Ambassador Marshall D. Shulman Marshal N.V. Ogarkov Mr. Reginald Bartholomew Col.-Gen. M.M. Kozlov Lt. Gen. Edward L. Rowny Mr. V.G. Makarov DAS of Def. Walter B. Slocomb Mr. N. Detinov Mr. Mark Garrison Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter Mr. William D. Krimer Mr. A.A. Obukhov, Note Take (Interpreter) Mr. V.F. Isakov, Note Taker [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Special Session on Disarmament.] SSOD Gromyko noted that the U.N. Special Session on Disarmament would be convened shortly. He did not know how the Secretary viewed it, and what he thought the prospects were for a successful outcome. If the Secretary had any ideas on this score, he would be pleased to hear them. The Soviet side regarded the SSOD as a broad worldwide forum, and would, of course, set forth its views on disarmament in that forum. It would be very good if the countries of the West as well as the East approached the SSOD in a serious and businesslike manner and adopted positive decisions on the questions involved. The important thing, of course, was not just to adopt decisions but also to implement them. The U.N. adopts quite a few good decisions, but subsequently, when the Secretary General circulates them to member governments, all too often they pile up on desks in various government offices and nothing much happens. He was not trying to reproach anyone in this regard, but simply would not like to see this happen in the case of the SSOD. As he had said, the Soviet side attached great importance to the 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Vance to Moscow, April 1978. Secret; Sensitive; Nodis. The meeting took place at the Kremlin. Drafted by William Krimer. The memorandum of conversation is printed in full in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 102.
