Chapter 2, January–June 1989  149
order to deploy strategic defenses by logically connecting the right 
to deploy without further reference to the ABM Treaty to the out-
come of discussions on a cooperative transition, rather than to a non-­
withdrawal pledge. The onus for failure of the discussions (should 
it occur) would fall on the Soviets, providing the U.S. with a stron-
ger political argument for deployment. Also, in conjunction with 
proposals for differentiated periods of permitted testing activities, it 
could shorten the time under the restrictive interpretation of the ABM 
Treaty. (S)
This option is not now supported by any agency. (S)
4. Drop the right to deploy in exchange for unlimited testing rights 
during the non-­withdrawal period as a quid pro quo for a non-­withdrawal 
period. This option would instead entail making explicit a right to 
test all space-­based weapons, regardless of physical principle, as the 
quid pro quo for a non-­withdrawal period. At the end of the non-­
withdrawal period, the sides would simply regain their right to with-
draw from the ABM Treaty. Or, this option could be implemented in 
conjunction with Option 2. in DST 001, which would make explicit 
such a right. (S)
Those who would support this option believe that the most import-
ant U.S. interest is to demonstrate the feasibility of strategic defenses 
through realistic testing, and that if this can be done, it will naturally 
diminish the political barriers to deployment of defenses. They also 
would argue that there is little practical difference between the polit-
ical difficulty in providing six months notice of an intention to deploy 
defenses and six months notice of withdrawal from the ABM Treaty. (S)
This option is not now supported by any agency. (S)
Future Work. Options considered in this paper were limited to those 
that could conceivably be implemented as we return to the negotiations 
in Geneva in June. Moreover, options 3 and 4 are included in the paper 
despite the fact that no agency now supports them. Some agencies 
believe that these are promising options, which merit further consid-
eration, but would not be appropriate to table now. Moreover, other 
options must and will be considered. In this work, thorough analysis 
of our negotiating position in light of SDI deployment objectives stem-
ming from the President’s decision on the course and funding of the 
SDI program will also be considered. (S)
