404  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
status of the SRF and of other surviving forces with “high” likelihood, 
except [less than 1 line not declassified]
—The primary U.S. status information deficiency is the limited 
information expected to be available on nuclear operations (launches, 
NUDETS), [3 lines not declassified]
—Information Availability—Enemy Status
—The ability to locate enemy residual strategic forces, elements 
of the command structure, strategic and intelligence/reconnaissance 
assets, or tactical forces will be severely limited by loss of intelligence 
assets due to enemy action or (in some cases) collateral damage.
—The most significant enemy information deficiency will be the 
inability to determine the mission and alert status of residual enemy 
forces.
—Determination of the extent of economic damage in enemy terri-
tories will be difficult without imagery data. SIGINT also is expected to 
be inadequate; hence, a “low” assessment of the availability of enemy 
status information, [less than 1 line not declassified]
(TS) On the ability of the NCA to Command and Control, Communi-
cate, and Retarget U.S. Military Forces
—The principal RF communications sites, satellite terminals and 
common-­user facilities are expected to be destroyed in a major nuclear 
exchange.
—[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
—[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
—[4 lines not declassified] and the forces and information sources 
that survive.
III. Conclusions
(TS) The primary conclusions drawn from the assessments made 
by this study are:
(1) We cannot offer a confident judgment on the survivability of 
the NCA. We did not have full access to evacuation/reconstitution 
plans and successful evacuation is highly situation-­dependent (rang-
ing from a surprise attack during a Presidential inaugural or State 
of the Union address, to attack after a prolonged crisis). [2 lines not 
declassified]
[1 paragraph (4 lines) not declassified]
(2) At least a portion of each leg of the SRF TRIAD is expected to 
survive and remain available [less than 1 line not declassified] The rapidly 
decreasing survivability of the Minuteman [2 lines not declassified] The 
hard target capability and control responsiveness of the Minuteman 
argues, however, for retaining even a small MM element in the SRF.
