Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
717
290.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting1
Washington, April 26, 1978
SUBJECT
Talks with the Soviets on Arms Transfer Restraint
PARTICIPANTS
State
ACDA
Leslie Gelb, Director, Office of
Spurgeon Keeny
Politico-Military Affairs
Barry Blechman, Assistant
Director, Weapons Evaluation
Defense
and Control
David E. McGiffert, Assistant
Secretary for International
White House
Security Affairs
David Aaron
Jessica Tuchman, NSC
JCS
Reginald Bartholomew, NSC
Lt. General William Smith
CIA
George Allen
The PRC met to discuss plans for the next round of talks with the
Soviets on supplier restraint in the transfer of conventional arms. The
following issues were raised and positions taken.
The discussion focused on two issues: What our goals should be
for this round of talks; and, what approach to use in pursuing those
goals. On the first question there were two views. NSC and ACDA ar-
gued that as the Soviets have not yet had their interest engaged in this
process, the purpose of this round must simply be to hook them into it,
and to get their agreement to continuing series of full-fledged working
group meetings. If this proves successful subsequent rounds could ad-
dress specific tough issues. State argued that this round is the time to
begin discussion of the difficult issues because otherwise we would be
offering the Soviets the opportunity to string us along, which they
would be happy to do indefinitely. In so doing, we would lose our slim
remaining chance of engaging British and French cooperation in this ef-
fort. Neither Defense nor JCS took a clear position on this issue.
Regarding the approach to be taken, two approaches—overlap-
ping, but differing significantly in emphasis—were presented.2 The
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 29,
Meetings—PRC 60: 4/26/78. Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation
Room.
2 Tarnoff sent Brzezinski an undated Issues Paper, “Strategy at the Helsinki CAT
Talks,” that discussed the two approaches. (Carter Library, National Security Council, In-
stitutional Files, Box 68, PRC 060, Arms Transfer Talks, Helsinki, 4/26/78)
