972  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
alliance together. Nevertheless its effectiveness will probably be some­
what reduced, and this reduction could attain serious proportions if 
European confidence in the will and ability of the US to protect Europe 
from the Communist threat should decline markedly.
55. De Gaulle will probably continue to seek to minimize the degree 
of integration of NATO forces and to develop France’s own nuclear 
capabilities. However, the achievement of a substantial independent 
nuclear capability would present enormous economic and technolog­
ical difficulties for France and would in any event require a period of 
not less than five years and probably considerably more.
56. In part for this reason, France may at some point solicit the 
collaboration of West Germany and perhaps of other European NATO 
countries, in the development of advanced delivery systems and per­
haps in the production of nuclear weapons. Adenauer would almost 
certainly not enter into extensive collaboration under present circum­
stances. He and his successors would probably adhere to the same 
position in the future, so long as they were assured of US aid and sup­
port and provided also that West German forces could obtain nuclear 
weapons from the US on acceptable terms. In the latter connection, 
West Germany and other NATO members are likely in the near future 
to press for changes in stockpiling arrangements that would provide 
NATO, WEU, or national participation in control.
57. Apart from the case of France, the independent development 
of nuclear weapons by West European countries will be inhibited by 
world opposition to nuclear testing, demonstrated strikingly in the 
recent UN vote on the French tests, and likely to become increasingly 
strong whether or not the major powers reach an agreement on the 
subject. In the face of this opposition, and the costs involved, we now 
believe that it is an open question whether such countries as Sweden 
and Switzerland will develop their own weapons. West Germany is 
unlikely to do so unless denied weapons on acceptable terms by the 
US, the UK, and France.
58. Over a period of 5–10 years, the emergence of a continental 
bloc that controlled a substantial nuclear capability and sizable conven­
tional forces, is a possibility. However, any such European turn away 
from primary dependence on the US would be likely only if European 
confidence in the US had markedly declined. Moreover, such a union 
based primarily on West German and French military potential could 
attain major proportions only under optimum conditions, including at 
a minimum continued rapid economic progress and internal political 
stability among the participants.
59. The progress of Western Europe in the past decade, including 
the stability of West Germany and gradual consolidation of its ties with 
the West, remains a major gain in the overall Western power position. 
However, this new strength will probably not be applied as fully and
