3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
June–December 1977
179
agreement” on export credit terms is now in effect, and the Soviets are
unwilling to pay the higher interest rates required. Soviet negotiations
with Italy have dragged on since May 1976, with France, Japan, and the
United Kingdom watching closely to see whether the Italians can with-
stand Soviet pressure to break the agreement by offering better terms.
The betting is that Italy will cave in.
A reduction in the trade deficit is expected in 1977 with con-
tinued—if sluggish—Western growth leading to expansion of Soviet
exports; a sharply lower grain bill will reduce imports. A deficit of $4
billion or less and a $3 billion increase in debt is anticipated. A further
decline in the deficit is likely in 1978, given continued economic growth
in the West and the bumper grain crop Moscow expects this year. Oil
exports could fall, but probably not enough to prevent an increase in
total exports while imports should be stable or lower.
Prospects in the longer run, however, are much dimmer because
the expected decline in Soviet oil production and exports will seriously
aggravate the Soviet hard currency position. Western bankers will
probably have increasing doubts about Moscow’s ability to maintain its
foreign exchange earnings and manage its debts in the 1980s. Substan-
tial new credits are likely to depend upon Soviet willingness to under-
take large compensation deals, particularly for development of energy
resources, that provide assurances of export capacity.
Grain
Even with normal harvests, Moscow will need to import 10–20
million tons of grain annually to support announced livestock expan-
sion programs during the next several years. If past practice holds,
about half of Soviet import requirements would be filled by the United
States. The need for US supplies obviously depends both on the size of
Soviet requirements and on production and stocks in other supplier
countries. Attempts to apply US leverage on the grain issue might lead
to minor concessions in the short run but would carry longer run costs.
The threat of withholding grain, even if not exercised, would compro-
mise US reliability as a supplier and lead the Soviets to pursue
alternatives.
Our leverage is lessened by the wide range of options available to
the Soviets in the event of a moratorium on US grain shipments.
—In the short run, other countries would be able to provide addi-
tional grain, especially at premium prices.
—Over the longer run, the USSR could probably arrange for alter-
native supplies, perhaps with the aid of long-term contracts.
—Domestic demand for grain could be substantially reduced by
(1) rationing and other conservation measures, (2) export cuts, and
(3) further slaughtering of livestock if need be.
