1956  1135
reasonable drafts for declaration that regard. Only because my side 
stubbornly clinging to demands unacceptable their side that no agree­
ment reached. To prevent these talks from developing into meaningless 
stalling situation their side proposed we discuss subject of embargo 
raised by their side under second item. At last meeting I had indicated 
willingness hear their views on question embargo but remarks I made 
then seemed show my side doesn’t intend carry on businesslike dis­
cussion of subject and seek solution. If that is position he could only 
regard it as unreasonable. Their side had joined in discussing subject 
proposed by my side. If my side refused discuss subject proposed their 
side it would indeed turn these talks into unfair unequal negotiation; 
he hoped this not intent my side.
2. Wang now specifically suggested we first reach agreement on 
following lines: “In order that subject raised by Chinese side under 
second item agenda may be handled, both sides of these talks agree 
to proceed to subject of embargo and seek practical settlement.” He 
would now like to hear my views.
3. I replied assumption he made was apparently that there no lon­
ger any way open to us continue seek agreement on question renun­
ciation force. While true this subject proposed by me, it subject which 
felt we both agreed went to very heart of basic disputes between us. 
It was suggested by my side as first essential step in seeking peaceful 
settlement those disputes. I could not but continue consider it this 
light. I therefore could not agree that we abandon efforts reach agree­
ment renunciation force. If his govt were to abandon obstacles it had 
placed in way of reaching agreement on renunciation force declaration 
I was satisfied we could very readily reach agreement thereon. In our 
discussion up to May 11, two of us had been proceeding—very slowly, 
it is true—in way which could lead to agreement. He responded to 
my proposal of last October with draft that indicated at least partial 
acceptance fundamental principles proposal which I had made. This 
was in sense step forward, although it was largely canceled out by his 
attempt introduce into that draft separate matter Foreign Ministers 
conference as precondition for agreement on renunciation force.
4. I said with introduction my draft Nov 10, which expressed very 
concretely principle of renunciation force without entangling it with 
extraneous topics, our discussions had progressed to new stage. Three 
weeks later on Dec 1, he had submitted new draft. Without sacrificing 
his views as to desirability eventual meeting Foreign Ministers, had 
in his Dec 1 draft at least tacitly accepted idea our immediate task, of 
reaching agreement on renunciation force, should not be complicated 
by introduction extraneous matters. I had welcomed this draft of his 
side, and called it advance over previous position. In my subsequent 
successive efforts continue our progress towards meaningful renuncia­
tion force, I had been very careful preserve, in entirety, area agreement
