142  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
such components, the United States is prepared to carry out such per-
mitted testing only from designated ABM test satellites. Any space 
object in earth orbit from which a component of an ABM system capa-
ble of substituting for an ABM interceptor missile is tested to counter 
a strategic ballistic missile or its elements in flight trajectory shall be 
designated as an ABM Test satellite. Further, it is the view of the United 
States that the number of U.S. designated ABM test satellites in orbit 
simultaneously shall not exceed a number well short of that associated 
with any realistic deployed capability. The United States believes the 
number 15 falls well below that threshold.” (S)
To help clarify ABM testing permitted during the non-­withdrawal 
period and to provide for greater predictability, the U.S. also proposed 
in the draft Predictability Protocol that the Parties shall provide each 
other with the following data:
1. Identification, no more than 12 hours after launch of each space 
object in earth orbit from which a component of an ABM system capable 
of substituting for an ABM interceptor missile is to be tested to counter 
a strategic ballistic missile or its elements in flight trajectory;
2. Notification within 12 hours after the re-­entry of an ABM Test 
Satellite from its orbit or after a change in orbit; and,
3. Notification of a test using such a space object in earth orbit to 
counter a strategic ballistic missile or its elements in flight trajectory no 
less than two hours prior to the conduct of any such test.
Thus, should the Soviets accept the current U.S. draft predict-
ability protocol, they would necessarily accept certain ABM testing 
in space, thereby implicitly accepting some aspects of the broad inter-
pretation. (S)
U.S. Position: Space-­based Sensors. The U.S. has also proposed that 
the sides agree not to object, “on the basis of the ABM Treaty, to the 
development, testing, and deployment  . . . of space-­based sensors.” In 
explaining this initiative to the Soviets, the U.S. noted that satellite sen-
sor programs are vitally important to both sides in providing warning of 
an attack, and thus are also vitally important to stability. Furthermore, 
it is very difficult and, as both sides improve their systems, becom-
ing increasingly more difficult to distinguish independently between 
space-­based sensors capable of substituting for ABM radars and those 
that are not. Thus, limitations on the capability of deployed space-­based 
sensors are neither desirable nor verifiable. The U.S. has presented to 
the Soviets a definition of “space-­based sensors” in the context of this 
proposal; but it has not been agreed to by the Soviets. (S)
Soviet Position. The Soviets have criticized the sensor proposal as 
undermining the ABM Treaty and they have responded negatively 
to the additions to the Predictability Protocol proposed by the U.S. in
