456
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Ambassador have asked for a meeting with the Revolutionary Council
to request exit visas for the six to leave the country inasmuch as he
did not have their papers? What would have been the position of
Ghotbzadeh or the Revolutionary Council in terms of internal politics
if the request had been made? An impossible situation, a true dilemma
that the Canadian Ambassador and probably every Ambassador would
want to avoid. It was necessary to find a way out which I imagine
required creating identities which did not correspond to reality. But
Ghotbzadeh himself and other Iranians pursued by Savak, didn’t they
benefit from Syrian, Algerian and other passports which did not corre-
spond to reality? What was the answer to this problem? Ghotbzadeh
did not, of course, respond directly to my questions but said, “But at
least they should not have made publicity and cries of victory over
there.” In that he is, this time, completely right.
The American telegram is in this sense very good but the evil has
been done. It is necessary, however, to avoid from the American side
all expressions of joy and of victory. They should be restrained and
the six should take into account that the 50 and Laingen and his two
colleagues remain in Tehran.
Ghotbzadeh was as always very correct and agreeable with me. I
asked him how he saw the development of the situation, knowing well
that the political campaign had absorbed him. “I can’t see it very
clearly,” he said. It is necessary to wait to see what will be the reaction
of the Canadian affair. (In this connection, we note that the students
on the compound have been much more restrained and cool than
Ghotbzadeh who might intend to use the affair for political reasons,
while the students have said that the treatment of the hostages will
not be harsher because of the affair.) On the results of the campaign,
Ghotbzadeh said that he had not been able to do anything because he
had dedicated himself completely to the question of the hostages. (In
other words, he said that the U.S. is responsible for his defeat.)
