578 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX II. Key Issues 1. Human Rights: Ceausescu will be prepared to discuss human rights, and we will recommend that the President outline our general policy and the values we support. We will recommend that the President make clear the importance to the Administration and the Congress of favorable and prompt action on emigration and marriage requests, including emigration to Israel, particularly if Romania wishes eventually to obtain most-favored tariff status on a long-term basis. There is disagreement within the Department on how to approach three subjects: Romanian treatment of the Hungarian minority, human rights considerations with respect to loans from international financial institutions, and the Rauta case. We are seeking to resolve this disagreement.4 2. Credits: The Romanians have long been pushing for large-scale credits on near-concessional terms for economic development. Despite previous rebuffs, Ceausescu may well raise this subject with the President. We cannot meet such a request, but in order to encourage Romanians to respond to our interests, we are asking the Export-Import Bank to study the possibility of a line of credit and perhaps expansion of the Cooperative Financing Facility (CFF) in addition to project-linked loans. 3. Export Controls: Ceausescu may complain at the restrictions imposed on exports of high-technology U.S. goods to Romania. An inter-agency review of our export control policy with respect to Romania is now underway. We are considering recommending some liberalization of commodity (as opposed to technology) exports, which appears to be possible without jeopardizing our strategic interests.5 4 In telegram 79839 to Bucharest, March 28, the Department noted ongoing disagreement between EUR and HA concerning the level at which issues such as the treatment of the Hungarian minority and the family reunification case of Romanian defector Constantin Rauta should be raised. HA supported the position that these issues be raised by the President, or, failing that, by the Secretary of State. EUR supported the position of keeping these issues in discussions at lower levels. Furthermore, the administration was coming under pressure from Congress—66 members of Congress had sent a letter to the White House indicating their concern with violations of human rights in Romania. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780135–0900) 5 In preparation for Ceausescu’s visit, an interagency group was formed to look into the possibility of loosening export controls toward Romania. The Department of Commerce and the Department of State supported some limited liberalization of export controls for commodities, while the Department of Defense continued to oppose for fear that such controlled technology might end up in Soviet hands. EUR hoped that by Ceausescu’s visit a definitive answer on policy toward Romania regarding export controls might be announced. (Telegram 47748 to Bucharest, February 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780087–0883)
