400
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of control and initiative exercised by Moscow. We should pick our
targets for a sharpshooter’s rifle, not a shotgun.
An improvement—both in substance and in public perceptions—
may lie in making two important distinctions. We must distinguish be-
tween what it is possible to gain in the way of altered Soviet behavior,
and what is not. And, in our public stance, we should concentrate as
much on what we are doing to compete as on Soviet behavior to which
we object.
Whenever we make public demands for actions the Soviets do not
then take, or build up their power or activities, we make ourselves look
weak.
It would be better, in international and domestic political terms, to
exhibit a great firmness, giving stronger emphasis than we are now
doing to our strength, our confidence, our actions—in the defense
budget, in Africa, in our economy, and in the reassertion of our ideals.
For in the long run, we hold most of the cards in the East-West
competition.
After there is agreement on the various elements of that strategy
towards the Soviets, I recommend that:
—I find the occasion privately to discuss with Gromyko, for an ex-
tended period of time, where we stand in our relations and what both
sides can do to prevent a serious deterioration.
—You or I give a major speech on US-Soviet relations in which you
would express the combination of the firmness, confidence, and tact
with which you seek realistically to regulate a basically competitive re-
lationship in ways that will be less dangerous for the world.10 It would
counteract public anxiety about a perceived decline in American
power. And it would present the case for both a strong defense es-
tablishment and our security interest in arms control. Such a speech
would provide an authoritative framework for all statements by our
spokesmen in the following months.
The thoughts that I have shared with you in this letter are the re-
sult of my belief that we have reached a critical point in our relations
with the Soviet Union and perhaps with China as well, and that it is
therefore essential to do a careful and searching analysis of our options
for dealing with these central questions of American foreign policy
over the next few years.
For that reason, I believe we should undertake a special review of
US-Soviet relations. I would personally lead the drafting and prepara-
tion of options for your ultimate decision, incorporating the views of
10 The President delivered a speech on U.S.-Soviet relations on June 7; see Docu-
ment 87.
