International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
411
134.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, June 5, 1978
SUBJECT
DISC
1. Introduction. Mike Blumenthal and Juanita Kreps have recom-
mended to you that we propose to the Congress a smaller and more
cost-effective DISC, and a new direct export incentive within the DISC
for small and medium-sized firms.2
2. The Pro Argument. A cost-effective DISC and a direct export in-
centive would help to sustain US exports and thus to stabilize the
dollar. By the same token, the National Export Policy now being devel-
oped3 will lack credibility in the business community if we are still op-
posing DISC when it is announced.4
3. The Con Argument. State argues that these proposed export in-
centives would step up the pace of export subsidy competition and
thus go counter to the type of international subsidies code we are trying
to negotiate in MTN. (See State memo at Tab A.)5
I doubt that negotiating a reformed DISC with Congress will sig-
nificantly reduce our chances of securing an international subsidies
agreement. Indeed, in seeking a reformed DISC, we could inform both
the Congress and foreign governments that we will propose its repeal if
a satisfactory international agreement is negotiated. This would show
the Congress that we are tough negotiators, and give foreign gov-
ernments a tangible reason to seek an international agreement.
In any event, the chances of negotiating a subsidies code are uncer-
tain, at best. In the absence of a code, common sense argues for having a
cheap and effective DISC, instead of the present expensive and ineffec-
tive one—which the Congress will otherwise insist on our retaining.
4. Conclusion. Substantively, the arguments favor DISC reform.
Procedurally, I see little merit in deferring your decision pending further
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 92, Finance/International: 1–6/78. Confidential. Sent
for information. Brzezinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 See Document 132.
3 See Document 119.
4 In his tax reform plan announced on January 20, Carter included a measure calling
for the phased elimination of DISC. See footnote 13, Document 119.
5 Tab A, attached but not printed, is a June 3 memorandum from Christopher (as
the Acting Secretary of State) to Carter entitled “Export Tax Subsidy.”
