Negotiating Channels 437 165. Memorandum From the White House Chief of Staff (Jordan) to President Carter1 Washington, undated As I told you, Secretary Vance has taken the position that he does not want to hear the tape of the Waldheim meeting with the Revolutionary Council2 or hear [read] the transcript. You may want to defer reading the transcript until you confer with him. I believe that even if you don’t read it, it is important that you know what actually happened. Let me begin by saying that I know that the Secretary-General was trying to identify with the Iranians, appear neutral in his role as Secretary-General and create an atmosphere that might result in progress on the hostage issue. He also was under a certain amount of pressure due to the fact that his life was in danger several times.3 Having said that, let me make these observations: 1. The Secretary-General did not present on behalf of the world community the view that Iran was in violation of international law. This should have been stated in a tactful way during his meeting with the Revolutionary Council. 2. He tried to identify with the Iranians at the expense of representing the world community. 3. Because he did not clearly state the U.S. or United Nations position on the situation, the members of the Revolutionary Council were left to draw their own conclusions about where things stood. 4. The tone of Waldheim’s remarks was apologetic, defensive and at points obsequious. There is no way that the Council—particularly the religious, non-secular members—could have concluded that they were dealing with either a strong man or a strong organization. Consequently, while recognizing the critical role that the United Nations and the Secretary-General have to play in resolving the crisis, I believe that you should consider reading the transcript just so that 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 1/80. Eyes Only. In the upper right corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Ham. J.” 2 According to Saunders, to establish their credentials, at the January 25 meeting (see Document 164), Bourguet and Villalon presented Jordan with a cassette tape recording from Ghotbzadeh of Waldheim’s meeting with the Revolutionary Council at the beginning of January in Tehran. (Saunders, “Diplomacy and Pressure,” American Hostages in Iran, p. 119) 3 See Document 132.
