572
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
8. When discussing the US option, we noted that we would expect
him to renounce his throne if he were admitted to the States for the
operation. The Shah did not seem to be very concerned with the pros-
pect. His response was that before the operation he could always
announce he was renouncing his claim to the throne in favor of his
son. In contrast, the Empress felt very strongly that he should not
renounce the throne. She said that such an action would be a major
disservice to his family and the people of Iran.
9. As incidental information, we understand that Princess Ashraf
called the Shah just before our visit to note she had received the Presi-
dent’s letter,4 and that she strongly recommended that the Shah go to
Houston for the operation then travel to Egypt after he had recovered.
We have also heard that the evening TV news in the States carried
a report that it was rumored that the Shah would go to Egypt for
his operation.
10. We believe it would be useful if we talked via secure line before
the President speaks with Sadat. Consequently, if it is convenient, we
will plan to call Camp David at 0830 in the morning your time. It
would be helpful to have your views on whether we should, as the
Shah suggests, give him our recommendation on whether he should
go to the States or Egypt. Also, if you have any thoughts on the question
of renouncing the throne, it would be helpful. Specifically, would it
be sufficient for the Shah to renounce in favor of his son, or would
we want him to only renounce the throne without mention of the
Crown Prince.
11. We believe the Shah is truly ambivalent about what to do and
if we gave him a specific recommendation, it could easily steer him in
that direction. If we do not make a specific recommendation it would
be a close call as to what he would do. We believe the Empress is
leaning toward Egypt, whereas the Shah’s specific medical concerns
may make him lean slightly toward Houston.
Moss
4 Princess Ashraf’s March 21 letter to Carter is in Carter Library, Plains File, Box
23, Iran 6/75–12/79. In his reply that same day, Carter wrote: “Our preference now is
that he receive treatment under Dr. DeBakey’s care either at Gorgas, the U.S. hospital
in Panama, or in Houston, Texas.” (Ibid.)
