1978  451
build similar systems. You should not expect our studies of these alter-
native basing systems to reveal a better solution than MAPS. Rather, we 
are looking at whether there are acceptable systems which do not raise 
the same issues of SALT verification and intelligence requirements that 
MAPS does.
It is important to emphasize that the SALT verification problems 
posed by MAPS are only a special case of a general intelligence prob-
lem that would also exist if SALT limitations did not exist. That prob-
lem is the requirement that our intelligence be able to monitor the size 
of the Soviet RV force which a MAPS must face with sufficient certainty 
to give us confidence that we have enough shelters to absorb the threat 
and leave an adequate number of U.S. missiles surviving. Uncertain-
ties in the size of the Soviet force can stem from a Soviet MAPS, Soviet 
cheating on SALT, or Soviet measures to conceal the size of their force 
in the absence of SALT limitations.
Recognizing that there will always be some uncertainty in our esti-
mates of the size of the Soviet force, a MAPS system would be designed 
with a tolerance for considerable uncertainty as to the Soviet ICBM 
inventory. For example, in one MAPS design concept we would plan 
on 200 M–X missiles with 50% survivability. If the threat from Soviet 
missiles were doubled, survivability would be reduced to 15%, i.e., only 
30 M–X missiles—­but still a force equivalent to 100 Minuteman IIIs. We 
also could hedge against threat increases by adding additional shelters; 
for example, if as in the previous example the threat doubled, a 10% 
cost increment for added shelters would keep survivability from drop-
ping below 25%, or 50 M–X missiles.4
In my view, a crucial point in discussion of MAPS verification 
in the SALT context is this basic fact about the concept: The system 
would, for strictly military reasons, be designed to tolerate a substan-
tial concealed increase in the size of the Soviet force. The size of that 
tolerable concealed increase would have to be large enough that we 
would be confident our intelligence could detect a force larger than 
that with very high confidence—­whatever concealment measures the 
Soviets might employ, including copying the MAPS concept. Meeting 
this strictly military requirement would in itself meet the basic test of 
arms control verification: That test is not absolute certainty, but high 
confidence that cheating (here, concealment of illegal missiles in a 
MAPS) would be detected before it could affect our security or under-
mine the strategic balance. For SALT it is very desirable—­and may be 
politically essential—­to have more confidence in counting the Soviet 
force than we require to meet this military requirement. However, it is 
important to recognize that we are talking about adding to a level of 
4 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Ermarth wrote: “No numbers.”
