Hungary 515 8. Economic and business topics. Esztergalyos reported his consultations included an extensive discussion with Deputy Prime Minister for Economics Marjai on US-Hungarian business relations. Esztergalyos reported Hungary’s main economic task is to increase efficiency and productivity and that 1979 through early 1981 is the crucial period. He noted favorably that Hungary has gotten its debt-service ratio down to about 20 percent. 9. Ridgway noted that although as a matter of policy the U.S. does not seek to achieve bilateral trade balances, congressional and other inquiries do arise. She hoped that in future years the mix of bilateral agricultural versus industrial trade will evolve to a more stable situation. Esztergalyos responded that Hungary has a major interest in entering into long-term relationships with U.S. firms, including some Hungarian investments in the US, and in altering the basic structure of bilateral trade. He noted that last year for the first time Hungarian industrial exports exceeded agricultural ones, and said Hungary wants to import more industrial goods than agricultural and raw materials. 10. Particular business issues. (A) Chemical patents dispute. Esztergalyos said he had heard that a Hungarian court ruling had recently gone against the Chinoin Chemical enterprise. He said this proves what the Hungarian Government has consistently maintained: that Hungarian courts and procedures are objective and do not automatically favor the Hungarian party. Esztergalyos said it is logical that as commercial relations expand, particular problems will arise but it is important that—as was done regarding the chemical patents disputes—both governments work to promote solutions between the disputing firms and enterprises and not permit things to become politicized. (B) Rockwell/Raba. Esztergalyos said it appears clear that in its MFN testimony last July Rockwell was trying to inject politics into a purely competitive question. It resents seeing Raba get a foothold in the United States with products as good as its own. Esztergalyos labeled as significant Rockwell’s inability or unwillingness to answer Senator Ribicoff’s question on how much business from it Raba’s new role is taking away. He said Rockwell has been invited several times to Hungary to discuss business prospects, including with Raba, but that sometimes companies seek to “win by political ways.” He said it was good to see that Congress and STR, on the contrary, look at things objectively. (C) Occidental. Esztergalyos reported that Occidental’s Armand Hammer may come to Hungary in the fall to review a number of prospective projects with Deputy Prime Minister Marjai and others. 11. Comment. Discussion was cordial and ran for 1¼ hours. There were no particular surprises except that Esztergalyos raised the President’s comment, which he did in low key and ostensibly on his
