839.6463/142: Telegram
[Document 624]
The Secretary of State to the Commissioner in the Dominican
Republic (Welles)
WASHINGTON, February 18, 1924—3 p.m.
4. Your 8, February 8, 4 p.m. The contract between the Santo Domingo
Water, Light and Power Company and the Dominican authorities provided
that the property specified would be sold at a price to be fixed by an expert
to be selected by common accord. In fact, however, the Department
understands the expert was picked by the Dominican Government and the
Company acceded to the choice. The Government wished the Company to
advance the cash necessary for the repairs for whatever sum that might be,
taking bonds at 90 therefor. As Hunt did not have authority to bind his
principals for an indefinite sum he was only willing to pledge himself in the
contract to make repairs up to $60,000 although he states the Government
repeatedly requested, him not to fix a limit. However, in order to meet the
wishes of the Dominican Government as far as possible he signed a letter to
the Secretary of the Interior before the conclusion of the contract by which
he agreed, should the expert fix the expenditure necessary for repairs at an
amount greater than $60,000. to recommend to his principals that they
advance the money for this purpose. The expert picked by the Government
reported the value of the property in its present condition at $533,012. and
fixed the expenditures necessary for the repairs at $323,420. Upon receipt
of this information Mr. Hunt, in accordance with his promise to the
Secretary of the Interior, recommended to his principals that they advance
the money necessary for these repairs. The latter agreed to do so and
requested that $951,000. in bonds (equivalent at 90 to $856,432. in cash) of
the projected loan issue be held in escrow for the Company to be turned
over to it at such time as the expert should state that the necessary repairs
had been satisfactorily completed. The Company and Hunt have
scrupulously lived up to their agreement. The Government apparently has
endeavored to find a technicality in the $60,000. provision for not living up
