708  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Guatemala may initiate negotiations for the purchase of comparable (or bet-
ter) aircraft from European or other sources. Although the United States 
Government has successfully prevented the sale by England and Italy 
of jet aircraft to Cuba and the Dominican Republic, it is not unrealis-
tic to consider that efforts by those nations to obtain arms will con-
tinue. Guatemala may also be expected to join in the search for arms 
from Continental sources. Furthermore, as the U.S. Military Assistance 
Program makes available modern aircraft for our allies, the U.S. cannot 
always count on diplomatic representation to prevent the sale of surplus 
aircraft by these countries as well as by non-Western oriented sources.
The six aircraft selected for sale to Guatemala have been demilitarized and 
could not be armed without extensive modification.
In consideration of the above, it would be appreciated if the Department 
of State would reconsider its decision of 23 December 1959 to cancel the sale of 
B-26 aircraft to Guatemala.4
Sincerely yours,
John N. Irwin II
4 For the reply to this letter, see Document GT–27, footnote 7 to the memorandum 
from Rubottom to Merchant, April 4, 1960.
GT–27.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Under Secretary 
of State for Political Affairs (Merchant)1
Washington, April 4, 1960.
SUBJECT
Caribbean Arms Policy: Sale of Surplus B–26 Bombers to the Government of 
Guatemala
Discussion:
Our Caribbean arms policy evolved out of increasing tensions in 
the area and the threat of Cuban aggression against other countries in 
the Caribbean area. It was shaped in part also by other developments, 
among them a break in relations between the Governments of Mexico 
and Guatemala as a result of the machine-­gunning by the Guatemalan 
1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom-Mann Files, Lot 62 D 418, “Guatemala, 
1960.” Confidential. Co­drafted by Owen and Correll. The source text is an unsigned car-
bon copy.
