84 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 9. Increased Afghan-Soviet ties: The Afghans will also possibly seek the establishment of some sort of “official” tie between the CPSU and Kabul’s ruling PDPA. Taraki strongly alluded to this possible development in his November 27 speech to the PDPA Central Committee plenum when he said that during the Soviet [visit] the Afghans would “study and take decisions on the relations between the parties of the two countries” (septel).6 Taraki will also probably seek some sort of Soviet public endorsement of the DRA’s policies to date, undoubtedly including some nice words regarding the Afghan leadership’s performance. General Soviet expressions of support for the regime’s domestic policies and reform measures are probably the minimum the Afghans expect to emerge from the trip. 10. The potentially critical Soviet role in guaranteeing this regime’s security will unquestionably be high on the agenda of these talks, but we anticipate that the substance of these discussions will be closely held and that the issue may not arise in public statements or reports. Both parties may be content with the current magnitude of Soviet presence in Afghanistan (best estimates are that approximately 600 Soviet military advisors are serving here, while about 2,000 Soviet civilians are employed throughout the government’s bureaucracy), and that further augmentations are unnecessary to deal with the present level of Afghan needs. 11. Finally, the visit conceivably could produce a new bilateral treaty of some sort to replace the current 1931 Treaty of Neutrality and Mutual Non-Aggression which was most recently extended for ten years at the time of Nikolai Podgorny’s visit here in December of 1975.7 Although both sides, especially the Soviets, could probably live with the legal status quo governing their relationship, the Khalqis may raise the subject because, in their minds, the 1931 treaty could represent a “relic” of the past, it does not commit Moscow to protect Afghanistan’s security in the event of aggression by some “foreign power,” and a new accord would constitute a dramatic symbol of the “new relationship” which the Afghan leadership is so eager to flaunt. The timing of this visit may find the Soviets in a treaty-signing mood, although for a number of reasons (e.g., reluctance to endorse too fully this particular leadership, concern about alarming unduly the other countries of South Asia—especially India, and a general hesitance to modify legal relation- 6 The Embassy commented futher on the November 27 speech in telegram 9616 from Kabul, December 6. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780504–0134) 7 In telegram 18473 from Moscow, December 29, 1975, the Embassy reported on Podgorny’s December 9–10 trip to Afghanistan, the main purpose of which was to renew the 1931 agreement. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D750449– 0163)
