1980  773
180.	 Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Defense for 
Research and Engineering (Perry) to Secretary of Defense 
Brown and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Claytor)1
Washington, March 31, 1980
SUBJECT
M–X Status Report—INFORMATION MEMORANDUM (U)
1. M–X Steering Committee (U)
(S) The M–X system is facing formidable opposition from a variety 
of sources and for a variety of reasons—­some real, some imagined, and 
some politically inspired. We have established a Steering Committee 
to correct the real problems, dispel the imaginary problems, and cope 
with the politically-­inspired problems. The committee, which I chair, 
consists of Gen Bob Mathis, Toni Chayes, Robin Pirie, Tom Ross and 
Jack Stempler. We had our first meeting last Monday2 and will meet 
about once a week to plan strategy and coordinate tactics on actions 
bearing on substantive program issues and public/congressional rela-
tion issues.
2. Program Issues (U)
(S) The focus of the engineering effort is to effect a design simplifi-
cation so that we can reduce cost. We have dropped the dedicated rail-
road track which connects the valleys in favor of a dedicated road, which 
is significantly cheaper. We are exploring a variation of the horizontal-­
dash (racetrack) system in which the transporter is detachable from 
the erector launcher and only the latter goes into the horizontal shelter. 
This design is several billion dollars cheaper, but permits only road-­to-­
shelter dash instead of shelter-­to-­shelter dash. We are working on an 
operational plan for this design which maintains the high confidence in 
survivability we had in the baseline (horizontal-­dash) system.
(S) We continue work on the Environmental Impact Statement, 
focusing on the “narrowing” issue. We are eliminating a number of 
regions for operational or geotechnical reasons but are not eliminating 
regions for reasons of increased basing costs. As a result, we will prob-
ably end up with two acceptable regions—­the Nevada/Utah basin, 
and the Northern Texas/New Mexico plateau. That means we have 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential 
Advisory Board, Box 84, Sensitive XX: 4/1–11/80. Secret. Smith sent the memorandum 
to Brzezinski and Vance via Alpha Channel under cover of an April 3 memorandum, on 
which Brzezinski wrote: “JW/your reaction? ZB.”
2 March 24. No minutes of the meeting were found.
