64
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
—The committee is going to arrange that the “blacks, women, and
children” be released to the PLO today.2 (Khalid al-Hassan’s advice
was that the U.S. should not be overly grateful to the PLO in public
because it would complicate their role in Iran.)3
Next, Hani al-Hassan has asked Khalid al-Hassan to check out in
the United States whether the following scenario could be worked out
with the USG: an announcement would be made that the Shah would
leave the U.S. on “x date.” An announcement would be made in Tehran
that the hostages would be released on “x date.”
Khalid al-Hassan also wanted to check out whether it was true
that Ramsey Clark had said that the Shah’s assets could be turned over
to Iran. I responded with the standard line on this subject—that any
Iranian who felt he had a rightful claim to any assets that might be
present in the United States would have access to the courts for pursu-
ing that claim.
During the course of Khalid al-Hassan’s phone call, he warned
against too many people muddying communications channels. He said
that the PLO is uncomfortable with Ramsey Clark and feels that he is
not well plugged in. In this connection, we were asked not to tell
anyone outside the Executive branch of this conversation—particularly
not Paul Findley.
Relations between Khalid al-Hassan and Abu Walid are close.
(Note: I presume from this comment that they would not regard the
Abu Walid channel as a muddying of the waters.)
Finally, Khalid reported that hatred of the U.S. in Iran is so great
that the PLO would prefer not to be thanked for anything it achieves
in this situation.
2 In a November 14 telephone conversation which took place at 7:30 p.m., Ambassa-
dor to Lebanon John Dean informed Saunders that he had received a letter from the
PLO stating that Iranian authorities would release the women and African-American
hostages by November 16 and expected “in writing a declaration by the USG announcing
the exact date of departure of the Shah.” (Department of State, Records of David D.
Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot
81D154, Memoranda of Conversation)
3 On November 13, Khalid al-Hasan stated that Arafat had “put himself so far out
on a limb at this point that he will do anything necessary for a successful conclusion of
the PLO-Iranian talks over the hostages.” Al-Hasan added that Arafat “is now acutely
sensitive to misinterpretations of his motives,” which are “strictly humanitarian” and
not founded in political gain. The PLO would thus “issue what are basically disclaimers
(including anti-U.S. statements) to protect its flanks.” (Department of State, Records of
David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–
1981, Lot 81D154, Iranian Embassy Students)
