124  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
In these ways we believe the American Republics can proceed 
effectively basis of common effort to meet their most pressing needs.
ETA–49.	
Editorial Note
Under Secretary of State C. Douglas Dillon, accompanied by 
Robert Cutler, Executive Director of the Inter-American Development 
Bank; Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary of State-­designate for Inter-
American Affairs; T. Graydon Upton, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury; 
two congressional representative from the Senate Foreign Relations 
Committee-Senator Bourke Hickenlooper and Senator Wayne Morse; 
and various advisers drawn from the Departments of State, Treasury, and 
Agriculture as well as from the International Cooperation Administration, 
the Export-Import Bank of Washington, and the Development Loan 
fund arrived in Bogotá, Colombia for the third meeting of the Special 
Committee of the Council of the Organization of American States to study 
the formulation of new measures for economic cooperation (Committee 
of 21) on September 3, 1960, and returned to Washington upon the con-
clusion of the Committee’s deliberations on September 13.
At the third meeting of the Committee of 21, which was attended 
by representatives of all the Americans except the Dominican Republic, 
the United States presented for the Committee’s consideration a pro-
posed new program for prompting social progress in Latin America to 
complement existing programs in the field of economic development. 
Financing for the new program was to come from the appropriation 
authorized by the United States Congress on August 31.
In a statement to the first plenary session of the committee on 
September 6, Under Secretary Dillon, the chairman of the United States 
delegation, presented a draft agreement for an inter-American social 
development program and said that its purpose was to add to the pres-
ent expanding programs of basic economic and industrial development 
a broad new dimension of social development to further social justice 
in the Western Hemisphere. The program’s purpose, he stated, was to 
bring fresh hope to the less privileged people who constituted such 
a large proportion of the people of Latin America and to open before 
them the path to a better life of material well-­being, equality, and dig-
nity. The Under Secretary declared that the United States Government 
was prepared to devote over future years large additional resources to 
carry forward such a program, which was dedicated to supporting the 
self-­help efforts of Latin-American governments and peoples.
