1380 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement meeting with defeat. For example, a great number of Western countries relaxed embargo in face U.S. objections. U.S. policy of hostility against China did not conform to interests of peace or of American people. Even people in U.S. criticizing that policy. 2. Wang continued, in San Francisco, Secretary of State Dulles not only clung to that outworn policy but called for even more aggressive policy. American Secretary of State was not yet willing to reconcile him­ self to fact PRC had existed for eight years. His speech did not hide intention subverting and overthrowing PRC. Dulles called PRC passing phase and pledged self to contribute to this passing. Could this be called sincere desire for settlement disputes and relaxation tensions between two countries? U.S. not only unwilling renounce occupation Chinese territory Taiwan but had installed guided missile bases on Taiwan. An American squadron had intruded in Chinese territorial waters and 66 sorties of carrier-­based planes violated Chinese air space. However, this U.S. policy of creating tension and threat of aggression against China could not achieve its ends. 3. Wang continued, not only was this policy opposed by Chinese people but it being condemned by all peaceful people. Even in Taiwan, under close control American aggressor, all patriotic people can no long­er endure being enslaved nor countenance Taiwan being turned into American base; they have therefore risen in protest against this policy and against outrageous slaughter of Chinese people. 600 million people would never forget this and other bloody crimes committed by American aggressor against China. 4. Wang continued, after seizure of Chinese Territory Taiwan, my side has been proposing what it calls Renunciation of Force. During these negotiations my side had never slackened aggression against China, and continued set up bases for aggressive guided missile atomic warfare against China. My side continued create provocation incidents to increase tensions. Under these circumstances the Renunciation of Force proposal was a deceptive and hypocritical excuse. As long as U.S. did not change its policy of hostility and aggression tensions would not be relaxed, disputes would not be settled, relations would not be improved and there would be no results in our talks and the U.S. would be held entirely responsible for the consequences. 5. Wang continud, he had another matter to bring up. At previ­ ous meetings he had given examples of unreasonable obstructions. Last year on February 9 at the 36th meeting he had given me a list of names including Tseng Kuang-­chih. Tseng had now returned to China but story he had to tell was appalling one. Wang had thought my side would have taken measures concerning, and give accounting of, indi­ viduals on that list. He understood Tseng taken away in handcuffs under orders Immigration Service and confined in solitary confinement
