476 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 73. Notes of a Meeting1 Moscow, February 9, 1990, 11 a.m.–2:30 p.m. Am forces in Germ after reunif—­talk to Secy G—ES good sub. Talks. Begin—Visit import.—­not only for prog. But also each moving forward, reaching new levels of understanding. In Malta, spoke phil. About world events—­then those phil. disc. became import. when events tested our understanding. Cannot say at end of last yr + 1st mo of this all US actions perfect, nor our, but during period, leaders have acted in balanced, prudent, responsible manner. More import. than specific accord negot w. Mr. Shev. B—­events test understanding + rel. up to those tests. Rel. has moved from comp. to coop more + more. Still some competit— *G—In your admin, one or two still regard USSR as a enemy B—­yes but so do you G—­yes, they showed themselves recently B—Came to do business. At Malta two Pres—3 issues at [illegible] Prepared to see if can’t dispose of these issues G—­fam. w. some details. Leave most to you + Shev. Welcome progress. Working on basis of understanding at Malta—­by Summit—­gen. understanding on all issues in START—­work on treaty lang. right after Summit. B—Get prog on 3 here so people will see making way to June. Ques. from press—­reflect this. Want to prove them wrong. G—Hope able to prove that—Some pts of concern remain in process of perestroika—­one principle. don’t avoid problems. Suff. trust to tackle problems. We + you see both sides want to chg sit for better. New suggs on ALCMs reported to me. Think about those. Believe some elements can be import. part of agreement. Some elements of verif can note agreement. But one test—­say firmly both sides confirm ceiling of 6000 warheads. W/in that limit, maneuvers possible. When I look at earlier proposals give US sig. adv. up to 2000 warheads—­not equality. Not retreat from equality—­neither Cong. nor S.S. ratify. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, Robert M. Gates Files, Memorandum of Conversation Files, OA/ID 91166– 007, I Bob Gates Memcons 1989–1992 [7]. No classification marking. Drafted by Gates, who handwrote the notes. No formal memorandum of conversation was found. The editor transcribed the portion of the text specifically for this volume. The memorandum of conversation of Baker’s 9–10 a.m. meeting with Shevardnadze on February 9 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. The memorandum of conversation of Baker’s 1–3 p.m. meeting with Gorbachev and Shevardnadze on February 9 is scheduled for publication ibid.
