Romania a) Credits. Senior Romanian officials have recently indicated that creation of a special American “financial facility” for Romania will be one of Ceausescu’s major goals. They are seeking credits on easier terms than those offered by either the Export-Import Bank or Commodity Credit Corporation export credit programs, which have been used extensively by the Romanians. The Romanians argue that as a developing country—and one so recognized by both the World Bank and the United States—they are entitled to receive “soft” loans. We have pointed out that concessionary credits, such as PL–480 loans, are intended only for the very poorest LDC’s and not for middle-level countries like Romania with a per capita GNP of $1450 (World Bank estimate). Furthermore, under current U.S. legislation Romania is not eligible for PL–480 loans. (Although the communist-country restiction in the Foreign Assistance Act can be waived by Presidential action, such a waiver must be “vital to the security of the U.S.”) Points to be Made (if Ceausescu raises): —Express our interest in expanding trade with Romania, as demonstrated by the active export credit programs conducted by Exim Bank and the Commodity Credit Corporation; express hope that Minister of Machine Building Avram’s talks on April 11 with Exim Chairman Moore and Ceausescu’s own discussions with Secretary Bergland will lead to even more productive use of these programs. —Although the United States has provided concessionary credits to the poorest developing countries, Romania cannot be considered eligible in light of its very impressive economic development. —Recall that the provisions of U.S. law and the Administration’s policy require us to review general questions of human rights in considering specific credit applications. b) Export Control. The Romanians complain that our export controls are a significant barrier to expanded trade, particularly in hightechnology fields such as computers and electronics. They are impatient with the delays and stringent conditions on the export of equipment and technology desired for cooperation projects with American firms, and in particular for an existing joint venture with Control Data Corporation to manufacture computer peripherals. Points to be Made (if Ceausescu raises): —We are treating Romania as liberally as possible within the restraints required by our export control legislation and our security interests. —Acting Secretary of Commerce Harman, with whom Ceausescu will meet Wednesday afternoon, will provide more information on the administration of our export controls. c) Cooperation Projects. The Romanians have sought direct U.S. Government involvement in establishing cooperation projects with U.S.
