78  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
The Planning Board believed that substantially our present base 
system will be needed for at least five years, but thought that it is not 
certain that it will be needed for the next ten years. With this modifica­
tion, it recommended that the Council accept the validity of the main 
thesis, in these words:
(READ the recommendation on page 2, pointing out the three sug­
gestions by the Chiefs, discuss and dispose)
9. The second of the nine issues (page 3) concerns positioning IRBM’s 
at widely-­dispersed bases around the Sino-Soviet periphery. Here the 
Planning Board rejected the notion that such positioning is required to 
retain the edge in the deterrent race, but felt that it would better ensure 
our ability to deter general war. There was a split on whether the impli­
cations of positioning IRBM’s outside the NATO area should require an 
NSC decision, after giving consideration to the over-­all advantages and 
disadvantages. Specifically, the language of the Planning Board recom­
mendation is as follows:
(READ the recommendation on pages 3–4, discuss, and dispose)
10. The third issue (page 5) concerns a policy proposal for a Western 
Mediterranean pact, to include Spain, the United Kingdom, France, 
Italy, Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria, and Libya, which the Nash Report 
found desirable if feasible. The Planning Board recommends that the 
Council note that State and Defense are considering the feasibility and 
desirability of such a pact.
(Discuss and dispose)
11. The fourth issue (page 6) concerns a new chain of bases across 
Central Africa, which the Nash Report thought should be seriously 
considered. The Planning Board, however, saw no reason to change the 
position taken in the U.S. policy on Africa South of the Sahara approved 
last August, which called for keeping the area under periodic survey 
to determine any changes in our strategic requirements. The specific 
Planning Board recommendation is as follows:
(READ the recommendation on page 6, pointing out the suggestion 
by the Chiefs, discuss, and dispose)
12. The fifth issue (page 7) concerns alternatives to our present Far 
East base system. The Nash Report said that such alternatives should 
be examined for the dual purpose of increasing dispersion and of 
establishing bases in the most politically reliable areas. Such a program 
would be costly, the Report admitted, but a retreat from the area would 
be even more costly. It is not a question of withdrawing entirely from 
any country, but rather of establishing alternate positions such as the 
Bonins, the Marinnas, Ulithi, North Borneo, Brunei, and Australia. The
