76  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
73. In spite of the confusions and uncertainties which have been 
described in earlier sections and the strong desire to relax international 
tensions by negotiating with the USSR, there seems to be an inclina­
tion among the more powerful and thoughtful Western nations to 
strengthen the deterrent to general war and to improve the common 
defensive posture. But these objectives, if achieved, will only establish 
the background against which will continue to be waged an intensive 
and world-­wide competition between the Soviet bloc and the US. In 
this competition, the Soviet bloc will wage vigorous economic and 
political offensives; it will take advantage of world trouble spots; it will 
exploit the nationalistic and revolutionary emotions of peoples now 
rapidly emerging from poverty, ignorance, and foreign control; it will 
vigorously pursue such profitable themes as disarmament and peace. It 
seems to us that the USSR and Communist China will have some meas­
ure of success in these efforts, and that this will generate increasing 
nervousness in the West over real or imagined losses of position.
74. While some further losses of position for the West seem likely 
to occur, we do not consider that there is any irreversible trend in this 
direction. Even though the Sino-Soviet bloc will almost certainly become 
an increasingly formidable opponent, its leaders must cope with major 
problems and difficulties in exploiting their strength. We believe that the 
general course of events in the East-West contest will depend more than 
anything else on the manner in which the West mobilizes and employs 
its political, economic, and military resources.
18.	
Briefing Note for the 356th NSC Meeting1
Washington, February 27, 1958
NASH REPORT
1. Mr. President, in October, 1956, you asked Frank Nash to “carry 
out a study of and make recommendations with respect to our system 
of overseas military bases and operating facilities.” (This language 
is quoted from your detailed instructions to Mr. Nash, annexed to 
his Report.) Mr. Nash completed his Report just before his death last 
1 Source: Nash Report on overseas military bases. No classification marking. 4 pp. 
Eisenhower Library, Whitman File.
