Afghanistan
641
less cogent now than they were before, even if the damage to their
relations with others has turned out to be greater than expected.
12. While the Soviets say they were perfectly happy with their
relations with Afghanistan before the April revolution, we see no possi-
bility of turning back the clock. Antipathy to the Soviet Union and its
ideology has greatly intensified in Afghanistan since April 1978 and
particularly since the Soviet invasion. It is thus difficult to conceive of
a regime friendly to the Soviet Union and preserving the gains of the
April revolution which could survive without the presence of Soviet
forces. Assertions, such as those by USA Institute Director Arbatov,
that the Soviet Union could establish a stable, friendly regime within
a few months, if outside interference is stopped, cannot be taken at
face value.3 The roots of the insurgency are in Afghanistan itself, and
the result of a Soviet withdrawal would be a Muslim victory or, at
least, chaos and dismemberment of the Afghan state.
13. Meanwhile, the Soviets are keeping alive talk about a political
settlement, but our impression is that this is simply a ploy designed
to focus attention on alleged U.S. interference, defuse international
pressures for a prompt Soviet withdrawal, take the steam out of the
Olympic boycott movement, buy time for continuing military efforts
to crush the insurgency, and preserve their options for the future.
They seem to be watching with a certain detachment what one of our
colleagues has termed the West-West negotiations on neutralization
and other political solutions, hoping that splits among the Western
countries will widen and the U.S. will stand isolated in its measures
taken in response to the invasion. Only when, and if, they become
convinced that they cannot achieve their objectives through military
means will the Soviets seriously consider a political settlement that
would bring about a Soviet withdrawal. For now, all available evidence
indicates that they will continue to pursue their objectives through
military means, even if this requires broader use of Soviet forces than
they originally anticipated.
Watson
3 See Document 230.
