990  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
inaugurated government of President Chiari in facing a serious current 
budget problem. The balance of $1 million is to be used to initiate sev-
eral small social development projects of rapid visual impact.
Other recent U.S. economic assistance to Panama includes a $5.3 
million loan by DLF, part of a $14.5 million program for farm-­to-­market 
roads, and a $2.5 million loan for low cost housing in Panama, thus 
implementing the last of the Nine Points in the President’s Program, 
announced on April 19, to improve our relations with Panama.
Several sources report that current accounts due and payable by 
the Panamanian Treasury amount to about $16 million with no cash 
position. Arrearages have been running at the rate of about $1 million 
per month. These deficits can be attributed to fiscal irresponsibility on 
the part of the previous regime.
The new administration came to power in orderly fashion on 
October 1. President Chiari has come out for an austerity program, rec-
ognizes the urgent need for socio-­economic reforms and advocates the 
diversification of the economy away from its present overdependence 
on the Canal Zone. Chiari is against Communism, is anti-Castro, has 
praised ICA and the President’s initiative for a Latin American social 
and economic development program. Thus far, at least, he seems more 
interested in promoting a peaceful socio-­economic evolution for his 
country, rather than seeking further economic concessions from our 
presence in the Canal Zone.
The ability of the Chiari Government to survive over the next six 
months and carry out badly needed administrative and budgetary 
reform depends upon an immediate infusion of financial assistance 
to restore fiscal order in the budget and a greater measure of liquid-
ity in the nation’s banks. Should the present government fall, social 
and political chaos would most likely follow. A successor government 
might well be a Castro-oriented or -inspired regime with Communist 
leanings; a government which in view of our long range strategic inter-
ests there, would undoubtedly constitute a serious threat to the mainte-
nance of our presence in Panama.
Our relations with Panama have improved steadily since the 
unfortunate violence of a year ago as a result of the new Canal Zone 
procurement policies, the President’s Nine Point Program, the flag 
decision, and the efforts of the newly appointed principal United States 
representatives in the area. The Chiari regime, if it can survive its cur-
rent financial crisis, offers hope for political stability, peaceful socio-­
economic evolution, and a friendly and reasonable relationship with 
us, all necessary to the attainment of our Isthmus policy objectives.
