August 8–September 17, 1978
43
the talks progress. Sadat said that this arrangement is agreeable to him.
He is anxious to have the opportunity to have an in-depth talk with
President Carter prior to the first trilateral meeting. I then told the Pres-
ident that I was returning to Washington the following day and asked if
he had any thoughts he wished me to convey. President Sadat asked
that I convey his warm greetings to President Carter and the Secretary
and to outline to them his preliminary thinking as follows:
He first said that we should leave the Israelis to what he called
their own misimpressions. The Israelis believe that he will be seeking a
declaration of principles. This, Sadat stressed, is not his immediate ob-
jective. We should seek what President Carter has already stated,
namely, a framework for a comprehensive settlement. Sadat noted that
Begin has spoken of wanting President Carter to act as a “broker”, not
as a full partner. Sadat was happy that President Carter has reaffirmed
his willingness to be a full partner. He will want to discuss with Presi-
dent Carter their common strategy.
As he had stated, he will not be asking for an immediate declara-
tion of principles. This is still desirable, but should be handled at an-
other level. At the Head of Government level, the focus should be on
what President Carter has said, namely, a framework for a comprehen-
sive settlement. This is the very least that should come out of the Camp
David meeting. The framework should be a written document signed
by Egypt and Israel. Such a written document should be the Camp
David achievement.
Sadat continued that he has not yet formulated his strategy in de-
tail. He is still working on it and will in the next week or so concentrate
on fleshing out his ideas. He already had some broad ideas in mind,
however.
First, Sadat noted, President Carter should be prepared for a “con-
frontation” between Sadat and Begin. But, as he had told the Secretary,
President Carter should be assured that he, Sadat, will not let him
down. It will, nevertheless, require a confrontation with Begin. He reit-
erated that he will want to discuss his strategy with President Carter
when they meet on September 6.
Sadat said that he considers the Camp David meeting to be a
turning point. It will be a crucial meeting, especially if—as he hopes
will be the case—the meeting creates some movement in the stalled
peace process.
Sadat wants President Carter and the Secretary to be sure that he
has taken into account all considerations that they have previously dis-
cussed in formulating his strategy. Apart from land and sovereignty, be
it Sinai or Golan, everything is negotiable. Here Sadat noted that he will
not be speaking for Syria, but any plans that are developed at Camp
David will presumably also apply to the Golan. He will, however, be
