1978 487 12. The data base for targeting needs to be revised and expanded. It is evident from past experience that the design and maintenance of a responsive target intelligence data base is very complex and any change in policy portends significant modifications in data. For these reasons, we recommend JCS evaluation of the impact that the targeting policies contained in this report will have on the ability to produce and maintain an adequate, comprehensive, responsive target intelligence data base. The JCS should provide a plan, with appropriate milestones and resource requirements, to provide a flexible data base. 13. The development of nuclear employment policy is an ongoing process that requires continuing interaction between policy makers and planners. Presently, there is no mechanism or arrangement that could assure that our employment policy is developed on this basis. The Secretary of Defense should create within OSD a mechanism to conduct the necessary follow-­on work and assure its continuity. [Omitted here is the body of the report.] 106. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, December 2, 1978 SUBJECT The U.S. Defense Program As background for our meeting Monday, this memorandum provides (1) a brief overview of the kind of defense the United States will have at various funding levels, and (2) a discussion of four selected issues of unusual importance: the future of strategic forces; the naval shipbuilding program; improving the capabilities of our Army divisions in Europe to meet the ­Warsaw Pact threat; and improving further the efficiency in the Department of Defense.2 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, Utgoff, Box 157, Budget, 1/77–12/78. Secret; Sensitive. Attached but not printed are an undated chart prepared in the Department of Defense entitled “Department of Defense— YOA & Outlay Summaries” and undated papers prepared in the Department of Defense on several specific issues. 2 Carter attended a meeting on defense appropriations on Monday, December 4, from 9 to 11 a.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary.) No minutes of the meeting were found.
