462
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
situation should be resolved. It recognizes that the Shah will not be
returned, but places special emphasis on the international tribunal, the
right of Iran to seek extradition of the Shah, to seek the legal recovery
of his “stolen monies” and public statements from the United States
that suggest that we are willing to develop a relationship which
acknowledges both the “equality” of Iran and is based on “mutual
respect”.
4. That political factors and personal animosity between Ghotbza-
deh and Bani-Sadr have possibly resulted in a situation whereby
although there is general consensus as to “how”, there is not a consen-
sus as to “who” or “when”. Ghotbzadeh wants to do it quickly and
be personally involved for obvious reasons, and Bani-Sadr prefers to
wait until after he takes power (at least that is the message from the
Egyptian which we need to confirm).4
5. That although Ghotbzadeh is personally unpopular, he probably
has the support of Beheshti and other members of the Revolutionary
Council who are against Bani-Sadr for other reasons. It is impossible
to discern as to whether the support for Ghotbzadeh reflects a desire
to resolve the situation quickly or whether they simply want to deprive
Bani-Sadr of the personal satisfaction of resolving it when he takes over.
6. That while Bani-Sadr might not like Ghotbzadeh, he has let us
know through two very direct channels—Mrs. Nobari and Ambassador
Lang that we were to continue to deal with Ghotbzadeh, but that he
wanted to be kept informed. He probably recognizes the reality of the
situation, and while not liking it is reconciled to it.
7. That while the Foreign Minister is disliked by almost everyone,
those same people recognize that he has a personal relationship with
Khomeini that cannot be ignored or taken lightly.
It seems to me that the following is and should be our posture:
—That we should continue to pursue an early release of the hos-
tages through Ghotbzadeh, but not at the expense of our relationship
with Bani-Sadr.
—That we should keep Bani-Sadr informed of our activities.
—That if it ever became a choice of having to choose between
Ghotbzadeh and Bani-Sadr, we would have to go with Bani-Sadr.
—That we should work to try to avoid that choice by a reconcilia-
tion of their views, in this respect the French contacts are invaluable.
—That to put Ghotbzadeh on “hold” now has a number of prob-
lems for us:
4 See Document 175.
