16 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement encourage countries which reserve a large segment of their petroleum industry to government entities to permit foreign oil company participation on reasonable terms. 2. Favorable Results Anticipated from the Proposed Change in Policy. (a) Improvement in the political climate of such countries towards a more reasonable attitude for admission of private capital to assist in developing their petroleum resources. This will result from the fact that: (1) The propaganda argument of the nationalistic elements that the U.S. Government and foreign oil companies desire the liquidation of government petroleum entities will be nullified; (2) The limited assistance proposed for the U.S. Government by loans to these government petroleum entities or more liberal exporter credits to American firms in selling supplies to them will strengthen the political support behind the responsible business and political elements in these countries desirous of obtaining a legislative change which would permit maximum development of the country’s petroleum resources by attracting the foreign oil industry participation needed to carry out the scale of operations required; and (3) Refusing to risk U.S. public funds in loans assistance to the exploration and development phases of the industry will encourage wide public support to the contention of the reasonable business and political elements in these countries that this phase of the industry is particularly suited to private risk capital, which must be attracted by terms competitive with those existent in other world petroleum producing areas. (b) By this improved political climate the petroleum monopolies will find it politically possible to encourage collaboration by foreign oil companies in mutually satisfactory working arrangements to carry out such exploration and development as joint ventures, or to release large areas of the country for concessions to foreign petroleum companies on terms similar to those in effect in other petroleum producing countries. (c) Making such loans contingent upon a reasonable attitude towards foreign private capital presently invested in the petroleum marketing and distribution phases of the industry will strengthen the latter’s long-­term position in the country and the profitability of their operations. (d) The extension of long-­term exporter credits to American firms and/or U.S. public loan assistance for such petroleum projects will assist in maintaining a Western Hemisphere orientation by these countries, and counteract the penetration efforts of the U.S.S.R. and its satellites into this strategic industry. (e) The more rapid development which will result for the petroleum industry in these countries will relieve the serious burden which the increasing petroleum demand of these countries is placing on their foreign exchange earnings.
