Arms Control and Disarmament  1543
you requested his comments on the subject of the report. Inasmuch as 
the report is strictly technical in nature, prepared by recognized experts 
in the field, I feel it would be somewhat presumptuous on my part to 
comment on the technical feasibility of the several measures suggested 
for improving the capabilities of the Geneva System. I agree that an 
appropriate next step would be the preparation of a quantitative anal­
ysis of the effect of these measures and am prepared to have AFOAT–1 
make such an analysis if you so desire.
I believe it worthwhile to note that the estimated effectiveness of 
the several improvements proposed by the panel is based largely on 
theoretical considerations and may be subject at this to the same faults 
as the initial estimates of capabilities of the Geneva system. I am con­
cerned as to the possibility that under the pressures generated by the 
present Geneva negotiations we may be induced to make commitments 
or to place unjustified reliance on prospective improvements based on 
inadequate data. Even if the improvements are subsequently deter­
mined to be effective to the degree they may now be estimated, they 
may be found politically or economically impractical to apply. Thus, it 
seems most important to me that the United States must not accept an 
inadequate system on the assumption, that future improvements will 
make it adequate.
It is quite certain that vigorous research in seismology will produce 
important improvements; however, I believe it would be very unwise 
to postulate any specific degree of improvement either in time or as to 
quality as a basis for committing ourselves to an expanded system call­
ing for a definite level of detection and identification. For that reason 
it is my view that the following principles which have been previously 
supported by the Department of Defense should govern our negotia­
tions as regards the suspension of underground tests:
(a) The treaty should provide only for the cessation of such 
underground tests as we believe to be identifiable by the Geneva 
System (on the order of 20 KT) without requiring an unreasonable or 
unworkable number of on-­site investigations. Obviously, if the USSR 
can be induced to accept a better system as an element of the treaty, 
the threshold would be lowered to accord with our best estimate of 
the system’s capabilities.
(b) The Control Commission should be charged with the conduct 
of a vigorous development program to improve the system and the 
suspension threshold should be progressively lowered as the improve­
ments are installed and in operation.
Neil H. McElroy
