662
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
The fact that key food-deficient countries have major stakes in
maintaining the allocative status quo is yet another complicating con-
sideration. Political relationships with allies and adversaries alike (e.g.,
Japan and the USSR) will be affected if the US moves toward greater re-
strictions on purchases in order to use food as leverage or to serve hu-
manitarian ends.
Although food leverage remains a potentially powerful source of
international influence, its productive use during the period of food
uncertainty ahead will require selectivity and careful calculation. The
negotiation of extended grain purchase agreements that assure US ex-
port markets and relieve other nations of food uncertainty for several
years may be a particularly promising area for the application of food
leverage. The economic and political benefits obtained from such ar-
rangements must, of course, be weighed against the consequent reduc-
tions in future flexibility.
Long-range US policy considerations in regard to world popula-
tion growth will have to be measured against more immediate do-
mestic and international imperatives. Any US efforts to foster a slow-
down in population growth are likely to be complicated by domestic
controversy over the posture the US should assume toward regimes
that advance population policies the US favors by coercive methods it
abhors. The US will also need criteria for determining when broad
population-related policies (such as a general linkage between US aid
and foreign population control efforts) should take precedence over
more specific shorter range considerations (e.g., maintenance of polit-
ical stability in a particular country).
World food and population trends thus are adding considerable
complexity to the definition and pursuit of US national interests.
Clearly, though, the threats posed by these trends will have to be faced
even if the US would prefer not to seize the opportunities they may
offer. Earnest desires that the bounty of America’s farmers never be
used as a weapon of influence in international affairs are likely to be
frustrated if the disposition of this bounty increasingly becomes both a
domestic and international political issue. The US may be unable to
avoid having to decide how to use food leverage to help manage global
issues and cope with international challenges.
[Omitted here are Chapter V: The Problem of Internationalized
Terror and Chapter VI: Nuclear Proliferation.]
