Human Rights
5
Should this review result in agreement, D/HA will so notify the
Deputy Secretary, who will make the final decision. Should there be
disagreement, there will be a meeting of the Assistant Secretaries con-
cerned with the Deputy Secretary, who will either make the final deci-
sion or refer the matter to the Secretary.
2. In the case of human rights legislation regarding AID’s develop-
ment assistance programs, necessary steps will be taken by the AID
Administrator, in coordination with D/HA and the concerned bureaus
in the Department, to take the foregoing criteria into consideration in
reaching necessary determinations.
3. In the case of security assistance, the foregoing criteria will be
applied in the development and review of program proposals by
D/HA and concerned bureaus of the Department through the regular
processes of the Security Assistance Review Committee and any suc-
cessor organizations.
2.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for
International Organization Affairs (Lewis) to the Coordinator
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Wilson)1
Washington, January 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Guidelines on U.S. Foreign Policy for Human Rights
I have the following comments and suggestions on the set of
guidelines circulated with your memorandum of January 5, 1977.2
Generally the guidelines would be much improved if they gave
greater prominence, other than the single reference in the first question
of the checklist, to multilateral organizations. I think special treatment
is due to multilateral organizations because of the extensive human
rights activity in which the three principal ones, the Council of Europe,
the OAS and the UN, are engaged. This activity is usually well publi-
cized and is well known to those in Congress who are interested. We
should, therefore, take special pains to canvass thoroughly the devel-
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1976–1977 Human Rights Subject Files and Country Files, Lot 80D177, SHUM—Policies.
Limited Official Use. Harold Heilsnis (D/HA) initialed in the bottom-right hand corner.
2 See Document 1.
