930 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement The enclosed draft statement of policy on the subject, prepared by the NSC Planning Board with the participation of representatives of the Departments of Justice and Commerce and the Federal Aviation Agency, is transmitted herewith for consideration by the National Security Council at its meeting on Thursday, January 7, 1960. It is recommended that, if the Council adopts the enclosed state­ ment of policy, it be submitted to the President with the recommen­ dation that he approve it; direct its implementation by all appropriate Executive departments and agencies of the U.S. Government; and des­ ignate coordinating agencies as follows: the Department of Defense for Paragraph 16, the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization for Paragraph 17, and the Federal Aviation Agency for Paragraph 18. James S. Lay, Jr. Executive Secretary cc: The Secretary of the Treasury The Attorney General The Secretary of Commerce The Director, Bureau of the Budget The Administrator, Federal Aviation Agency The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff The Director of Central Intelligence DRAFT STATEMENT of U.S. POLICY WITH RESPECT TO THE DEVELOPMENT OF CARGO AIR LIFT GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 1. It is in the [national security]2 interest of the United States to have available an efficient and effective civil air cargo fleet, which, in time of peace, as well as in a national emergency, could be used to meet a portion of military air cargo requirements. Such a fleet could also serve as an instrument of [other]3 national policies. The United States does not now have such a fleet. Conditions Which Have Limited the Development of a Modern Civil Air Cargo Fleet 2. In the commercial field, long preoccupation with the more profitable passenger business and with constant passenger aircraft 2 Treasury and Budget propose deletion. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.] 3 Treasury and Budget propose deletion. [Brackets and footnote are in the original.]
