September 18–December 16, 1978 379 want to continue to support him. Sadat, I said, as well as the USG, should by now realize that the attitudes we took and the statements we made at both times (the Jerusalem visit and the Camp David announcements) have proved to be very beneficial to him and Carter, both of whom we decided to support in our own style based on refurbishing our credibility with our effective brethren in the area. Our attitude at the Baghdad Conference will be one further proof of our honest intentions towards both Presidents, if one were needed! I then told Sayid that Sadat must come to the Arab Summit, and I would see to it that no action would be taken which would embarrass or hurt Egypt.” “Let me tell you about the Baghdad Summit,” the Crown Prince said. “Some weeks ago Saddam Hussein contacted me and discussed the possibility of an Arab Summit meeting in Baghdad. I promised to think about it. Down deep I thought it was good to have it especially in Baghdad. We have been trying for some time to break the Iraqis away from the Russian influence there and I have seen recently some positive signs. I felt that if they arranged for the Summit to be held in Baghdad they would feel, as the hosts, a special responsibility for its success. Therefore, after a decent lapse of time, I agreed that there should be a meeting of the Foreign Ministers on October 30–31, followed by the Summit on November 1 and 2 if everything went well.” “When I began to get indications that the Summit was going to be used as a platform for the Rejectionists to condemn Egypt and isolate them from the rest of the Arab world, I became concerned and determined that this could not be allowed to happen. I took the occasion of the visit here of Foreign Minister Sadoum Hammadi to make plain Saudi Arabia’s position. We have invited the Foreign Minister to visit us in order to “discuss the arrangements” for the Baghdad Conference.” “I told him in blunt terms,” Fahd said, “that SAG would not tolerate or support any action to boycott or to isolate Egypt from the rest of the Arab world. Saudi Arabia will oppose any condemnation of Egypt because of its participation in the Camp David talks.” Hammadi said, “Well there won’t be any, because without Saudi support no action can be taken.” “I replied that I didn’t know about that” and he answered, “Oh no, don’t kid me: Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, Jordan, Oman, Abu Dhabi, YAR, Sudan, Tunisia and Morocco will all follow you.” “Later,” the Crown Prince said, “I talked by telephone to Saddam Hussein and made plain to him our position. He agreed that the Summit would deal only with lofty purposes (e.g., UN resolutions, Palestinian rights, etc.) and not be an instrument of condemnation for Egypt or a platform for the mouthings of the radicals of the Rejectionist movement.”
