National Security Policy 163 trade, etc. Throughout the paper there are statements of policy which imply that we should try to isolate the Communists behind the Iron Curtain and minimize their contact with the rest of the world. Our major political and economic efforts, apparently, are to be devoted to maintaining the free world alliances and winning over the neutrals to our side, thereby helping to isolate the Communists. In my judgment this policy is both negative and inadequate. Note paragraph 4 of the new paper which deals with the “basic problem”. Listed in this paragraph are four courses of action which, if followed, are supposed to achieve our basic objective “to preserve and enhance the security of the United States and its fundamental values and insti­ tutions”. I submit that even if we are successful in carrying out these four necessary courses of action, this, in itself, would not achieve our basic objective as stated in the paper. Even if we were to win over to our side all the neutral nations and succeeded in completely isolating the Communists behind the Iron Curtain, our national security would nevertheless continue to be endangered. The Communists already have very great resources and a rapidly advancing technology behind the Iron Curtain. There is no way in which we can alter this situation. It is the military power which these resources and technology generate that poses the basic threat to our national security. In fact, isolating the USSR from contact with the rest of the world might well increase our danger. It seems to me that the only way in which we can hope to allevi­ ate the basic threat to our national security is to effect a fundamental change in the character of the government of the USSR. No matter how remote this eventuality may seem to be, it must remain our ultimate objective. But this is not enough. We must also know in which direction we wish to effect this change in the Russian government. To my mind the desired direction is unmistakable. It must be toward a govern­ ment more responsive to the will of the people, and, eventually, a government squarely based on the will of the people. This is the most dependable and perhaps only real assurance for world peace in the future. Agreements with dictators, no matter how well meant they may be, are always subject to sudden renunciation. Furthermore, Khruschchev is here today but may be gone tomorrow. The United States could not with assurance embark on a major disarmament pro­ gram so long as the government of the USSR is in the hands of a real dictatorship. It is much more difficult for democratically based governments to initiate sudden aggression, especially when it would expose their people to virtual annihilation. It should, therefore, be our objective not only (in the words of paragraph 4(d) of the paper) “to engage successfully in a world-­wide peaceful contest with the USSR”, but more importantly to influence and encourage the USSR directly
