680
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
134.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Relevance of the Truman Doctrine to Current Situation (U)
As you consider options regarding the situation in Southwest Asia,
I would like to recall for you an earlier crisis which in my judgment has
some striking parallels with the present challenge we face in Afghani-
stan, in that region and globally. I have in mind the events which led up
to the promulgation of the Truman Doctrine, announced by Truman in
his message to Congress on March 12, 1947.2 (C)
Truman’s message responded to what he perceived to be a clear
and present danger. It was the threatened collapse under Soviet pres-
sure of two countries which at the time were at the outer limits of
American consciousness—Greece and Turkey. Communist govern-
ments had been established with the aid of Soviet troops throughout
the Balkans. Greece was in the midst of a civil war, instigated in the
main by communist-led insurgents. Concurrently, Moscow was put-
ting pressure on Ankara to revise the Montreux Convention3 to prevent
access of non-Black Sea powers into the Black Sea, and had raised
claims of sovereignty against two areas in Turkey. (C)
All this in a region which prior to 1947 had been a British sphere of
influence of little or no strategic interest to the United States. Within
this country there was strong sentiment for a rapid U.S. disengagement
from all of Europe and a return to isolationism. Truman was also under
considerable pressure from a number of politicians, especially Henry
Wallace, who argued that the U.S. should undertake more strenuous
efforts to cooperate with Moscow. (C)
Against this background, the United States received an urgent
message in late February 1947 that the British intended to cease aid to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 67, Truman Doctrine: 1/80. Confidential. Sent for information. Brzezinski added the
date to the memorandum by hand. The President initialed the top right-hand corner of
the memorandum. Blackwill and Larrabee sent the memorandum to Brzezinski under a
January 2 memorandum, requesting that he sign it. A notation on the cover memo-
randum in Larrabee’s hand indicates that Brzezinski signed it on January 2.
2 For the text of Truman’s message, see Public Papers: Truman, 1947, pp. 176–180.
3 Brzezinski corrected the spelling of Montreux. The 1936 Montreux Convention
Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits gave Turkey control over the Bosporus
Straits and the Dardanelles and regulated transit of warships.
