390
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
tain amount resentment and jealousy. He hoped that Warne could take
steps to bring Point IV salaries into harmony with those paid to Iranian
Governmental officials and employees. If Warne could successfully
take these steps it might prevent development of friction which could
seriously injure work of Point IV in Iran.
4. Warne said that he had already gone into this matter and in fact
had asked a committee to make further investigations and recommen-
dations. In meantime he inclined believe there was really no great dis-
parity between Point IV salary scales and those of Iranian Govt. It shld
be borne in mind that (a) Point IV employees were required to give full
time to Point IV work; they put in longer hours and were not permitted
to accept other employment or resort to other means of adding to their
income whereas many Iranian Govt officials and employees were in a
position because of their short working day to augment their salaries
by engaging in other types of work. (b) Point IV employees had been
carefully selected and in general had higher qualifications than average
Iranian Governmental employees. Most of them for instance were
bi-lingual. Some of them upon entering Point IV had been given
[more?] responsible positions than those which they had occupied in
the Govt. It was understandable therefore that number were receiving
higher salaries. Nevertheless he prepared go further into matter and
take steps adjust certain salary scales which might seem out of line with
Iranian Governmental salaries.
Mosadeq said he was not insisting that income of Point IV em-
ployees shld necessarily be reduced. He hoped that their salary scales
cld be put on same level as that of Govt employees and that such addl
amts as they might receive be paid in form of overtime, bonuses for
special qualifications, etc. Salary scales might be published in order to
counter exaggerated rumors.
5. Mosadeq said he wished discuss another problem of delicate na-
ture. Before doing so he wanted to make sure that Warne agreed with
him that extremely close cooperation between Point IV and Iranian
Govt was necessary in interest of both organizations. When Warne ex-
pressed agreement, PriMin said unfortunately there were some Point
IV employees hostile to Iranian Govt who were using their position to
work against Iranian Govt. Most prominent of them was Ardeshir
Zahedi, who was in a key position and who, according to statements
made to Mosadeq by prominent member Majlis in presence of several
Natl Front leaders, was engaging in activities hostile to Govt Iran. It
was not necessary for Mosadeq to point out that Zahedi was son of and
undoubtedly under influence of Gen. Zahedi, who had been connected
with Brit and who had been carrying on activities aimed at overthrow
of Mosadeq. Presence man like Zahedi in Point IV wld strengthen
propaganda which certainly would be instituted by mbrs Tudeh and
