reciting the general trend of the State laws so far as the Department is familiar with them, the Austrian Government might say in substance that reciprocity existed; and that this would obtain for nationals of the United States the right to acquire and hold land in Austria. It was suggested that this arrangement might be made by an exchange of notes signed simultaneously with the Treaty. The Department understands that this suggestion by Doctor Schüller was tentative, requiring the approval of his colleagues, and that if it is accepted by both Governments the first paragraph of Article I as in this Government’s original draft will be accepted. The Department recognizes as intimated by Doctor Schüller that it might be of advantage to the nationals of the United States to have the right to own land in Austria. It does not believe, however, that the matter is of sufficient importance to nationals of the United States in Austria or other foreign countries, to warrant this Government to conclude treaty provisions which would interfere with the independence of the several States in the regulation of the matter. The Department desires that you present the following considerations to the Austrian Foreign Office as a basis for a possible finding that reciprocity exists. Under the Federal System of the United States the control of real property is a function of the States; and barring the granting of rights in respect of the leasing of land such as are included in the first paragraph of Article I of the draft under negotiation and of rights in respect of inheritances and devises such as are provided in the first paragraph of Article IV, it is the policy of the National Government to refrain from interfering with that control. This Government’s policy in that respect extends to the omission from treaties of the most-favored-nation clause as it relates to the right to acquire or hold real property. It is believed that it would be unwise for the United States to deviate from its established course. The States, generally speaking, have adopted a very liberal policy with respect to the right of aliens to hold land. According to the information at the disposal of the Department, the laws of twenty-two States permit aliens of all nationalities, resident and non-resident, to own unlimited amounts of
