48 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII of revolutions had occurred in Iraq and Bangladesh, and Afghanistan might not be any different.2 5. ACQ: [1 line not declassified] 6. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dissem: [3 lines not declassified] 2 A likely reference to the July 1968 revolution in Iraq, after which the Ba’ath Party took control of the country, and the assassination of Bangladeshi President Mujibur Rahman in August 1975. Both cases involved the seizure of power by military officers. 20. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 22, 1978 SUBJECT Status of Our Relations With Afghanistan We have resumed normal diplomatic relations with Afghanistan and your decision on our overall posture has been communicated to the relevant agencies.2 In more specific areas, these are the principal actions taken by the Working Group that we set up under the SCC. —Covert action is not appropriate at this time; we are, however, reviewing our intelligence collection priorities and capabilities. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, North/South, Thornton, Subject File, Box 97, Chron: 1–5/78. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Drafted by Thornton. Aaron initialed the memorandum for Brzezinski. Carter also initialed, indicating he had seen it. The memorandum is attached as Tab B to a memorandum from Thornton to Brzezinski, May 11 (not printed), which identifies Brzezinski’s memorandum to Carter as a “much shorter version of the same material” of a paper attached at Tab A to Thornton’s memorandum (and also not printed). That paper, entitled “SCC Working Group on Afghanistan: Summary of Actions,” noted the following: 1) there was no possibility at the time of a covert action against the Afghan regime due to lack of resources and a regional political atmosphere not conducive to such action; 2) there were no current plans to approach Afghan military trainees in the United States about moving against the regime [text not declassified]; 3) USAID in Kabul was carrying on its operations as normal; and 4) it was decided to allow the UN to take the lead in ongoing efforts to deal with the problem of narcotics in Afghanistan. 2 See Document 12.
