1652  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
principle that the agreement itself should only commit us to steps 
which we know can be controlled. The U.S.–U.N. hope would be that 
during this moratorium period scientific advances would [illegible in 
the original] agreement with the President on a ban extended to cover 
further explosions. The moratorium should not exclude the possibility 
of conducting experimental nuclear explosions underground jointly 
with the Russians or under international control, so obtain necessary 
data for developing a control system. There is presumably a reasonable 
prospect that scientific advances will enable us to move further before 
long. The period of moratorium should thus be either one or two years.
It might of course be argued that during this period of one or two 
years the U.S. and U.K. would be bound by their voluntary abstention, 
while the Russians might carry out experiments undetected. Against 
that, the U.K. suggests, the points can be made first, that we do not 
know whether the Russians are in fact doing underground tests; and, 
second, even if we got a comprehensive test suspension it would take 
well over a year to install the control system, during all of which time 
the Russians could cheat if they wished to; and third, this risk is inher­
ent in the present moratorium which has been in force since the Geneva 
conference began. Thus it is suggested that we would not lose very 
much and we might make a considerable impact upon public opinion.
DISCUSSION:
1.	 Effect upon public opinion. Such a move would be viewed favor­
ably by that segment of public opinion which welcomes any move 
toward the cessation of nuclear weapons tests. It would provide an 
effective answer to Soviet charges that we have proposed an atmo­
spheric test ban because we never really intended to stop all tests. On 
the other hand, it could create the impression that effective interna­
tional controls are not really necessary and to this extent weaken public 
support for the U.S. position on controls.
Since the U.S. and U.K. have suspended tests for the time being—
without the Soviet Union having felt it necessary to make a similar explicit 
renunciation—our public posture is not now vulnerable. If challenged as to 
long range testing plans, the U.S. and U.K. can point out that they are not 
now testing and that it is up to the Soviet Union to demonstrate its inten­
tions in serious negotiation for an atmospheric test ban rather than for the 
U.S. and U.K., without any quid pro quo, to answer for the indefinite future.
2.	 Effect upon negotiations. While such a move might increase the 
chance of Soviet acceptance of an atmospheric test ban, it would weaken 
our position seriously in negotiation for a complete test cessation under 
effective control. Once we were committed to a complete suspension, 
the pressure would be on us to withhold testing even if there were no 
progress in negotiations for extending the control system. Yet what the 
U.S. and U.K. want is to put pressure on the Soviets to extend controls in 
order to get other tests brought to a halt. This can best be done if the U.S.
