1286
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
high. How to accommodate to these problems and to share responsi-
bility with OPEC—which is making the profits—will be discussed
jointly. Then he will be going to Yugoslavia, Spain, and Portugal. After
his visit, the world will see the communique—we don’t have any secret
agreements—to analyze it, and to see whether we answer Jordan’s
questions.
We have discussed the Middle East. His Majesty has seen the Euro-
pean resolution. We do not see it as incompatible with the Camp David
process. There was a resolute attack by the Israeli Cabinet and the PLO
on the European resolution. Therefore, it must be fair and well bal-
anced (laughter)! He doesn’t know what can be done on the Maqarin
Dam.5 Habib had been to see His Majesty and others. Would His Maj-
esty like to comment? We do not want to interfere. We are trying to
eliminate some obstacles that exist. He has studied the problem, in-
cluding water rights for the West Bank and Syrian cooperation. We
have gone as far as we can, without some agreement between Jordan,
Syria, and Israel on what to do. Does the project have a life?
King Hussein said very much so. They have agreed to address
themselves to the question of the West Bank, and prepare an answer for
Phil (Habib) soon.6 He hopes the U.S. will continue. Would we please
clarify the rules and the guidelines on shares so that they can tackle the
problem of getting Syrian cooperation.
The President asked about the possibility of direct Jordanian
dealings with the Israelis.
King Hussein said that they do this in the Israel-Jordan Mixed Ar-
mistic Commission (IJMAC), concerning the waters of the Yarmuk
River and the Jordan Valley. There are direct and indirect contacts.
The Prime Minister said that they had had a meeting yesterday.
Ambassador Veliotes said that they had solved a technical problem,
and they met under the auspices of IJMAC.
The President said good.
Ambassador Veliotes said that these were technical issues.
The Prime Minister said that there is now no problem. He assumes
that issues with Israel can be managed. Habib raised issues on which
there was agreement. There was only one, raised by Israel, on water for
the West Bank. Jordan is not ready to go into details. This must await a
5 On May 14–15, Habib met with Hussein and senior Jordanian officials as part of
his four day mission to help resolve riparian issues arising from the Maqarin Dam/Yar-
mouk river project. Habib had earlier met with Begin and senior Israeli officials May
12–13. A full summary of Habib’s mission and his meetings with both the Israelis and Jor-
danians is in telegram 3260 from Amman, May 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800241-0698)
6 Not further identified and not found.
