Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
59
a. The United States shall encourage domestic commercial exploi-
tation of space capabilities and systems for economic benefit and to
promote the technological position of the United States, except that all
United States earth-oriented remote sensing satellites will require
United States Government authorization and supervision or regula-
tion. (U)
b. Federal civil earth imaging from space, at resolutions at or better
than ten meters, will be permitted under controls and when such needs
are justified and assessed in relation to civil benefits, national security,
and foreign policy. Appropriate controls on other forms of remote
earth sensing will be established. Expanded civil use of intelligence
space data and technology within appropriate security constraints is
encouraged. (C)
c. Data and results from the civil space programs will be provided
the widest practical dissemination, except where specific exceptions
defined by legislation, Executive Order, or directive apply. (U)
d. United States federal or private space systems identified as crit-
ical to the national defense may be equipped at DoD expense for use in
national emergencies or to deny their use by an enemy in times of na-
tional emergency declared by the President. Implementation will occur
as described in subparagraph 2b. The fact of or the details of such meas-
ures may be classified. (C)
e. Terrestrially-oriented federal or private radio frequency (RF)
surveys in space are prohibited except through or in coordination with
the Director of Central Intelligence under appropriate security con-
trols. (TS)
f. The United States will develop, manage, and operate the Shuttle-
based Space Transportation System through NASA in cooperation with
the DoD to service all authorized space users—domestic and foreign,
commercial and governmental—and will provide launch priority and
necessary security to military and intelligence missions while recog-
nizing the essentially open character of the civil space program. Mis-
sion control is the responsibility of the mission agency. Military and in-
telligence programs may use the Shuttle Orbiters as dedicated mission
vehicles. (C)
5. The NSC Policy Review Committee shall meet when appro-
priate to provide a forum to all federal agencies for their policy views;
to review and advise on proposed changes to national space policy; to
resolve issues referred to the Committee; and to provide for orderly
and rapid referral of open issues to the President for decision as neces-
sary. The PRC will meet at the call of the Chairman for these purposes,
and when so convened, will be chaired by the Director, Office of Sci-
ence and Technology Policy. (U)
