National Security Policy  785
Paragraph 23 (page 16), which is split, proposes a major change in pol­
icy with respect to the development of nuclear capabilities by additional 
nations. Present policy provides in essence that the United States should 
seek to prevent the development by additional nations of nuclear weap­
ons capabilities (NSC 5810/1, paragraph 18, page 7). The new majority 
proposal is that the United States should first seek to prevent or retard 
development by additional nations of nuclear weapons capabilities.
The majority proposal goes on to say:
(Read Revised Para. 25–­b)
The Defense-­JCS version would not have us seek to prevent or 
retard the development by additional nations of nuclear weapons; it 
would sanction exchanging with, or providing to, additional selected 
allies information on nuclear weapons; but it would not go so far as to 
be prepared to make nuclear weapons themselves available to selected 
allies. (The Joint Chiefs in their formal comments support this version).
Inescapably related is paragraph 24 (page 18), [which states present 
policy to the effect that the United States should consider the long-­term 
development of a NATO nuclear weapons authority.]2
Defense and JCS would leave Paragraph 24 unchanged. The major­
ity, however, views the question with greater urgency and would say 
in Paragraph 23 c:
(Read Revised Para 23 c)
Paragraph 25–­a (page 18) is a revised general guidance paragraph 
on providing military assistance to nations “whose increased ability to 
defend themselves and to make their appropriate contributions to col­
lective military power is important to the security of the United States.”
Paragraph 25–­b (page 19) is new, and deals with military aid to other 
nations, including uncommitted nations. It reads:
(Read paragraph 25–­b, page 19)
Paragraph 25–­c (page 20) is also new, and grows out of the OCB 
conclusions on the overseas internal security program.
Paragraph 26 (page 20) is a new item of guidance and would encour­
age, in less developed nations, the participation of indigenous military 
forces in economic, social, and psychological programs.
Paragraph 28 (page 21) is the general paragraph on military research 
and development which is in existing policy, with two new sentences 
added on nuclear weapons R & D. They read:
(Read paragraph 28–­a, page 21, last two sentences)
We now resume discussion of the political and economic section at 
the point where we left off at the Council meeting three weeks ago, and 
take up paragraph 36.
2 Brackets are in the original.
