“All questions in regard to rights, whether of property or person, arising
between citizens of the United States in China, shall be subject to the
jurisdiction of and regulated by the authorities of their own Government. And
all controversies occurring in China between citizens of the United States and
the subjects of any other Government shall be regulated by the treaties
existing between the United States and such Governments respectively,
without interference on the part of China.”
As to disputes between citizens of the United States and subjects of China, the same
treaty further provides, Article XXIV as follows:
“And if controversies arise between citizens of the United States and subjects
of China, which can not be amicably settled otherwise, the same shall be
examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the public
officers of the two nations acting in conjunction.”
This last provision was made more specific in the Treaty of 1880,32 Article IV, which
reads as follows:
“When controversies arise in the Chinese Empire between citizens of the
United States and subjects of His Imperial Majesty, which need to be
examined and decided by the public officers of the two nations, it is agreed
between the Governments of the United States and China that such cases
shall be tried by the proper official of the nationality of the defendant. The
properly authorized official of the plaintiff’s nationality shall be freely
permitted to attend the trial, and shall be treated with the courtesy due to his
position. He shall be granted all proper facilities for watching the
proceedings in the interests of justice. If he so desires, he shall have the right
to present, to examine, and to cross-examine witnesses. If he is dissatisfied
with the proceedings, he shall be permitted to protest against them in detail.
The law administered will be the law of the nationality of the officer trying
the case.”
Here, as in the case of the conventional tariffs, the Government of the United States
introduced into its treaty with China special provisions, not for the purpose of
hampering or otherwise limiting the sovereign rights of a friendly nation, but merely as
a modus operandi intended to remedy a vexatious condition which had for many years
proved what seemed an almost insurmountable obstacle to the maintenance of friendly
relations between the two countries. There was not then—and there is not now—any
desire permanently to limit the sovereignty of China. Pursuant to these treaties
Congress has enacted the necessary laws to enable the American Consuls in China to
perform the necessary judicial functions attendant upon the hearing and settling of
complaints brought against American citizens by the Chinese. The extraterritorial
