254 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 77. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) and the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, September 15, 1977 SUBJECT Presidential Talk on Human Rights There still seems to be public misunderstanding of what our human rights policy actually comprises; how we are trying to implement it; and—perhaps most important—how it fits in the President’s overall foreign policy design. Many still seem to think we are talking only about violations of the person and of political rights, and that our criticism of foreign governments on that score may interfere with our other goals. We think a Presidential talk on the whole range of human rights issues would be useful later in the year, or early next. It should be in the more relaxed and reflective “fireside chat” format rather than a formal speech. Its purpose would be to explain how “human rights” is a thread that runs through everything the President is doing, and indeed gives coherence to his varied initiatives. To that end, it would: —Include our definition of “human rights,” as in your Law Day and Warren Christopher’s Bar Association speeches.2 —Explain how our North-South efforts (including the basic human needs emphasis), and our attempts to help bring racial justice to southern Africa (and perhaps the Middle East and Cyprus) are fundamental parts of the “human rights” policy. —Make clear the relation of these initiatives to American security interests: insofar as we can alleviate the causes of tension and discontent, we will deny opportunities to would-be trouble makers and reduce the risk of wars, thus contributing to a world in which Americans can live in peace and prosperity. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 2, TL 9/1–15/77. Unclassified. Drafted by Jenonne Walker on September 13. Tarnoff initialed the memorandum. The title of Coordinator of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs was changed on August 17 to Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. 2 See footnote 6, Document 74.
