Comprehensive Test Ban 601 Afghanistan guidelines on scientific exchanges and technology transfer to the Soviet Union. A. Background This issue must be considered in light of earlier analyses of the technology transfer question, the US proposal to lend the Soviets an NSS unit, and new circumstances in the post-Afghanistan period. Technology Transfer Analyses. The question of technology transfer associated with providing US NSS equipment for use at stations in the USSR was examined on an interagency basis in 1977,3 in 1978,4 and again in 19795 (in preparation for the visit of Soviet experts to the US). In each instance, the responsible agencies determined that the NSS equipment could be transferred to the Soviet Union for use in monitoring a CTB treaty. In its review of this matter in 1978,6 the DOD cited the following grounds for concurring in the transfer: —It is not practical to “reverse engineer” the critical components and produce them in quantity. —The number of NSS is small enough so that diversion to other applications would be no threat. —Since the equipment would be provided in connection with an international treaty, it would not set a precedent for approval of export of system components alone. Two conditions were imposed by the DOD: —The Soviets should not be given manuals or data on how to build critical elements of the NSS (or any embargoed items). —DOD should be consulted in connection with any Soviet request to be present when the NSS equipment is being manufactured. On June 30, 1978, the Department of Commerce authorized the transfer of NSS technical data and hardware to the USSR.7 Consistent with the DOD recommendations cited above, Commerce specifically excluded from its authorization any technical data relating to production of NSS components. The 1979 review, completed just before Soviet experts visited the US, approved transfer of the equipment on the same basis as the 1978 authorization (outlined above). US Prototype Proposal. It was decided that the US would offer to transfer one NSS to the USSR. The US CTB Delegation was instructed in 3 Not found. 4 The 1978 Interagency Study of NSS technology transfer to the Soviet Union is available in Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82, Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, 1978. 5 Not found. 6 Not found. 7 Not found.
