National Security Policy 159 600 million dollars over a period of three years. Although the imple­ mentation of this program could result in the earliest possible interim defense against ballistic missiles at a limited number of SAC bases, the expenditure of additional funds in these amounts does not appear to be justified. Since the NIKE-ZEUS system on the basis of available data will probably have a much greater capability, although it will be a year to 18 months later, the Department of Defense feels that the available effort should be devoted toward moving the NIKE-ZEUS system along at an optimum rate to achieve the earliest practicable capability with that system. Accordingly, the Department of Defense proposes to accelerate the development of the NIKE-ZEUS system, placing particular emphasis on the electronic part of the development program. Mr. Holaday here summarized. In summary, (1) We do not recommend an increase in the ICBM program above the approved 13 squadrons and 130 missiles at this time. (2) If the development work on the TITAN missile continues suc­ cessfully, we may recommend an increase of 4 additional squadrons of TITAN in submitting the 1960 budget, that will give a total of 17 squad­ rons and 170 missiles. (3) Bases have been selected for the deployment of 5 squadrons of ATLAS missiles on soft bases. A study is being made on making semi-­ hard the remaining 4 squadrons. Selection of these bases has not been made to date; they will probably be selected to give diversification of deployment at or near present SAC bases. (4) One hard base for the deployment of 4 TITAN squadrons has been selected near Denver, Colorado. Sufficient money is in the pres­ ent budget to provide for the deployment of three squadrons. The 4th squadron will be financed in the 1960 budget request. If additional squadrons of TITAN missiles are provided, they will be deployed on hard bases. (5) We do not recommend an increase in the POLARIS program above the 5 submarines and 80 missiles at this time. We may request additional money in the 1960 budget request to add 3 more submarines, giving a total of 8 submarines and 128 missiles. (6) We recommend an increase in the IRBM program from 8 squad­ rons and 120 missiles to 12 squadrons and 180 missiles. (7) We recommend an accelerated program using the NIKE-ZEUS system as a defense against ICBM missiles.
