plebiscite period, should attempt to use that administrative authority to thwart a fair
plebiscite. This is matter of broad international consequence and I feel there would be
ample justification for directing attention of Government of Chile to regrettable
character and consequences of such an attitude as it appears to have assumed. If any
question of fact is at issue, the Plebiscitary Commission is on the ground and can
determine it; but if Chile entertains any idea that she has right to use her administrative
authority not only so as not to prevent coercion and intimidation but actually to
countenance or to foster them, the Government of Chile should be disabused of this
notion.
Arbitrator’s award has sustained right to a plebiscite under the Treaty of Ancon and has
provided for the plebiscite; and if now Chile thwarts plebiscite by failing to use her
administrative authority properly to protect it and by refusing to accede to the
reasonable requirements of the Commission for such protection as is required, she will
be responsible for all the consequences.
It may be well to have in mind that one of these consequences may be not merely
failure of the present plebiscite and ordering of a new plebiscite, but a forfeiture of her
right to a plebiscite and with it of any right to the disputed territory; for, as award
indicates, one of conditions of Chile’s retention of the territory is that a plebiscite
should be held, with implication that neither Chile nor Peru should frustrate it.
Arbitrator has held that there was not sufficient evidence that Chile had frustrated it,
and that plebiscite should be held as stated in the treaty. But if now, with plebiscite
ordered and with Plebiscitary Commission on the ground, it appears that the
administrative authority of Chile is used in such a way as to frustrate the holding of an
appropriate plebiscite and that she refuses to take the reasonable measures essential to
that plebiscite, she may be exposed to the contention that she has forfeited any right to
the territory under the Treaty of Ancon.
I am not unmindful of provision in award for the ordering of new plebiscite and this
would appear to be appropriate if it appeared that objections which vitiated the first
plebiscite were not of such fundamental character as to void agreement for a plebiscite.
But if it appeared that Chile’s administrative authority had been exercised in way to
thwart purpose of the plebiscite or that she had refused to use that authority on request
of the Commission in way that would reasonably support a fair plebiscite, the logic of
the Arbitrator’s award might be turned against her and a court of arbitration might well
hold that Chile had been guilty of a prevention of performance of article III of Treaty of
Ancon and had lost her rights under it.
Upon the evidence presented to the Arbitrator in the case submitted, he was unable to
find Chile guilty of conduct frustrating the plebiscite. The Arbitrator was unwilling to
resort to disputable inferences in reaching such a grave conclusion. As he said in the
award, the plebiscite furnished an appropriate method of deciding the controversy; but
