138 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and reasonable expansion by our partners abroad will contribute to a better sharing of the deficit. W. Michael Blumenthal3 3 Blumenthal signed “Mike” above this typed signature. 38. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, July 5, 1977 SUBJECT Cargo Preferences I have just received Stu Eizenstat’s memo (Tab A) on which you approved a scaled-down version of cargo preferences.2 Obviously, there are important domestic policy considerations at stake. But, your decision will also have significant foreign repercussions which I do not believe were adequately spelled out in the Eizenstat memo: —Our trading partners, particularly the Europeans, will see cargo preferences as a protectionist device. It will raise doubts about your commitment to an open world trading system and to the London Summit Declaration. As you may recall, Prime Minister Nordli told you in London of the serious impact cargo preferences would have on Norway.3 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economic Policy Group: 1977. Confidential. Hormats sent the memorandum to Brzezinski for his signature under cover of a July 1 memorandum. (Ibid.) 2 Tab A is not attached. In his July 1 cover memorandum to Brzezinski (see footnote 1 above), Hormats wrote: “The President has decided to go ahead with a modified cargo preference scheme recommended by Stu Eizenstat. His note on Eizenstat’s memo (Tab A), which we have never received (we had to obtain this from the EPG), indicates that Bob Strauss should work with the unions and Congress to obtain agreement on the ‘minimum’ acceptable level of preference.” A June 23 memorandum from Eizenstat and Bill Johnston to Carter entitled “Cargo Preference” is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economic Policy Group: 1977. 3 Carter met with Nordli in London from 2:30 until 2:45 p.m. on May 10. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)
