28
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
6.
Address by Jimmy Carter1
New York, June 23, 1976
RELATION BETWEEN WORLD’S DEMOCRACIES
An address on Relations Between the World’s Democracies was delivered
by Mr. Carter at a luncheon of the Foreign Policy Association in New York
City, N.Y., June 23, 1976. He said:
For the past seventeen months, as a candidate for President, I have
talked and listened to the American people.
It has been an unforgettable experience and an invaluable educa-
tion. Insofar as my political campaign has been successful, it is because
I have learned from our people, and have accurately reflected their con-
cerns, their frustrations, and their desires.
In the area of foreign policy, our people are troubled, confused and
sometimes angry. There has been too much emphasis on transient spec-
taculars and too little on substance. We are deeply concerned, not only
by such obvious tragedies as the war in Vietnam, but by the more
subtle erosion in the focus and the morality of our foreign policy.
Under the Nixon-Ford Administration, there has evolved a kind of
secretive “Lone Ranger” foreign policy—a one-man policy of interna-
tional adventure. This is not an appropriate policy for America.
We have sometimes tried to play other nations one against another
instead of organizing free nations to share world responsibility in col-
lective action. We have made highly publicized efforts to woo the major
communist powers while neglecting our natural friends and allies. A
foreign policy based on secrecy inherently has had to be closely
guarded and amoral, and we have had to forego openness, consultation
and a constant adherence to fundamental principles and high moral
standards.
We have often sought dramatic and surprising, immediate results
instead of long-term solutions to major problems which required
careful planning in consultation with other nations.
1 Source: The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I, part I: Jimmy Carter, pp. 266–275.
Carter spoke before members of the Foreign Policy Association in the ballroom of the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. (Helen Dewar, “Carter: Consult Allies on Policy,” The Washington
Post, June 24, 1976, pp. A1, A6) In late December 1975, Carter had asked Brzezinski to de-
velop a general outline of a basic statement on foreign affairs. Brzezinski and Gardner
submitted a memorandum to Carter in January 1976, which, Brzezinski noted, would
later become the basis of the address: “The speech was Carter’s major statement on for-
eign policy, and it foreshadowed many of his actions and concerns as President.” (Power
and Principle, p. 7)
