682 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 surround and subdue Afghanistan. If the Soviets were invited in to help frenzied Iranians defend themselves against America, they could anticipate almost no internal resistance, such as they have had to face in Afghanistan. (C) [1 paragraph (17 lines) not declassified] Unless we think in broad strategic and operationally bold terms, we are likely to stumble into a mess in Iran which will result in the takeover of the whole country by the Soviets. (C) [1 paragraph (10½ lines) not declassified] In contemplating possibilities for unusual, far-reaching actions against Iran, we should at least think about the potential for more effective action we might have if we were able to utilize bases in Turkey for this purpose. The state of our relations with Turkey during the 1970’s has, in spite of the recently concluded DCA, left us sadly limited in our capacity to utilize that country’s facilities. But how much is release of the hostages and settlement of our festering crisis in Iran worth to us? How much have we already expended on it? A halfbillion dollars in military aid firmly committed to Turkey for the next three or four years would go a long way toward satisfying their needs for force modernization, would tie them in more firmly to NATO and would enormously strengthen the alliance in its southeastern sector. It does not seem to me that this would be too high a price to pay for utilization of Turkish bases for mounting a strike against Tehran. (S) In terms of the kind of thinking we conventionally do these days, the “strategic thoughts” I have just outlined above might be considered justification for my incarceration in a psychiatric institution, an inverse American version of the fate of General Grigorenko . . .2 But I sense that we may be whipping ourselves up into a emotional frenzy over the hostages in Tehran which could inadvertently have far worse consequences which would do more harm both to us and to the world than some of the actions I have suggested thinking about . . . (C) 2 General Petro Grigorenko was arrested and declared guilty of “prophesying” in 1964 when he criticized Nikita Khrushchev as “an ordinary zero” who would be out of power by the autumn of that year. A commission of psychiatrists sentenced him to prison and then to a psychiatric hospital. He was released in 1965 after Khrushchev’s fall from power in October 1964.
