International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
445
can demonstrate success in the MTN we can put obstacles in the path of
protectionist pressures.
Giscard: We should be frank in our analysis here. I know countries
do not like to be offensive, but the analysis will remain among our-
selves and will not be seen to be offensive in the outside world.
The French problem is unemployment. It is both a social and a po-
litical problem. Compared to the East the fact that the West has unem-
ployment, particularly unemployment among the young, is a handicap
we must do something about. Also, the LDCs are directly tied to our
difficulties. We should not just pay lip service to them but include a dis-
cussion of LDC problems among our own. We are interdependent with
them.
Let me assess the causes of our problems. During the 1960’s and
the early part of the 1970’s there was a considerable amount of growth.
There was then a gradual slowdown, and an increase in oil prices. This
resulted in a new disequilibrium in the world. Things were improved a
bit because of the oil price freeze. But there now may be a period of oil
price increases, in part for international monetary reasons. There will
be catastrophic economic difficulties if there is once again a steep oil
price increase. This would cause an impossible situation, causing coun-
tries to tighten their belts and try to increase their exports. It will lead to
huge increases in unemployment. The period between now and 1982
will be dangerous. We here have an economic responsibility. There is a
long lead time before economic measures are felt. To influence events
beyond 1979 we must take steps now. We should start to do things this
summer or early autumn to be effective in future years.
Fukuda: This is an age of uncertainty. There is an opaque future for
all of us. People are insecure. Many economic and social problems con-
tribute to a lack of confidence. There is uncertainty in East/West and
North/South relations. Within ten years there could be an oil crisis. We
need a clearer vision for the future. We should adjust ourselves to the
post-petroleum era, and should work toward a clearer vision of that
era. In addition, we should cooperate to help the peoples of the world
regain confidence. We should pool our wisdom and by the next
Summit should take up the long-range future energy problems of the
world.
Andreotti: The fact of this meeting has a useful purpose. It enables
our people and public opinion in our countries to become accustomed
to interdependence in the solutions of economic and social problems
both among the industrialized countries and between them and the rest
of the world. The issue of the LDCs is not a matter of aid but an element
in the overall progress of humanity and attention to these problems in
LDCs can reduce demand for improvement in our countries, which
have already developed.
