516 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV an enemy strike was en route. Along with continuing improvements in warning sensors, in force reaction times, and in the flexibility and survivability of forces and command and control systems, [less than one line not declassified] the USSR can now employ its strategic forces for preemptive, retaliatory, or launch-­on-­tactical-­warning strikes, in addition to the much less likely option of surprise attack. While we do not fully understand the significance for Soviet strategy [less than one line not declassified] could reflect: concern that the USSR might not obtain advance warning of a US decision to strike; recognition that any decision to preempt would risk initiating a nuclear exchange by mistake; growing confidence that Soviet forces could respond in time or even suffer some losses and still be able to counterattack against a wide range of US targets; and hope that Soviet power now deters the United States sufficiently to lessen the chances that the United States would escalate from theater to intercontinental war. At a minimum, launch-­ on-­warning capabilities and tactics increase the options available to the Soviet leadership under circumstances of crisis and conflict which could vary widely. 3. Other noteworthy developments of the past year show that Soviet strategic programs have neither narrowed in scope nor slackened in pace. These programs continue to reflect the Soviet conviction that enhancement of the USSR’s strategic posture requires concentration on supporting capabilities, such as command and control, as well as on forces and weapons: —In strategic offensive forces, research and development activity is in progress on improved weapons in all categories. Systems under development include several new or modified ICBMs, a new IRBM, a new large ballistic missile submarine and SLBM weapon system, what is probably a long-­range ALCM (air-­launched cruise missile), and possibly a new intercontinental bomber or cruise missile carrier or both. —In ASW programs, there were initial sea trials this year of a new class of SSN (nuclear-­powered attack submarine) which can dive deeper and may be somewhat quieter than its predecessors. There is evidence that the Soviet SSN force will expand in the future. The Soviets have continued their efforts to develop more effective ASW sensors, though they continue to lack broad ocean detection capabilities. —In ABM defense, R&D in both systems and technology continues. The limited ABM capability at Moscow remains operational without change. —In command, control, and communications, the Soviets have long stressed redundancy and extensive bunkering in an effort to ensure continuity of command and the availability of information in wartime. In addition, they are augmenting their fixed facilities with various kinds of mobile command posts for national and military authorities. The command and control system appears capable of supporting essential decisions and transmitting initial launch instructions to Soviet strategic forces even if directly attacked. It also appears to have good capabilities for sustained battle management, but these capabilities would be severely degraded if key national-­level command bunkers and communications centers were destroyed.
