Covert and Overt Operations
911
mission, Turner said that it is more likely a general upgrading of
contingency planning for the region to bring it to the level that we
have observed for Europe and the Far East. [3 lines not declassified]
There are, however, constraints on Soviet action: the weakness of the
Turkestan Military District, adverse effects on détente, and problems
in Poland. (TS)
Turner estimated that an attack is not likely now, but if the U.S.
enters Iran, or if there is an internal collapse, these external events
might provoke the Soviets to move. [1 line not declassified] this will be
an indication of much greater readiness and of offensive rather than
defensive thinking on the Soviet part. (SNIE on which Turner’s briefing
was based is at Tab C.) (TS)
Discussion of the DCI’s Briefing
Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we are dealing with a Soviet contin-
gency plan which likely depends on the internal collapse in Iran. There-
fore, we need a better assessment of the Iranian political situation. (TS)
General Jones disagreed with the contingency plan notion. The
Joint Chiefs believe there is a 50–50 possibility that the Soviets are
themselves trying to control the timing, not just preparing to react to
outside events. One of the Chiefs is sufficiently disturbed to recommend
immediate deployment to the region in an effort to deter the Soviets.
The Chiefs are more concerned with time than the DCI. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski summed up that we have reached no overall conclu-
sions about Soviet intentions. (S)
He then stated the next two issues: what to communicate to our
friends, and what to communicate to the Soviets. (S)
Communications to Our Allies in Europe
[2 paragraphs (9 lines) not declassified]
Muskie is seeing Francois-Poncet and Genscher on Monday.3 He
agreed to have a general analytical discussion about the possible inter-
nal collapse of Iran, but he does not want to be sufficiently explicit on
our concerns to encourage Francois-Poncet’s inference that we [less
than 1 line not declassified]. (TS)
[1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified]
Communications with Countries in the Region
Komer emphasized that only three countries in the region are
significant, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Turkey, for U.S. military reactions
to the Soviets. The Saudis are at present more concerned with the
3 August 25.
