Afghanistan
845
315.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, September 9, 1980, 1–3 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
Alexander Bessmertnykh, Minister-Counselor, Soviet Embassy
Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member
The Elections. After some mutual comparison of recent vacation
travels—his in the Baltic and mine in California and Arizona—the
conversation turned to the current campaign. As far as the USSR was
concerned, it made little difference who won in November, Bessmert-
nykh said. When I expressed surprise at this statement, given Governor
Reagan’s position on the Soviet Union and on a whole range of security
issues, Bessmertnykh conceded that the President was logically the
preferable candidate for Moscow because of his approach to arms
control questions. “Reagan directly opposes SALT, Carter does not,”
Bessmertnykh said. But as seen from Moscow the difference between
the two candidates on defense matters is unimportant. Soviet defense
analysts feel that the Carter Administration has done as much as any
American government can do to increase defense expenditures and
strongly doubt that Reagan would allocate more for defense over the
next two fiscal years than Carter has, Bessmertynkh said, and particu-
larly if he cuts taxes. (C)
It is true, Bessmertynkh continued, that a sober and straightforward
comparison of the positions which the two candidates have adopted
would seem to make Carter preferable for us. But speaking entirely
informally and off the record, it is simply a fact that the President is
viscerally disliked in Moscow and that this dislike is widely shared
both by the general Soviet public and by official circles. There were
two recent events that strongly influenced this Soviet attitude. The first
was the decision to try and implement a world-wide boycott of the
Olympics. This was very bad, and it was deeply resented because it
was not seen as a serious way for the superpowers to do business. In
fact, it engendered a feeling of national resentment within the Soviet
populace, who were then extremely gratified at the great success of
the Olympics. The other matter which was a subject of great irritation
within the USSR was the President’s statement that Brezhnev had lied
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 84, USSR: 9/80. Secret. The meeting took place in the Soviet Embassy.
