1248 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of years, you could not bind your successors, and would be dramatic. Sec said it should be announced tomorrow. Sec said he had seen Strauss yesterday and was seeing Strauss and Quarles this afternoon. Sec said if it was not done soon the Soviets would do it first and we would be aping them. Sec said it would be quite dramatic and would not cost much. Sec said McElroy if he was back from Cincinnati, or Quarles, Strauss, the Joint Chiefs and himself should talk to the Pres re this. (2) The Brit are pressing hard to do something on a Summit conference and are more or less prepared to concede in the preparatory talks a 5–­5 basis. Sec said he was reluctant to do that. Sec asked Pres what he would think of the possibility of asking the NATO people to ask Macmillan to go to Moscow to explore the possibilities and report back. Sec said it might give Mac­ millan the prestige he needs; of course there was the risk that he is under great political pressures at home, personally he was the best of the lot. His talks might prove it was not worthwhile to have a Summit confer­ ence, although he might be reluctant to come to that conclusion. Sec said he could not come much before 3 because he was giving a luncheon for Erhard, and then the briefing was at 3, but they could talke about these matters right after it. Sec said if Pres did decide to do this he should call Macmillan on the phone to tell him by 10 p.m. which would be 5 p.m. our time. Sec said he could not come in the morning as he was giving his major presentation on MSP before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. 299. Memorandum of Conversation with the President1 Washington, March 24, 1958 PRESENT Secretary Dulles General Twining, Chairman, JCS Deputy Secretary of Defense Quarles Mr. Allen W. Dulles Admiral Strauss General Cutler General Goodpaster Secretary McElroy 1 Source: Proposal to suspend nuclear testing dropped; includes draft Presidential statement. Confidential; Personal and Private. 7 pp. Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President.
