120  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
1. Widespread social progress and economic growth benefitting all 
the people and achieved within a framework of free institutions are the 
imperatives of our time.
2. Our nation’s history and traditions place us in accord with those 
who seek to fulfill the promise of the future through methods consis-
tent with the dignity of free men. Our interests and sympathies are with 
them.
3. A new affirmation of purpose is called for in our cooperation 
with friendly developing countries in their efforts to progress.
In his announcement, President Eisenhower outlined three specific 
needs which he believes must be mot through cooperative action: prac-
tical ways in which developing countries can make faster progress in 
meeting their own needs and ways in which their friends can most effec-
tively cooperate with them (he mentioned better land utilization, low-­
cost housing, und minimums for decent living); improvement of the 
opportunities for the bulk of the population to share in and contribute 
to un expanding national product; and acceleration of the trend toward 
greater respect for human rights and democratic government based on 
free elections. The Congress of the United States has indicated its gen-
eral concurrence in the President’s concept. END UNCLASSIFIED
BEGIN CONFIDENTIAL
Brazil views President Eisenhower’s proposal as an emergency 
program applying to social infrastructure, to be followed by a program 
to deal with economic infrastructure. The Brazilians also are insisting 
on the principle of programming through a joint commission, either the 
Committee of 21 or some other multilateral committee, wherein funds 
available under the new program would presumably be allocated to 
the various countries by this group.
It is very probable that Brazil will lead representations at Bogotá 
in favor of some variety of massive U.S. assistance to Latin American 
economic development and in criticism of the level of existing and 
announced U.S. assistance. The President’s new proposals are not likely 
to satisfy Brazilian desires on the scope and volume of U.S. aid.
II—U.S. POLICY AND OBJECTIVES
The United States believes (a) that the current, continuing revo-
lution in Latin America requires energetic steps by each nation’s gov-
ernment, in the direction of meeting the peoples’ legitimate aspirations 
and that failure to do so can only lead to repetitions of the kind of 
destructive social upheaval seen in Castro’s Cuba; (b) economic devel-
opment programs which do not bring relatively quick, though perhaps 
relatively small, amelioration of dire misery encountered in many 
areas will not meet the above problem; (c) it is absolutely essential that
