Afghanistan thought they could do the job quickly, they might decide on a major pacification effort. The manpower requirement for such an effort would be open-ended, probably taking far more than 150,000 men. The buildup of such a force could only be accomplished over a period of months. ([classification marking not declassified]) Soviet operations, which almost certainly will combine carrot with stick, may be able to intimidate or placate the insurgency to quiescence, and they can certainly remove it as a potent threat to the Babrak regime. Indeed, it is unlikely that even a much stronger insurgency could seriously threaten either the Soviets or Babrak’s government as long as the Soviets retain substantial forces in Afghanistan. On the other hand, the traditional militancy and fierce independence of the rebels, coupled with the severe difficulties that the mountainous Afghan countryside poses for military pacification operations, probably will make it impossible for the Soviets to eradicate the insurgency. ([classification marking not declassified]) Thus, the long-term outlook for the Soviets in Afghanistan is for a continued military presence with both Soviet and government forces harassed by at least low-level insurgent operations. The Soviet presence could provoke the insurgency to greater determination and closer cooperation. The rebels could continue harassing operations for the foreseeable future, withdrawing into high-mountain redoubts or to sanctuaries across the border to evade search-and-destroy operations. We can foresee almost no circumstance in which the Soviets will be able to eradicate the insurgency and permanently pacify the countryside, but, with a force of 150,000 men, they probably could reduce the insurgency to an acceptable level of annoyance. ([classification marking not declassified]) The Soviet military occupation of Afghanistan is likely to be of long duration. The Babrak regime is not likely to be either politically or militarily secure without the Soviet presence, and rebuilding the Afghan Army probably will take from one to three years. Eradication of the insurgency—if it can be accomplished at all—could take some years after that. In the short term, there is the threat of spillover into adjacent areas of Pakistan and Iran resulting from a Soviet decision to attack or pursue insurgents operating out of those countries. Given the dislocation of so many Afghan refugees, the refugee camps’ potential as a source of recruitment and supplies for the insurgents, and the Soviets’ publicly stated rationalization of the invasion as a response to external threats, the potential for spillover is high. ([classification marking not declassified]) [Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
