664 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Returning to the question of the shrinking nighttime, the Chairman said that, as the nights grow shorter, they would fly the helicopters in only a few hundred miles to a point where they could still return to the carriers should they be discovered. They would wait the night and then go on the second night to the point where they would pick up their fuel. The President asked how much fuel was involved. The Chairman replied, “9,000 gallons.” Dr. Brzezinski asked about the containers for the fuel. The Chairman explained that if we drop in the fuel, they will use blivits. These are essentially large tires containing 400 gallons of fuel each that can be rolled along the ground to a hiding place. However, if they land the C–130s, there is fuel inside of them, and the helicopters simply come right up next to the C–130s and are refueled. In this option, three C–130’s are used. The helicopters, after being refueled, go and hide in the hills outside of Tehran. The problem is that this requires overflight of Saudi Arabia during daylight hours which might tip off the Iranians somehow that an operation was under way. Therefore, we are looking at the combination of C–130s and C–141s refueling from Diego Garcia. The Chairman concluded by saying that, in three or four days, we will have our analysis completed of these various alternatives, particularly whether the caching idea looks good. If we do not proceed with the operation soon, or if the prepositioning of fuel does not turn out to be a desirable option, we can in a few weeks send in the Otter to look for another landing site away from the road. Mr. Aaron asked why we couldn’t have another Otter operation right away. The Chairman replied that we need good moonlight for the Otter operation. Admiral Turner added that the pilot found that he could see much better than he thought he would be able to with the night-vision devices that are associated with the Otter. Dr. Brzezinski asked how much leadtime would be necessary to place the fuel if we should decide today to go forward with that. The Chairman asked if he could approach the problem from the other end. If we were to go forward with the rescue, the Chiefs would recommend aiming for the 24th of April. While we could get it there within a week of any decision to go, our plans would call for putting it in the night before and then go right on with the rest of the operation. Alternatively, if we wanted to test our capacity to carry out this activity surreptitiously, we could put it in three or four days ahead of time. In that circumstance, they would camouflage and hide the fuel, and we would pull the men out. Dr. Brzezinski asked, that if they just went forward with the operation, what would happen to the men? The Chairman explained that the men who would do the hiding of the fuel
