470
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
there. As soon as the West Bank is ready to participate, whatever ar-
rangements are worked out for Gaza could be expanded. I told him that
I would report his comments, but reiterated that I thought this was a
non-starter.
5. On Hussein and the Saudis, I said I could understand his sense
of annoyance, but suggested that it is in GOE’s own interest to take
steps to improve relations. Sadat said he is not prepared to do so now.
“Let Hussein and the Saudis stew in their own juice awhile.”
6. Sadat had a bad cold and was by then showing signs of wea-
riness. He asked that I get back to Cairo quickly to pass on his message
without delay. I undertook to do so.
7. Comment: Sadat’s back is up. Whether this is due to the
Baghdad Conference, various Israeli statements made publicly and to
the Egyptian delegation suggesting a no-hurry approach on the West
Bank/Gaza, the apparent Israeli reneging on a Sinai interim with-
drawal timetable, the unresolved West Bank settlements issue, or a
combination of all these, I cannot say. I suspect that all these factors
have played a role. Of his several points, I believe Sadat’s principal one
is achieving some kind of specific linkage between the Sinai treaty and
West Bank/Gaza agreement. He insists that it was his understanding
throughout the Camp David talks that, even though the two frame-
work documents were separate, they would be linked in terms of im-
plementation. He is concerned at what he believes will be an effort on
our part to press him on outstanding issues rather than the Israelis. He
fears he is being asked to compromise further on what is already a com-
promise. He is once again bitter about the Israelis and speaks of Israeli
“arrogance.” Some of this is doubtless tactical bargaining, but he is gen-
uinely concerned that he not appear to be concluding a separate peace
with Israel. Hence, he is likely to continue to insist on some sort of im-
plementation linkage, including if necessary delaying the initial in-
terim withdrawal arrangements in Sinai by a few months. He wants
withdrawal in Sinai to begin, but he has come to realize that some sort
of specific synchronization of Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities is
needed if his already tarnished Arab credentials are somehow to be
maintained.
Eilts
