Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX underestimate importance he attaches to meaningful linkage formula. He wants withdrawal in Sinai to begin, but has come to realize need for some sort of synchronization of Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities if his tarnished Arab credentials are to be maintained. End summary. 1. Met this afternoon with Sadat, at his request, in Ismailia. Meeting lasted hour and a half. VP Mubarak and PriMin Khalil were also present. 2. Sadat recounted his half hour telecon of last night with President Carter. He was somewhat disturbed about some of the things that had been mentioned and said that he had summoned me to confirm to President Carter the positions that he had stated in telecon. He asked that I convey following to President Carter: A. President Carter had told him of a new American draft,5 which I would hand to Sadat. The President had asked that Sadat not make any alterations so that the existing gaps between the parties can be bridged and the text accepted as the final treaty. Sadat said he has no objection, but if there is no specific linkage between the first phase of Sinai withdrawal and full autonomy for the Palestinians, at least in Gaza, he cannot agree. President Carter, according to Sadat, had seemed perplexed at Sadat’s position. The President had noted that there is no legal connection between the Sinai and West Bank/Gaza problems. Sadat claimed that he made it clear that there is such a connection in the Camp David framework document. (PriMin Khalil then cited para B–2 of the “Framework for Peace,” which invites the other parties to proceed simultaneously to negotiate and conclude similar peace treaties with a view to achieving comprehensive peace. The “other parties,” Sadat and Khalil contended, include the Palestinians.) Sadat insisted that, contrary to Israeli charges, he has not sought to introduce any new element. Egypt’s position has always been clear on this point. GOE insists on timetable for Israeli actions re West Bank/Gaza. As President Carter aware, the Israelis want no fixed dates synchronizing Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities. If such a linkage does not exist in precise form and with dates, Sadat said, it will in effect mean that the Sinai treaty is a separate peace. Such a situation will be exploited by the USSR and the rejectionists, the latter, he noted, are trying to win the Saudis over. He had made it very clear, both in his speech to the Knesset6 and in the Camp David tripartite talks, that he will never sign a separate agreement. Unless the Palestinian question is resolved, there cannot be peace. 5 See Document 131.
