1956  1129
gone through carefully and we believe Dave is the man for this job. We 
are still very hard pressed here. We will be interested in getting Dave’s 
analysis of the document. Col. Monroe is in Korea where he is sup­
posed to needle our people on the MAC to renewed action on the issue 
of the missing military personnel. We are not sanguine that anything 
significant will come out of the MAC on this but the further effort needs 
to be made.
We have not yet had any reply from the British on our request of 
July 20 that O’Neill renew insistently his request to see all the American 
prisoners. I intend to ask Arthur de la Mare, the new Counselor of the 
British Embassy for Far Eastern matters, to send out a tickler on this to 
O’Neill today. We would like to have some news on this for you before 
the August 9 meeting.
We have received word from the British that the Foreign Office 
in Peiping informed them that Bishop Henry Pinger is to be released 
“tomorrow” (presumably August 4) upon expiration of his sentence. 
This will reduce the number of American prisoners to 10. But the last 
3 to be released have been compelled to serve their full sentences. 
Wang cannot claim that they were released “expeditiously” or that the 
­so-­called “policy of leniency” has been applied in their cases. In our 
next guidance telegram we may suggest that you make an observation 
on this at the next meeting. Also we may suggest that you raise the mat­
ter of the violation of the Agreed Announcement in the case of Father 
­Clifford. You will recall from Hong Kong telegram that his request for 
permission to write O’Neill was refused by the Chinese ­Communists. 
The British Charge still has not heard from half of the imprisoned 
Americans. It is highly probable that the request of others have also 
been denied.
An amusing footnote to the petition of the American ­Communist 
Party of the State of Connecticut to Mao Tse-­tung for the release of 
Downey and the other imprisoned Americans, is a report we have 
received that the National Communist Party headquarters in the U.S. 
reprimanded the head of the Connecticut Party organization for his 
temerity in forwarding this request to Peiping. Apparently it was con­
sidered a breach of Party discipline.
Tell Dave we are glad to hear that he will remain in the Foreign 
Service Class 4 rather than going to the new Class 5. We have just heard 
that he is on the list of those who were recommended for promotion by 
the last Selection Board, and therefore will be placed in the new Class 4.
I suppose you have seen the Departmental Circular No. 185 which 
implements the new Foreign Service Act which the President signed 
July 28.
Things are a little bit disrupted with Herman Phleger in London 
with the Secretary, and Walter Robertson away on leave until August 20.
