723.2515/2150: Telegram [Document 248] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase] SANTIAGO, April 17, 1926—4 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.] 78. After an interview with Minister for Foreign Affairs today I later conferred with President of Chile alone. Both gentlemen declared that creation of neutralized independent state is unacceptable, and Ambassador Cruchaga has been so advised. I strongly urged acceptance of alternative proposition to cede territory to Bolivia. Both the Minister and the President said that as Peru had refused to accept this proposition it was not necessary for Chile to state position on it. I said that although I was uninformed, it was premature to think that because there had been a refusal, the mediator might not yet persuade Peru to accept. … I argued that cession to Bolivia now will only anticipate that which the Government of Chile desires to make, and that to make it now would be an advantageous act and will avoid the inevitable discussions of our terms that would surely arise later, to say nothing of fact that national sentiment will inevitably oppose cession once territory has been won in a plebiscite. … I also said that if Chile is sure that Peru will not cede at this time, it would be stroke of high policy for Chile to offer cession, thus winning Bolivia’s friendship and turning her against Peru. President Figueroa said they feared to cede entire province to Bolivia in light of recent speeches of President Leguía and of Bolivian Special Ambassador to Peru in regard to regaining their ancient frontiers, which convinced him that a union between Peru and Bolivia was either in existence or in process of formation, and that Chile is in very perilous position; I again expressed opinion that offer of cession now to Bolivia would break up such a union, but he disagreed with me. I am inclined to believe that President is sincere in his fears. Both he and Mathieu expressed their desire to make any fair settlement that is consistent with Chile’s vital interests, but neither the President nor the Foreign Minister is disposed to
