Arms Control and Disarmament 1377 convention establishing the European Company for the Chemical Pro­ cessing of Irradiated Fuels (EUROCHEMIC). 46. As a country associated with the work of the OEEC, the United States is following with interest other OEEC programs, such as the security convention now in the process of ratification; the drafting of third party liability legislation, and feasibility studies regarding the use of Iceland’s natural steam fields in connection with a heavy water pro­ duction plant. 47. Organization of American States (OAS). Drafting a statute for the Inter-­American Nuclear Energy Commission continues. The first IANEC meeting is planned for early 1959. We believe it would be desirable that a second Inter-­American Symposium on the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy be held in late 1959 or 1960 in a South American country under the aegis of the new Commission. The Department of State and the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission have agreed that full participation by the United States should be extended if such a Symposium is held. 48. Puerto Rico Training Center. The Puerto Rico Nuclear Center, which is operated by the University of Puerto Rico for the AEC, is intended to serve as a regional nuclear training center for Latin Amer­ ica. Initial operation of the center, in facilities made available by the Uni­ versity, and using some $300,000 worth of nuclear equipment provided by the AEC, has proceeded successfully. Some 50 students, mostly from Puerto Rico, have now been trained in radioisotopes techniques, and the first course in nuclear engineering is in progress. 49. The principal facilities of the Nuclear Center will consist of a research reactor and associated laboratories, to be located at the Maya­ guez Campus. The design of these facilities is in progress and contracts for their construction are expected to be awarded by the end of FY 1958, with completion scheduled in FY 1960. The cost of these facilities is estimated at $3 million. An additional $500,000 has been requested in the FY 1959 budget for a medical radioisotopes laboratory to be located at the San Juan Campus. 50. Upon completion, the Puerto Rico Nuclear Center will be able to accommodate upwards of 100 students annually in various phases of nuclear training, plus a number of research associates. Annual oper­ ating costs of the Center at that time will be in the vicinity of $1 mil­ lion. To serve its regional purpose, the Center must attract qualified students from Latin America. Although the students trained to date have been largely from Puerto Rico, there is encouraging evidence of interest in the Center throughout Latin America, and applications from the Latin American Republics are being received in increasing num­ bers. This interest was demonstrated by the attitudes and statements of scientists from a number of the Republics who participated in the Sym­ posium on Health Physics in Biology and Medicine held at San Juan
