538 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement out also that the provisions for shipment of PL–480 and Eximbank cargoes on American vessels (to the extent of 50%) is natural since the shipments are made possible by dollar loans which usually include the dollar cost of freight. Mr. Rubottom said he appreciated the fact that Ecuador was under pressure from Colombia, but he pointed out that Colombia itself has never passed an act so discriminatory as the new Ecuadoran law. He concluded by saying that the provisions of Article 6 are not entirely clear,5 but the act as a whole seems completely discriminatory. Mr. Bernbaum said that if the United States did not prevent an example of discrimination such as the new Ecuadoran law, the measure could serve as an example for the rest of the world and other countries might follow Ecuador’s lead. He pointed out that the United States had protested the Chile law and that this law is not yet in effect. He mentioned the difficulties with Argentina, dating from the time of the Peron6 Administration, but added that these difficulties had recently been solved through an exchange of notes with the new Argentine Government. Mr. Bernbaum admitted that a Government has the right to bring its own cargo in its own ships for its own account, but pointed out that the new Ecuadoran decree goes far beyond such a measure. He said that the United States asks only for the right to compete on a commercial basis and pointed out that subsidies like those granted to United States shipping lines do not prevent competition. The decree was discussed further along the above lines and the Ecuadorans indicated that they would like information as to how the United States had settled the shipping discrimination issue with Argentina. In summary, Mr. Rubottom spoke very frankly and forcefully and left no doubt in any one’s mind as to the attitude of the United States in this matter. Enclosed for the use of the Department of State and other agencies are memoranda from officials of the Grace Line showing how seriously the new decree is expected to affect American shipping interests, and a copy of a memorandum written by the Minister of Economy to the Minister of Foreign Affairs in justification of the new decree.7 5 Telegram 484 to Quito, June 17, reported that Ambassador Chiriboga of Ecuador informed the Department of State in a note of June 10 that, in accordance with Article 6 of the April 23 decree, Ecuador had decided to limit applicability of the decree to cargoes destined for Government and public agencies. (922.73/6–1758) 6 General Juan Domingo Perón, President of Argentina, June 4, 1946–September 22, 1955. 7 The enclosures are not printed.
