Human Rights
173
which is programmed specifically for humanitarian purposes, ought
not to be considered for human rights leverage.
Economic Assistance
A.I.D.’s legislation requires that it be sensitive to human rights
considerations in the design and implementation of its programs. Sec-
tion 116 of the Foreign Assistance Act requires a denial of all develop-
ment assistance under the Act to governments which engage in con-
sistent patterns of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights, unless the assistance directly benefits the needy people of that
country. Section 502B declares that no security assistance shall be pro-
vided to a government that engages in a consistent pattern of gross vio-
lations of internationally recognized human rights, except under ex-
traordinary circumstances.
A.I.D. currently:
—reviews ongoing and proposed projects in each country which
may be a serious violator of internationally recognized standards of
human rights.
—ensures that such projects will directly benefit the needy people
of the country.
A.I.D. will:
—submit assistance proposals for such countries to the Inter-
agency Committee on Human Rights and Foreign Assistance for dis-
cussion of overriding political considerations.
—ensure, in developing its proposals for projects in developing
countries in which there is a serious question about human rights, that
full consideration will be given to the impact of the program on the im-
provement of human rights in that country.
—constantly examine the implementation of its programs in all
countries to ensure that they are supportive of the Administration’s
human rights objectives.
—review annually, on a country-by-country basis, its total pro-
posed levels of bilateral development and supporting assistance to en-
sure that these levels are fully compatible with the Administration’s
policy of positively promoting a commitment to human rights.
The strengthening of sound development policy which is neces-
sary to reach the needy people of developing countries however, re-
quires long-range planning. A.I.D.’s internal procedures require keen
sensitivity to human rights issues, and the process described above
should serve to ensure built-in responsiveness. Therefore, we hope that
development assistance would not be used to send short-term signals
of approval or disapproval except in extreme cases. Further, while re-
ductions in development assistance in reaction to flagrant violations of
human rights may be appropriate in extreme cases, sudden increases
would be much harder to implement productively. Positive incentives
should thus be limited to instances of longer-term steady improvement
