622 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 6. Talks, that is conversation, mean little compared to the reassurance found in written documents and precise obligations; that is one reason why communiques and joint principles and treaties have more importance in the USSR than in other diplomatic exchanges; but the “spirit” of a document is virtually non-existent; 7. The main value to Western leaders may be simply to get some feel for the mind set of the Soviets and their mode of reasoning. The top Soviet leaders do in fact have extraordinary power and will make decisions. But they have no great incentive to make concessions and thereby expose themselves politically. Negotiations therefore take place within a pre-defined framework, and on any issue it is important for the Soviets to point to the precise concession they extracted in the bargaining. [Omitted here is a 2-page profile of Brezhnev.] 121. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Director of the Policy Planning Staff (Lake)1 Washington, July 13, 1979 SUBJECT The Next 18 Months I ASSUME: —terrific bind on resources, —state budget (cut for FY 80 by 5% yesterday), AID, FMS, ESF, etc., plus SALT military and energy. —very tough political environment for Carter—possible squeaks or losses in early primaries, overwhelming emphasis by White House on election related policies both domestic and foreign (Kirby2 tells me 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director: Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981: Lot 82D298: Box 18, Next Eighteen Months 8/9/79–9/10/79. Confidential. Copies were sent to Lissakers and Berger. Kreisberg added the “from” line by hand. In the top-right hand corner of the memorandum, Lake wrote: “Ed—Hold for this PM. TL.” Presumable reference to Edward O’Donnell, Lake’s Special Assistant. Kreisberg drafted the memorandum as part of a larger project coordinated by Lake and Tarnoff to provide Vance with recommendations designed to structure and define the remainder of Vance’s time as Secretary. Lake and Tarnoff submitted their recommendations to Vance in an August 9 memorandum, Document 123. 2 Presumable reference to Policy Planning Staff member William Kirby, Jr.
