794 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 20. I said question he had asked again this morning seemed to me in effect to be whether, when we came to discussion other matters between us, my government intended to capitulate to position his gov­ ernment with regard points in dispute between us. If I understood him rightly, he saying that in effect there no point in continuing these talks unless I would assure him here and now that when we came to discus­ sion these other matters I would entirely concede to his position. This was hardly in the spirit of negotiation and seeking peaceful means for settlement our disputes, seemed to me it came very close saying that he not willing renounce use force in settlement our disputes unless he first assured that other side would capitulate to his views in settlement of dispute. 21. I said this was again jumping over question of our declaration to question of merits of our disputes. As such I did not consider ques­ tion to be a proper one. If he had asked me the question in relation to our declaration whether it my intent in issuance this declaration that he abandon his views with regard status Taiwan, or respective merits our positions with regard thereto, and his views with regard to meeting of Foreign Ministers, my answer would have certainly been a categorical “no.” 22. Wang said statements he had made this morning were intended to clarify our respective points view on question issuance declaration between us. As he had previously stated repeatedly, in making such declaration it necessary both sides indicate willingness make mutual concessions. As he had often pointed out, amendments put forward my side to December 1 draft turned out to be merely fur­ ther persisting in my original point or without displaying any desire make further progress our talks. Statement I had just made had con­ firmed that this one case—that is, amendments put forward by my side did not indicate any modification principles my side put forward and this showed U.S. side had not made any concessions with regard to declaration. If one side should hold its own views while insisting incessantly that other side should give way on own views, then no agreement could possibly be reached between two sides. 23. Wang said he would point out particularly that it not true as I alleged that his side had accepted what I termed principles my ­October 8 statement. Could there have been any occasion in which it could be claimed his side had given recognition to U.S. right self-­ defense in Taiwan area? Was it not fact that point on self-­defense clause in Taiwan area had always been point of controversy and point of opposition in course talks? 24. Wang said from opening these discussions he repeatedly had tried make clear that international disputes between two countries China and U.S. must be separated from internal issues of China.
