492
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
The President: That is very helpful. I am glad to get to know you. I
have heard fine things about you. I know President Sadat has confi-
dence in you. We should try to minimize our public demands and
statements. They have a way of becoming matters of national honor.
The Israelis also do this, and we hope that neither side will talk so much
to the press.
Vice President Mubarak: We were very upset about the Israeli settle-
ments. When we decided to keep quiet, they said that we approved of
what they were doing.
The President: They say that Egypt doesn’t care and that this is just a
U.S.-Israeli problem.
Ambassador Ghorbal: When we talked to Weizman and Dayan, we
took a very strong position on the settlements.
Secretary Vance: One issue which you have been pressing has been
an Egyptian presence in Gaza, especially the presence of Egyptian po-
lice. This is a very explosive issue with the Israelis. Are you still in-
sisting on it?
Vice President Mubarak: We are only interested in a symbolic pres-
ence. I’ll speak to Weizman. We don’t want police there to fight Israel.
We know the situation in Gaza. We just want to send some police and
have a presence.
Secretary Vance: I hope you can get this cleared up.
Vice President Mubarak: We mentioned it before.
The President: This is an additional problem. Even if there are only
fifteen police, it opens up a new area. One possibility might be that
when negotiations take place, when there is a registration of voters,
when the elections are held, there would be some kind of international
monitoring. This could involve the U.N., or perhaps a joint Israeli-
Egyptian presence. They could attest to the fairness of the elections.
This would be the best way for there to be an Egyptian presence.
Vice President Mubarak: We could think of an Egyptian-Israeli
presence.
The President: Why don’t you explore this with Weizman?
Secretary Vance: The fear is that you want to take over the Gaza
Strip.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll explain to him. We want to finish with
this problem. We don’t want Gaza.
The President: Try to make this clear to the Israelis.
Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk about the priority of obligations
with him. I won’t tell the Israelis that we agree yet. Mr. President, if you
want to see me while I am here, I will be available.
Secretary Vance: There is only one other major issue and that is oil.
There should be some way to work this through.
