1196  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
resolve questions of compliance, agree upon additional measures to 
improve the viability and effectiveness of the Treaty, and resolve ques-
tions related to the application of relevant provisions of the Treaty 
to new kinds of strategic offensive arms. The JCIC Protocol includes 
provisions that are designed to facilitate resolution by the Parties of 
compliance concerns, including by means of special access visits. The 
provisions of the Treaty governing the JCIC are being provisionally 
applied for a 12-month period pending entry into force of the Treaty.
AMENDMENTS; ENTRY INTO FORCE;  
DURATION; WITHDRAWAL
The Treaty shall enter into force on the date of exchange of instru-
ments of ratification.
The Treaty is to remain in force for 15 years unless superseded ear-
lier by a subsequent agreement on the reduction and limitation of stra-
tegic arms. The Parties may agree to extend the Treaty for successive 
five-year periods.
The Treaty also provides that each Party may, in exercising its 
national sovereignty, withdraw from the Treaty if it decides that 
extraordinary events related to the subject matter of the Treaty have 
jeopardized its supreme interests.
CONCLUSION
Accompanying this Report is an Article-by-Article Analysis of 
the Treaty, including its Protocols, Annexes, and Memorandum of 
Understanding, as well as other agreements, letters and statements 
associated with the Treaty sent for the information of the Senate.
I believe that this Treaty, by significantly limiting and reducing stra-
tegic offensive arms, will reduce the risk of war and therefore enhance 
the national security of the United States. I therefore recommend that 
the Treaty be submitted to the Senate for its advice and consent to rati-
fication at the earliest possible date.3
Respectfully submitted,
James Baker
3 President Bush transmitted the treaty to the Senate on November 25, 1991. (Public 
Papers: Bush, 1991, pp. 1520–1523) The United States Senate ratified the Treaty Between 
the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Reduction 
and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms on October 1, 1992. The treaty entered into 
force on December 5, 1994.
