National Security Policy  381
3. I do not believe that there has so far been any deliberate com­
parison of the economic effects of these two courses of action with the 
security effects of the course on which we are now embarking.
4. If the President should decide to propose increased national 
security expenditures, and—­if necessary—­increased taxation, I believe 
that the country would welcome his leadership and rally vigorously to 
his support.
Present aggressive Communist policies in Berlin, and the tougher 
world-­wide Communist posture, would provide a convincing rationale 
for that leadership.
Such a Presidential initiative—­and the US response thereto—­would 
encourage our allies to increased effort. It might deter the Communists 
from considering that the elections and the present budget-­cutting 
exercise portend a period of weakness, which they can exploit through 
more frequent probing operations.
5. This need not involve abandonment of the President’s econ­
omy campaign. Domestic expenditures could still be held to minimum 
feasible levels, and the disagreement with Congressional advocates of 
greater spending would focus on these levels.
6. Conclusion. It may be worth making these points to the President 
on Sunday:
(a) There is growing need for a more effective development pro­
gram and local war capability, to hold our own against the increasingly 
aggressive Communist policies which now seem likely.
(b) If this need cannot be met within presently planned budgetary 
limits, it might be useful to have the executive branch (using the NSC 
mechanism as appropriate) urgently undertake a deliberate compar­
ison of: (i) the security effects of failing to meet this need, (ii) the eco­
nomic effects of meeting it through deficit financing and/or additional 
taxes. This comparison could provide a basis for final Presidential deci­
sions on the FY 1960 DOD and MSP programs.
Attachment
Note From Leddy to Carson
Washington, November 29, 1958
Basic National Policy Problem
Mr. Dillon has approved the attached memorandum from Mr. Smith 
to the Secretary regarding an approach to the President. However, he
