1112
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
upon “World Population: Silent Explosion”, a special reprint from the
State Department Bulletins of October, November and December 1978
which was distributed to all Ambassadors under cover of a personal
letter from the Secretary on December 5, 1978.6 A limited number of
copies are available in English, French and Spanish. Begin FYI The
basis for the U.S. position on the IDS remains the speech given by DAS
Hormats for the first session Prepcom for the IDS on April 3, 1979.7 End
FYI.
6. G–77 countries which we believe have a particular interest in the
issue based on their domestic policies and programs include Bangla-
desh, Colombia, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Korea, Mexico, Nepal,
Pakistan, Philippines, Senegal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Tu-
nisia. In addition, USUN should encourage OECD country delegations
to press importance of issue. Begin FYI Recently, in varying important
fora, French President Giscard d’Estaing, German Chancellor Schmidt
and Japanese Prime Minister Ohira emphasized the importance of pop-
ulation growth. In essence, their views coincided in calling overpopula-
tion one of the most important concerns facing the world. End FYI. The
Chinese and the Turks, habitual intermediaries with the G–77 and
interested in population problems, may also be helpful. The above
listing is illustrative and should not limit your contacts, as you deem
appropriate.
7. Action requested of other addressee posts. Leaders of several de-
veloping nations, such as Presidents Lopez Portillo of Mexico, Zia of
Bangladesh and Suharto of Indonesia, have recently emphasized the
urgent priority of population policies and family planning programs
aimed at lowering fertility. The Department would appreciate excerpts
from policy statements or speeches by other national leaders on popu-
lation issues which either demonstrate awareness of the dangers of
population growth or which minimize the problem and oppose lim-
iting fertility.
8. In addition, at discretion of Embassy, if a suitable occasion arises
with appropriate officials, you may draw on this message to indicate
our interest in the subject of population as related to development
strategy, inform them of our efforts in New York to work with other
delegations on this subject, and seek their cooperation in these efforts.
Vance
6 See Document 320.
7 Telegram 1459 from USUN to Paris, April 4, 1979, transmitted the text of Hormats’
remarks and was repeated to the Department and the Mission in Geneva. (National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790155–0157)
