Negotiating Channels
345
It was a close judgment call whether this helped or hurt the hostage
situation. He tended to believe that it may make it worse. However,
we should recognize that Khomeini is already convinced that we are
supporting Bakhtiar and others—on the basis of information captured
at the embassy, among other things. So our efforts in this regard do
not really change his perspective of our role. Secretary Vance noted
that we should tell Bakhtiar either to shut up or have his water cut
off. [1½ lines not declassified] Dr. Brzezinski noted the tremendous impact
of government support on emigre organizations—they place great
importance even on limited shows of support. Mr. Carlucci agreed that
it is a dilemma; however, we do want to achieve the psychological
effect of stimulating their action through our support. Mr. Carlucci
added that we will “not be dealing with boy scouts” in this operation.
[5 lines not declassified] Secretary Brown noted that the magnitude of
our efforts should be governed by what we really know about what
we are trying to do. At the moment, we are only starting and do not
have as much information as we would like. We must wait and see
how it goes. Dr. Brzezinski asked if we were in touch with Iranian
military leaders; do we have an inventory of the military leaders who
remain from the previous regime? Secretary Vance said we would be
in touch today with someone in New York who is reputedly in contact
with Admiral Madani. Mr. Carlucci noted that [less than 1 line not
declassified]. We do not have an inventory of present military leadership.
Our information is scanty, but we are trying to build it up. Secretary
Brown said he had directed contact with a group of Iranian naval
officers who are in this country as a purchasing mission, but he was
not aware of what had come of this. Mr. Christopher said we should
be focusing on the labor organizations in the oil fields. Mr. Sick noted
that Hassan Nazih, former head of the NIOC, was now out of the
country, and we should have contact with him soon. He probably has
the best understanding of the possibilities there. [5½ lines not declassified]
Secretary Vance agreed that we need more information before moving
to that stage.5 (TS)
The SCC then turned to the second CIA paper (Tab B)6 which
addresses various options developed by the small subcommittee
chaired by David Aaron. Mr. Carlucci noted that operations such as
those discussed in this paper were of a different order of magnitude
from the political action options discussed above and would require
substantially more resources. Mr. Aaron noted that these had been
identified as possible contingent actions for consideration. This was
5 In the left margin next to the last sentence of this paragraph, Carter wrote: “I agree.”
6 Tab B, an untitled and undated paper, is attached but not printed. Annex A to
this paper describes various tribal groups in Iran.
