1192 Venezuela: U.S. Relations with Venezuela VE–1. Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter– American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Acting Secretary of State1  Washington, January 28, 1958 SUBJECT Recognition of the new Venezuelan Government.2 Discussion: Venezuela has undergone a revolutionary change of government. The former President, General Marcos Pérez Jiménez, was forced by the Armed Forces to resign on January 23. His downfall was preceded by an unsuccessful uprising on January 1 and 2, in which the Air Force and units of the Army sought to overthrow his government. After several days of civilian riots and student demonstrations, followed by a widely supported general strike on January 21 and 22, he was ousted by 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.02/1–2858. Confidential. Drafted by Carl E. Bartch of the Office of South American Affairs; concurred in by Robert Murphy, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs; E. Allan Lightner, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Information and Cultural Affairs; John S. Hoghland, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations; Marjorie M. Whiteman, Assistant Legal Adviser for Inter-American Affairs; and Clement E. Conger, Assistant Chief of Protocol. 2 At the Secretary of State’s staff meeting on January 23, 1958, at 9.15 a.m., Assistant Secretary Rubottom stated the following with respect to the overthrow of Pérez Jiménez: “14. Mr. Rubottom gave a full report on recent developments in Venezuela leading to the overthrow of Perez Jimenez and the establishment of a military junta. He pointed out that no Americans were involved in these events and that the wells and refineries of the Standard Oil Company are in full production. He noted that a representative of the junta called at the Embassy this morning and assued our Charge that the new regime is friendly to the U.S. and seeks quick recognition. “Mr. Murphy asked Mr. Rubottom to stay in close contact with the Navy Department to furnish guidance with respect to the U.S. carrier and destroyers which are approximately 150 miles from the Venezuelan coast. The Acting Secretary asked Mr. Rubottom to furnish General Goodpaster at the White House with a summary of the situation in Venezuela for the information of the President.” (Notes of the Secretary’s Staff Meeting, January 23, 1958, designated SM N-604; Secretary’s Staff Meetings, Lot 63 D 75)
