28
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
10.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Israel1
Washington, August 16, 1978, 0116Z
207141. Subject: Message to Begin on Settlements. Ref: State
204867.2
Following for your information is Prime Minister Begin’s reply to
the Secretary’s message of August 14, as delivered by Israeli Embassy
August 15. Begin text:
Dear Mr. Secretary:
I thank you for your kind message of August 14th which reached
me first thing this morning upon my return from a brief but fine
vacation.
I understand your message was written before our cabinet re-
solved3 to suspend all decisions with regard to the five proposed nahal
settlements until after the Camp David meeting.
I wish to use this opportunity, Mr. Secretary, to inform you of two
basic facts:
—A) Nahal is a formation within the framework of the Israel De-
fense Forces.
—B) The most recent decision to establish five new nahal outposts
in the Jordan Valley was originally taken on June 18, seven weeks be-
fore the idea of the forthcoming tripartite meeting was conceived.
I am informed that certain commentators in the U.S. media have
expressed the opinion that Israel, by its alleged acts, was actually
seeking to torpedo the Camp David meeting. You will perceive from
the facts, Mr. Secretary, that nothing could be further from the truth.
And truth, as always, will prevail.
May I repeat to you my profound conviction that whilst I believe
all of the three countries concerned are interested in the success of the
Camp David meeting, none is more so than the State of Israel.
In conclusion, Mr. Secretary, I wish to respectfully remark on one
particular sentence in your recent message. It reads: ‘as you will re-
member after the historic steps of last fall, a principal reason the peace
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840140–2308. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by James P. Covey (NEA/IAI); cleared by Korn,
Houghton, Ann K. Korky (NEA), and Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O); approved by
Korn. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo.
2 See Document 8.
3 August 14.
