538
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
206.
Memorandum for the Files1
New York, March 12, 1980, 3:15–4:15 p.m.
SUBJECT
Conversation with Secretary General Waldheim
PARTICIPANTS
UN
Secretary General Waldheim
Rafii Ahmed, Executive Secretary to the SYG
Diego Cordovez, Secretary of the Commission
US
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Ambassador vanden Heuvel
Arnold Raphel, Notetaker
Secretary Vance and the Secretary General met to discuss the Com-
mission’s visit to Tehran and consider where we go from here on the
hostage issue. Waldheim led off the conversation by sharing some
thoughts on “personalities” to give us an understanding of the dynam-
ics of the Commission. It was obvious that Waldheim’s impressions
were based on extensive conversations with Bedjaoui. His assessment
of the members of the Commission, their relative strengths and weak-
nesses, and the role they played in Tehran was in large measure a
reflection of Bedjaoui’s views.
Waldheim noted that Bedjaoui was “quite confident” that the issue
would be resolved sooner rather than later. The special treatment Bed-
jaoui received from Bani-Sadr, whom he met with alone two times,
obviously irritated the other members of the Commission, especially
Co-Chairman Aguilar. Waldheim noted that Bani-Sadr and Bedjaoui
had many affinities, both being “children of the revolutions.” The
Secretary General, as illustrative of the tensions within the Commission,
explained at some length why the Commission left when it did. He
noted that Bedjaoui wanted to stay one day more, as requested by
Bani-Sadr and Qotbzadeh, on the assumption that the two Iranians
could deliver on their promise to move the issue forward. The other
four Commission members, especially Aguilar, were very skeptical,
however, and insisted the Commission leave when it did. Aguilar went
1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,
Box 2. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in Waldheim’s office. Vance also met
with all the members of the Commission after concluding his meeting with Waldheim.
(Memorandum of Conversation, March 12; ibid)
