452
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
(S) Another consideration is that we should expect close Congres-
sional scrutiny of the stockpile reliability and verification problems as-
sociated with a CTB. A treaty which constrains experiments to the
kiloton and sub-kiloton range—let alone a still lower level—is likely to
be attacked by some as a “give away” that concedes a permanent reli-
ability advantage to Soviet nuclear forces. On the other hand, a CTB
treaty that has a higher yield quota or phase-out provision will prob-
ably be attacked by others as a significant departure from the ideal of a
“comprehensive” test ban.
(S/FRD) Options (U)
(S) At issue is whether some form of limited nuclear testing—lim-
ited in yield, numbers of tests, or duration—should be allowed under a
CTB in order to maintain, over the long term, high confidence in the re-
liability of our nuclear weapons stockpile.
(S) At this time, there is no known method of ensuring high stock-
pile reliability that does not include some nuclear testing. Yet any pro-
posal for modifying a “zero-yield” CTB would conflict with the basic
purposes of an ideal CTB, the degree dependent upon the type of modi-
fication desired. Weighing together these two policy requirements is
the tough problem.
(S) The options which appear to offer the best approach toward
satisfactorily gaining both objectives of stockpile reliability and
non-proliferation are listed below:
1. (S/FRD) Phase-out, i.e., some form of quota testing, restricted
solely to nuclear weapon states, at a limit of 15 KT or less, over a speci-
fied period of time. [2 lines not declassified] As to the length of the transi-
tional period, it is again noted that methods to quantify confidence
levels in the reliability of our stockpile, in a condition of non-testing,
are not known. Sufficient time to determine the feasibility of a “wood-
enized” stockpile and to permit an orderly transition to a posture that
would provide adequate assurance of high confidence in stockpile reli-
ability under a CTB would be essential criteria. For a short transition
period, e.g., 5 years or less, a review provision following it would be
desirable.
2. (S/FRD) Small quota of tests per year. A quota of perhaps two tests
per year at some fixed yield limit, perhaps as low as 5 KT or even as
high as the 150 KT TTBT limit, might provide sufficient opportunity for
assuring stockpile confidence. This rate would be so much lower than
the current testing rates of both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. that it should
allay most concerns about the development of new weapons. However,
this approach would be a major deviation from a pure CTB. To mini-
mize its impact on our non-proliferation goals, it would require full
clarification to the non-nuclear weapon states of the need of nuclear
