1957 1467 and the Government of the United States of America deem it necessary to reach an agreement on judicial assistance between the two countries. The Governments of the two countries decide to appoint experts to start negotiations on the substance and concrete arrangements of an agreement on judicial assistance between the two countries.” End text. 7. I replied. As communications from his country to Mr. Wirin had indicated their intention of making a proposal of this kind, this matter has already been given careful consideration of my government. First let me point out that it is Mr. Wirin as the defense attorney for the defend­ ants Powell who is seeking to obtain testimony in his country and not the U.S. Government and that the court was simply acting on Wirin’s behalf. A passport has now been issued to Mr. Wirin for the purpose of taking the testimony he seeks on behalf of his clients. It is entirely up to the authorities of his country whether or not they desire to cooperate with Mr. Wirin in the collection of the evidence which he seeks. There is no responsibility of the U.S. Government in this regard. It is clearly not necessary to have a judicial assistance agreement such as he proposed to permit Wirin to take the testimony that he seeks. Countries com­ monly permit the taking of such testimony without intergovernmental agreements. I myself have often had experience in this regard. I was therefore authorized to inform him that the U.S. Government does not consider it possible to enter into such agreement and does not consider such an agreement necessary for the taking of such testimony. 8. Wang replied. He considered the response made by me to this question as not satisfactory. No matter who is going there to take tes­ timony, the case is not one of an individual applying to the Chinese Ministry of Justice, but it is the District Court of Northern California that has made the request to the Ministry of Justice. Clearly this court is an institution of the United States and cannot be anything else. The statement has been made to the effect that an individual person may proceed to obtain testimony in a foreign country without the agreement of the government concerned. Such a statement cannot be regarded as correct. That statement does not conform even with the accords signed by the United States itself with foreign countries. 9. Wang continued. He just would cite one case. At the 6th Inter- American Conference held in Havana in 1928 a Bustamante code was adopted at that conference at which the U.S. was represented. Article 388 of this code states that every judicial step which a country has to take in another country will be carried out by letters consular or let­ ters rogatory submitted through diplomatic channels. If, as I said, the possibility of judicial assistance existed without the necessity of agree­ ment between the governments concerned, then this article in the Bustamante code in which U.S. has associated itself would appear to be irrelevant. Now the fundamental fact is that an institution of the U.S. has put forward such a request to his authorities and his authorities
