156  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
President by the Security Resources Panel of the ODM Science Advisory 
Committee. These are:
(1) Report on whether decisions should be made now:
(a) To produce additional first-­generation ICBMs beyond the 130 
currently programmed, to be operational prior to the end of FY 1963;
(b) To build additional launching sites required to make opera­
tional any additional first-­generation ICBMs so produced; and
(c) To harden such additional launching sites.
(2) Report on whether to order now production of more than 
3 POLARIS submarine missile systems; and on possible further accel­
eration of production.
(3) Report on whether to install interim defense against ballistic 
missiles attack at SAC bases, utilizing modified available anti-­aircraft 
missiles.
The Secretary of Defense agreed at the 16 January meeting to report 
on whether to increase the number of operational IRBMs beyond the 
8 squadrons (120 missiles) now approved.
In arriving at our decisions it appeared appropriate to consider 
these questions in the light of the over-­all missile capabilities which the 
U.S. would have during this time period. Presented on this chart are the 
following missiles:
JUPITER
THOR
ATLAS
TITAN
POLARIS
MACE
REGULUS
SNARK
The basic chart shows those programs specifically approved by the 
President in black. The programs recommended by the JCS as a part of 
JSOP 61 are shown in blue on the first overlay.
Although the three additional programs here indicated, the MACE, 
the REGULUS II and the SNARK are aerodynamic missiles somewhat 
more vulnerable to enemy defenses than are the ballistic missiles, we 
consider that these missiles will be effective weapons for some time to 
come. The capability which they represent must be considered as com­
plimentary to the several ballistic missile programs.
On the basis of the information available, the Department of 
Defense does not at this time propose an increase in the ATLAS pro­
gram over the 9  squadron approved program. While ATLAS bases 
are currently planned to be soft, latest studies indicate that the
