904
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
352.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, August 25, 1977, 9:45–9:55 a.m.
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Gerard Smith, Ambassador-at-Large for U.S. Nuclear Proliferation Matters
Michael Armacost, NSC Staff Member
Ambassador Smith indicated that he wished to talk briefly about
what he might face in the negotiations with Japan over the Tokai issue.
He noted that one should not expect them to return from this round of
talks with an agreement signed and sealed—with which the President
readily agreed. The Japanese, Smith said, are likely to raise a number of
specific questions which will require a U.S. response; above all,
whether we will be prepared to assist them in obtaining plutonium to
meet their advanced reactor requirements by shipping plutonium di-
rectly or approving shipments from the UK or France. In addition, the
Japanese will face difficulties in determining what type of conversion
plant to build since different facilities would be required to handle the
product of conventional reprocessing on the one hand and a co-
processed product on the other.
The President emphasized that Congress at present feels very
strongly about limiting U.S. exports of plutonium. Therefore, Smith
should indicate to Fukuda and other Japanese representatives that we
cannot guarantee Congressional approval for any arrangements which
would provide for U.S. exports of plutonium. The President replied
that he would be prepared to join Smith in discussing this matter with
Congressional leaders to insure that the legislation makes provisions to
handle Japan’s unique problem. He indicated that Smith could tell Fu-
kuda that he would undertake such efforts with the leadership on the
Hill.
Smith then noted that we are asking the Japanese to undertake a
very large-scale safeguard experiment, the cost of which may run as
high as $15 million. He asked the President whether as the negotiator,
he had any leeway to accept some sharing of these costs. The President
indicated that this would be very hard to sell with Congress and the
public in view of the fact that we have been doing major experimenta-
tion in this field for years without requesting others to share the finan-
cial burden. Smith suggested that one step short of direct cost-sharing
would involve transfer by the U.S. of some advanced instrumentation
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 35, Memcons: President, 8/77. Secret. The meeting took place in the Oval Office.
