1980  891
request and in close coordination with the Department of Defense. In 
your written comment on that report,6 you asked that following our 
review, we provide you with a “summary of procedure” and that we 
“inform at least the top five in the chain of succession.” Our review is 
now nearing completion and we have progressed sufficiently in our 
post exercise critique to comply with your request at this time.
(S) The exercise tested several of our contingency plans for national 
security emergencies including, primarily, those for the dispersal and 
support of Presidential successors. Surrogates were used for the princi-
pals involved and communications security was a paramount consid-
eration. Enclosed is a brief description of the plans which were tested 
and the procedures associated with each.
(U) With respect to your request to inform at least the top five in 
the chain, you are advised that all officials in the line of succession, 
below the level of the Vice President, are briefed by me and my staff on 
the plans and procedures for emergency dispersal and support shortly 
after assuming office. I intend to provide each of them with copies of 
this letter and our final review of the NINE LIVES Exercise.
(S) In general, the exercise was very profitable from the viewpoint 
of lessons learned. The principal problem areas which deserve our con-
tinued attention and near term solutions include:
—Clarification of legal interpretation associated with details 
of succession to the Presidency. These are being investigated by the 
Department of Justice.
—Need for greater communications support at various dispersal 
locations. The Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Depart-
ment of Defense are investigating means to improve this capability.
—Need for more effective procedures for decisionmaking with 
respect to timing, successor selection, and dispersal. This is being 
addressed by the National Security Council, the Department of Defense, 
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
—Need for more adequate support of successors when dispersed. 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency is expanding current 
plans to provide such support.
—Need to re-­evaluate helicopter support for the emergency dis-
persal of successors during crises periods. This problem is under study 
by the Department of Defense and the Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency.
(U) I considered the exercise to be very successful and feel that 
this kind of joint civil/military exercise greatly enhances our continu-
ity of government capabilities. With your continued support and in 
6 Not found.
