1158  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
the period ahead no enemy can expect to launch an attack against us 
without inviting his own destruction.
With respect to limited and local aggression more adequate provi­
sion has been made for Army modernization and for airlift. Also, since 
the end of fiscal 1960 our readiness has been increased by the deploy­
ment of an additional attack carrier to the Mediterranean and the Far 
East, the deployment of the first POLARIS submarine in the Atlantic, and 
the achievement of a capability to mount a significant airborne alert.
On 2 December 1960 the JCS approved the National Strategic Target 
List and the Single Integrated Operations Plan to become effective on 
1 April 1961. The Plan and the Target List were developed by a Joint 
Staff composed of members of all four Services and representatives of 
Unified Commanders contributing forces to the initial attack on targets 
in the Sino-­Soviet Bloc. Targets selected, assurance factors, and damage 
criteria used were consistent with NSC Study 2009. This action is very 
significant in that for the first time it integrates effectively and provides 
for mutual support of aircraft and missiles of all Unified Commands in 
one attack plan.
As of 7 December 1960 the following missiles were in an imme­
diate response posture: 38 THOR in the United Kingdom; 12 JUPITER 
in Italy; 13 SNARK at Presque Isle, Maine; 5 ATLAS at Vandenberg 
AFB, California and Warren AFB, Wyoming; and 16 POLARIS missiles 
deployed aboard the U.S.S. GEORGE WASHINGTON.
The ICBM site activation program suffered some delay in construc­
tion and initial installation and checkout of equipment. Delay in oper­
ational readiness occurred at the first five (5) sites. Scheduled target 
dates will be met from March 1961.
The GAM–­77 (HOUND-­DOG) is a supersonic air-­to-­surface mis­
sile designed to be used as a primary target weapon or as a penetration 
aid at a maximum range of 650 n.m., thereby enhancing the striking 
power range and operational life of its carrier aircraft, the B–­52. The 
first two B–­52 squadrons were scheduled to be equipped with oper­
ational missiles by December of 1960. However, additional testing is 
required to improve reliability and some slippage is occurring. The first 
B–­52 squadron with 18 operational missiles is participating in testing 
at Eglin Air Force Base, Florida. The present program involves 29 B–­52 
squadrons, all scheduled to become operational by September 1962.
A. PROGRAMS FOR NUCLEAR RETALIATORY FORCES. The first 
objective of the U.S. Military Program has dictated maintenance of stra­
tegic nuclear retaliatory striking forces, tactical nuclear delivery forces, 
and deployment of forces as appropriate, all acting in concert to deter 
general war or to prevail in the event general war occurs.
The  Strategic Air Command (SAC) has the largest capacity for nuclear 
retaliation and is charged with primary responsibility for exploiting the
