886 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 involved with the UN. Waldheim might explore whether the return to Iran of a member of the UN Commission or some other unpublicized emissary from him might be useful. —We might again approach Agha Shahi and Habib Chatti as leaders in the Islamic Conference and members of the Standing Committee on Afghanistan, urging them to make a special approach urging the Iranians to put the hostage crisis behind them in order to be able to concentrate on the Soviet threat from Afghanistan. —Ask the Algerian Government to instruct its Ambassador in Tehran to make his own probes, particularly among the religious leadership, to provide us with analysis of what the demands and objectives of that leadership are with regard to resolving the hostage crisis. In asking the Algerians to make this approach, we would probably have to provide them with a short statement of our own position so that they could have that to draw on in their conversations. Such a statement would be drawn from the position paper which you approved in November and reconfirmed in January.15 The Algerians might even raise the question of whether the Conference earlier discussed by them with the Swiss chaired by the two of them or other neutrals might be useful in bringing Iranians and Americans together to resolve bilateral issues which will have to be dealt with when the hostage issue is resolved. —We would crank up private individuals such as Richard Cottam here in the U.S. or Bourguet and Villalon in Paris to make whatever contacts they could. We would particularly ask Cottam to try to open a channel to Beheshti. —We would inform the Swiss of what we are doing but reserve them for the next step.16 Step #2. Following relatively soon after we have some feedback from the above approaches, we would launch approaches of our own by sending direct messages to key figures in Iran. These messages would as much as possible take advantage of the efforts of intermediaries during Step #1 to determine how a resolution of the crisis might be shaped. These messages might include: —A letter from me to the new Foreign Minister through the Swiss stating readiness for discreet exchanges or discussions through an agreed channel in order to manage an acceptable conclusion to the crisis. This could include our positions on key issues. —The hostage families have just sent via a visiting minister a letter to Ahmad Khomeini. They could send a follow-on message either to Ahmad Khomeini or to Beheshti or perhaps copies to both introducing the idea of contact between the hostage families and an appropriate Iranian group, and possibly a visit by a family delegation to Iran. This would follow through on your conversation with Mrs. Keough and Mrs. Kennedy, which I am further exploring with them. 15 See Document 137. 16 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “There is no reason for delay on doing all of these things. They are not mutually incompatible.”
