Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
541
perhaps return just before the 21st and arrange for transfer of the
hostages over the Iranian holidays.
Waldheim’s own view was that we should wait and see how the
elections turn out and then look at setting a date for the return of the
Commission. Waldheim closed the conversation by noting, a point later
made by the Commission members, that in their last conversation with
Qotbzadeh, the Foreign Minister told the Commission that it would
be welcome back but not with the same composition. Both Bedjaoui
and Aguilar said that this comment may have been a result of fatigue
and discouragement on Qotbzadeh’s part and a reflection of his own
mercurial personality. They did not see it as a definitive Iranian request
to change the makeup of the Commission. Both felt, however, that it
was an issue that must be reviewed before the Commission makes
plans to return to Iran.
207.
Telegram From the Embassy in Switzerland to the
Department of State1
Bern, March 13, 1980, 0920Z
1455. For the Secretary From Saunders and Precht. Subj: First Meet-
ing With B and V.
1. (S) Entire text.
2. Please pass to the White House Eyes Only for the President and
Dr. Brzezinski.
3. Summary: Our initial meetings with B and V Wednesday2 con-
centrated on their analysis of how the situation evolved in Tehran over
the past 17 days while the UN Commission was there and, to a lesser
extent, on how we move ahead from here. We will begin at breakfast
Thursday to talk through how they see the next steps. In the near term,
they believe it important that the Commission still visit the hostages,
but they now see that visit taking place after the transfer of the hostages
to government hands. They report both Bani-Sadr and Ghotbzadeh as
believing that transfer can take place within 7–14 days after the first
round of the parliamentary elections March 14. They interpret the
events of the past few days—despite our pressing the argument that
1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files,
Box 2. Secret; Niact Immediate; Nodis; Cherokee; Special Encryption.
2 March 12.
