Afghanistan
63
National Defense for briefing. He complained that Fulbright program
requires “hundreds” of applicants for only five positions and said
GOA prefers to name the scholarship recipients. Amin welcomed any
possible U.S. assistance and expressed GOA willingness to discuss
details with U.S. technicians. Regarding wheat project in Baghlan Prov-
ince, however, Amin said that project would have to be reviewed in
the light of the new land reform program.
6. Relations with Pakistan and Iran: Newsom expressed U.S. desire
for continued peace in the region. While not wishing to appear as an
intermediary, he noted Iranian concern over GOA attitude toward
Helmand waters agreement3 and Pakistan’s concern over GOA inten-
tions re Durand Line and Pushtunistan problems. He added that U.S.
hopes to resolve problem with GOP over reprocessing plant, and, since
U.S. provides assistance to both countries, we are interested in good
relations between the two.
7. GOA leaders followed line that they want friendship and cooper-
ation with neighbors and seek understanding of their revolution and
technical and economic support for their development plans. Taraki
said Afghanistan would not bother its neighbors (and commented
sarcastically that if he must pray in a mosque or church to get help
for his country he would do so). Amin said U.S. need not worry that
GOA would cause tensions in area. Afghanistan would attack no rpt
no state and would seek to solve problems through negotiation. Since
regime is new, it will take time for GOA to develop its positions
on Helmand waters and Durand Line, latter being historical problem
between Afghanistan and Pakistan. He recognized, however, that prob-
lem does exist between the two countries over Pushtunistan and
Baluchistan issues. This would have to be solved by realistic negotia-
tions but Afghanistan’s domestic priorities for the moment are more
important and it premature for GOA to raise this delicate subject with
GOP at this time. On Helmand waters, GOA also needs time to study
agreement and has asked GOI to observe status quo. Taraki also said
these issues under study. He jokingly said after only two months in
power that he has to study everything before deciding what to do. For
example, he said he had never in his life been in the elegant room in
which our meeting took place and he needed to learn way around it and
then gradually acquaint himself with the issues facing his government.
8. Party-to-party relations: Newsom carefully explained to Amin
that U.S. legislation contains prohibition on aid to Communist coun-
tries. While term Communist not precisely defined, Congress generally
assumes that if a party in power considers itself to be part of the
3 Iran and Afghanistan signed the Helmand waters agreement on March 13, 1973.
