Human Rights 323 The resolution establishing that Office constitutes a self-contained mandate.7 A positive U.S. gesture on this Iranian-Third World text should enhance support for what HA considers to be our primary objective, the creation of the post of a UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. Recommendations 1. That we call for a vote on and abstain on the Iranian resolution, making an appropriate explanation of vote in either case (calling for a vote precludes adoption by consensus) (supported by L and EB).8 2. That we join in a consensus with a statement setting forth our problems with the resolution (supported by IO, S/P, USUN and HA). S/P believes our statement should place special emphasis on the overriding importance of the universal declaration of human rights.9 3. That if others call for a vote on the Iranian resolution, we then seek a paragraph-by-paragraph vote; if it is secured, we vote for the paragraphs which we find acceptable, abstain on paragraphs 1(E) and 1(F), and abstain on the resolution as a whole. We would make clear that we were using this procedure to emphasize our view that no one 7 On December 5, the Third Committee of the General Assembly approved a resolution sponsored by Cuba not to vote on the High Commissioner for Human Rights resolution, co-sponsored by Costa Rica, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Senegal, Spain and Venezuela. (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1977, p. 724) Earlier that day, Maynes sent Young a statement, under a December 5 covering memorandum, outlining the Department’s support for the resolution and the final version of a statement concerning the Iranian resolution. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 19, Human Rights— UN) 8 There is no indication as to whether Christopher approved or disapproved the recommendation. In a December 1 memorandum to Christopher, Cooper reiterated the EB position, noting that paragraphs 1(E) and 1 (F) of the draft resolution “contain economic features with which we cannot agree and on which we have taken reservations in the past.” Cooper also expressed astonishment that HA agreed to the consensus position regarding paragraph 1 (E): “Except for racial discrimination this priority-setting paragraph excludes most of the human rights issues which I believe are integral to the American system of values and which I thought underlie President Carter’s human rights policy. These center on respect for the individual, especially if his right to be free of oppression by others (even if they are of the same race or nation), to be physically secure in his being, and to be free to express his views. The priority-setting paragraph 1(E) downgrades the human rights issues which, in my judgment, should be paramount. I do not understand our human rights policy if this paragraph is consistent with it.” (Ibid.) 9 There is no indication as to whether Christopher approved or disapproved the recommendation. However, in a December 3 memorandum to Vance, Christopher noted that Young had recommended, and Christopher and Maynes had concurred, that the United States should: “1. Abstain on the Iranian resolution if it is brought to a vote by others. 2. If others do not demand a vote on the Iranian resolution, we would not do so, but would join the consensus with a statement expressing our reservations.” Vance indicated his agreement with this scenario. (National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 7, Memoranda to the Secretary—1977)
