February 1951–February 1952 135 tankers for the movement of approximately 1.6 million tons to the Soviet Far East and Communist China. In this way, the Soviet Union could take care of the minimum petroleum needs of the Communist Far East which cannot be met by local production. The use of the sea route would also relieve the overworked Trans-Siberian Railroad of its present haul of Soviet petroleum products, which amounts to more than 10 percent of its total West to East traffic. The remaining 1.3 million tons of petroleum products could be shipped by rail from Abadan to Bandar Shah and thence by tanker to any of the Caspian Sea ports. The large amount of extra rolling stock and locomotives required for the Abadan-Bandar Shah railroad could be supplied by the Soviet Orbit without seriously depleting its tankcar and locomotive park. The estimated Soviet Orbit imports would, during the the first year, amount to only 12 percent of the 1950 production of the Abadan refinery. Nevertheless, the Government of Iran could remain solvent at this level of production because the net income derived from Iranian operation would be about the same as that realized from operation by the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company at the 1950 production level. In summary, it seems apparent that with Soviet cooperation Iran could succeed in operating its petroleum industry even if the Western powers (1) withdrew their technicians, (2) stopped buying Iranian petroleum products, and (3) withheld all shipping under their control. [Omitted here is the 13-page body of the study with an attached appendix, two tables, and a map.] 46. Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of State1 Tehran, September 25, 1951. 1157. 1. Shepherd, British Ambassador, asked Ambassador Henderson have informal tea with him yesterday afternoon. View circumstances Henderson accepted although credentials not presented. Conversation informal and friendly. Shepherd presented his views considerable detail, indicating certain differences in interpretation and 1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, 1950–1952, classified general records, Box 39. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Henderson. Repeated to London. The telegram is the Embassy’s copy as approved and has no time of transmission.
