December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
755
218.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Riyadh, March 17, 1979, 6:30–8:20 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
United States
Saudi Arabia
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Crown Prince Fahd Abd al-Aziz
Warren Christopher
al Saud
Ambassador John West
Prince Abdullah Abd al-Aziz al
General David Jones
Saud
Chip Carter
Prince Sultan Abd al-Aziz al Saud
Gary Sick
Prince Saud Faysal al Saud
David Ransom
Dr. Rashad Pharaon
Isa Sabbagh
Mr. Abd al-Rahman al-Mansuri
Note taker
Crown Prince Fahd opened the meeting by noting that the audience
with the King had been excellent.2
Dr. Brzezinski said that he brought greetings from the President.
He hoped that the Crown Prince would soon be able to visit Wash-
ington and continue these talks. The President believes that our coun-
tries are linked not only by interests but by a shared belief in God and a
special spiritual bond. There is a very special relationship between us.
We wish to preserve that. We believe those relations today are chal-
lenged by internal and external threats to our interests. As a conse-
quence we must respond to the challenge, to determine if the future
world will be dominated by moderate or radical forces. The external
threat originates with the Soviet Union, and its effects have been seen in
Afghanistan, Ethiopia, and South Yemen. The internal threat consists of
forces creating regimes favorable to the Soviet Union. The United
States is determined to respond to both challenges. In recent weeks we
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 33, Memcons: Brzezinski: 3–6/79. Secret. The meeting took place in the King’s Palace.
2 The U.S. delegation met with Khalid at the King’s Palace from 5:45 p.m. to 6:10
p.m. on March 17. The memorandum of conversation from this meeting is ibid. Earlier
the same day, the delegation met with Saud in the latter’s office from 3:30 p.m. to 5:30
p.m., where the discussion covered the state of U.S.-Saudi relations, the threats to the
Middle East posed by the Soviet Union and by “radicalism” in the region, U.S. efforts to
promote a wider security framework, U.S. relations with the Arab world, and Wash-
ington’s efforts to broker a comprehensive regional peace for the region. On the last
point, Brzezinski highlighted three results of the impending Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty: the establishment of the principle of Israeli withdrawal and dismantlement of the
settlements, the initiation of Palestinian involvement in the peace process, and the ce-
menting of Arab/American friendships. The memorandum of conversation for this
meeting is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle
East Region; Arabian Peninsula.
