793.00/163a [Document 681] Statement Issued to the Press by the Department of State, August 31, 192526 August 31, 1925 SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE FRANK B. KELLOGG, SECRETARY OF STATE, BEFORE THE ANNUAL MEETING OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION, DETROIT, MICHIGAN, SEPTEMBER 2, 1925 Mr. Kellogg said: The events in China of the last few months have again brought to the forefront its relations with the other Powers and have made it necessary for the Government of the United States to declare its policy in relation to Chinese affairs. In brief, that policy may be said to be to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of China, to encourage the development of an effective stable government, to maintain the “open door” or equal opportunity for the trade of nationals of all countries, to carry out scrupulously the obligations and promises made to China at the Washington Conference, and to require China to perform the obligations of a sovereign state in the protection of foreign citizens and their property. It is quite impossible in the few moments allotted to me to discuss all the complicated issues involved in the present Chinese situation. I shall, therefore, but briefly sketch the more important, which chiefly concern the conventional Chinese tariffs and the extraterritorial rights of foreign residents in China. The import tariffs, and to some extent the export tariffs, of China are controlled by treaties between China and the various Powers. The first conventional tariff schedule was appended to the first treaty made with Great Britain in 1842;27 the same schedule was added to the first treaty with the United States in 1844,28 and to treaties made with other foreign Powers at later dates. These treaties have been changed and the rates revised from time to time but the principles involved in the original conventional tariff have remained the same. It has become evident that there is a wide feeling in China that the tariff schedules attached to the various treaties have become a severe handicap upon the ability of China to adjust its import tariffs to meet the domestic economic needs of the country. It must not be forgotten, however, that these tariffs were not adopted as a sinister means of controlling the fiscal policies of the Chinese Government but merely as a modus operandi devised to meet and remedy a condition which had become a fertile source of friction in the relations between China and the Powers due to the uncertainties connected with the rates and methods of collecting duties under the then existing tariffs. Schedules of
