March 1952–February 1953
439
present trends in Iran continue unchecked beyond the end of 1953,
rising internal tensions and continued deterioration of the economy
and of the budgetary position of the government are likely to lead to a
breakdown of governmental authority and open the way for at least a
gradual assumption of control by Tudeh.
4. Settlement of the oil dispute with the UK is unlikely in 1953.
5. During 1953 Iran will attempt to sell oil to other buyers, both in
the Soviet Bloc and the West. Shortage of tankers will limit sales to the
Soviet Bloc to token amounts. Small independent Western oil com-
panies will probably not buy significant quantities of oil. We estimate
that major Western oil companies will not be willing to make an agree-
ment with Iran so long as the current legal, economic, and political ob-
stacles exist. Nevertheless, some moderate-sized oil companies are be-
coming restive, and it is possible that combinations for the purchase
and transport of substantial quantities of Iranian oil may be made
unless there is direct and strong objection by the US Government. The
British would probably regard any arrangement between US oil com-
panies and Iran, in the absence of British concurrence, as a serious
breach of UK–US solidarity.
6. Kashani or possibly another National Front leader might replace
Mossadeq during 1953. Any successor would probably be forced to re-
sort to ruthless tactics to eliminate opposition. In his struggle to elimi-
nate his opposition and particularly if he failed to do so, Tudeh influ-
ence and opportunities for gaining control would increase rapidly.
7. The Mossadeq regime almost certainly desires to keep US sup-
port as a counterweight to the USSR and appears to want US economic
and military assistance. Nevertheless, there will probably be an in-
creasing disposition to blame the US, not only for Iran’s failure to sell
substantial amounts of oil or to obtain an oil settlement, but also for
Iran’s financial and economic difficulties.
8. Therefore, the US Point Four and military missions are likely to
find it even more difficult to operate during 1953 than at present. They
would probably be placed under severe restrictions if Kashani or other
extremists came to power. However, neither the Mossadeq Govern-
ment nor a successor National Front regime is likely to expel these mis-
sions during 1953.
9. The USSR appears to believe that the Iranian situation is devel-
oping favorably to its objectives. We do not believe that the USSR will
take drastic action in Iran during 1953 unless there is a far more serious
deterioration of Iranian internal stability than is foreseen in this esti-
mate. However, the USSR has the capability for greatly increasing its
overt and covert interference in Iran at any time, to the detriment of US
security interests.
