Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980 761 should not be undertaken formally in the Muskie-Gromyko channel but more by indirection and quiet hints (for example, in some of my informal talks with Dobrynin and especially with the Poles, who are anxious to promote a peaceful resolution of the Afghanistan problem). (3) Though the political benefit of U.S.-Soviet TNF talks would not be great, it probably would be useful to have some exploratory discussions no later than October. That would demonstrate that your personal interest in nuclear arms control can be promoted alongside the policy of firmness on Afghanistan. Indeed, such discussions would demonstrate that the kind of mature and two-track policy that we wish to pursue with the Soviets is a more viable alternative to Reagan’s extremism. We would need to judge the value of this somewhat later, in terms of Soviet behavior in Afghanistan and the effectiveness of Reagan’s attacks on our Afghan policy. (4) If the Soviets continue to be beastly on Afghanistan, and if the Bush visit to China24 goes reasonably well, you might consider having me visit Beijing for consultations, in late September or early October, thereby underscoring your special accomplishment in expanding the U.S.-Chinese relationship. (5) A summit meeting with Begin and Sadat would probably not produce any results between now and November. In any event, we need to try inducing Sadat and Begin to help infuse new life in the Camp David process. The downside is that Begin probably will not wish to be helpful. Yet we should in any case seek to restart the talks, and have Sol25 go to the area for a sustained period of time. A September trip by Muskie could also be helpful, both for the negotiations and for reasserting our commitment to Israel. (6) You might contemplate convening a summit meeting on East- West relations with our principal Allies (or, alternatively, a Schmidt meeting here in September). With the Olympics behind us, it might be timely to hold a 1–2 day meeting of the Guadeloupe type, but including also the Italians and Japanese in order to discuss where do we go from here on the Soviet strategic threat posed through the Afghanistan invasion. There happens to be a real need for such a meeting, but it should not be convened unless we are certain that it would prompt some tangible steps going beyond the Venice Communique.26 Nonetheless, this could be an effective demonstration of leadership, and perhaps by early fall our friends might be inclined to go along because of increasing concern over what foreign policy Reagan might pursue, plus 24 Bush traveled to China in late August. 25 Linowitz. 26 See footnote 5, Document 145.
