September 18–December 16, 1978
465
135.
Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of
State1
Cairo, November 13, 1978, 1927Z
24770. Subject: Meeting With Sadat. Ref: A) Cairo 24767,2 B) Cairo
24762.3
Summary. Sadat somewhat disturbed about his telecon with Presi-
dent Carter of last night.4 He wished confirm to President Carter
various positions that he had stated in telecon. Specifically, in absence
some kind of specific linkage between first phase of Sinai withdrawal
and full autonomy for the Palestinians, at least in Gaza, he cannot agree
sign Sinai treaty. Doing so would be a separate peace. Such separate
peace would be detrimental to him and to President Carter in area. He
insisted that his position is consistent with Camp David Accords and
that he is not seeking introduce any new element. If West Bank/Gaza
settlement cannot be obtained at this time, linkage should at least in-
clude Gaza. He does not at this time wish contact Hussein and Saudis,
but plans “punish” them. Hussein, in his view, will not join negotia-
tions until after he sees successful effort in Gaza. If Israelis insist they
will not be ready before end of 1979 to establish autonomous self-
governing body in West Bank/Gaza, Egypt can wait and delay first in-
terim withdrawal in Sinai by several months in order permit some syn-
chronization. Israelis are seeking to stall in West Bank/Gaza. Exchange
of ambassadors, if it takes place without anything having happened in
West Bank/Gaza, will be bad. He professed to have been “hurt” by
charge that he is now demanding more than Camp David Agreements.
He stands by everything he promised, but contended that there are
limits to what he can do. He asked that President Carter reconsider
various points mentioned in telecon; otherwise he cannot sign treaty. I
sought to explain to Sadat what President Carter had in mind in his
comments. Sadat asked that I report on our talk so that President Carter
can take it into account before sending promised follow-up message.
Sadat’s back is up. This is partly a negotiating ploy, but we should not
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 55, Middle East: Peace Talks Between Egypt and Israel, 11–12/78. Secret; Cher-
okee; Niact Immediate; Nodis. At the top of the telegram, Carter wrote: “This is a very
accurate description of Sadat’s (final?) position. We should try to recognize this & work
accordingly. J.C.”
2 Telegram 24767 from Cairo, November 13. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, [no film number])
3 Telegram 24762 from Cairo, November 13. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P850070–1499)
4 See Document 133.
