they are a portion of the amount due by the Government of the Republic of Austria in satisfaction of the awards rendered by the Tripartite Claims Commission. The issue of such bonds would be in full agreement with the Austrian laws and the international obligations assumed by the Austrian Government. There is not doubt as to the fact, that the American claims awarded by the Tripartite Claims Commission come under the general lien expressed in articles 197 and 200 of the Treaty of St. Germain, ranging after the lien of the League of Nations loan (which, however, is restricted to specific sources of revenues) and after the general lien of the relief credits. The Austrian Government would not be in a position to furnish special security in addition to the afore-referred to general lien provided in articles 197 and 200 of the Peace Treaty, as such a special lien would require the consent of the other allied and associated powers and the reparations commission and open questions of a delicate and intricate nature, which could only be solved under the greatest difficulties if at all. The bonds will mature at a term to be specified by agreement and beginning from the date when the full amount of American claims has been ascertained. The Austrian Government wishes, however, to reserve its right to redeem the bonds before expiration of the stipulated term of maturity. Further details as to the text and form of the bonds, rate of interest, maturity a. s. f. we hope to settle by mutual agreement. Mr. Undersecretary, I am aware of the fact that the calculated extent of Austrian obligations arising from the awards of the Tripartite Claims Commission will have a bearing on the decision of your Government, whether the offer of my Government should be accepted or not. This offer is made regardless of whatever Congress will decide in connection with Austrian property, although we hope that an agreement for the settlement of the American war claims will have a favorable influence upon the deliberations of Congress concerning return of property. Technically, however, we want to divorce these two questions. Although the work of the Tripartite Claims Commission is not yet near its termination, it has, as I understand, progressed to a point, where the
