Arms Control and Disarmament 1603 would so outweigh any such disadvantage that we ought to assume the risk. The President said that he thought even an agreement limited to atmospheric tests, and including as few as three or four control posts, would be better than no agreement at all. I said that I thought that while our scientists can advise us on the size, composition and nature of con­ trols, they are not in a position to make the required judgment as to the overall value to us of the establishment of mobile control personnel behind the Iron Curtain. The President said that while he thought there was a clear under­ standing on both sides as to the different points of view and matters of agreement, the officials would attempt to work out an agreed statement embodying the conclusions. I remarked it would be at this point that the trouble would begin. Macmillan said that what they had in mind was not so much a substantive paper as a procedural paper to cover who was to do what and where. The President said he planned to get together with Macmillan at 4 o’clock Monday afternoon to clear up any final ambiguities, and that the Prime Minister was leaving at 8:30 Tues­ day morning. I referred briefly to my own plans to return to the hospital for a cou­ ple of days and the prospect that I might be discharged on Wednesday. John Foster Dulles 443. Memorandum for the File by McCone1 Washington, March 23, 1959 Discussion with Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd at Luncheon on March 23, 1959 at British Embassy After reviewing the March 21st meeting at Camp David on the Geneva Conference, Mr. Lloyd stated he hoped that we would support their proposal for a limited number of on-­site inspections as a logi­ cal means of solving the impasse on the inspection and veto issue. In answer to a question, Lloyd stated that he felt that 50 inspections per year would be a good number and, in his opinion, about all that the scientists would wish to undertake. 1 Source: Discussion with Lloyd on nuclear testing suspension talks. Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, McCone Papers, Sealed File No. 5.
