1310 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement discussed at length Department suggestion GOV request investigation under Rio treaty of attempts outside forces overthrow his regime. I stressed U.S. internal political factors which make difficult again probe into Dominican Republic’s actions against GOV without including Cuba in same investigation. President appreciated these facts but repeated what he has told me many times, namely insofar as Venezuela is concerned no action can be taken on Cuba until Trujillo problem is resolved. President is convinced Venezuelan people are on his side in this matter and from standpoint his own personal honor he cannot enter into any action against Cuba until Trujillo regime is forced out of power. As President has stated before he does not want link any OAS action against Trujillo with that of Cuba. President is fully aware of dangers of Castroism and he repeated he gladly would head movement of Latin American countries to dispose of Castro problem once effective action were taken against Trujillo. He said Colombia, Chile, Argentina and Peru were in full accord with GOV in this line. He added he had discussed Cuba with President-­elect Janos Quadros of Brazil when latter made brief visit to Venezuela after his trip to Habana and he had received recent assurances Quadros Brazilian executive agreed with Venezuelan position vis-­a-­vis Castro and Trujillo. Betancourt believes present Brazilian Government is playing ball with Trujillo. At one point in conversation President said he was willing move against Cuba as soon as effective sanctions contemplated in sixth MFM in San Jose were put into effect. Plan he envisaged would call for representatives of Latin American nations meet privately with Castro and inform him that there must be reassignment of Cuban foreign policy failing which full weight of sanctions then would be imposed on Cuba by membership of OAS. Mere fact Cuban Government has violated terms of OAS agreements would be sufficient, but fact also it has placed itself within Soviet orbit would result in hemisphere-­wide support of action against Castro. He belittled any efforts of countries such as Guatemala or Nicaragua to initiate action against Castro. Reiterated offer Venezuela and Colombia send armed forces prevent Castro penetration Dominican Republic if requested by OAS or provisional GODR. I presented our case in strongest possible terms and Betancourt’s reply was equally firm. I do not think it is at all likely Betancourt will change his mind. Sparks
