574 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 22. He said moreover, even in case those Chinese who I had admitted being prevented from departing, so far many of them still unable effect return. Not only has India no means offer assistance on its own to these people, but according to recent information U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service has of late made regulation requiring all ­Chinese students get entry permit Taiwan before given date. This intimidation Chinese students designed forestall return. This gross violation agreement. 23. Wang said it is intention PRC side make representations U.S. Government through Indian Embassy. However still felt such questions should not be brought up here so as hinder progress in present talks. 24. Wang said if U.S. side nevertheless insists raising these ques­ tions PRC side bound raise following questions: A) Is U.S. side prepared provide complete list names and addresses Chinese in U.S.? B) Will U.S. side aid Indians determine status Chinese in U.S.? C) Is U.S. side prepared rescind measures violating spirit of agreement? Before these questions are satisfactorily answered PRC side could not answer question U.S. side might raise. 25. Wang said he considered if both sides sincere in desiring prog­ ress should concentrate on second item and adopt reasonable proposal of PRC side under this item. 26. I replied that when present talks began, first question on agenda was return of civilians. I had hoped that September 10 agreed announcement would resolve that question. So far as U.S. concerned, question resolved even before September 10 because U.S. had rescinded all measures preventing return of Chinese in U.S. I had informed Wang of that at outset of talks. Nevertheless to show good faith U.S. had entered into arrangement that India could assist any Chinese in U.S. who felt prevented from returning. 27. I said many vague and general statements had been made here and by Wang’s government concerning supposed measures by U.S. Government preventing return of Chinese. It is well known in U.S. and well known to Indian Embassy that there is nothing to prevent any Chinese in U.S. from communicating with Indian Embassy if he feels obstructed in departure. 28. I said under agreed announcement, U.S. agreed accept any rep­ resentations by Indian Embassy on behalf of Chinese who felt there was obstruction to departure from U.S. It is important to look at facts. From outset of talks to present moment, not one single specific case called to attention U.S. Government in which departure prevented.
