Human Rights
307
Negotiating instructions were also sent out earlier this week to our
personnel in six other countries—and on Monday will be sent to our
post in a seventh—whose human rights records were not determined
to be seriously questionable: namely, Afghanistan, Israel, Jordan, Mo-
rocco, Pakistan, Egypt and Sri Lanka.
For technical reasons unrelated to human rights, the remaining 18
agreements are not ready to be negotiated at this time. We are consid-
ering within the Department which of the 18 countries are regarded as
raising serious human rights questions. I am attaching, under Tab 3, a
supportive editorial from yesterday’s Washington Post8 and two earlier
Washington Post stories,9 apparently inspired by the Department of
Agriculture.
Warren Christopher10
8 Attached but not printed. The November 24 Washington Post editorial, entitled
“Food for People,” highlighted the Department’s efforts “to try to pick its way through
the minefield of the new law. It is the law. And it’s good policy. Among all the categories
in which aid is given, food is one that deserves to be treated in terms of enlightened hu-
manitarianism.” (Food for People,” The Washington Post, November 24, 1977, p. A–22)
9 Both attached but not printed. Dan Morgan, “U.S. Holds Back Food Aid in Rights
Review,” The Washington Post, November 22, 1977, pp. A–1 and A–7 and “17 Countries
Await ‘Human Rights’ Clearance for Food Aid,” November 23, 1977, p. A–8.
10 Christopher signed “Warren” above his typed signature.
91.
Telegram From the Department of State to All Diplomatic
and Consular Posts1
Washington, November 25, 1977, 2107Z
282352. Subject: Guidance on Human Rights Provisions of New
Development Assistance Legislation.
1. Summary: New legislation amending Foreign Assistance Act
(FAA) requires SecState to provide to Congress an annual report on
status of human rights in all countries receiving development assist-
ance. FAA already contained requirements for such a report on coun-
tries receiving security assistance. Reports on both development and
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770439–0217.
Limited Official Use. Drafted in HA/HR; cleared in draft by Swift, Collins, Runyons,
Clapp, Martens, David Moran, Fuerth, and Lister; approved by Schneider. Also sent to
CINCPAC, CINCEUR, SecDef, JCS, and CINCSO.
