636 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 204. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 13, 1978, 11:30 a.m.–noon SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Second Meeting with President Nicolae Ceausescu of Romania PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs O. Rudolph Aggrey, Ambassador to Romania George S. Vest, Assistant Secretary of State Jerrold Schecter, NSC Staff Member Herbert J. Hansell, Legal Adviser to the Department of State Robert R. King, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker) Mrs. Huffman, Interpreter President of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu First Deputy Prime Minister, Gheorghe Oprea Foreign Minister, Stefan Andrei Presidential Counselor, Vasile Pungan Minister of Machine Building Industry, Ion Avram Ambassador to the United States, Nicolae M. Nicolae Mr. Celac, Interpreter Mr. Mateescu, Notetaker The President was pleased with the private discussions with President Ceausescu just prior to this meeting. He briefly summarized some of the matters that had been raised: He will propose renewal of MFN for Romania, and though it cannot be granted for more than one year at a time, we will seek to minimize public discussion; the two presidents will inform each other of the results of their international visits without violating the confidence of other states (Ceausescu’s forthcoming visits to China and Korea were mentioned in this context); both sides understand each other’s views on the division of Korea; and oppose the intervention of foreign military forces. President Ceausescu said there have been delays and rejections granting permission for technology licensing for Romania. Agreements with US firms are thwarted by delays and problems, particularly involving electronics and nuclear matters. The President asked George Vest to respond. Mr. Vest said this matter had been discussed earlier with Ceausescu by Under Secretary 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 36, Memcons: President: 4/78. Secret. Drafted by King. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House.
