Eastern Europe Region Europeans to make concessions in the field of human rights rather than put at risk the USSR’s relations with the West. Only time and experience will define how far the dissidents can go, but for the moment they can claim at least one victory. The Polish regime recently sent new instructions to writers and publishers easing censorship and explicitly saying that criticism of party and government people was permissible—within limits. The dissident intellectuals have long thought that the Soviets would allow the regime more latitude than it realized and that it could be pressed into according more freedom to the intellectual community. The US Impact Except for the letter sent by the Czechoslovak dissident Kohout to President Carter, there is little hard information on what the East European dissidents make of Washington’s recent pronouncements and actions regarding human rights. There is, of course, a danger that hopes and expectations will be raised to unrealistic, and even dangerous, levels. But we have no evidence that this is the case, nor is there any evidence that the dissidents have changed their tactics as a consequence of the new attention to human rights in Washington. We suspect that the dissident opinion contains a certain cynicism regarding the US commitment to human rights if it comes into conflict with US equities regarding the USSR. The dissident activity in East Europe had begun well before President Carter was elected, or took office. It has waxed and waned since the end of January, in part as a consequence of the amount of attention it has received from the Western media. The dissidents almost certainly regard the President’s statements as a new plus; publicity in the West and the kind of pressure on the regimes that is implicit in Washington’s statements, are vital to the dissidents’ hopes of bringing about change. There is no evidence, circumstantial or otherwise, that President Carter’s remarks have had a significant impact on how the East European regimes are dealing with their dissidents. The regimes have been responding to developments, almost on a day-to-day basis, within the framework of a general approach dictated by the particularities of their own internal situation and the inclination of their leaders. In all the regimes, continuity rather than discontinuity has been characteristic. Hence, the Czechoslovaks and East Germans have tended to be tougher than the Poles or the Hungarians. And the policies of the Romanians and the Yugoslavs have been somewhere in the middle. There is little reason to doubt that the US administration’s position on human rights has been a cause for some concern in the East European capitals. The Yugoslav leadership, for example, must be concerned that their violations will undermine the kind of support they think they
