764
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
For if America is not the companion of human progress in the
world, if we do not work to shape events in progressive directions, the
world will pass us by. If we do not promote freedom in the world, there
will be less freedom in the future for Americans.
Today, let me describe to you the kinds of freedom we must pro-
mote and the tools we need to promote it.
First is the freedom of nations: the freedom of nations, including
our own, to be independent, to be free of outside domination. That has
been and is the enduring goal of U.S. foreign policy. But it cannot be
our only goal, for America’s national interest, America’s national
ideals, require that we support other kinds of freedom in the world.
This Administration is committed to a second kind of freedom: the
political freedom of people within nations.
And we are committed to a third goal: the freedom from poverty
and human misery, conditions that destroy human lives and create un-
rest in the world.
A narrower approach, an approach which ignores the hopes and
needs of people within nations, cannot succeed. For it would ignore the
political stirring of humanity, the current of human freedom that is
gaining strength in the world. And when peaceful change is frustrated,
violent and radical change can explode in a storm that damages
America’s interests and creates opportunities for our adversaries.
So when Soviet troops seek to crush the freedom of an independ-
ent nation, we will oppose it.
When an adversary threatens our vital interest in the Persian Gulf,
in Europe, in the Caribbean, in Asia or elsewhere, we will oppose them.
When foreign governments allow the seizure of American citizens,
as in Iran, we will not give up until they are home safe and free.
And when governments anywhere suppress the freedoms of their
own people, when malaria or malnutrition degrade human lives, we
will oppose that as well.
We believe, in short, that America can flourish best in a world in
which freedom is growing—freedom in all its aspects: national inde-
pendence, political liberty, and freedom from hunger, poverty, and
disease.
To promote these freedoms, we need to maintain a foreign policy
that rests on four pillars.
• The first is an unwavering commitment to our security through a
strong defense, solid alliances, and unyielding opposition to aggression.
• The second is an unrelenting effort to help resolve the regional
disputes that threaten peace.
• The third is our foreign assistance programs which support the
security and progress of other nations around the world, while pro-
viding us with the influence we need to advance our interests.
