facts deemed necessary to a proper appraisement, examination and classification of the merchandise. This information is embodied in reports submitted to the Secretary of the Treasury for reference to appraising and other customs officers at ports of importation in the United States. They advise foreign exporters and shippers as to the United States Tariff Law and invoice requirements. By direction of the Secretary of the Treasury, upon request from appraising officers, or upon their own motion when they have reason to believe that fraud or undervaluation exists, they make special investigations in the above subjects as well as other violations of the Customs Revenue Laws and improper invoicing of merchandise, and, when necessary, inquire into the cost of production of merchandise. The facts ascertained and reported by them are also used in connection with the enforcement of the statutes of the United States intended to prevent dumping of foreign merchandise into the United States at less than a fair value. In case you deem it advisable you may furnish to the appropriate authorities the more comprehensive and detailed description of the activities of Customs Attachés that is contained in the Department’s Circular Instruction of April 2, 1925, with reference to this subject. In any event, you will point out that no inquiry into cost of production will be undertaken by Customs Attachés without the prior general or specific permission of the interested government. In view of the considerable number of these Attachés assigned to a district comprising several countries and the consequent necessity of attaching the whole number of such Attachés to the Diplomatic Mission in each country in this district, it is not believed to be necessary that these officials be carried on the diplomatic lists of each country in which they may occasionally perform duties. Although these officials will be provided with American Diplomatic Passports and will hold the status of Attachés of the American Diplomatic Mission, their duties, as noted above, do not normally bring them into contact with foreign governments, but rather with foreign individuals and business firms. Consequently, it would appear to be sufficient if the principal Customs Attachés only were placed on the diplomatic lists of foreign governments, provided that such governments recognize for practical purposes the official status of the Assistant Customs Attachés who are on the staff of the principal Customs Attaché. If, however, any foreign government should prefer to place both the Customs Attaché and the Assistant Customs Attachés on its diplomatic list, there would appear to be no objection thereto. In the event that, due to the exigencies of the Customs Service, a Customs Attaché who has not been regularly assigned to Austria should be assigned there for temporary duty, he will not begin to perform such duty pending notification to you and by you to the Austrian Government of his presence and official status. Instructions in this sense will be issued by the Secretary of the Treasury. For your information, it is pointed out that the legislation directing that these Customs officials be attached to American Diplomatic Missions came about through the difficulties which they have hitherto experienced on account of a lack of understanding
