1160  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Frigorificos del Cerro S.A., Uruguayan Army troops, who had been 
guarding the plants, were withdrawn on October 27, 1958.
[illegible in the original]
UR–8.	
Letter from the Director of the Office of South American 
Affairs (Bernbaum) to the Ambassador in Uruguay 
(Woodward)1

Washington, November 21, 1958.
Dear Bob,
You will by the time this letter is received have heard from us 
by telephone and telegram regarding the latest developments on the 
Uruguayan front. I’ll describe them now just to make certain that you 
have the flavor of what has been going on.
The Export-Import Bank’s response to Lacarte’s letter of September 
25 regarding a balance of payments loan was delivered to Lacarte only 
a few days ago.2 It had been held up by differences of opinion in the 
Bank as to how to respond to the unorthodox Uruguayan initiative 
and by our insistence that a positive attitude be reflected in the letter. 
We did get that positive attitude included in the sense of keeping the 
negotiations open but we did not succeed in getting the bank to define 
exactly what commitments it wanted from the Uruguayans. A copy of 
the letter is enclosed.3
Dick and I have spoken with Lacarte a few times during the last 
few days about this letter. He was of course gratified over confirma-
tion of the Bank’s continued interest in the negotiations. Lacarte was, 
however, unhappy over the failure of the Bank to define in just what 
respects his own letter was deficient. As you know, he had wanted the 
Bank to state exactly what it wanted so that he could then pressure his 
own government into committing itself to the necessary measures. As 
he sees it now the big problem is to get the Uruguayan Government 
to make the necessary commitments without confirmation that such 
1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Uruguay 1958.” 
Limited Official Use; Official-Informal. The source text is a carbon copy bearing 
Bernbaum’s typed signature.
2 Neither Ambassador Lacarta’s letter of September 25 nor the Export-Import Bank’s 
response of November 18, 1958, were found in Department of State files.
3 No enclosure was found with the source text.
