638 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Again, assuming you choose A, I recommend that you decide in favor of the large M–X missile and announce it now, particularly if you are not ready to choose between MPS and the track-­mobile concept. (S) Agenda and Recommended Decisions 1. CNA–78/CG review—ZB; comments by others. 2. TNF—Brown instructed to provide concrete deployment plans by the end of June. 3. Early ’80s imblance—Brown asked to present by the end of June options for short-­term fixes. 4. M–X issue—­resolve as completely as possible prior to Summit—­if B is your choice, must be announced before Summit. 141. Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1 Washington, June 4, 1979, 3–4:20 p.m. Minutes from NSC Meeting on Strategic Issues and US-Soviet Relations (C) Dr. Brzezinski opened the meeting by stating that its purpose was to review the trends in the US-Soviet balance as indicated in CNA–78 and the recent PRC on the Consolidated Guidance,2 and to reach some decisions concerning tactical nuclear forces and the M–X. He noted that other meetings would be needed later on to discuss some related issues such as strategic targeting, C3I, and our strategic doctrine. He then stated the following seven key conclusions that he had drawn from CNA–78 and the Consolidated Guidance meeting: 1. The US continues to enjoy considerable advantages in all non-­ military aspects of the US-Soviet competition. (TS) 2. Only with our Allies do we have an advantage over the Soviets in the crude dimensions of military power. Thus we cannot afford to jeopardize Alliance cohesion and confidence which are crucially dependent on US power and resolve. (TS) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Meetings File, Box 2, NSC Meeting: #19 Held 6/4/79, 5–7/79. Top Secret. According to the Summary of Conclusions of the meeting, in attendance at the meeting, which took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House, were Carter, Mondale, Vance, Jones, McIntyre, Press, Utgoff, Brown, Duncan, Turner, Seignious, Brzezinski, Aaron, Jordan, and Powell. (Ibid.) 2 For the May 14 PRC meeting on the Consolidated Guidance, see Document 134.
