Yugoslavia support of the United Nations and of the Great Powers—first and foremost the U.S.” Tito told Carter “I received your [January 31] letter about our actions in the Horn of Africa. [see footnote 8, Document 251] I think that what you have asked is entirely correct, albeit not to be mediators but to continue further with our activity to contribute to a peaceful resolution of the issue there as soon as possible. We have already decided earlier that our Minister of Foreign Affairs, after our return from the U.S., will go to Ethiopia and Somalia.” Tito promised to inform the administration of the results of the Yugoslav diplomatic mission to the two countries. Carter stressed that the United States was “worried about the permanent or occasional presence of the Soviet and Cuban troops in that region” and that he hoped Soviet and Cuban forces would withdraw as soon as peace was established. Carter continued: “I hope that the Soviet and Cuban troops will agree that the UN and the Organization of African Unity should be included in the resolution of that conflict, because we don’t want that part of the world to be a battlefield between ourselves and the Soviet Union.” The two Presidents also discussed Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs David Aaron’s diplomatic Mission to Ethiopia. Tito promised to continue the dialogue on the issue of the Horn with Moscow, saying that “I believe that the Soviet Union should hear our opinion about this question.” The two Presidents also discussed at length the situation in the Middle East. While noting that some progress had been made—such as Egyptian President’s Anwar al-Sadat’s November 20, 1977, visit to Israel—Carter suggested that important problems still needed to be resolved: “First: withdrawal from the occupied territories; second: securing the borders; third: the right [of Israel] to existence as a nation; fourth: the orientation toward a peaceful solution to all problems; fifth: the Palestinian question.” Carter told Tito that “we don’t think that a separate solution between Israel and Egypt [alone] could be a lasting solution; we want an all-encompassing solution to this problem.” For his part, Tito suggested that he had not agreed with Sadat’s visit to Israel since Sadat “did not consult with other Arab states that are at war with Israel.” “Of course,” Tito continued, “he did not ask me either, but that is how he operates, that is his style. We have distanced ourselves from this approach; we have been silent. It is true that this act was very courageous, but also very risky, and what happened, happened because no one supported him.” Tito also stressed that, despite his disagreement with Sadat’s actions, he had given his support to the Egyptian leader, because of the need to find a solution to the crisis in the Middle East. Tito also informed Carter of the contents of a letter he received from President Sadat on the situation in the Middle East and that he was planning a response to the Egyptian leader upon his return from Washington.
