United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 43 continued exportation of U.S. dollars and gold was desirable. The proposal for an Inter-American Bank envisaged a revolving financial institution, but the Latin Americans were saying that the institution could not be established unless the United States put up the money. A division of contributions would need to be worked out, but it was imperative that the Latin Americans have a real and hard sense of contribution. He preferred a ⅓–⅔ ratio because it was consistent with the idea of an international institution, and agreed that if the contributions were on a 50/50 basis the capitalization should be smaller than if it were ⅓ and ⅔. He would be willing to consider soft loan authority for the institution, but would oppose creating a soft loan institution with a commitment of constant replenishment by the United States without participation by the Latin Americans. United States participation must be by direct appropriations from Congress on the basis of a clear understanding of the amount and nature of the capitalization and the dividing line between hard and soft loans, and a clear understanding that further appropriations would be necessary in the future. The Chairman agreed that the institution should have the right to borrow in private markets, and that the emphasis should be on project loans, with the possibility of other types of loans to the extent feasible. Secretary Strauss commented that he had a number of questions concerning the institution, including the need for it, but that he would in the first instance seek the answers from his staff. Mr. Waugh expressed surprise at the turn of the discussion of the institution away from the hard loan approach. He questioned the notion of U.S. veto power, recalling that the initial approach involved control by the Latin Americans. He also questioned the proposal that the Development Loan Fund lend to the institution to enable it to make the same type of loans that the DLF could make bilaterally. He did not see that any approach was being made to the main Latin American problem of financing social overhead projects. He outlined the view of the Export-Import Bank’s Board of Directors: that the Inter-American Bank would necessarily involve competition with existing institutions; that the competition of a bank which made only hard loans would be preferable to competition of a soft loan institution; and that the charter of the Inter- American institution should require that its loans offer reasonable assurance of repayment in the same currency in which the loans were made. This would permit hard loans in Latin American currencies. Mr. Waugh continued that if the Inter-American Bank made soft loans it would interfere with and perhaps drive out sound loans by private lenders said existing public institutions and would require periodic new appropriations by the United States. Any soft loans of U.S. funds should be made only by agencies controlled by the United States. Mr. Waugh felt that the matter should be discussed with interested Congressional committees
