United States in Chile to the Chilean Foreign Minister, in the course of good offices,
that Chile should have the right to purchase “the Peruvian territory between the river
Camarones and the River Sama,” but if any significance is to be attached to this as a
proposal of a river line exclusively, it is met by the fact that in the later protocol of May
10, 1883,40 the Parties did not set forth a river line but stated that “The territories of
Tacna and Arica shall continue in the possession of Chile,” etc.
There were further discussions on the wording of the paragraph in question when the
time came for the signature of the formal treaty, and it is to be regretted that the record
is not more complete on this point. There is some evidence in the record which
indicates that Chile endeavored to obtain the insertion of the expression “Department
of Tacna” which would have embraced the provinces of Tacna, Arica and Tarata. The
Peruvian Counter Case quotes from the work of Gonzalo Bulnes (“Guerra del
Pacifico”—vol. III, p. 578) what purports to be a telegram from the Chilean Foreign
Minister, then in Lima, to the President of Chile, on October 18, 1883, two days before
the signing of the treaty, as follows:
“In subscribing the definitive treaty, read the telegram of Aldunate to Santa
Maria (President of Chile) dated October 18, 1883, we said that the
department (departmento) de Tacna was to remain for ten years in the power
of Chile; and the negotiators of Iglesias (President of Peru) argue that what
was agreed in May, covered only the area, until the plebiscite of the
provinces (provincias) of Tacna and Arica as far as the river Sama, and not
the additional province of Tarata (no la otra provincia de Tarata) which
reaches up to Locumba and which also forms part of the departmento de
Tacna. In the presence of this difficulty, I do not dare to decide anything by
myself. If we, concluding a treaty, had said that we ceded the territories
(territorios) of Santiago and Victoria, would it be understood that we also
ceded Rancagua? Everything is prepared for the delivery of Lima and Callao
on Saturday; and the present difficulty causes grave perturbation.”
While Chile has not had the opportunity to reply to the Peruvian Counter Case, it is
apparent from the Chilean Counter Case that some question of this sort had arisen, as it
gives a telegram of October 19, 1883, from the President of Chile to the Chilean
negotiators as follows:
“The telegrams and records that we have consulted convince us that we
always have pointed to the River Sama as the boundary line between the
Peruvian territory and that territory that is to be turned over to Chile.
According to the conditions of the agreement we took the Sama in its entire
extension, from the coast to the point where it branches off and continues to
the Bolivian border, all settlements south of that line to be included in the
territory to be ceded. When the said line was fixed it was also kept in mind
