374
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ing new verbal formulas for dealing with the Middle Eastern problem,
in negotiating and then ratifying the Panama Canal Treaties,2 etc., etc.
Yet foreign policy, though involving the foregoing, also involves
the need to influence attitudes and to shape political events. This re-
quires a combination of additional steps, none of which we have yet
truly employed. In some cases, what is needed is a demonstration of
force, to establish credibility and determination and even to infuse
fear;3 in some cases it requires saying publicly one thing and quietly ne-
gotiating something else;4 in many cases what is needed is prolonged
and sustained exchange of political views, so that even our enemies
share or at least understand our perspectives. Often it does not require
solving problems but striking the right posture and sometimes letting
problems fester until they are ripe for action.
Examples of the foregoing would include quiet efforts to manipu-
late African leaders to obtain desired results; a willingness to back some
friendly country very strongly, so that it in turn is prepared to use its
force on our behalf (for example, I think there is a good chance that by
tangibly backing Morocco with arms we could get Hassan to use his
troops for us the way Castro is using his on behalf of the Soviets);5 read-
iness to use black propaganda to stimulate difficulties for our opponents,
for example by encouraging national sentiments among the non-
Russian Soviet peoples or by using deception to divide the Soviets and
Cubans on African policy.6
I will be developing some ideas for you regarding the above,7 but
at this stage I simply wanted to register with you a basic point: namely,
that our foreign policy has to operate on many levels and use many
tools. The world is just too complicated and turbulent to be handled ef-
fectively by negotiating “contracts” while neglecting the need also to
manipulate, to influence and to compel.
2 On March 16, the Senate approved the Treaty Concerning the Permanent Neu-
trality and Operation of the Panama Canal by a vote of 68–32. (Congress and the Nation,
vol. V, 1977–1980, p. 55) On April 18, the Senate voted to ratify the basic treaty by the
same vote of 68–32. (Adam Clymer, “Senate Votes to Give up Panama Canal; Carter
Foresees ‘Beginning of a New Era,’” The New York Times, April 19, 1978, pp. A–1, A–16;
Congress and the Nation, vol. V, 1977–1980, p. 56)
3 The President underlined “demonstration of force” and wrote “Like Malaguez
[Mayaguez?]?” in the left-hand margin next to that portion of the sentence. He also under-
lined “to infuse fear.”
4 The President underlined “saying publicly one thing” and “negotiating some-
thing else” and wrote in the left hand margin “Lying?”
5 The President underlined “to use his troops for us” and wrote “Proxy war??” in
the left-hand margin next to that portion of the sentence.
6 The President underlined “by using deception” and placed a question mark in the
left-hand margin next to that portion of the sentence.
7 The President underlined this portion of the sentence and wrote “You’ll be
wasting your time” in the left-hand margin.
