Hungary
453
return of the Crown. We wish to take that step. The question is when
and how. We believe we should try to finalize this at an early date.
We will be giving the necessary instructions to Ambassador Kaiser so
that we will be able to move forward.
Puja said that in the Hungarian evaluation of bilateral relations,
we have basically solved all except two issues. The first is the Crown
and treasures, and he is happy to hear that the US has decided to
return it. As the Secretary is aware, it is a very important, sacred relic
of the Hungarian nation. That is why they have placed great emphasis
on its return. Undoubtedly, such an act will greatly influence the feel-
ings of the people of Hungary toward the United States. The Secretary
said we should keep this very tightly and an announcement should
only be made at the appropriate time by mutual agreement. Puja said
this was taken for granted. Hungary has never made propaganda out
of it.
148.
Memorandum From Robert King of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, October 5, 1977
SUBJECT
State Department Actions on Returning the Crown and Granting Hungary MFN
In consultation with Ambassador Kaiser from Budapest, who is
here until this weekend, State is drafting a lengthy cable of instructions
on the procedures for return of the Crown.2 It will specify the assurances
which the Hungarians must give on the display of the Crown, our
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77. Secret. Sent for information. Brzezinski wrote at the
bottom of the memorandum, “Give me a history of the Crown, how it was stored before
the war, what annual honors—religious or political—was it paid, etc?” King replied on
October 12, summarizing two lengthy studies prepared by the Office of the Legal Adviser,
one in 1971 and the other in 1977. (Ibid.) The 1971 study is in the Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter Subject File, Box
14, Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen: 2/76–3/77. The June 15, 1977, study is in the Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Hunter
Subject File, Box 14, Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen: 4–6/77.
2 See Document 150.
