1230
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Representative to the United Nations Donald F. McHenry argued that
given the search for a “comprehensive peace” in which the United
States had taken an active role, “we should not be distracted by ap-
proaches that offer no prospect for making practical progress.” Further,
the United States “should not adopt an approach that does not endorse
UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, the agreed basis for all
peace efforts in the Middle East—an approach which, indeed, seeks to
change Resolution 242. We should not allow the United Nations to be
used in this way. The clash of opposites and the sharpening of contra-
dictions has no place here, in this body dedicated to the maintenance of
peace and the resolution of disputes through peaceful means.” For the
full text of McHenry’s statement, see telegram 1714 from the U.S. Mis-
sion to the United Nations, May 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800216–0283)
366.
Summary of Conversation1
Washington, May 1, 1980, 8:45–9:05 a.m.
SUBJECT
Summary of the President’s Meeting on Oil Supply Agreement with Israel
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Acting Secretary of State Warren Christopher
Secretary of Energy Charles Duncan
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Henry Owen
Richard Cooper, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs
Robert Hunter, NSC Staff Member (notetaker)
The President indicated that we should develop a reasonable ap-
proach on implementing the oil agreement with Israel that would be
definitive enough to meet Israel’s needs, but that would not become a
price-subsidy device. If Israel were being gouged on price, or couldn’t
get oil, then it should be able to get oil through us, at cost price. But the
triggering mechanism should not become an incentive to activate in
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-
tial Advisory Board, Box 85, Sensitive XX: 5/1–13/80. Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took
place in the Oval Office. The summary was found attached to a May 1 covering memo-
randum from Hunter to Brzezinski, upon which Brzezinski wrote: “Keep it in the NSC.”
