Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1075
(A) During Secretary Vance’s recent trip to Argentina,2 the Argen-
tine government announced its intention to ratify the treaty of
Tlatelolco.
(B) We understand that Argentine ratification, unlike its signature
of the treaty several years ago, will not be accompanied by an interpre-
tative statement that the treaty permits its parties to develop nuclear
explosive devices for peaceful purposes. We also understand that Ar-
gentina would negotiate a full-scope safeguards agreement with the
IAEA providing for safeguards against any military or nuclear explo-
sive use.
(C) However, Argentina is not prepared, at this time, to waive the
preconditions specified in the treaty for entry into force. Thus, Argen-
tina will put itself in the same legal position as Brazil and Chile, which
have both ratified but not waived the entry into force conditions.
Twenty-two Latin American states have ratified, waived the condi-
tions, and are therefore already bound by the treaty.
(D) When the remaining conditions are met, Argentina, Brazil, and
Chile would automatically be bound by the treaty, and would be obli-
gated to conclude a full-scope safeguards agreement with the IAEA.
(E) At present, the only remaining conditions are U.S. ratification
of Protocol I (we signed in May 1977),3 French signature and ratification
of Protocol I, Cuban signature and ratification of the treaty, and Soviet
signature and ratification of Protocol II.
(F) Therefore, our two governments are both in a position—
through our own actions and through encouragement of steps by
others—to help bring the Treaty of Tlatelolco fully into force.
(G) Let me underscore the great significance of what could lie
ahead. Argentine and Brazilian adherence to the treaty would be one of
the greatest boosts for non-proliferation in a long time. Those two
countries clearly pose a serious threat in the non-proliferation area.
Given their unyielding attitude toward the NPT, the Treaty of Tlate-
lolco is our best, and perhaps our only, opportunity to get them to ac-
cept formal restraints against the development of nuclear explosives.
(H) For our part, now that the president has signed Protocol I, we
hope to have it ratified within the coming year. We have also urged the
French to reconsider their position toward Protocol I, and we have indi-
cations that they are doing so.
(I) In addition, through our newly opened Interests Section in Ha-
vana, we have directly raised the issue of the treaty of Tlatelolco with
the Cubans at various government levels. We have received inquiries
2 See Documents 426 and 427.
3 See footnote 2, Document 414.
