Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Sadat is in full control of the relationship with Saudi Arabia, we are in touch, but neither of us talks about it. The President: I am glad to hear this. Secretary Vance: I still don’t see clearly how you will explain to the Arab world that you are prepared to complete the process with Gaza, while leaving the West Bank out. The President: Let me try to answer. The world will see that Egypt prefers to move in both the West Bank and Gaza, and only if there are uncontrollable factors which prevent movement in the West Bank, Egypt would then continue with Gaza regardless. Vice President Mubarak: When Sadat gives his word, he never deviates. If it is only going to be in Gaza, we will tell you. If we say both, we mean both and as quickly as possible. The President: If you had the choice between getting progress in the West Bank and Gaza by next October or just in Gaza by next April, would you prefer October? Vice President Mubarak: Yes. We would prefer to finish with both, even if it takes three or four or five months longer. Secretary Vance: We still have the problem of how to explain this in public. The President: Only President Sadat can do this. He needs to emphasize the importance of keeping the West Bank and Gaza together. Otherwise he gives the impression of wanting to separate Gaza. Vice President Mubarak: I said there would be no separation. The President: I hope you won’t raise the question of the priority of obligations. I understand the problem and we have had tedious negotiations on this. We understand the problem posed by some earlier agreements with Arab nations. It is clear that the present treaty is in conflict with those obligations. We have looked at our own agreements, and we have contacted international lawyers, and we have tried to put in common internationally accepted language of what is necessary in cases of this sort. Secretary Vance can explain it to you. Vice President Mubarak: What is mentioned in the treaty will not do anything, but it will hurt us internally and the Communists and extremists will use it against us. They will say that Egypt and Israel are allies. The President: We can’t satisfy the Iraqis and the Syrians ever. Secretary Vance: If Syria is attacked by Israel, you can still help Syria. The President: And President Sadat can say that. Egypt has the advantage of being able to explain this in a positive way. He can defend his Arab brothers in Syria and Jordan if they are attacked by Israel. But
