1979  625
The Bottom Line
I think the President’s best course would be to go ahead with the 
MX decision in early June as now planned. I agree that there are still 
some significant uncertainties in the trench concept. I also believe that 
in the two weeks remaining until the NSC meeting to review the issue 
with the President the Air Force and OSD will be able to refine the 
trench and horizontal MPS options sufficiently to give the President 2 
reasonably acceptable options to choose from. (S)
Finally, while Option 5 looks like an overall loser, I recommend 
that it not be dropped from the list of options to be presented to the 
President. Keeping Option 5 in the running and perhaps tuning it a 
little and saying something nice about it may have a beneficial effect 
on the final stages of DOD’s studies of the trench and MPS variant 
concepts. (S)
137.	 Memorandum From Denis Clift, John Matheny, and 
Ralph Crosby of the Vice President’s Staff to Vice 
President Mondale1
Washington, May 24, 1979
SUBJECT
PRC on MX Basing, Friday, May 25, 1979, 2:00 p.m., Situation Room
The third PRC (principals only) on MX Basing will be held on May 
25. We recommend that you attend. The candidates for MX basing have 
now been narrowed to three from the original list of five:
—ICBMS in Trenches. This concept was first introduced at the last 
PRC and consists of a series of 25-­mile long trenches with several rail 
cars carrying missiles running back and forth within each trench. The 
trenches are covered with removable concrete slabs. This option would 
run anywhere from $6 to $10 billion more than MPS and appears to 
have no advantages (if MPS uses horizontal shelters) other than being 
able to shift missiles more quickly during crisis buildup to enhance 
security. OSD currently favors this option because they believe it has a 
better chance of Presidential approval than MPS.
—MPS: The Multiple Protective Structure (MPS) System (the pre-
ferred option, in fact, of OSD and JCS)—­this time with an added feature 
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National 
Security Council Meetings, 1977–1980, Box 100, NSC Meetings, [6–12/1979]. Secret.
