FOREIGN RELATIONS OF THE UNITED STATES

Foreign Relations of the United States, 1977–1980 Volume IX Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978– December 1980 Second, Revised Edition Editor Alexander R. Wieland General Editor Adam M. Howard United States Government Publishing Office Washington 2018

DEPARTMENT OF STATE Office of the Historian Bureau of Public Affairs For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov

Foreword This revised edition of Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980, incorporates additional material found since the publication of the first edition in 2014. This added material consists largely of personal handwritten notes

IV Foreword exist in official U.S. files. However, among Lewis’s handwritten notes, a more complete draft was found, a version which covers all of the days of the summit. It is printed here as Document 28. Adam M. Howard, Ph.D. General Editor Bureau of Public Affairs May 2018

About the Series The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, under the direction of the General Editor of the Foreign Relations series, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg first promulgated official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991. Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, established a new statutory charter for the preparation of the series which was signed by President George H.W. Bush on October 28, 1991. Sec-

VI About the Series with Department of State historians by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. Most of the sources consulted in the preparation of this volume have been declassified and are available for review at the National Archives and Records Administration. The editors of the Foreign Relations series have complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department’s Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and the memoranda of conversations between the President and the Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. All of the Department’s central files for 1977–1981 are available in electronic or microfilm formats at Archives II, and may be accessed using the Access to Archival Databases (AAD) tool. Almost all of the Department’s decentralized office files covering this period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, have been transferred to or are in the process of being transferred from the Department’s custody to Archives II. Research for Foreign Relations volumes is undertaken through special access to restricted documents at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library and other agencies. While all the material printed in this volume has been declassified, some of it is extracted from still-classified documents. The staff of the Carter Library is processing and declassifying many of the documents used in this volume, but they may not be available in their entirety at the time of publication. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Carter Library include some of the most significant foreign-affairs related documentation from White House offices, the Department of State, and other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Some of the research for volumes in this subseries was done in Carter Library record collections scanned for the Remote Archive Capture (RAC) project. This project, which is administered by the National Archives and Records Administration’s Office of Presidential Libraries, was designed to coordinate the declassification of still-classified records held in various presidential libraries. As a result of the way in which records were scanned for the RAC, the editors of the Foreign Relations series were not always able to determine whether attachments to a given document were in fact attached to the paper copy of the document in the Carter Library file. In such cases, some editors of the Foreign Relations series have indicated this ambiguity by stating that the attachments were “Not found attached.”

About the Series VII Editorial Methodology Documents in this volume are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the Chief of the Editing and Publishing Division. The documents are reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents within the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the original text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the documents are corrected with bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words repeated in telegrams to avoid garbling or provide emphasis are silently corrected. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the original text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume. In telegrams, the telegram number (including special designators such as Secto), is printed at the start of the text of the telegram. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount and, where possible, the nature of the material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed with headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. All brackets that appear in the original text are so identified in footnotes. All ellipses are in the original documents. The first footnote to each document indicates the source of the document, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and eluci-

VIII About the Series date the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used where appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record. The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than to page numbers. Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. The Advisory Committee does not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series, but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and reviews volumes as it deems necessary to fulfill its advisory and statutory obligations. Declassification Review The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Administration, conducted the declassification review for the Department of State of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12958, as amended, on Classified National Security Information and applicable laws. The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments. The declassification review of this volume, which began in 2012 and was completed in 2013, resulted in the decision to withhold 1 document in full, excise a paragraph or more in 5 documents, and make minor excisions of less than a paragraph in 21 documents. The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassification review process described above, that the documentation and editorial notes presented here provide a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of the Carter administration’s policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute. Stephen P. Randolph, Ph.D. Adam M. Howard, Ph.D. The Historian General Editor Bureau of Public Affairs December 2014

Preface Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the administration of President Jimmy Carter. The volume documents U.S. foreign policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute from August 1978 until January 1981, focusing on the Camp David Summit among President Carter, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat; the negotiation and conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty; the Carter administration’s ongoing efforts to broaden support for the Middle East peace process in the Arab World; U.S. involvement in the post-Treaty talks on Palestinian autonomy; bilateral security arrangements between the United States and Egypt, Israel, and Jordan; as well as U.S. efforts to deal with the ongoing hostilities in Lebanon and diplomatic initiatives taken in the United Nations vis-a`-vis the Arab-Israeli dispute. This volume continues the narrative of the Carter administration’s efforts to seek a peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli dispute begun in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, which covers the period from Carter’s inauguration to Begin and Sadat’s acceptance of the President’s invitation to meet with him at Camp David on August 8, 1978. Readers interested in the relationship between President Sadat, the deposed Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, and the new Islamic government in Iran, culminating in Sadat’s decision to provide asylum to the Shah in March 1980, should consult Foreign Relations, volume XI,

X Preface hensive negotiated settlement to the Arab-Israeli dispute begun in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January

Preface XI dent Carter’s personal diary relating to the summit that were published in 2010. The complete, un-edited version of this diary is held privately by the Jimmy Carter Center and, as of the publication date of this volume, is unavailable to the public. Requests by Department of State historians to secure access to this version of the diary for use in compiling the Foreign Relations series were denied by the Carter Center. Similarly, Department of State historians sought access to the personal papers of other U.S. officials in order to supplement the official record of the summit. Former Secretary of Defense Harold Brown and Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski granted Department of State historians access to significant portions of their respective personal papers collections at the Library of Congress, both of which remain closed to the public as of this volume’s publication, though Brzezinski denied access to his personal journals. Although the Camp David Accords represented an important breakthrough in the peace process, the task of facilitating the translation of the Framework documents into a formal peace agreement between Egypt and Israel proved a slow, often laborious, task for the Carter administration. The compilation on the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty documents the administration’s efforts, beginning with the Blair House talks in October 1978, to work with the Egyptians and Israelis to reach an agreed treaty text, a process which reached a deadlock that Secretary of State Cyrus Vance’s frequent meetings with the Egyptian and Israeli leadership proved unable to break. The compilation on the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty negotiations after Vance made a December 1978 trip to the region, therefore covers the administration’s final push to work with Begin and Sadat to break the negotiating deadlock, marked by Carter’s personal re-intervention in the negotiations, first in Washington, meeting with Sadat and Begin separately during the first week of March 1979, and then in Israel and Egypt a week later. Following the conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, the next round of negotiations, designed to address the question of Palestinian autonomy, largely took place at a lower working level. The final two compilations of this volume cover this period. In April 1979, Carter passed primary responsibility for the peace negotiations to a special representative, former Special Trade Representative Robert S. Strauss, who was in turn succeeded by Sol M. Linowitz eight months later. With the U.S. failure to broaden Arab support for its diplomatic efforts, highlighted by the negative reaction to the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty in the Arab world as well as the pressures brought by the growing number of foreign policy crises elsewhere, the Carter administration’s engagement with the Arab-Israeli dispute entered a far less intensive phase. During the last eighteen months of the administration, U.S. diplomatic efforts on this issue centered largely upon keeping the (ulti-

XII Preface mately inconclusive) autonomy talks on track, securing the continued goodwill and stability of Egypt by negotiating resupply of the military with U.S. arms, mediating in Sadat’s mounting public rivalry with Saudi Arabia, dealing with the ongoing upheaval in Lebanon, and addressing the series of resolutions related to the Arab-Israeli dispute brought before the United Nations Security Council. In keeping with the other Foreign Relations volumes in the Carter administration subseries, the emphasis of this volume is on policy formulation, rather than the implementation of policy or day-to-day diplomacy. As in other volumes in this subseries, the National Security Council and the Department of State were the primary agents of U.S. policymaking. Given the intense personal interest of the President in the peace process through much of the period covered by this volume as well as the President’s April 1979 decision to turn over the negotiations to a special representative answerable directly to him, the former occupied a more sustained place in determining policy. Following the conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, these two agencies were joined more directly in the policy making process by the Department of Defense, especially in assessing and meeting the perceived strategic needs of Egypt and Israel. Acknowledgments The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library and Museum in Atlanta, Georgia, particularly Ceri McCarron, Brittany Parris, David Stanhope, and James Yancey for their patient and tireless assistance. Thanks are also due to the Central Intelligence Agency for arranging access to the Carter Library materials scanned for the Remote Archive Capture project. The Historical Staff of the Central Intelligence Agency were helpful in arranging full access to the files of the Central Intelligence Agency, and Sandy Meagher was helpful in providing access to Department of Defense materials. Thanks are due to the staff of the Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress for expediting access to the papers of Harold Brown and Sol M. Linowitz. The editor thanks the staff at the National Archives and Records Administration facility in College Park, Maryland, for their valuable assistance. Alexander R. Wieland collected and selected documentation and edited the volume under the supervision of Adam Howard, then Chief of the Middle East and Africa Division, and Susan C. Weetman/Adam Howard, General Editor of the series. Dean Weatherhead coordinated the declassification review under the supervision of Carl Ashley, Chief of the Declassification and Publishing Division. Stephanie Eckroth and Craig Daigle did the copy and technical editing. Do Mi Stauber, Inc. prepared the index. Alexander R. Wieland, Ph.D. Historian

Contents Foreword ................................................................ III About the Series ........................................................ V IX XV Abbreviations and Terms ............................................ XXI XXVII Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980 Contructing Frameworks for Peace: The Camp David

Sources Sources for Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX For this volume, the editor made extensive use of Presidential papers and other White House records held by the Carter Library. These records proved the best source of documentation on the roles of President Carter and the National Security Council in formulating, developing, and implementing United States policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute and the Middle East peace process from August 1978 until January 1981. The National Security Affairs files are divided into two sub-series: Brzezinski Material and Staff Material. Within the Brzezinski Material sub-series, the Country File (especially those files on Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia, and the files on the general Middle East region, which incorporate material on both bilateral relations as well as peace negotiations and the Palestinian autonomy talks which followed the March 1979 signing of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty), the Country Chron series of the Brzezinski Office File, the President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, and the Subject File provided the richest sources of documentation. The Cables File helped complete the documentation of the post-Camp David negotiations through its collection of Department of State Nodis telegrams. The Trip File provided important documentation on President Carter’s March 1979 visit to Egypt and Israel. The Staff Material sub-series is a similarly valuable resource for nearly all aspects of U.S. policy toward the Arab-Israeli dispute, especially the Middle East and Office Files. The Middle East File—particularly, the Subject File, Meetings File, Trips/Visits File, and staff member Chron File contained within—is essential both for the breadth of the topics it covers and for its ability to display the way in which U.S. policy was developed at the working level within the National Security Council. The Presidential Advisory and Outside the System Files of the Office File contain some of the most sensitive documentation generated by the National Security Council for Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski and President Carter. Separate from the National Security Affairs collection is the National Security Council Institutional Files, which focus primarily on the records of meetings of the National Security Council and its sub-groups, the Presidential Review Committee and the Special Coordinating Committee, (including supporting documentation generated by the Department of State, Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, and others for the meetings), as well as documentation related to Presidential Review XV

XVI Sources Memoranda and Presidential Determinations. Documentation from all of these files is further supplemented by that contained within the collection of papers donated to the Carter Library by Zbigniew Brzezinski (“Brzezinski Donated Material”) and the collection of material assembled by President Carter in order to write his memoirs (“Plains File”). Both contain a significant amount of material on the Middle East peace process, including meetings between President Carter and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, and King Hussein of Jordan. Moreover, the Plains File includes Carter’s handwritten notes of numerous meetings and telephone conversations with Egyptian, Israeli, and U.S officials, including exchanges in which no formal memoranda of conversation or other official records were produced. Similarly, for keeping track of the President’s daily work schedule, the President’s Daily Diary is a particularly invaluable resource. To document the Department of State’s role in the Middle East peace process, the conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, and the U.S. role in the negotiations which addressed Palestinian autonomy after March 1979, as well as key bilateral contacts between the United States and the Egyptians, Israelis, Jordanians, Lebanese, Saudis, and Syrians on these issues, the Central Foreign Policy File is a core resource. In 1973, the Department phased out the old subject-numeric Central Files, replacing them with an electronic system, the State Archiving System (SAS), which has been transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration and is part of the online Access to Archival Databases (AAD). For this volume, the Central Foreign Policy File provided cabled accounts of key meetings between Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and the President’s two Special Representatives to the peace negotiations, Robert S. Strauss and Sol M. Linowitz, with their Egyptian and Israeli counterparts, accounts for which no formal memoranda of conversation were produced. Similarly, the system contains important cabled messages from President Carter and Secretary Vance to Middle Eastern leaders, many of which were not followed up by signed original copies. Some of the most tightly held telegrams are not in the electronic system, but appear only on microfilm reels; the same is true of all non-telegram documents, such as memoranda of conversation, letters, briefing papers, and memoranda to principals. For the sake of consistency and traceability for researchers, all citations to documents from the Central Foreign Policy File include the original microfilm reel numbers and frame locations. A number of Department of State lot files are also of particular value: the records of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance (Lot 84D241); the files of Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr. (Lot 80D166); the Bureau of Near Eastern and

Sources XVII and the Department of State Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Han-

XVIII Sources Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Handling Restrictions Memos, 1979–1983, Lot

Sources XIX Vertical File White House Central Files Central Intelligence Agency, Langley, Virginia Office of the Director of Central Intelligence

XX Sources Published Sources Boutros-Ghali, Boutros. Egypt’s Road to Jerusalem: A Diplomat’s Story of the Struggle for Peace in the Middle East. New York: Random House, 1997. Brzezinski, Zbigniew. Power and Principle: Memoirs of the National Security Adviser,

Abbreviations and Terms ACDA, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency ADF, Arab Deterrent Force AF, Air Force AID, Agency for International Development Ammo, ammunition AMOCO, American Oil Company (Standard Oil Company) AMVIP, American Very Important Person AO, area of operations APC, armored personnel carrier Art., article Backchannel, a method of communication outside normal bureaucratic procedure; the White House, for instance, used “backchannel” messages to bypass the Department of State BEQ, bachelor enlisted quarters BOQ, bachelor officers’ quarters Bpd., barrels per day C, Jimmy Carter; Confidential CD, Camp David; Christine Dodson CDA, Camp David Accords Cherokee, a telegraphic distribution channel for the Eyes Only messages between the Secretary of State and an Ambassador CIA, Central Intelligence Agency CIP, Commodity Import Program CJCS, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Codel, Congressional delegation Col., Colonel ConGen, Consul General; Consulate General CONUS, Contiguous United States CV, Cyrus Vance Cy, Cyrus Vance D, Deputy Secretary of State; Office of the Deputy Secretary of State DA, David Aaron DAS, Deputy Assistant Secretary DCI, Director of Central Intelligence DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission DefMin, Defense Minister DEM, David E. McGiffert DOD, Department of Defense dols, dollars DPO, deputy principal officer DSAA, Defense Security Assistance Agency EB, Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, Department of State XXI

XXII Abbreviations and Terms EB/ORF/FSE, Division of Fuels and Energy, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, Department of State EC, European Community ER, evening report EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EUR/RPE, Office of OECD, European Community and Atlantic Political-Economic Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EUR/RPE/EEC, European Economic Community Affairs, Office of OECD, European Community and Atlantic Political-Economic Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State EW, Ezer Weizman Exdis, exclusive distribution FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations FMS, Foreign Military Sales FonMin, Foreign Minister FY, fiscal year FYDP, Five-Year Defense Program FYI, for your information Gen, General GNP, gross national product GOE, Government of Egypt GOI, Government of Israel GOJ, Government of Jordan GOL, Government of Lebanon HASC, House Armed Services Committee HB, Harold Brown Helos, helicopters HHS, Harold H. Saunders HO, Henry Owen HRH, His Royal Highness ICA, International Communication Agency ICJ, International Court of Justice IDF, Israel Defense Forces IG (also I–G), inter-agency group; Interdepartmental Group IMF, International Monetary Fund INOC, Israeli National Oil Company INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State INR/DDC, Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State INR/RNA, Office of Research and Analysis for the Near East and South Asia, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State INR/RNA/NE, Near East Division, Office of Research and Analysis for the Near East and South Asia, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State Intsum, intelligence summary IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State; Indian Ocean IO/UNP, Office of UN Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State J, Jimmy Carter JC, Jimmy Carter

Abbreviations and Terms XXIII JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff LAF, Lebanese Armed Forces LD, Leslie Denend L/NEA, Assistant Legal Adviser for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State LOA, letter of agreement LOC, lines of communication m., million MAP, Military Assistance Program MB, Menachem Begin MD, Moshe Dayan Memcon, memorandum of conversation Memrec, memorandum for the record MFA, Ministry for Foreign Affairs Milcon, military construction MOA, Memorandum of Agreement NAC, North Atlantic Council NAM, Non-Aligned Movement NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NEA/ARN, Office of Lebanon, Jordan, Syrian Arab Republic, and Iraq Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NEA/EGY, Office of Egypt Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NEA/IAI, Office of Israel and Arab-Israeli Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State NEA/RA, Office of Regional Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State Niact, telegram indicator requiring immediate action NIO/NESA, National Intelligence Officer for Near East and South Asia, Central Intelligence Agency Nm, nautical mile Nodis, no distribution Noforn, not releasable to foreign nationals Notal, not received by all addressees NPT, Non-Proliferation Treaty NRP, National Religious Party (Israel) NSA, National Security Agency NSC, National Security Council OASD/ISA (NESA), Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Department of Defense Ofc, office OMB, Office of Management and Budget OMC, Office of Military Cooperation Opns, operations OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense P, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs; Office of the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs; President. P&D, planning and design

XXIV Abbreviations and Terms PAO, public affairs officer para, paragraph PDRY, People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen) PG, Persian Gulf PLO, Palestine Liberation Organization PM, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State; Prime Minister PNC, Palestinian National Council POL, petroleum, oil, lubricants Pr., President PRC, People’s Republic of China; Policy Review Committee; Presidential Review Committee PriMin, Prime Minister RDF, rapid deployment force Reftel, reference telegram RG, record group; Robert Gates RH, Robert Hunter RO/RO, roll on/roll off Rpt, repeat S, Secretary of State; Office of the Secretary of State SA, Saudi Arabia S/AA, Ambassador at Large, Department of State SAG, Saudi Arabian Government SAM, surface-to-air missile SARG, Syrian Arab Republic Government SASC, Senate Armed Services Committee SC, Security Council; Susan Clough SCC, Special Coordination Committee SecDef, Secretary of Defense Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State Septel, separate telegram SFM, Sinai Field Mission SGA, Self-governing authority SISN, Personal Representative of the President SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate Spt., support Sqd, squadron S/S, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Department of State SSM, Sinai Support Mission S/S-O, Operations Center, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Department of State Stadis, Department of State distribution only Tac, tactical Telcon, telephone conversation Tosec, series indicator for telegrams sent to the Secretary of State UAE, United Arab Emirates UAR, United Arab Republic UN, United Nations UNDP, United Nations Development Programme UNEF, United Nations Emergency Force UNGA, United Nations General Assembly UNHCR, (Office of) United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Abbreviations and Terms XXV UNICEF, United Nations Children’s Fund UNIFIL, United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon UNSC, United Nations Security Council UNTSO, United Nations Truce Supervision Organization U.S., United States USA, United States Army USAF, United States Air Force USDEL, United States delegation USEC, United States Mission to the European Community USG, United States Government USINT, United States Interests Section USLO, United States Liaison Office USMTM, U.S. Mililary Training Mission USN, United States Navy USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics USUN, United States Mission to the United Nations VBB, Vance-Brown-Brzezinski VP, Vice President WB/G, West Bank/Gaza WQ, William Quandt YAR, Yemen Arab Republic Z, Zulu Time (Greenwich Mean Time) ZB, Zbigniew Brzezinski ZBB, zero-based budgeting Zbig., Zbigniew Brzezinski

Persons Aaron, David L., Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Abdullah bin-Aziz al Saud, Saudi Second Deputy Prime Minister Abu Odeh, Adnan, Jordanian Minister of Information until December 1979 and from September 1980; Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs Ali, Kamal Hassan, Egyptian Minister of Defense from September 1978 until May 1980; Minister of Foreign Affairs from May 1980; Deputy Prime Minister from May 1980 al-Araby, Nabil, Director, Legal Department, Egyptian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Arafat, Yassir, Chairman, Palestine Liberation Organization al-Asad (Assad), Hafez, President of Syria Atherton, Alfred L. (Roy), Jr., Ambassador at Large until May 22, 1979; U.S. Ambassador to Egypt from July 2, 1979 Avner, Yehuda, Israeli diplomat; personal adviser to Prime Minister Begin Badawi, Ahmad, Egyptian Minister of Defense from May 1980 Badran, Muhdar, Jordanian Prime Minister until December 1979 and from September

XXVIII Persons Brown, Harold, Secretary of Defense Brzezinski, Zbigniew K., Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Burg, Yosef, Israeli Minister of Internal Affairs Byrd, Robert C., Senator (D-West Virginia); Senate Majority Leader Callaghan, James, British Prime Minister until May 1979 Carlucci, Frank C., III, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Carter, James Earl (Chip) III, son of President Carter Carter, James Earl, (Jimmy), President of the United States Cathey, Charles H., Major General, USA; Head of U.S. Military Training Mission, Saudi Arabia, from July 1977 until July 1979 Chamoun (Shamun), Camille, Leader, National Liberal Party (Lebanon); former President of Lebanon from 1952 until 1958 Chamoun (Shamun), Dany, Leader, Lebanese Forces Charney, Leon, U.S. attorney for Israeli Defense Minister Ezer Weizman al-Choufi, Hammoud, Syrian Permanent Representative to the United Nations Christopher, Warren M., Deputy Secretary of State; Acting Secretary of State from April

Persons XXIX Ehrlich, Simcha, Israeli Minister of Finance Eilts, Hermann F., U.S. Ambassador to Egypt until May 20, 1979 Eizenstat, Stuart L., White House Counsel; President’s Assistant for Domestic Affairs and Policy Ermarth, Fritz, member, National Security Council Staff until November 1980 Evron, Ephraim (Eppie, Eppy), Israeli Ambassador to the United States from January 11, 1979 Fahd bin Abdul Aziz al Saud, Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia Flaten, Robert, staff, Legislative Management Office for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Congressional Relations, Department of State; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations from September 1979 Freij, Elias, Mayor of Bethlehem Gaffney, Henry H., Director, Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, Department of Defense Gamasy (Jamasi), Mohammed Abdel Ghani, Lieutenant General, Egyptian Minister of Defense until September 1978 Gates, Robert, Special Assistant to the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Gemayel, Pierre, Leader, Kataeb (Phalange) Party (Lebanon) el-Gheite, Abou, staff, Office of the Foreign Minister (Egypt) Ghorbal, Ashraf, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States Giscard d’Estaing, Vale´ry, President of France Glaspie, April, staff, U.S. Embassy in London Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Guiringaud, Louis de, French Minister of Foreign Affairs until November 29, 1978 Habib, Philip C., Senior Adviser to the Secretary of State Haddad, Saad, Major, Lebanese Christian militia leader Hammadi, Saddoun, Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs Hansell, Herbert J., Legal Adviser, Department of State, until September 20, 1979 Hart, Donald F., Head of Economic/Commercial Section at Embassy in Tel Aviv Henze, Paul, member, National Security Council Staff Hinton, Deane R., Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs from

XXX Persons Keene, Douglas, Deputy Director, Office of Security Assistance and Sales, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State, from March 1979 until August 1980 Khaddam, Abdel Khalim, Syrian Minister of Foreign Affairs Khalid bin Abdul Aziz, King of Saudi Arabia Khalidi, Walid, Palestinian historian; co-founder of the Institute for Palestine Studies in Beirut

Persons XXXI Nasser, Gamel Abdel, President of Egypt from 1956 until 1970 Navon, Yitzhak, President of Israel Nehushtan, Jacob, Minister, Israeli Embassy in Washington Newlin, Michael H., Principal Officer, Jerusalem until January 1980 Newsom, David D., Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs; Acting Secretary of

XXXII Persons Sharaf, Abdul Hamid, Chief of the Royal Court (Jordan) until December 1979; Jordanian Prime Minister from December 1979 until July 1980; Jordanian Minister of Foreign Affairs from December 1979 until July 1980; Jordanian Minister of Defense from December 1979 until July 1980 Sharon, Ariel, Israeli Minister of Agriculture al-Shawa, Rashad, Palestinian mayor of Gaza from 1971 until 1982 Sherman, George F., Jr., Public Affairs Adviser, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State Shulman, Marshall D., Special Adviser on Soviet Affairs to the Secretary of State Sick, Gary, member, National Security Council Staff Small, David H., Assistant Legal Adviser for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of State Smith, Carl R., Brigadier General, USAF; Military Assistant to the Secretary of Defense Sterner, Michael E., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Strauss, Robert S., Special Representative of the President to the Middle East peace

Persons XXXIII Wisner, Frank G., Deputy Executive Secretary of the Department of State from 1977 until 1979 Yadin, Yigael, Israeli Deputy Prime Minister Young, Andrew J., U.S. Representative to the United Nations until September 23, 1979 Zablocki, Clement J., Representative (D-Wisconsin); Chairman, House of Representatives Committee on International Relations Zamir, Yitzhak, Israeli Attorney General Zwiefel, David E., Deputy Director, Office of Egypt Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, until June 1979; Deputy Chief of Mission, Amman, from June 1979

Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978– December 1980 Constructing Frameworks for Peace: The Camp

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Each of the three leaders will be accompanied by a small number of their principal advisors. No specific time has been set for the duration of the meeting.” Special National Intelligence Estimate Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 6. Final point Saud had to make regarding the Camp David meeting was that he hoped what emerges therefrom will include the Palestinians and the principle of self-determination for the Palestinians. He stressed that this would be very important on gaining support in the Arab world. I said I could understand this concern but cautioned that what we want is a workable set of principles not a ringing declaration that will not advance the cause of peace in practical ways. On the Palestinian question, we believed the Aswan formulation5 was a practical one. 7. We then turned to discussion of Lebanon. I stressed our concern over the situation there and told Saud of the time and effort you had put in on the Lebanese problem during your trip. Saud said he had read our press briefing6 on Lebanon and considered it very good. He recounted the talks Fahd and he had had recently in Damascus, saying that the Syrians are very suspicious of the U.S. Syrians misunderstood the U.S. effort to call a security council meeting on Lebanon, saw the hand of Israel—and therefore the U.S.—behind the agressiveness of the Christian militias, and were suspicious of the contacts of the American Ambassador in Beirut with the Christian leaders. I said none of this is true. As regards the last point, I explained that Ambassador Parker’s contacts were undertaken on instructions from Washington and in the cause of restraining the Christian extremists and strengthening President Sarkis. Saud said he and Fahd had told the Syrians that their suspicions of the U.S. are unfounded. Saud said he considered most important thing U.S. could do now would be to give as much attention as possible to its contacts with the Syrians. I told Saud we had been and still were active in Damascus, and especially in Israel, in seeking to keep the lid on in Lebanon. 5 In his remarks to the press after meeting with Sadat in Aswan on January 3, Carter said: “We believe that there are certain principles, fundamentally, which must be observed before a just and a comprehensive peace can be achieved. First, true peace must be based on normal relations among the parties to the peace. Peace means more than just an end to belligerency. Second, there must be withdrawal by Israel from territories occupied in 1967 and agreement on secure and recognized borders for all parties in the context of normal and peaceful relations in accordance with United Nations Resolutions 242 and 338. And third, there must be a resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. The problem must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and enable the Palestinians to participate in the determination of their own future.” (Public Papers:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and unwilling to be pinned down. We left Saud well after midnight, and within an hour had confirmation that meeting with Fahd will be Thursday at 2000 local in Jidda. West Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX sing publicly their support for the President’s initiative. I said we were very pleased over Fahd’s statement, which had been helpful as well in making the Saudi position clear in the U.S., and I hoped Hussein would give consideration to finding a way for Jordan, too, to show its support. (I had earlier said to Sharaf that Jordan’s reaction will be closely watched in the U.S.) Hussein reiterated that he hoped for the success of the Camp David meeting and, turning to Sharaf said “we will see what we can do”. Hussein, hence, did not tip his hand on question of Jordanian public support. He may wish to consult his cabinet on issue, and we will just have to wait and see how this matter develops. In all these meetings I was accompanied by Suddarth and Korn. End summary. 2. Question of Jordanian perception of an erosion of U.S. position came up and was discussed at length in my morning meeting with Sharaf, who expressed concern that U.S. position on the West Bank and Gaza was very [garble] to the Begin plan.2 I told Sharaf I thought there had been misunderstanding in both Jordan and Saudi Arabia of what I had said in my previous visit in July. My purpose had been to set out our thoughts coming out of the Leeds talks3 on the Egyptian and Israeli West Bank/Gaza proposals; in doing this it was in no way my intention to imply that West Bank/Gaza arrangements should be made without prior agreement on a broad framework of principles covering all the major issues, withdrawal, peace, security and the Palestinian problem. I assured both Sharaf and Abu Odeh that this is our goal and that our positions remain as the President and the Secretary had earlier stated them in talks with King Hussein. With both Abu Odeh and Sharaf I made a strong pitch for some public expression of support from Jordan for the President’s Camp David initiative. I said this was not only important for President Carter and Sadat, but for U.S.-Jordanian relations. 3. In the meeting with Hussein, which lasted about 40 minutes, I covered all the points in the talking points you approved for my stops in Saudi Arabia and Jordan. I emphasized in particular that the President felt we are at a critical juncture in the Middle East (Hussein agreed), that an effort was needed to break the impasse and the U.S. was the only one that could do so. I explained at length why direct negotiations are necessary. I said that our objective at Camp David will be 2 During meetings with Carter in December 1977, Begin presented a plan for Palestinian “home rule” in the West Bank and Gaza. The plan called for the establishment of a Palestinian administrative council through free elections, while leaving security of these areas to Israeli authorities. The plan also called on Israel to hold in abeyance for five years its sovereignty claim to the West Bank; at the end of that period Israel would review the arrangements to see how well it had worked. For documentation on the Begin plan, see

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX desire to visit the U.S., but I suspect this also was implied in this remark.) However, Hussein said he was glad to have our assurances that U.S. positions remain unchanged and welcomed the President’s Camp David initiative. Even if Camp David does not bring progress, Hussein said, it will be important and helpful if it produces a U.S. position compatible with Resolution 242. “We look forward to hearing the best possible news from Camp David” Hussein added. I said I had had a good talk with Prince Fahd5 and we had been very much heartened and pleased by Fahd’s statement6 of support for the President’s Camp David initiative. I noted that Fahd’s statement had also helped a great deal in the U.S. in dispelling doubts about Saudi Arabia’s position. Turning to Sharaf, Hussein said “we will see what we can do.” 7. At end of this part of conversation, I reminded Hussein that during my previous visit I had said it would be helpful to know more precisely what Jordan needs in a statement of principles to be able to join negotiations. It would be particularly helpful to have his thoughts on this before September 5. I subsequently underlined this point with Sharaf. Both were non-committal. 8. With this the conversation on Middle East peace efforts ended. There followed a brief discussion of Lebanon, which is being reported separately.7 9. As regards the question of a Jordanian statement of support for the President’s Camp David initiative, Hussein did not tip his hand in any way. Later in the evening Abu Odeh remarked that he did not think we should expect anything “yet”. Suddarth’s guess is that Hussein will wait to consult his cabinet before formally deciding anything, at least for appearances sake.8 Suddarth

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX for circumventing the Israelis now will lose us what little confidence we still enjoy. (And furthermore won’t work with the Israelis. Begin understands quite well what we are aiming at. He won’t go along and is probably encouraged in his resistance by the knowledge that we are looking for expedients rather than taking him on directly.) Kamel and Saud, and many other Arabs who regard themselves as our friends and feel they have a stake in Sadat’s future, fear that at Camp David we will strike a middle ground between the Egyptian and Israeli position and will try to persuade Sadat to agree to “compromise”. They obviously think we might succeed in doing so. What they in fact mean is that they fear we will try to persuade Sadat to accept something that is less than a firm Israeli commitment to withdraw after five years. The Camp David Meetings Broadly speaking, there are two things that we have to decide: a) —what we want to end up with; and b) —how we can best go about getting where we want. What do we want to end up with? Ideally we would like to close the Camp David meeting with agreement between Sadat and Begin on a broad framework of principles for a settlement, covering all the main elements—peace, withdrawal, security and the Palestinians—which serve as a basis for a series of continuing negotiations to hammer out the details in each of these areas. We know in advance, however, that it is not going to be possible to get such agreement. We also know several other things; they might be called the ground rules of the game: —We cannot allow Camp David to be seen as a failure. The blow to the President’s prestige and authority and the consequences for stability in the area would be too serious. —Since it cannot succeed in achieving its ideal goal, we must have an acceptable fallback. —Somebody is going to go home disappointed, probably mad, from Camp David. There will be no way to please both sides at this point (but the temptation to try will be strong and should be guarded against). Any effort to do so is likely to please the Israelis but alienate the Arabs. —The Arabs do not really expect that at Camp David Begin will make the concessions that will be needed to achieve a Declaration on terms minimally acceptable to Sadat. They will, however, be satisfied and consider the meeting a success if it ends with the US taking a position on the issues minimally acceptable to Sadat. If we do this, the Israelis will be unhappy and the Administration will be attacked by Israel’s supporters in Congress and various Jewish

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Planning a strategy to avoid being caught on the horns of this dilemma, or if unavoidable to minimize the dangers therefrom, is another (with the drafting of texts) urgent task. This will involve the development of a detailed scenario for the Camp David meetings and for the presentation of our proposals. Saunders should be given responsibility for this. A third task will be to draft a speech for the President to give at the close of the Camp David meeting. Responsibility for this could be given to Quandt. There would thus be three task forces, headed by Atherton, Saunders and Quandt respectively, who would be assisted by various other members of the Middle East working group to do the following: —prepare our position on the Declaration —prepare a detailed scenario for the Camp David talks —prepare a draft of a speech by the President. After Camp David Assuming that Camp David ends with a US statement of positions minimally acceptable to Sadat, we can expect to find ourselves at odds with Israel and the negotiations therefore deadlocked because the Israelis refuse to continue them on the basis of our position. We will need to pursue the study (already begun) of ways to bring the Israelis to reconsider their positions. Briefing Paper Prepared in the Department of State and the National Security Council1 Washington, undated THE PIVOTAL ISSUE: THE SINAI/WEST BANK RELATIONSHIP The Issue The pivotal issue at Camp David will be the relationship that exists in the minds of both Begin and Sadat between the resumption of Sinai 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Substantive discussions on the Sinai became stuck on two issues. One was the disposition of two airfields which Israel has constructed in the eastern Sinai—one in the north not far from the Gaza Strip and one in the south near Eilat. The other was the status of Israeli settlements which have been established in the northeastern Sinai between the Gaza Strip and el-Arish. The former is essentially a military question; the latter, while given a security coloration by some Israeli leaders, is primarily an issue with domestic political ramifications in Israel. Israel has privately suggested to Egypt that these two issues be resolved through an exchange of territory. Sadat has resolutely maintained that there will be no tampering with the pre-existing international boundary. It seems clear that, were Sadat politically able to conclude a separate Sinai agreement, a deal could be struck by relying on time-phasing and other compromise solutions for resolving both the airfield and settlement issues. It is virtually certain, however, that Sadat will refuse to entertain further negotiations over outstanding Sinai issues in the absence of significant movement by Israel on the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian question. Efforts to pursue the goal of the Political Committee—achieving a Declaration of Principles which would provide the framework for a comprehensive agreement—have made less progress. The major barriers to agreement continue to be (a) whether and if so how the principle of Palestinian self-determination shall be applied and (b) the related issues of Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza and who shall exercise sovereignty over these two areas. The U.S. has remained actively involved in these efforts, and with our assistance, the parties have been discussing for the first time questions which lie at the very heart of the Arab-Israeli conflict—namely, the ultimate partition of Palestine between Jewish and Arab political entities. Neither side describes the issue in these terms today, but this is what is basically at stake for both and accounts, on the one hand, for Israel’s desire to keep the territorial boundary question open and, on the other, for the Arab desire to foreclose (except for minor modifications) what they perceive as further Israeli expansion through settlements and territorial acquisition beyond the 1949–67 Armistice Lines. In the Arab perception, acceptance of those lines as Israel’s boundaries already involves conceding two-thirds of pre-1947 Palestinian territory. On the question of Palestinian self-determination, Egypt publicly espouses the maximum in free choice for all Palestinians wherever they reside (although privately hoping to stave off the creation of an independent state under radical leadership) while Israel would prefer that only residents of the West Bank and Gaza participate at all in the process and then only in negotiations in which Israel could exercise a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX plan for territorial compromise presented by the Arabs or “to discuss” after an interim period the issue of sovereignty, to which it said that “a solution is possible.” As an indication of the problem before us, this was considered a major advance by many Israelis but has made little impression in Egypt, since it falls far short of what Sadat feels he needs. It appears that there is little room for further softening of the Israeli position except, perhaps, in return for a commitment by Sadat to pursue a Sinai agreement. Both parties have accepted the need for an interim period between the beginning of the implementation of any West Bank agreement and the ultimate disposition of territory and sovereignty. This provides us with the ability to argue that irrevocable changes need not, indeed cannot, occur immediately. It does not, however, diminish Sadat’s desire to receive a commitment that those changes will indeed take place nor Begin’s difficulty in giving such a commitment. What Each Man Wants Conceptually, the needs of the two leaders can be expressed as follows: —Begin, in order to justify the political and personal crises he would face in agreeing in principle to withdraw from the West Bank, will want from Sadat a commitment to see the Sinai negotiations through to a final solution which includes the removal of the Egyptian military threat and normalization of relations. It remains to be seen, in fact, whether even then he could agree to an ultimate relinquishment of Israeli control (except for security strongpoints) to an Arab authority which would come to exercise many if not all the attributes of sovereignty. —Sadat, in order to justify the political crisis within the Arab world which would follow his agreement to pursue a Sinai agreement before West Bank details have been worked out, will want from Begin a commitment to withdraw from the West Bank and Gaza subject to negotiation of the security and other details of a settlement, to freeze Israeli settlements, and to allow the Palestinians a meaningful voice in the eventual disposition of that territory. Begin, in addition, wants to be assured that if he makes the necessary commitments on the West Bank there will be someone on the Arab side with whom Israel can negotiate. He understands that Sadat’s goal is to draw Hussein into the negotiations, but will want some assurance that, if that proves impossible, Sadat himself will undertake to negotiate at least the general guidelines of a settlement for the West Bank and Gaza and will negotiate a Sinai settlement even if there is no actual change in the status quo on the West Bank/Gaza.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX treaty. Sadat wants language which includes the code-phrases “legitimate rights” and “a solution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects.” Sadat has the following additional desiderata as regards the Sinai, assuming he is willing to continue negotiations at all: —Assurance that Israel agrees that such negotiations, and any agreement that may ensue, will be part of a comprehensive agreement. He may insist on a verbal understanding that final implementation of a Sinai agreement must await the successful conclusion of the steps agreed upon during an interim period on the West Bank. —Assurance that when the implementation of a Sinai agreement has been completed, the Israeli airfields and settlements will be removed. Handling the Dilemma at the Summit General Considerations Both men are coming to Camp David with the need to deal with the West Bank/Gaza and Palestinian issues very much in their minds. For Begin and his team, however, the goal is a Sinai agreement, and West Bank negotiations constitute a means to that end. Sadat, on the other hand, will want to avoid talking about the Sinai. To him this is a subject that must await basic Israeli decisions on the West Bank and Gaza. He believes he has already shown sufficient flexibility to warrant give from the Israeli side and is in no mood to make further concessions, least of all on his own territory. Moreover, Foreign Minister Kamel and other members of Sadat’s party will be ready to encourage Sadat to hold firm should he show signs of weakening. While the relationship between the Sinai and the West Bank will inevitably surface directly at some point, the result when it does will not depend solely on the obvious issues themselves. It will also be greatly affected by our success prior to that time in (a) helping each to understand the political requirements of the other and (b) building a sense of shared strategic interest. Success in these areas early on would hopefully pave the way for a greater willingness by each to acknowledge the substantive needs of the other outlined above. Bilateral with Begin The task with Begin in this respect will be twofold: —To convince him of our sympathy with Israel’s desire to conclude an agreement on the Sinai, thus normalizing its relations with its largest and potentially most dangerous Arab neighbor and going far toward removing the threat of another disastrous war, and —To convey to him our understanding of Sadat’s reluctance to do so in the absence of something he can use in the wider Arab context.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX no previous Israeli Government has been prepared to return all of Sinai or has been as willing as this one to discuss as thoroughly the core issues of the conflict—those surrounding the Palestinian dilemma. It would be helpful to express sympathy with Sadat’s belief that he should not be asked to discuss the Sinai further when Israel still has not made basic decisions on the West Bank. However, it is a Sinai agreement that the Israelis want most badly, and that desire provides Sadat leverage with regard to the West Bank. Although we do not expect negotiations on the details of a Sinai settlement during the Summit, it is our view that a commitment on Sadat’s part to resume Sinai negotiations would be the most effective instrument available in bringing Israel to confront the need to reconsider its West Bank position. We could also explain to Sadat the value we see in agreements that can be implemented over a period of several years, both on the West Bank and in the Sinai, describing how we see the initialling-signingratification-implementation stages of a Sinai agreement being phased in relation to specific stages of agreements on the other fronts in such a way that Egypt could retain a degree of leverage over the overall process throughout. Finally, it may be necessary at some point to note that Israel’s resistance to explicit withdrawal language in the context of general principles relates not only to the West Bank/Gaza, but to the Golan Heights where Israel will only be brought to contemplate withdrawal if Syria makes a much more convincing offer of peace than it has so far. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX I know from our talks in Geneva3 of your own deep desire for a just and lasting peace. My understanding is that Syria continues to adhere to the relevant Security Council resolutions constituting the basis for a negotiated settlement and has left the door open to rejoining the negotiations if conditions acceptable to Syria are met. We are gratified that Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat have both responded positively to the invitation to meet with me next month in a major new effort to establish a framework for a Middle East peace settlement. We have purposely not set a fixed duration for the talks, scheduled to begin on September 6, so as to be able to allow as much time as is needed for our efforts to succeed. This is an encouraging indication of the seriousness with which these parties are approaching this meeting. I extended this invitation because I believe we have reached a crucial point in the search for peace in the Middle East. Nine months have passed since President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin opened significant new possibilities for negotiations with the historic meetings in Jerusalem and in Ismailia. The sides have made progress toward resolving some of the issues that divide them at this time, but recently, as you are aware, an impasse was threatened. I am convinced that we cannot afford an impasse, since the positions would then harden and the atmosphere deteriorate to the point where the present opportunity for peace could well become another of the lost opportunities that have marked the history of this tragic conflict. The objective of the Camp David meeting will remain as it has been defined by the two sides themselves in negotiations this year: to make progress toward an agreement on a framework, based on Security Council Resolution 242, that would allow steady progress toward agreement on specific issues, within the context of the agreed goal of a stable, just and comprehensive peace. An agreed framework such as the United States is seeking might ultimately make it possible for other parties to the conflict, including Syria, to rejoin the peace negotiations. Our experience in attempting to facilitate and promote negotiations this past year has demonstrated that it is impossible to carry negotiations beyond a certain point on the crucial issues unless the heads of government themselves can be engaged in a direct exchange. This was one of the considerations that led me to the decision to extend invitations to the two leaders to meet with me at Camp David. Our objective will be to achieve agreements at the political level which can provide guidance for the negotiators on the key issues. I plan to do everything

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX afford a failure; but Begin probably feels that a Camp David failure is Sadat’s and Carter’s failure but not his own. Begin might well calculate that Sadat will be undermined and your policy will be discredited. Thus things will eventually return to what they were before you initiated the active search for peace. 2. It follows from the foregoing that you will have to make it very clear to both of them, but especially to Begin, that failure at Camp David will have directly adverse consequences for relations with the United States. In addition, failure is likely to reintroduce the Soviet Union into the region. 3. Sadat will define success in terms of substance, particularly in regards to withdrawal. Begin will define success largely in terms of procedure, since he prefers procedural arrangements to substantive concessions. 4. The above, in turn, means that you will have to extract substantive concessions from Begin, while persuading Sadat to settle for less than an explicit commitment to full withdrawal and return to 1967 lines with minor modifications. 5. You should avoid being overly absorbed in details or specific formulations, particularly during the first few days. Both Sadat and Begin will be trying to manipulate you to side with them, and Begin in particular will try to draw you into the details and verbal formulations that he enjoys discussing as a way of avoiding decisions. The State briefing papers include specific language on a number of substantive issues, but this should be thought of as illustrative, not as something you will want to introduce in the initial talks. As a point of reference, the attached table gives some idea of possible formulations on the central issues of withdrawal, borders, security, and sovereignty that we might try to get Sadat and Begin to accept.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX from their point may be understandable, want to change the demographic picture in the West Bank. Despite Dayan’s talk about only individuals being allowed to purchase land, I suspect that the Israelis will continue to try to create facts on the ground that will affect what happens in five years. Given this situation, the illegality of large scale Israeli settlement activity in the West Bank should be reaffirmed if Sadat is to sell some unpalatable territorial concessions to confreres. 8. Since the Camp David meeting may bring us to the crunch, I have one other general observation to make with which Sam may or may not agree. Despite his sense of U.S. pressure, Mr. Begin strikes me as being in an advantageous position. If Sadat does not agree to his territorial demands, the Egyptian President can be depicted as being at fault; if Sadat agrees to those territorial demands, that’s all the better; if Sadat subsequently goes under because of such agreement, well— that’s just too bad because Mr. Begin knew all along the unreliability of the Arabs and, anyway, it removes the one Arab leader who successfully challenged Israel’s longtime sole claim on the affections of the American people; and if it fails because of Begin’s own unwillingness to go the extra mile, this can be explained away at home and any opposition criticism will be manageable for as adroit a political leader as Mr. Begin. Sadat has no such advantage. He must come out with something saleable or he is in trouble, his already faltering peace initiative will be irrevocably damaged, and the validity of his reliance on the United States will be perceived by his own people and the Arabs as having been misplaced. 9. The above are general thoughts based on reftels. It is difficult to be specific in the absence of some more precise indication of what our objectives will be at Camp David. As requested elsewhere, I am preparing a series of messages9 on the political/economic dynamics of Egypt which I hope to submit next week and which will spell out in greater length the constraints under which even the normally venturesome Sadat will have to work. Eilts

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tinian question based on the Aswan Formula announced by President Carter at Aswan, Egypt in January 1978.3 2. The second achievement, to be won through hard bargaining, would be a precisely written secret agreement on the framework for a Middle East peace settlement. This secret agreement would be signed by both President Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachim Begin with a witnessing signature by President Carter. The reason President Sadat would insist on a written document witnessed by President Carter is to prevent subsequent statements by the two parties—either inadvertently or deliberately—misinterpreting the understanding reached between the leaders of Egypt and Israel. 3. In defining what he meant by a precise agreement on the framework for a Middle East peace, President Sadat stated that both he and Prime Minister Begin had to agree on a clear definition of all the major aspects of a Middle East settlement. Following the acceptance of this major, overall framework of agreement, details would then be worked out by committees, hopefully to include the participation of other Arab nations also. 4. President Sadat’s own basic tenet for a framework of an agreement allows for considerable flexibility on details, but no compromise on sovereignty or territory—except for minor adjustments on the West Bank. 5. President Sadat proposed the Palestinian question as one example of the need for both a public and a secret agreement. Whereas the public statement could announce an agreement on the Aswan Formula as a basis for the Palestinian issue, secret negotiations would need to address Israeli concerns regarding which Palestinians would be the future leaders of a Palestinian West Bank. 6. President Sadat stated that President Carter’s participation is essential because he (President Sadat) has lost the trust and confidence which he had in Prime Minister Begin, and now he must fall back on his trust in President Carter’s sincerity and fairness. President Sadat felt that if he and Prime Minister Begin reached a precise written understanding and if President Carter witnessed that written understanding, then the peace process could indeed take a major step forward.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX have emerged as the most powerful non-Syrian force in Lebanon. At a minimum, they are capable of defending the areas under their control against the Muslim Leftists and Palestinians. It is clear that if the Christians cannot dominate a new Lebanon, they will try to fragment the country along confessional lines to achieve unencumbered political dominance in the areas—the richest in Lebanon—under their control. This objective has brought them into direct conflict with the Syrians. The first clash occurred at Fayadiyah in February 1978, and since then the tempo of fighting has increased. The results have not been disappointing to the Christians, and they seem more determined than ever to thwart Syrian designs. (C/NOFORN) For its part, Israel’s policy toward the Syrian presence in Lebanon has until recently reflected some ambivalence. In late 1975 and early 1976, Tel Aviv expressed strong opposition to Syrian intervention in the Lebanese civil conflict because of the threats such a development would pose to Israel’s security. Of particular concern was the threat to Lebanon’s status as a Christian-dominated nonconfrontation state, and that posed by a Syrian military presence along Israel’s northern border. The careful manner in which Syria handled its escalating intervention in Lebanon, its tacit acknowledgement of Israeli security concerns, US pressure on Israel not to over-react to Syrian moves, and the transitory security benefits that the Syrian involvement provided Israel allowed Israeli officials to come to accept a carefully controlled Syrian presence in Lebanon. Israel at times was called upon to control Syria’s actions, but at no time did Israel appear to be moving to end Syrian involvement. Tel Aviv, however, never accepted that the Syrian presence should become either permanent or dominant and, to a very real degree, Syria is in Lebanon at Israel’s sufferance. It now appears that the Israeli Government has decided to end the Syrian adventure in Lebanon. Discussion Syria’s Position and Options (S/NOFORN) In the face of its difficult position in Lebanon, Damascus has three basic options: withdraw from Lebanon; confront the militias and prepare for a prolonged occupation; or temporize and hope for favorable developments. Syria has so far pursued the third option, partly out of natural caution and partly out of fear of the repercussions from exercising options one or two. The third option, however, is beginning to prove counterproductive. No favorable developments are on the horizon, and a series of escalating clashes, separated by tense cease-fires of more and more limited duration, has been occurring. Christian hardliners appear intent on provoking a Syrian military attack in the belief that Israel will come to their assistance. So far, how-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX cedure. Israel is quite experienced in this and is certainly aware of the problems involved. Nevertheless, the Christian militias are an available tool with which to bring pressure to bear on the Syrians, and Israel may believe that if this leads to a showdown with Damascus, the Syrians will back down in the face of Israeli threats. Outlook (S/NOFORN) There is a real possibility of a miscalculation by one side or the other in this situation. While not seeking a confrontation with Syria, Israel’s actions risk it. The future status of Lebanon is, however, a strategic problem for Israel and not merely a sideshow in the security and foreign affairs arena. Hence, Israel is probably willing to run even major risks. For its part, Syria appears more likely than ever before to probe Israel’s will in Lebanon. The implication of these respective policies is that both powers are seemingly embarked on courses of action that risk a major confrontation in the Middle East, perhaps not in the immediate, but almost certainly within the foreseeable future. Memorandum of Conversation1 Ismailia, August 26, 1978 SUBJECT Meeting with President Sadat re Camp David PARTICIPANTS President Anwar al-Sadat Vice President Mohamed Husni Mubarak Ambassador Hermann Fr. Eilts I met with Sadat for one and a half hours in Ismailia. Vice President Mubarak was also present. I first briefed Sadat on our current thinking on the scenario for the Camp David talks. I told him the thought is to devote part of the first day to bilaterals between President Carter and each of the two visiting leaders. Thereafter, the scenario might develop depending upon how 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX speaking for the West Bank and Gaza. On the West Bank, Sadat stated he will prepare himself for “flexibility”. (He did not elaborate on what he had in mind.) He went on to say that in anything he negotiates, it will not only be Egyptians, but the Saudis as well who should support it. The Saudi position is terribly important. The U.S. has great interests in Saudi Arabia and has had a historical relationship with that country. If a satisfactory framework can be achieved, the Saudis will support it. He had the previous day received a message from Prince Fahd in reply to the President’s letter to King Khalid.2 Fahd’s message had stated that, apart from relinquishment of Arab land and sovereignty, the Saudis will support him in whatever he agrees upon. I said I was glad to hear that there will be flexibility in his West Bank ideas but noted that some of his closest colleagues contend that Egypt has no mandate to discuss West Bank matters. How did he see this aspect of the problem? Sadat agreed that the lack of a clear-cut mandate from either the Arabs, Hussein or the Palestinians poses a problem for Egypt in negotiating West Bank matters. But, Sadat observed, if he neglects to negotiate the West Bank, which means the Palestinian case, he will in effect be pressed into appearing to negotiate for a separate Sinai settlement with Begin. This, as he put it, will subject him to criticism by the Soviets and the rejectionist Arabs. A separate agreement for the Sinai will strengthen the Soviets in the area. This should, at all costs, be avoided. The second reason why he is prepared to negotiate for the West Bank is the position of Egypt as the leader of the Arab world. He noted that Egypt has half the population of the Arab world. Real power lies in Egypt. Israel recognized this in the Oc-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Carter a written paper on the Egyptian strategy and positions. He plans to meet with Foreign Minister Kamel this week to develop details. Sadat said he is thinking of “saving President Carter for a major coup.” Begin will be working on a theory that President Carter plans to come out with some proposals. This is what Begin is trying to abort. Perhaps, Sadat said, President Carter will not have to make any proposals or suggestions. He, Sadat, is thinking of doing something along the lines of his Jerusalem visit that might vitiate the need for an American proposal at this time. He did not at this time wish to elaborate. President Sadat said that he will need President Carter in what he called a Dullesian4 exercise in brinksmanship. “This man Begin,” he said, “is totally against any agreement except on his terms.” Sadat’s strategy is that President Carter and he come out “victorious,” whatever the results of the Camp David talks might be. Begin is trying to “hit” at President Carter, but Begin will find that this turns into a trap for him. As I was leaving, I asked whether Sadat has had any further thoughts on bringing Gamasy. Sadat said he does not plan to bring him. To do so will only give Begin the opportunity to divert the discussions by suggesting that the Defense Ministers might be tasked with discussing difficult matters. If agreement is reached and a need arises for Gamasy to come in order to work out details, Sadat noted that Mubarak can send the general to Washington within twenty-four hours.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with the Palestinian question. The Israeli Government has also added to the obstacles by denying any Jordanian right in the West Bank and refusing to admit that it is occupied Jordanian territory. It is more necessary for us now to have a clear and unambiguous indication that as a result of the process of negotiation Israel would end its occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and the other territories occupied in June, 1967 and allow a process of self-determination leading to the resolution of the Palestinian problem along lines outlined and with reciprocal guarantees for future mutual security to Arabs and Israelis alike. I am convinced that under such circumstances it would be within our ability not only to participate actively and positively in constructing peace on a solid and lasting basis but also to influence our Arab brethren to participate in the peace process on the basis of the formula you suggested earlier for Geneva or a similar collective framework. —I do hope and pray that your brave initiative in arranging the forthcoming talks in Camp David would result in the necessary breakthrough. I am sure that you are determined to achieve substantive progress. Permit me, however, to point out that it is feared here in Jordan that the inability to achieve such genuine progress in the talks, as a result of Israel’s proven intransigence, might prompt the participants to issue a vague and uncommiting document of principles aimed at de-emphasizing the differences and inviting other participants. It would be unhelpful to move along such a course and, consequently, expose potential participants such as Jordan to unjustified international and local conflicting pressures. It would be unfair and unrealistic to expect Jordan and other Arab parties to shift their stands on principles on such grounds in the absence of genuine indications of an Israeli positive attitude on the substantive questions. —I wish to assure you, Mr. President, that Jordan remains ready and willing to participate in all peace efforts that have a credible chance of progress and a productive conclusion. We are committed to the ideal of peace in our region and the hope of a just settlement. After the talks in Camp David I hope that we would reopen close consultations regarding the situation. I shall conduct consultations with my Arab partners in this spirit and for the reactivation of the atmosphere of collective search for peace and positive action. I have already conveyed my country’s views to President Sadat and I am sure that he understands and appreciates them. —I wish to thank you again for your confidence and friendship. I hope I can reciprocate and that my country would remain the strong friend and partner to your great country as it has always been and a factor for stability and a force for the preservation of the identity of the area and for honorable peace here and in the world.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1 Washington, August 30, 1978 SUBJECT U.S. Aid to the Middle East As you prepare for the Camp David meeting with Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat, I believe you should bear in mind a growing predicament in our aid to the Middle East. On the one hand, you should continue to assure both Israel and Egypt that the levels of U.S. economic and military assistance will not be decreased or withheld as leverage in the peace negotiations. On the other hand, there is an increasing disparity between the customary levels of U.S. aid to the Middle East confrontation states and their actual needs for assistance. Below are some of the facts that point up the increasing difficulty in justifying continued high levels of U.S. aid to the Middle East. I am not in this memorandum suggesting a reduction in those aid levels in 1980. But I do suggest that you should consider the need to begin creating a climate where appropriate reductions will be acceptable diplomatically to Israel and Egypt. —Total: U.S. aid to the four Middle East confrontation states totals

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Attachment Table2 undated U.S. Aid to Middle East Confrontation States, 1977–1979 (in millions of dollars) 1977 1978 1979 est. Israel Security Supporting Assistance FMS Credits 1,0003 1,0004 1,0005 PL 480 Housing Guarantees Israel Total 1,821 1,817 1,790 Egypt Security Supporting Assistance PL 480 Military Training Egypt Total Jordan Security Supporting Assistance 1436 FMS Credits Military Assistance Program Military Training PL 480 Jordan Total Syria Security Supporting Assistance PL 480 Syria Total Grand Total 3,039 3,081 3,107 2 Secret. 3 50% of repayments forgiven. [Footnote is in the original.] 4 50% of repayments forgiven. [Footnote is in the original.] 5 50% of repayments forgiven. [Footnote is in the original.] 6 Includes Maqarin Dam project presented as a separate regional project. [Footnote is in the original.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Minister Begin expressed appreciation for US efforts to reason with the parties involved, but he proposes that President Carter also send a letter to Assad immediately proposing a cease-fire and stand-fast in the weeks ahead. He asked that we get an urgent response to his proposal so that the participants at Camp David would not all be distracted by worries over Lebanon. End summary 2. I met for an hour Wednesday morning with PM Begin, FonMin Dayan and DefMin Weizman. Col. Tehila5 and Elie Rubenstein were also present. As anticipated, the subject on their minds was Lebanon. The atmosphere was serious but the participants did not seem particularly tense. 3. PM Begin led off the discussion. His remarks were brief and to the point. The Lebanese situation is nearing a grave crisis, he said. The Syrian Army has turned its tanks and guns against the civilian population. Israel wants a successful Camp David, he said, but it needs US help over the next few weeks to contain the situation in Lebanon. The Syrians are now trying to crush the Maronites and to take over control of the country. They are attempting to take advantage of the period before Camp David to do this because they believe Israel will be reluctant to act strongly in Lebanon at this time. 4. The GOI cannot permit this course of development to continue, the PM said. It has a moral commitment to prevent the massacre of a national religious minority. No one else is helping the Christians and it is an intolerable thought that they be wiped out. 5. The Prime Minister said that, in view of the above, he wanted to make a request of the US Government. He proposed that there be another American representation in Damascus as soon as possible demanding an immediate cease-fire in Beirut and elsewhere. If this can be arranged, the participants can go to Camp David “with a clear head” and not have to worry every day about what is going on in Lebanon. 6. Defense Minister Weizman said that he would like to emphasize the security part of the Lebanese equation. Until ten years ago, when the PLO arrived, Lebanon was quiet. Today there is not only an attempt to destroy the Maronites and impose the Syrian will on Lebanon, but Syrian occupation of Lebanon threatens the northern frontier of Israel. If Iraq’s appreciable force, which can be moved to the area on short notice is added, Israel can find itself encircled on the northern front. Israel cannot tolerate the occupation of Lebanon by Syria. 7. Until recently, Weizman continued, IDF aircraft had flown over Lebanon on reconnaissance missions uncontested by the Syrians. In the last two weeks, however, there have been two attempts by Syrian MiGs 5 Ilan Tehilla, military aide to Weizman.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Camp David as a screen to continue action from Lebanon, “this is a misuse and would be intolerable to us.” 12. Dayan added that Israel wants to put everything on the table and be 100 per cent honest. Israel is facing three military crises: a) Syria is threatening to take over or blockade the northern Christian ports. If they should try this, the GOI will be faced with the problem of what to do about it by use of its land, sea or air forces; b) in Beirut, if Syria goes into the Christian quarters the GOI will be asked by the Christians to do something militarily; c) Syria has tried to convert the Lebanese sky into a Syrian sky by challenging Israeli reconnaissance flights since last week. This is a change. “Is Israel to accept it?” 13. At this point Weizman interjected that the situation is highly volatile. If forced to act on the question of reconnaissance flights, the GOI will not go in with two or three aircraft to shoot down a few Syrian planes. The IDF will “bring in the elephant” (meaning that overwhelming force will be used). 14. I assured the Prime Minister that I would convey the full details of this conversation to Washington and be back to him as soon as I have a response. I then went over the points contained in ref A concerning our plans to calm the Lebanese situation. The Prime Minister said he very much appreciated our efforts and hoped that the President would also be able to accept his suggestion about a direct approach to Assad. He emphasized the need to deal with Lebanon before his departure for Camp David and said I should call him as soon as Washington responds.6 15. There followed some brief discussion of UNIFIL and South Lebanon which is being reported septel.7 16. Comment: The Israeli message was very clear: if the Syrians try to close the northern ports, move in force against the Christian areas of Beirut, or challenge Israeli reconnaissance flights over Lebanon, the Israelis may feel compelled to react militarily—Camp David notwithstanding. Begin seems convinced that anything less than a high-level US approach directly to Assad might fail to get across the message

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ever, I believe it is important for me to be sure you are aware of my own appreciation of the present mood there. —I know from my own talks with Israeli leaders during my visit to Israel early this month4 that they remain deeply suspicious of Syria and of Syria’s role in Lebanon. We recognize that the Syrian forces in Lebanon, along with contingents from Sudan, Saudi Arabia and the UAE, are there at the request of the Sarkis government and with the approval of the Arab League for the expressed purpose of preserving the unity of Lebanon and restoring the authority of the central government. The Israelis at times have tacitly accepted this role but in light of recent Syrian moves against Christian areas, they again see Syrian moves as steps in a strategy of assuming a dominant role in Lebanon and preparing a second front against Israel. That perception arouses deep concern in Israel and heavy pressure on the government to take action. I believe these pressures to take action have reached a new intensity in recent days. As long as confrontations in Lebanon occur, misunderstandings and miscalculations about Syrian intentions in Israel could all too easily lead to greater Israeli involvement in Lebanon. It is vitally important that this be forestalled. —These impressions gained during my own recent talks in Israel are underscored by more recent discussions our representatives have had with Israeli leaders. —While the USG and I personally have made sustained and strong efforts in urging restraint upon the Israelis, there is a limit to what we will be able to do if the situation in Lebanon continues to deteriorate. An accidental clash between Israeli and Syrian aircraft flying over Lebanon could all too easily occur, and this could precipitate dangerous new tensions. We are urging the Israelis to exercise the most rigid discipline and prudence to prevent inadvertent clashes or a contest for control of the airspace over Lebanon. We urge Syria to do likewise. —Our purpose in sharing this assessment is not to discuss responsibility for recent events. Syria too is deeply suspicious of Israeli involvement in Lebanon’s affairs. Israel certainly is not without blame for some of the tensions and troubles which have engulfed Lebanon. Our purpose is to be sure Syria fully understands the situation in which its actions are being taken and to urge the utmost caution. —In addition to sharing this assessment with you, I must also express the deep concern of many Americans, some with relatives in Lebanon, about where the situation in Lebanon is heading. The prospect of further changes in the delicate political composition in Lebanon raises questions about how Lebanese unity can be restored. As long as the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, August 31, 1978 SUBJECT Strategy for Camp David For the talks at Camp David to succeed, you will have to control the proceedings from the outset and thereafter pursue a deliberate political strategy designed to bring about significant changes in both the Egyptian and Israeli substantive positions.2 I strongly suggest that you bear the following points in mind: 1. Sadat cannot afford a failure and he knows it; both Sadat and Begin think that you cannot afford failure; but Begin probably believes that a failure at Camp David will hurt you and Sadat, but not him. He may even want to see Sadat discredited and you weakened, thus leaving him with the tolerable status quo instead of pressures to change his life-long beliefs concerning “Judea and Samaria.” 2. You will have to convince both leaders, but especially Begin, that failure3 at Camp David will have directly adverse consequences for our bilateral relations and in terms of Soviet influence in the region. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX that you will have to take the following steps, which could affect the US-Israeli relationship: —Go to the American public with a full explanation of US national interests in the Middle East (strategic relations with Soviets, economic interests, oil, cooperation with moderate regimes). —Explain the scale of US aid to Israel ($10 billion since 1973, or nearly $4000 for each Israeli citizen). Despite this, Israel is unwilling to reciprocate by showing flexibility in negotiations. —We will be prepared to spell out publicly our views on a fair settlement. —We will be unable to defend Israel’s position if the negotiations shift to the UN or Geneva. —Both Sadat and Begin can be assured that progress toward peace will mean a strong relationship with the United States, including in the economic and security areas, and enhanced ability to control developments in the region in ways that will serve our mutual interests. 8. The absolute minimum you want from each leader is the following: —From Sadat: —Acceptance of a long-term Israeli security presence in the West Bank/ Gaza. —A five-year interim regime for the West Bank/Gaza; no independent Palestinian state; deferral of negotiations on borders and sovereignty until end of five-year period. —Acceptance of less than an Israeli commitment to full withdrawal and Palestinian self-determination as guidelines for negotiations. —Willingness to negotiate guidelines for West Bank/Gaza even if Hussein does not come in. —Repetition of “no more war” pledge; willingness to renew UNEF in October; honoring terms of Sinai II, including commitment to peaceful resolution of differences. —A willingness to negotiate seriously if an agreement on principles is reached. —From Begin: —Acceptance of all the principles of 242, including withdrawal and the “inadmissability of acquisition of territory by war,” as applicable on all fronts. —Modifications in “self-rule” proposal in order to make it sufficiently attractive to moderate Palestinians to bring them in as participants and to increase prospects of their accepting its main features (open borders, some Israeli security presence, some Israeli rights to live in West Bank, self-government) beyond five years. These modifications require an Israeli acceptance of the principle of withdrawal; a moratorium on organized settlement activity, in contrast to the rights of individuals to acquire land on a reciprocal basis; a visible termination of the military occupation at the outset of the five-year period; devolution of authority for the new regime from an agreement among Israel, Egypt, and Jordan; and genuine self-government for the Palestinians.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. Withdrawal/Security on the West Bank/Gaza Sadat should agree to an Israeli security presence during the fiveyear interim period and for an indefinite time beyond; he should agree to defer decisions on the precise location of borders and on sovereignty until the end of the transitional period. In return, he should be able to claim credit for ending the military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza, and for establishing that the principle of withdrawal will be applied in the final peace settlement dealing with these areas. Begin should agree that the principle of withdrawal does apply on all fronts, including the West Bank and Gaza, provided that its application takes into account Israel’s long-term security needs in the area; sovereignty will remain in abeyance until a final peace agreement is reached at the end of the five-year period. This will allow Begin to take credit for protecting Israel’s fundamental security interests, while not requiring that he explicitly abandon Israel’s claim to sovereignty over these areas. 2. Settlements There should be a moratorium on organized settlement activities, but both parties should agree that provisions should be made for individual Israelis and Palestinians to do business and to live in Israel and the West Bank/Gaza in the spirit of open borders, free movement of peoples, and normal peaceful relations. 3. Negotiations Both parties should commit themselves to continuing negotiations on both the Sinai and the West Bank/Gaza issues. 4. Resolution 242 Both parties should reiterate their commitment to all of the principles of Resolution 242 as the basis for peace treaties on all fronts. In addition, they should agree on the Aswan language5 on Palestinian rights, and should commit themselves to the concept of full peace and normal relations. Sadat should repeat his commitment to “no more war” and agree to the renewal of UNEF6 in October. Attached at Tab A is a memorandum7 of Ambassador Eilts’ last conversation with President Sadat. It is well worth reading. Sadat seems to be preparing more surprises.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Israel. The challenge at Camp David is to find a formula part way between the PLO’s position and the Begin plan that Hussein and reputable West Bankers can be brought to swallow. 5. What West Bankers would settle for. Given the bitterness and frustration engendered by 11 years of occupation, they would be powerfully attracted by the prospect of an end to the occupation. Bona fide moderate West Bank leaders cannot and will not act alone: the key to their participation isn’t Hussein’s participation, something that Dayan reportedly realizes. Thus, the best way for Sadat to make headway on the Palestinian problem is to insist he cannot make a separate peace in Sinai and to maintain he must have enough to persuade Hussein to take the plunge thereby also engaging moderate Palestinians in the occupied territories. 6. West Bankers would assume that Hussein would not be willing to join negotiations unless he was certain of obtaining Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and restoring an official Arab presence in Jerusalem. This would give them confidence and enable them to counter radical criticism. 7. The most sensitive burning issue is settlements. A halt to further settlements would have a great positive impact for it would demonstrate concretely the peace process can work in Palestinians’ interest. Withdrawal is also a sine qua non. Although West Bankers could reluctantly be brought to accept adjustments in the 1967 lines, this fundamental point would have to be presented in terms consistent with Resolution 242. Stress should be put on mutually acceptable modifications (perhaps lines could be extended somewhat in the north and south in order to permit adjustments elsewhere). Refugee return or family reunions with de facto Israeli controls would also be a powerful endorsement to participate, because it would allow local Palestinians to demonstrate they were acting for the benefit of expatriates as well. On sovereignty, we believe moderate West Bankers would reluctantly accept a limited form of self-determination whereby at the end of an interim period they would vote to ratify a link with Jordan. They (and we assume Hussein) would not accept Israel’s position that the question of sovereignty can be discussed at the end of the interim period thereby permitting an Israeli veto over any change in the interim regime. They remember Begin’s categoric statements about no foreign sovereignty in the West Bank and, in the absence of flexibility, the whole exercise could come to grief on this issue. 8. On security arrangements, West Bankers are pragmatic. After 11 years of living with Israelis they recognize Israel has legitimate concerns and are willing to accept an IDF presence for the interim period and perhaps beyond as long as their minimal requirements outlined above are met.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX regime; (2) main elements of a permanent solution for the West Bank/ Gaza (what happens after the 5 years); (3) the principles by which the remaining Sinai issues might be resolved; (4) the relationship between a West Bank/Gaza agreement and progress toward an Egypt-Israel peace treaty; (5) the undertakings of peace that would be in a peace treaty. 1. Transitional West Bank/Gaza Regime Agreement on the following arrangements for a transitional regime: (a) Israeli military government would be replaced by selfgovernment by the inhabitants—i.e., an end of military occupation; (b) authority for the new regime would derive from agreement among the parties; (c) question of sovereignty would be resolved within 5 years; (d) Israeli forces would be withdrawn to designated areas; (e) Palestinian displaced persons and refugees would be allowed to return at an agreed annual rate and under agreed procedures; (f) during the 5 years negotiations would be conducted and agreement reached on a final treaty on the basis of Res. 242 including withdrawal, security measures and commitments to peace; (g) the inhabitants of the areas would participate in the negotiations through elected representatives and would express their consent to the terms of the final settlement; (h) Jordan and Palestinian representatives would be invited to join negotiations to conclude a detailed agreement on the transitional regime and to participate in negotiations for a final settlement. 2. Elements of a Permanent Settlement for the West Bank/Gaza (post 5 years) Agreement that: (a) the area would be demilitarized; (b) Israel would retain its own security forces in specified numbers at specified locations, the arrangement to be subject to review after 10 years; (c) Israel would retain early warning installations (the U.S. could man these if necessary); (d) the locally-elected governing authority would undertake commitments to maintain peace and security and to prevent terrorist acts; (e) relationship with Jordan and/or Israel would be defined; (f) there would be open borders with Israel in terms of movement of personnel and economic arrangements; (g) Israeli participation in inspection of Jordan River crossing points would be defined; (h) certain Israeli settlements would be allowed to remain and rights of Israelis to purchase land defined; (i) principles governing immigration of Palestinian refugees would be defined; (j) the consent of inhabitants to the terms of the settlement would be expressed by plebiscite or parliamentary ratification. 3. Resolution of Sinai Issues Agreement that an Egypt-Israel peace agreement would be implemented in two main phases over a five-year period.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with President Assad, and may try to do something dramatic such as ask for the removal of the UNEF forces. Admiral Turner noted that Begin would be content with an unclear result. He does not want to take the blame for a failure with his own people who are generally ahead of him in their willingness to make a trade of territory for peace. The Soviets will try to blame a failure on U.S. policy and will try to get back into the peace process and to isolate Sadat. Concerning Lebanon, Admiral Turner did not think that Syria would want to fight Israel, but Syria does want to reduce the power of the Christian militias. The Soviets are not urging the Syrians to do too much there, and they do want to back the Syrians against Israel in a military conflict. The real question is whether the militant Christians will hold back. It is impossible to forecast what may happen between now and September 6. This will be a dangerous period. It depends most on the right-wing Christians and how hard they will push. The President asked about Jordan and whether it looked to Saudi Arabia for guidance. He noted that there was a possibility that Hussein would be too timid to join the talks. He asked if Jordan could be persuaded by the Saudis to join the talks or whether the Syrians would also have to be brought in. Admiral Turner said Hussein would need Saudi support and an Israeli indication of a willingness to give up sovereignty in the West Bank. This will be more important than Syrian influence. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he felt that the consequences of failure at Camp David could be more serious. The Arabs might conclude that the United States cannot lead the process for peace. They will draw conclusions of a far-reaching nature about the American role, which will cumulatively give them less of a sense of co-responsibility with us on matters of international economy and oil. Radical forces could be strengthened. Dr. Brzezinski also thought that Sadat might be less predictable than Admiral Turner had indicated. Sadat might be prepared to gamble on another war. He would not have to expect to win, just as in 1973 he went to war in order to force the United States to take action. The President said that he felt the Saudi attitude would depend heavily on what President Sadat says. Secretary Vance noted that Sadat had already said that if Camp David came to nothing, a strong statement by the United States would still help in the Arab world, and would have the effect of mobilizing world opinion to keep things moving. Dr. Brzezinski said that Sadat then defines success in terms of our taking a clear position. Secretary Vance agreed that if the United States did not take a position, then Sadat would feel that Camp David was a failure. Admiral Turner said that he thought it would be difficult for us to take a position which would satisfy Sadat without provoking a confrontation

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ment.6 Israel will not pay twice for that pledge. Admiral Turner remarked that the CIA assessment is that the balance of forces is more favorable to Israel now than it was in 1973. Secretary Brown was then asked to review the number of security issues. He dealt first with the problem of conventional threats to Israeli security, noting that these were easier to deal with than the problem of terrorism. To deal with conventional threats, demilitarization is probably the most important concept. This provides time for Israel to react to any threat. For example, there might be arrangements which would prohibit Egyptian armor from going beyond the passes. A second means of providing Israel with security would be military enclaves in key areas. Three Israeli battalions in blocking positions along the roads from the Jordan Valley into the West Bank would provide good security for Israel. Access rights to these blocking positions would have to be worked out. In Sinai, Israel is particularly anxious to keep the airbase at Etzion. There is not enough airspace in Israel for training. Early warning sites might also be useful to detect any build-up on the Arab side. The United States can help improve the capabilities to detect movement of the forces. Third-party patrols offer another possibility. The United States could also assure Israel of stable levels of military assistance, and we could respond to a number of the outstanding requests under MATMON–C.7 For example, Israel might get more aircraft and access to advanced technology. Secretary Brown went on to review ways of defending against terrorism. While these threats are more difficult to deal with, they do not affect the security of the state as much as the conventional threats. Therefore, it might be reasonable to ask Israel to accept somewhat less assurance in dealing with these threats, even though politically they are just as difficult to deal with than the larger threats. The key to dealing with terrorism is to have an Arab political authority which is a party to the agreement which is committed to maintain order. If Israel does give up the West Bank, this would pose new problems, but if an Arab authority were present it would have an incentive to prevent terrorism. There would have to be some sharing of intelligence and some cooperation at the local level. There are some technological arrangements 6 Reference is to the Egypt-Israel Interim Peace Agreement, also known as Sinai II, signed in Geneva on September 4, 1975. For documentation on the Sinai II Agreement,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX a possibility but no specific thought had been given to it. The President added that Sadat had not been opposed to a US-Israeli treaty, and he had the impression that Egypt would also participate if it were essential to peace. Secretary Brown thought that a multi-lateral treaty might be of some benefit. Dr. Brzezinski added that the Saudis might want to be part of such an arrangement. Admiral Turner added that the Arabs are a bit squeamish about joining any pact to which Israel would be a part. They also view foreign bases as anathema. The Soviets might also react very negatively. Secretary Brown agreed that the Soviets might try to get bases in Iraq and Libya. Ambassador Eilts pointed out that the Saudis had not been enthusiastic about an American base in their territory and they were very sensitive about this issue, as much as they might like a strong American position in the area generally. The Egyptians are also sensitive about a highly visible American presence in Egypt. The President concluded this part of the discussion by saying that no one favored an American military presence in the area unless Egypt and Israel both wanted it and feel that it is essential. It will not be an advantage to us. Dr. Brzezinski agreed, adding that it could be counterproductive. Secretary Brown agreed that the risks seem to outweigh the benefits. General Jones added that Israel will want some military presence in the West Bank and at the airfields in Sinai. While not advocating an American presence, the reason for suggesting the joint training facility was to deal with the problem of the bases in Sinai. While homeporting at Haifa does not seem desirable, more frequent visits in the area and use of repair facilities does make some sense. Secretary Brown felt that Alexandria was even a better facility than Haifa, but there were problems connected with use of either of these facilities. The President concluded the meeting by discussing his plans for the first few days of Camp David. He thought that he would meet first with Begin alone and then with Sadat. They would then all get together. He would make an effort to reassure both leaders of our own good intentions, and would encourage them to deal with one another. He would offer our good offices and he would only put forward proposals after consultations. He would try to point out to both of them the benefits of a comprehensive agreement, and the dangers of failure. Begin should understand the risks of radicalization in the Arab world, and a return of negotiations to a U.N. or Geneva form. The President said that he would not try to rush the talks, but he did not want them to drag out too long either. He would try to get all of the concepts on the table before the end of Friday, then take a break on Saturday for a reflection. The Vice President would represent him in the White House during his absence, although he would also want the Vice President to come up for some of the discussions. He concluded by stating it was

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —neither Egypt nor Israel should be surprised by the other two parties. —inducements to either Israel or Egypt should not make it more difficult for the other side to make concessions. As we discussed, I am enclosing with this memo a copy of the memo4 which I sent to the Secretary of State on September 2. 4 Attached but not printed. In his September 2 memorandum to Vance, Sanders discussed Israeli security concerns about territorial concessions and moves the United States could take to assuage those concerns. The United States, Sanders suggested, should make “clear” that any peace settlement should provide for “demilitarization of the contested areas,” “Israeli (or joint) presence on key terrain to provide early warning and, at least initially, to control access to populated areas in Israel and perhaps in the West Bank,” “Israeli overflight rights in some areas to provide early warning,” “border adjustments to eliminate particularly dangerous areas,” “reduction of Arab forces contiguous to demilitarized areas,” and strict limitations on “foreign forces in Jordan.” Moreover, to win Israeli confidence, Sanders added, the United States should also consider a number of bilateral arrangements including “exempting Israel from restrictions on exceptional technology transfer,” increasing FMS credits to Israel, “guaranteeing a U.S. resupply of Israel if a war breaks out because of a failure of the agreement,” including Israel among nations “completely excluded” in annual arms transfer ceiling, offering Israel a Mutual Defense Pact, and “incorporating Israeli legitimate security concerns into our own proposals.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX quickly note significant gaps in the official record, especially the absence of memoranda of conversation from the numerous, often lengthy meetings that Carter held with the Egyptian and Israeli delegations. The President’s Daily Diary records the specific dates and times of each of the meetings that Carter held between the opening of the summit on September 5 and its conclusion on September 17. In addition, each Daily Diary entry contains a list of that meeting’s participants. The most complete official record of the meetings held between the U.S., Egyptian, and Israeli delegations at Camp David is in a draft summary document produced by the National Security Council Staff. This summary provides the dates, times, and locations of each meeting held by the United States with Egyptian and Israeli officials, along with lists of participants and brief synopses of the meetings’ substance. For the text of this summary, see Document 28. The reader should note that this volume includes all memoranda of conversation that have been found in U.S. Government archives. In his subsequent writings on the Camp David Summit, Carter has highlighted his own personal note-taking and its importance not only for the historical record, but also for the work of the U.S. delegation during the negotiations. As part of his introduction to the summit in the published version of his personal diary, the President wrote that he “kept detailed written notes during all the discussions at Camp David (September 5 to 17), and from them I dictated entries in my diary a couple of times a day. Many of the scratched notes are available to scholars in the Carter Presidential Library.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 216) These notes, along with multiple annotated drafts of the two “framework” documents, “A Framework for Peace in the Middle East Agreed at Camp David” and “Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel,” which in part formed the basis for the summit negotiations, were collected into a “working papers” file in Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, undated, and Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Personal Note Prepared by President Carter1 Camp David, undated Notes made at C. David before Begin & Sadat arrived— Demilitarize West Bank2 Israeli military enclave—5 years +3 No new settlements Terminate military rule No independent Palestinian state No hazy security guarantees4 242 basis of negotiations on all fronts Leave W Bank sovereignty ? open—5 years5 Give credit to Begin homerule plan (5 years)6 Jerusalem a united (Israeli?) city—borough type7 Sinai—settlements—airstrips—no military threat—normalization8 W B[an]k—withdrawal—security—borders—sovereignty—Palestinians—settlements Phased implementation—some postponements Local W B[an]k gov’t control terrorism Israel monitor open borders End economic boycott—attempts to isolate Israel Open waterways, incl Suez Trade, cultural, student exchange + diplomatic recog[nition] Agreed number of returning refugees Long term Israeli security presence on W B[an]k Who will negotiate w/Israel absent Jordan? No more war Renew UN agreement in Oct. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53, Middle East: Camp David President’s Working Papers, undated. No classification marking. Carter discussed the drafting of this note in Keeping Faith, pp. 325–327. 2 Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand margin pointing to this phrase. Carter made a checkmark in the right-hand margin adjacent to this phrase. 3 Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand margin adjacent to this and the next four phrases. 4 Carter drew an arrow in the left-hand margin pointing to this and the next phrase. 5 Carter drew an arrow and a caret in the left-hand margin pointing to this phrase.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Draft Summary of Meetings1 undated CHRONOLOGY September 5, 1978—Tuesday

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dr. Brzezinski Professor Barak U.S. Delegation Israeli Delegation Subject: Lebanese situation; Israelis put forward a suggestion that Sinai issues remain unresolved; withdrawal problems on West Bank, etc. Memcon-Tab 8

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subject: Sinai and Israeli security requirements. Memcon-Tab

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subject: Lengthy discussion of revised U.S. Framework paper and Egyptian concerns about it. Egyptians presented written comments and suggestions on U.S. Framework paper. Memcon—Tab 31.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX September 14, 1978—Thursday

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subject: Drafting framework and Sinai papers.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX I am concerned because of the longer term strategic implications for the Middle East, and I am disturbed that further fighting in Lebanon could become the trigger for a wider war in the Middle East. I am also deeply moved by what continued fighting in Lebanon will do to the people there. As you know, many Americans are in touch with relatives there, and we receive constant reporting on the human dimensions of the tragedy there. I understand, Mr. President, that this will reach you at the end of the holy holidays. May the blessings of this season sustain you. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Assad in a manner which would allow the Syrians to come in—not necessarily at the beginning, but later. Brzezinski asked if the outcome of Camp David is a compromise, will the Syrians attend? Kamel answered affirmatively. Quandt asked (a) is there likely to be another meeting after Camp David if the latter has reasonable success and (b) will the Jordanians attend such a meeting? Kamel responded affirmatively, noting that all Egyptian ideas are based on the concept of Jordanian participation. Quandt asked whether, in the event the Saudis support a Jordanian role and the Syrians do not, the Jordanians will still attend? Kamel thought they will, provided “Palestinian rights” are adequately safeguarded. Boutros Ghali opined that two other countries might be interested in participating—Morocco and the Sudan. Saunders observed that during his post-Leeds Castle visit to Morocco,3 King Hassan had emphasized the need to obtain Arab support for Sadat’s initiative. Kamel observed that the Egyptians have had similar signals from Hassan. Egyptian priorities are to obtain Saudi support and Hussein’s participation. Hussein, Kamel noted, needs a clear and unambiguous commitment on withdrawal from the West Bank. Quandt inquired where an Arab Summit might be held. Kamel responded that this is an open question, but identified his preference for somewhere in Saudi Arabia. Saunders asked who besides Morocco and the Sudanese might attend? Kamel spoke of the confrontation states,4 the Saudis, Morocco (if she wishes) and perhaps the Gulf States. Kamel observed, however, that the Moroccans are thinking of a full meeting. The Secretary wondered whether there might be more problems than benefits emerging from a full summit. Kamel agreed, noting that the Libyans would create problems. The smaller the summit, the better. Saunders asked about the Tunisians and the Algerians, and what weight they carry? Kamel responded that they all carry some weight, but did not think the two states would wish to participate. Boutros Ghali commented that the Tunisians tend to be neutralists: neutralists between Morocco and Algeria and neutralists between the moderates 3 Saunders met with King Hassan in Rabat, July 21, for a three-hour discussion of the Arab-Israeli negotiations and bilateral U.S.-Moroccan relations. Saunders sent a record of the discussion to Vance in Washington, as well as to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jidda

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX French are also involved. He asked what answer the Israelis have given to U.S. representations. The Secretary said they have replied that if there were a ceasefire, there would be no reason for Israelis to be involved. Boutros Ghali recalled that, while recently in Rome for the Pope’s funeral, he had talked with Lebanese Christian leader Helou and Moslem leader Sulh. Both had asked for an Egyptian role in resolving the Lebanese problem. Boutros Ghali noted that as long as Egypt is engaged in the peace process, it is difficult for Egypt to play a positive role in Lebanon because of Syrian opposition. They had discussed this with Sadat on the aircraft on the way over. Sadat had said that as soon as something can be achieved at Camp David, this will open the way for a more active Egyptian role in Lebanon. Memorandum of Conversation1 Camp David, September 6, 1978 PARTICIPANTS AMERICAN SIDE Hermann Fr. Eilts, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt EGYPTIAN SIDE Mohamed Hassan El-Touhamy, Deputy Prime Minister SUBJECT Talk with Hassan El-Touhamy re West Bank/Gaza While walking back to his cabin with Hassan El-Touhamy this afternoon, he noted that President Sadat will be informing Prime Minister Begin today2 of his ideas on the West Bank/Gaza. Touhamy made a point of emphasizing to me that Egypt is prepared to assume responsibility for negotiation of the West Bank/Gaza even if Hussein and/or the Palestinians are unwilling to do so. When asked how this squares with the constant comments of members of the Egyptian Delegation that Egypt has no mandate to negotiate the West Bank/Gaza, Touhamy said Egypt needs no mandate to do so. As the strongest Arab power, it 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tive will come out of the Camp David talks. Subsequently, Presidency Director Hassan Kamel confirmed to me that Sadat had told the Egyptian Delegation about his pleasure and satisfaction with yesterday’s talks. Ahmed Maher later told me that, in his briefing to the Egyptian Delegation, Sadat had indicated that he had told President Carter and Prime Minister Begin that he would be willing to negotiate the West Bank in the event King Hussein still refuses to participate. In contrast to Sadat, Foreign Minister Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel is worried and tense (Boutros Ghali is only slightly less so). Kamel is concerned (a) about Sadat’s having told Begin of his readiness to negotiate the West Bank if Hussein will not play ball and (b) that in today’s trilateral meeting, Sadat may make more concessions than he can implement. Kamel retains his worry that Sadat will be pressed by President Carter into accepting compromise positions that will discredit Sadat and Egypt in the eyes of the Saudis, the Palestinians and other Arabs. I suggested to Kamel that he ought to have a little more confidence that Sadat will know his own political limits, but stressed the importance of Sadat showing maximum flexibility at this delicate stage. Kamel remains decidedly uneasy. After I had taken Sadat to Aspen, Ahmed Maher said he wished to speak to me. Maher commented that the Egyptian paper6 is regarded by Sadat as a comprehensive and balanced approach to achieving peace. He expressed the hope that both we and the Israelis will recognize this. He argued that the paper is as far as Egypt can go. I told him that I thought Prime Minister Begin will be commenting on the Egyptian paper at today’s trilateral meeting. At some point I was sure that President Carter would also comment on it. Maher then asked if the Israelis are putting forward a plan of their own. I said that I was not aware of any such Israeli intention and noted that Prime Minister Begin still stands by his self-rule and Sinai plans. I understood that Prime Minister Begin had indicated to President Sadat that everything in these Israeli plans is negotiable. Maher then wanted to know if we consider it essential that “something” come out of the Camp David meeting? Would it not suffice, he wondered, simply to have a statement that the U.S. will continue its active efforts to work with the parties to achieve peace. He acknowledged that this would be pretty thin gruel for a Trilateral Summit, but expressed concern that Sadat might be pressed to agree to concessions in the West Bank that will be rejected by Hussein, the Palestinians and the Saudis. I suggested that Sadat was surely equally mindful of the need to satisfy the Saudis, Palestinians and Hussein in anything he might 6 The text of the Egyptian paper, “Framework for the Comprehensive Peace Settlement of the Middle East Problem,” is printed in Quandt, Camp David, pp. 356–360.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Major General Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch Ambassador Simcha Dinitz Dr. Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor to the Foreign Minister SUBJECT Meeting with Israeli Foreign Minister and Defense Minister Secretary Vance introduced this first meeting of the two delegations by outlining the schedule of meetings for the rest of the day. Lebanon He then turned to Lebanon, saying that the President had sent a message2 to President Assad of Syria this morning as Prime Minister Begin had asked last night. Although there were no answers as yet to his earlier letter or, of course, to the President’s message, we hoped for some response soon. We were also waiting for a response to our approach to the Saudis. Secretary Vance then said that Prime Minister Begin had mentioned to the President an attack by Syrian aircraft on Israeli aircraft. He asked whether such an attack had occurred. Weizmann said that there had been no exchange of fire. However, three times in recent days Syrian fighters had scrambled and attempted to go into an attack mode in a menacing fashion. They were unable, however, to join combat as the Israelis broke away. He said that over twenty Syrian aircraft had been scrambled over Lebanon in these incidents. Secretary Vance said we have no late intelligence suggesting that the Syrians have yet deployed any missiles into Lebanon, only anti-aircraft guns. Weizman said their intelligence agreed, so far, although missiles were deployed right on the border. Peace Negotiations Turning to major subjects for the Camp David meetings, Dayan said that Weizmann wanted to clarify something after his informal talk3 the previous evening with Secretary Vance concerning Sinai. Weizmann said it was important to emphasize there are still serious unresolved problems over Sinai, although great progress has been made in the various earlier meetings. If the Egyptians have the idea that everything is settled, this should be clarified. He agreed with Secretary Vance that in essence the remaining issues are the future of the settlements and the air fields. Weizmann said that although there are many records of the meetings at which the Sinai has been discussed, there is nothing in the way of a written agreement at this stage. Dayan asked 2 See Document 29. 3 No record of this meeting has been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX had understood from Begin that according to President Carter, Egypt would be ready to permit Israeli forces to remain in the West Bank after five years, while insisting on a statement of “full withdrawal”, perhaps leaving Israeli forces there in some special status. (Secretary Vance nodded agreement.) But, Dayan said he was not clear on the future of the West Bank settlements. Did the Egyptians mean withdrawal to include dismantling all settlements? Secretary Vance said this was unclear at this point and has to be further defined. The basic principle is that there should be no settlements in the West Bank or Sinai in the Egyptian frame of reference. However, what in practical terms they will accept is unclear. Weizmann summarized a number of points from his various meetings with Sadat and Gamacy which he characterized as “very interesting and tangible”. The question however is whether Sadat still endorses that. (He mentioned such examples as joint policing, retention of Israeli forces, leaving West Bank settlements intact, permitting private land sales to Israel, open borders, full commerce, and so forth.) Weizmann said that when he met Sadat he would remind him of their discussion of these points and that “we don’t start from zero in these meetings”. Secretary Vance agreed and said that one important purpose here is to get down in writing agreement on some of these points thus far discussed but not recorded. Dayan then recalled that in the U.S./Israeli “working paper” of last autumn,6 the United States and Israel had agreed on the parties to be included in the negotiations, and one of the parties was the Palestinian Arabs. He then asked whether we can, in the near future, see a way to bring in representatives of the Palestine/Arabs to these negotiations, either formally or as advisers. Dayan said he had recently met privately with some Palestine/Arab leaders and that he was encouraged by their point of view, though he recognized that they would not necessarily say the same things if other Arabs were present. Was there some way to get them now into the negotiations? Secretary Vance said he had discussed this point with Kamel this morning who said that if Camp David ends with a sufficient and satisfactory agreement, that then he believed Palestine/Arabs would be prepared to join the negotiations. Weizmann inquired whether Sadat still wanted to start with a broad statement covering the West Bank problem and then with that in hand to go ahead on Sinai. Vance replied that to the best of his knowledge he is still in that mood, but “you will have to hear it from him.” Weizmann said he hoped everyone understands that there is a major difference between the Sinai and the West Bank. 6 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and that they included the Mayors of Hebron and Bethlehem, Hikmat Al Masri from Nablus, Anwar Katib from Jerusalem, a leading lawyer from Ramallah, and two members of the Shawa family of Gaza. Although there were individual differences, they all expressed a great desire somehow themselves to have a role in determining their own future. They are afraid that they will be left with nothing if Camp David fails, and they want very much to see the military government abolished and their own administrative council established. They want to be able to meet to discuss general political issues, which they cannot now do. They want reunification of families displaced in 1967, with perhaps as many as one hundred thousand returning. They feel that there are all the elements necessary for genuine self rule in the West Bank and Gaza; for example, there are plenty of Arab doctors now in the hospitals and Arab agricultural experts. With respect to the Israeli Defense forces, the Arab leaders distinguish between what they would like (total withdrawal) and what is realistic. Dayan insisted that their major concern is to make sure the IDF will not interfere in their daily lives; that they would, of course, agree they had to give assurances that their Arab police would prevent terrorist attacks against Israelis from West Bank locations, and that at present they would need substantial help from Jordan or Egypt to do so. They could accept an IDF presence limited to the function of defending Israel in a strategic fashion, though they of course do not like it. With respect to sovereignty, they agree, said Dayan, that this issue would be decided at the end of or indeed during the five year interim period. Therefore, he said it is vital to them that new settlement activity be frozen for five years so that “all the land won’t be bought up by the Israelis”. One Palestine leader wanted all Israeli settlements removed. But the consensus position is to freeze settlements, at least insofar as new settlements are concerned. (He said that they might agree to permit some additional families to pre-existing settlements.) Dayan said they know full well there are more West Bank Arabs staying overnight legally or illegally in Tel Aviv, etc., than all the Israelis living in the West Bank, and that their priority is to keep free access to the Israeli Arabs. With regard to self-determination, the Palestine leaders want that right. If they had it, however, they would want to keep some relationship with Jordan. Dayan said he had pressed whether they would give up their Jordanian citizenship for an “Arafat citizenship”, and they did not wish to do so. They agree that the area is perhaps too small and too fragmented for a fully independent state but they want equal rights with other peoples to make that decision themselves. Dayan said he was also pleased to find that they put a high priority on keeping free contact with Israel; they do not want ever to return to closed borders with the Israelis or, of course, with Jordan. Dayan concluded this review by saying he was impressed that the leaders genuinely want to be involved in deciding their future, yet at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX solution if it is attractive enough. Secretary Vance said in his view the answer depended on how strongly Sadat supported the solution. If Sadat is very positive about it, then he believed the Saudis would also support it. The meeting concluded in order for Secretary Vance to meet with President Carter.7 7 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Vance did not meet alone with Carter on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX from Arab countries and their claims. The most difficult category would be the 1948 refugees in Lebanon. Security/Withdrawal Secretary Vance pressed Weizman and Dayan for their specific ideas on what their security requirements in the West Bank would be during the interim period. Initially, Weizman took the position that Israel would need to retain approximately its present military forces and positions in the West Bank. He enumerated the categories of Israeli security requirements as encompassing (a) a military presence in the Jordan Valley and control of entry to both the West Bank and Gaza; (b) early warning stations on the West Bank; (c) strong points on the West Bank heights overlooking the Jordan Valley; (d) control of key points on East/West access roads in the West Bank plus the building of some new roads; and (e) prepositioned depots and defense positions on the West Bank for additional forces that might have to be sent in. Weizman stressed that, even if there were peace with Egypt, Israel still had to be prepared against threats from Syria, Iraq and Jordan to the East. Secretary Vance made the point that all of this would not take into account the essential political problem that there needed to be some reductions and redeployment (which could be characterized by the Arabs as withdrawal) of Israeli forces and a decrease in their visibility in order to give evidence of the end of the occupation. Secretaries Vance and Brown and Dr. Brzezinski pressed this point during an extended discussion. In the end, both Weizman and Dayan acknowledged the importance of agreeing on concepts which would meet the categories of Israeli security requirements listed above but would at the same time reduce the Israeli military visibility. Secretary Vance stressed Israel should have what it needs for security; at the same time, there could be withdrawal into encampments. Dayan said he hoped we could say withdrawal “out of,” rather than “into.” The Israelis were reluctant to present to us a detailed military plan, arguing that this could be dealt with in negotiations. They did, however, suggest a number of ways in which their military visibility could be reduced: (a) the most important would be the abolition of the offices of the military government which Weizman said would remove Israeli military government officials (about 500 personnel) from about 15 municipal centers; (b) some service schools now located on the West Bank could perhaps be relocated in Israel proper; (c) if any troop concentrations were in populated areas, they could perhaps be redeployed to other points on the West Bank; (d) battalions could be converted into companies. Dayan stressed that Israel’s objective was to take itself out of the daily lives of the local population, even including security functions

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX With respect to West Bank settlements, Dayan asked whether we had in mind freezing only the establishment of new settlements or also the number of people in existing settlements. Secretary Vance replied that President Carter had come to no final conclusion on this but our present thinking was that the freeze should apply to both new settlements and enlargement of existing settlements. Our concept was that there should be a freeze until a negotiated agreement was reached. Dayan said there was a link between Israel’s right to settle in the West Bank and its willingness to agree to the return of 1967 displaced persons. Israel had proposed the latter in its self-rule plan on the assumption that Israel would also be able to settle the West Bank during the interim period. Dayan suggested that there were three points that needed to be covered in dealing with the settlements problem: (a) the relationship between freezing settlements and the return of displaced persons; (b) the settlement of refugees in Gaza through building new housing for them; and (c) to establish a plan for a fixed number of Israeli settlements in the West Bank so that the Arabs would be reassured that Israel’s settlement plans were not unlimited and would not threaten to colonize the entire West Bank. Dr. Brzezinski thought this might be resolved by providing that the principle of unanimous approval by Israel and the local Administrative Council for the return of displaced persons should also be applied to the establishment of new settlements. The Vice President asked whether it was conceivable that this problem could be resolved by Israel’s accepting the principle of a freeze on settlements, so that Sadat could claim a victory, but with some flexibility in practice for Israel, with the details to be negotiated between Israel and the local Administrative Council. Dr. Brzezinski thought a solution might be possible by agreeing that there would be a freeze on unilateral settlement activity and by making all three points raised by Dayan the subject of an agreement by the parties—i.e., a fixed five-year settlement plan (Dayan indicated Israel had in mind 15–20 new settlements in the Jordan Valley comprising 100 families each); the return of about 100,000 displaced persons; and permanent housing for refugees in Gaza. Secretary Vance concluded this part of the discussion by saying that we would take note of what the Israelis had said and would reflect on it. Sinai Air Bases Picking up on the earlier discussion of Sinai settlements, Dayan said he wanted to try a “wild shot.” If the U.S. took over the air base near Yamit, could the latter be included in a zone under U.S. auspices; the U.S. base commander could have an Arab deputy for the Arab population in the zone, and an Israeli deputy for the Israelis. Weizman followed up by asking how serious was the possibility that the U.S. would

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Meeting: The Secretary first told Kamel about President Carter’s desire to have a meeting2 this evening with President Sadat and three members of the Egyptian side. Kamel said he would inform President Sadat. Kamel noted that after this morning’s tripartite meeting,3 Sadat was very relaxed. Egyptian Paper: The Secretary said that Sadat and Begin had begun to discuss the Egyptian paper.4 They had spent three hours on the subject and will

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX sisting that the settlements be removed overnight. It is a matter that can be discussed. The Vice President noted that it is difficult for Begin to waive the principle of Israeli settlements. Many Israelis do not like the settlements, but it is necessary to find some way to handle the matter. A five-year freeze in the West Bank should enable the subject to be handled through more permanent negotiations. Begin cannot abandon his life-long commitment to settlement activities. The Vice President and Secretary pointed out that another problem is that some of the settlements in the West Bank were built by Labor in unsettled areas; Begin, however, has built settlements in populated areas. Kamel agreed that this is a problem. Egypt, he said, cannot say now that some settlements might remain. The Palestinians and Jordanians must decide this. The Vice President noted that Egypt could say that it is opposed to all such settlements and believes they should be frozen. Kamel said that this sounded alright to him but Egypt cannot go beyond this. He would convey this idea to Sadat. West Bank: End of Transition Period: The Secretary then asked what Kamel foresees will happen at the end of five years as this concept is set forth in the Egyptian paper. Kamel responded that the Palestinians should at that time exercise their right of self-determination. Egypt can work with the Jordanians so that any Palestinian entity which emerges is linked with Jordan. The Secretary noted that previously three options had been cited for the end of the five-year period: (a) linkage with Jordan, (b) continuation of existing status, and (c) affiliation with Israel. Are these three still feasible? Kamel said that the last of the three will be troublesome to Egypt. He was convinced, however, that Egypt can work out the linkage-with-Jordan concept. King Hussein’s Role: Vice President Mondale noted that King Hussein is gunshy when it comes to the peace negotiations. Kamel responded that Hussein has for the past eleven years built for himself a secure state east of the Jordan. He is anxious to keep this. Prince Hassan is even more so when it comes to the West Bank. Vice President Mondale agreed that Hassan thinks the West Bank is trouble. Kamel observed that King Hussein does not think so. He would like to have the West Bank back. Hussein is admittedly cautious, but if the right framework is developed, he can be influenced. He was sure that the Saudis and the U.S. can help to influence Hussein. Kamel opined that when Sadat talked about negotiating

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX petroleum. The Secretary agreed, but noted such an article will only give rise to endless claims and counterclaims. Kamel pointed out that the Egyptian paper does not talk about damage to military installations. What is being talked about is compensation for damage to civilian installations. He suggested that the matter be taken up with President Sadat who has strong views on the matter. The Secretary observed that during the morning tripartite session, Begin had responded to this article by citing a possible $120 billion- Israeli-damage claim against Egypt. Security Arrangements: Vice President Mondale recalled that Sadat has often said he is open-minded on security arrangements. He asked about the possibility of existing security arrangements in the West Bank beyond the fiveyear transitional period. Kamel responded that the Egyptian idea is that after five years, Jordan and Egypt will assume security responsibility. The Palestinians and Israelis, he was convinced, should be able to coexist. They have many affinities during five years of trying to live in peace. Both sides will learn to live together. The Vice President and the Secretary agreed. Sinai Airfields: The Secretary then asked how the Sinai airfields issue might be resolved? Kamel responded that the Israelis should build airfields of their own in Israel. The Secretary said that the airfield near Eilat (Etzion) could be built elsewhere, but he wondered about the one near Arish. Kamel observed that Sadat is strongly opposed to having any Israeli airfields in Sinai. He suggested the matter be raised with Sadat. Compulsory ICJ Jurisdiction: The Secretary then asked about Article 4 of the Egyptian paper, having to do with compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. He asked if the Egyptians have any precedents for such compulsory ICJ jurisdiction? Maher thought there are some precedents and undertook to have the Egyptian lawyers look into the matter. Peace Treaties: The Secretary then asked about Article 6 having to do with peace treaties to be concluded three months after a framework was signed. He asked why “treaties” was in the plural? What did the Egyptians have in mind? Maher responded that the reference is to all of the parties concerned. Kamel elaborated by saying that the Egyptian paper envisages that the Jordanians and the Egyptians will sign peace treaties. The Secretary thought that something like “promptly” would be better than specifying a three-month time period. Kamel observed that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX on issues which had been discussed yesterday which produced some new qualifications. Just to deal with the review of the two issues from yesterday first: 1. Devolution of Authority. Secretary Vance stated his understanding that it was generally agreed that authority for the Palestinian self-governing authority would devolve from agreement among Israel, Egypt, and Jordan. Barak and Dayan indicated that they had not yet discussed this with the Prime Minister and would have to do so. Barak recalled that, in a Begin-Lewis conversation3 before Begin’s departure from Israel, the Prime Minister had suggested that authority would devolve from the Military Governor during the first two years of the transitional agreement and then, after that, from a Jordan-Israel-Egypt agreement. Both Secretary Vance and Dr. Brzezinski said they felt that the devolution from the three party agreement should come immediately and to introduce a phase of devolution from the Israeli military government would undercut the political advantage of enhancing an appearance of authority moving promptly to the West Bankers. Dayan said they would take this up with the Prime Minister. 2. Security/Withdrawal. Secretary Vance summarized his understanding that what is needed is Israeli withdrawal out of certain areas and stressed the political importance of reducing the Israeli presence. He felt there had been general agreement the previous afternoon on the principle subject to discussing details of the Israeli security presence that would remain. The main new point introduced on this subject was Barak’s question on whether the U.S. shares the Israeli view that this withdrawal would represent the full implementation of the principle of withdrawal in Resolution 242. In the exchange that followed, Secretary Vance responded that these moves would be an adequate fulfillment of the withdrawal principle during the transitional period but, since there will not be full implementation until the end of the transitional period, withdrawal in the interim period cannot be considered final implementation of the principles of 242. The bulk of the meeting was spent on the issues of sovereignty and the Israeli settlements. Sovereignty. Secretary Vance began by stating the U.S. view that, at the end of five years, there should be a decision on the future status and relationship of the West Bank/Gaza with its neighbors; that the Palestinians should participate in this decision; that the mechanism for decision on the final status and relationship should be negotiations among Israel, Jordan, Egypt, and the West Bank/Gaza authority.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Gaza. He stressed that acknowledging the right of the Palestinian Arabs to participate in the determination of their future does not mean that they would “take their territory with them.” He argued that allowing the Palestinian Arabs to make the decision on the future of the West Bank and Gaza put them in a position of deciding an important element of the Jewish future as well. Israel could not accept that. 3. He felt that deferring a decision on the status of the territories until after five years would allow for a decision on arrangements which would not be black and white. Here he was echoing Barak’s point on leaving sovereignty undefined. Settlements. Secretary Vance began this portion of the discussion by stating our tentative view that there might be a freeze on both the number of settlements and the number of people in the settlements. The future of the settlements would be decided in negotiations among Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and the Palestinian authority. He acknowledged that Israel does not agree with this position and believes there should be some additions in both categories. The Secretary acknowledged that the Sinai is different because there is a recognized international boundary and there is no question of sovereignty in the Sinai. There, we believe settlements should be removed. In response to questions from Weizman and Dayan, the Secretary reported that the idea of extending Gaza to include the Yamit settlements had been rejected and that individual Israeli buying of property in the West Bank is acceptable. Dayan then explained with some feeling why freezing the number of settlers is “absolutely impossible.” He said that no one counts people who go in and go out of a community except in prisons. He also said that the freezing of the number of new settlements would be unacceptable to the Israeli government and that pressing this issue would have repercussions on other issues. Specifically, he said he did not see how Israel could agree to large numbers of displaced persons returning to the West Bank if Israel’s right to allow new settlers to go to the West Bank had been frozen. If the settlements are frozen, Israel would have to impose its own freeze on other issues. Dayan then put forward Israel’s strategy for dealing with this issue. Israel would put forward a plan describing the number of settlements it proposed to install during the five-year transitional period, where they would be, and how they would acquire the land without confiscating it. By putting forward such a plan, Israel would impose on itself limitations on the settlements for five years and then would agree to the return of displaced persons and plans for settling the refugees permanently in Gaza. Secretary Vance suggested the following formulation: there will be no new settlements or expansion of existing settlements without the ap-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dayan on two occasions in this part of the discussion expressed his concern that the imposition of a freeze on settlements would very quickly be extended by the Arabs to apply to east Jerusalem, and Israel could not make itself vulnerable to that. Weizman emphasized the importance of the settlements in Israeli psychology. He said the whole of Israel had been made and defended on the basis of settlements. Secretary Brown noted that if Israel did not have the Israeli Defense Forces—as had been the case earlier in its history—Weizman would have a stronger argument. Weizman then asked Secretary Vance to confirm his understanding that the United States is saying all settlements should disappear. Secretary Vance replied, “In the Sinai, yes.” Secretary Vance then turned to Weizman and told him that President Sadat believes there is agreement between Weizman and Gamasy on the Sinai airfields. Weizman said that is not the case. Weizman then got out a map to explain how difficult it is for Israel to substitute for the Sinai airfields, particularly the one at Etzion near Eilat. Dayan thoughtfully suggested that maybe it would be possible to reach agreement at Camp David on the airfields so that only the issue of the settlements would stand between us and agreement. However, Dayan was not sure this issue could be negotiated with Sadat. Secretary Vance said tentatively he thought it would be desirable to try to resolve the airfield problem with Sadat at Camp David, but he said he would want to think about it and talk with the President. Weizman said he did not want to sound as if he were suggesting a tradeoff between the Sinai and the West Bank, but he thought that if Israel knew how the West Bank problem were to be solved, it would be much easier to deal with issues in the Sinai when the negotiations focus there again. Dayan thought Israel should try to reach agreement at Camp David between Sadat and Weizman on the military problems in the Sinai and then return to the issue of the settlements. He wondered if the Secretary would arrange another meeting between Weizman and Sadat. The Secretary replied by saying that he would want to give this more thought and then suggested that the conversation return to the West Bank. He said he understood what Dayan and Weizman had said about the settlements there, told them he did not find their arguments compelling but promised to report them to the President. Dayan reminded him for the third time that any freeze on settlements would ultimately come back to apply to Israeli population of annexed portions of east Jerusalem. Alluding again to his idea of a plan for the settlements, he said that we could perhaps deal with the Arab concern by applying a freeze at such points where the Arabs feel Israel will use the settlements to limit Arab activity on the West Bank.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egyptian Side: Mohamed Ibrahim Kamel, Minister of Foreign Affairs Ambassador Ahmed Maher el-Sayed, Director of the Cabinet of the Foreign Minister Ambassador Nabil el-Araby, Director of Legal Department, Foreign Ministry Dr. Osama el-Baz, Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs Dr. Boutros Boutros Ghali, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Dr. Ashraf Ghorbal, Ambassador of Egypt to the US Mr. Ahmed Abou el-Gheite, Office of the Foreign Minister Minister Abdul Rauf el-Reedy, Director of Policy Planning, Foreign Ministry Summary: Lengthy discussion of preference for compulsory ICJ jurisdiction and concern over (a) sovereignty issue in West Bank/Gaza, (b) Israeli settlements, (c) the return of Palestinian displaced persons and refugees, and (d) the future of Jerusalem. The Secretary said that Presidents Carter and Sadat would meet at 1600.3 They will discuss generally the nature of the US suggestions. We had not yet begun to write our suggestions, but will begin doing so tomorrow. We hope to get a draft4 to the Egyptian side tomorrow afternoon or Sunday. Vice President Mondale will be returning tomorrow, and his input will also be needed. The Secretary thought that our ideas will be acceptable to both President Sadat and President Carter. They will outline a general framework and will draw heavily on the Egyptian document. Kamel opined that the Egyptian proposal is in many parts consistent with United States positions. The Egyptians believe that their proposal should be accepted. He had told Sadat that the American and Egyptian Delegations would meet today. Sadat had approved such a meeting with all the Egyptian Delegation present. He then asked if we wanted any clarification on the Egyptian paper. Compulsory ICJ Jurisdiction: He asked where the concept of ICJ compulsory jurisdiction had come from. Are there any precedents for this? El-Baz responded that the concept had been taken from the ICJ yearbook for 1975–76. In that volume, he noted, there are recorded at least 100 agreements on compulsory ICJ jurisdiction. The Secretary asked if any peace treaties are included. El-Baz said no, but referred to a Chilean/Argentinian copyright convention, a UK/Ghanian loan agreement, and a number of other agreements, both bilateral and multilateral. El-Baz also noted that the Israelis had on October 3, 1956, accepted the concept of compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, admittedly with some reservations. Their declaration was not as exclusive as the Connally Amend-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Kamel agreed, and acknowledged that his impression was that President Carter favors the Begin plan with respect to self-government. He recalled that at the Leeds Castle conference,7 Egypt had also put forward ideas on the subject. The Secretary said that we take exception to the Egyptian idea that Jordanian and Egyptian authority should prevail in the West Bank and Gaza during the interim period. We believe authority for the self-governing authority should flow from Jordan, Egypt and Israel. There should be an election for representatives of the Palestinians who will govern. Kamel thought that Jordanian/Palestinian and Egyptian/Palestinian relationships are enough for the interim period. Why should Israel participate in self-rule? Saunders noted that the Secretary had been speaking of an agreement which would provide authority to the government. He had not been talking about Israeli involvement. The Secretary observed that the Israelis would withdraw. Saunders pointed to the difference between our concept and that of the Begin Plan, which speaks of authority deriving from the military government. This, the Secretary noted, is not acceptable to us. Saunders stressed that under our idea, authority would devolve from the three governments— Egypt, Jordan and Israel. They would set up the mechanism for local elections. El-Reedy asked about our interpretation of this difference in terms of the consequences for self-government? The Secretary said he had read the Egyptian proposal as suggesting a continuing supervisory role by Jordan and Egypt. This is not good. Authority should be gotten to the people as quickly as possible. Saunders noted that the Egyptian plan at Leeds Castle turned over authority to Jordan and Egypt jointly. This is not realistic. The Israelis are in the West Bank and Gaza. Hence, agreement by the three is better than any unilateral Israeli authority. El-Reedy asked if this suggests a role for Israel. Saunders said only insofar as the defined agreement on security is concerned. There would be no role in government. Security, possibly immigration and some other matters might be handled through a committee. The Secretary said we would have to find areas where such committee supervision is needed. Quandt noted that, under the Israeli plan, authority derives from the military authority. It can be revoked at any time. This is not acceptable. El-Baz recalled that El-Araby had alluded to United States thinking in terms of beginning the self-government role. What about termination of that role? Would this transpire in the same manner? The Secretary thought there would have to be a provision indicating what happens at the end of five years and how to proceed. This should depend in a major way on the will of the people. Saunders observed that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX cise. The Secretary reiterated that the alternative “will have to be limited.” El-Araby observed that only the Palestinians can decide this. The Secretary noted that we cannot say this. El-Baz asked who else might come into the process. The Secretary said that King Hussein could come in. Hussein has not foregone the Jordanian claim to the West Bank. Nor has Israel foregone its claim. El-Baz said Sadat had told President Carter that Israel has no right to claim sovereignty in the West Bank and Gaza. The Secretary recalled that in recent years it has been the practice that the people on the land where conflicting claims exist have the right to determine their own future. El-Baz argued that if the issue is left vague, Israel has a privileged claim on sovereignty until the last minute. This is an unbalanced arrangement. It will reopen the whole issue at the end of the transitional period. There is no mechanism to ensure Israeli departure. The Secretary said we assume that in the transition period talks will take place between the Palestinians and Jordan on what happens afterwards. El-Baz argued that the Israeli objective is to keep the West Bank. Jordan, he insisted, does not claim it. Egypt could go to King Hussein to obtain his renunciation of the Jordanian claim, should this be required. Association between Jordan and the West Bank and Gaza should be left to the Palestinians. The Government of Egypt says it favors such a link in advance. Egypt will also push for this. But in the final analysis, the Palestinians should decide. If the issue is left floating, it will appear that the entire Palestinian problem is unresolved. We should agree that the question of sovereignty not be left to negotiation. Quandt said that sovereignty is the word that upsets everyone. The final status, he noted, should be decided at the end of five years. Why should we now try to get into the sovereignty question and create problems for ourselves. El-Baz responded that the reason is that the Israelis are mentioning the issue. El-Reedy said that the Israelis are introducing sovereignty in order to confuse their obligation to withdraw under UN Resolution 242. The introduction of the sovereignty issue was done to make the West Bank/ Gaza appear as disputed territory. Egypt never claimed sovereign rights in Gaza. It simply administered the area under an armistice agreement. Jordan was in the West Bank in the same manner. The late King Abdullah moved into the West Bank in 1950. His takeover was challenged by the Arab League and was not recognized. In 1967, after UN Resolution 242, everyone talked of the return of the West Bank to Jordan. At the same time a Palestinian national movement emerged. At the Rabat Summit9 a decision was reached that the party to which au- 9 Reference is to the October 1974 Arab Summit conference held at Rabat, Morocco. For documentation on this conference, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXVI, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1974–1976.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX El-Reedy referred to Atherton’s statement that sovereignty will be decided in the peace treaties. He asked whether this means that we cannot now know what a peace treaty will look like. Atherton commented that the peace treaty will be based on the principles of UN Resolution 242, including withdrawal. El-Reedy commented that eleven years after the passage of 242, why is it not possible to say that the Israeli claim to sovereignty is not acceptable. This should by now be clear. El-Araby asked whether that if the assumption is made that the Palestinians will wish to join Jordan at the end of five years, will Israel be able to veto this and continue proposed arrangements for five years to fifty years. Egypt is not against a limited choice. El-Baz said that when Egypt accepted the right to a limitation on self-determination, it never thought that the sovereignty issue would be involved. Egypt cannot accept anything that keeps the sovereignty question open for five years. Quandt observed that there is no such thing as absolute sovereignty. Two elements must be worked out: (a) borders, which may require adjustments, and (b) security, which may dilute some aspects of sovereignty. El-Baz said that Egypt considers that sovereignty rests with the Palestinians. Ghorbal noted that we are coping with two diametrically opposed viewpoints—that of the Israelis and that of the Egyptians. The United States is trying to put off the issue. It cannot be put that way. Egypt agreed to a limited exercise of sovereignty in order to satisfy the security needs of Israel. Egypt said it would direct the Palestinian entity into a link with Jordan. But Egypt cannot accept dissolution of the Palestinians into a greater Israeli state. The Israelis want the West Bank and Gaza to satisfy their expansionist ambitions. We cannot paper over the differences. He likened the issue to the UAR/Syrian union,10 which was “an act of sovereignty.” Egypt cannot accept a link of the West Bank and Israel. It cannot accept what it has put forward for Israel’s security, namely Israeli expansion in five years. The Secretary asked how the question of sovereignty should be resolved. Ghorbal responded that the United States had worked on Sadat to make peace and to normalize relations. Now there must be a political decision also to press the Israelis. El-Baz observed that the Israeli claim to sovereignty does not mean anything. Sovereignty rests with the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, he reiterated. The type of entity and self-determination can be resolved. But on sovereignty in the West Bank there can be no legitimate problem. If Israel agrees to withdraw, it is a renunciation of the Israeli

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX malizing relations. It should be left to the future to see how this works out, but the Israelis should not be able to use their armed forces to achieve their aims in the West Bank and Gaza. Dr. Brzezinski asked how this would come about. Ghorbal responded that the United States had seen how, despite its statements, the Israelis have gone ahead to do what they wish. Brzezinski thought that we should talk about some of the details of the five-year arrangements, e.g., a freeze on settlements. Let us suppose, he stated, that as a result of our efforts the Israelis get out of Sinai, in the West Bank the military occupation is limited, there is a reduction of Israeli forces, a self-governing authority is set up, and there is a freeze on settlements. There might also be a return of some divided families. This process will require five years in itself. It will transform the political realities of the West Bank. This is what the United States is aiming at. We have to talk about tangibles and we have to work with Egypt to achieve this. Ghorbal commented that this must also be present in the Israeli minds. Brzezinski reiterated that we must create conditions to manage this type of situation. Five years is not a great deal of time. We need to nail down specifics: e.g., the end of the occupation, the nature of the strong points, etc. We should not seek now to solve hypothetical problems. Israel, he noted, would even be willing to solve the Golan problem if Syria is ready. In Sinai, the Israelis are willing to do so. In the West Bank, the Israeli presence will be significantly reduced. These are all tangible benefits. Kamel said he was astounded that the United States should accept the Israeli claim to sovereignty in the West Bank. Egypt will not accept this. It is out of the question. The Secretary pointed out that one cannot stop the Israelis from asserting their claim. Kamel responded that sovereignty is inherent in the Palestinians. The Israelis have to return everything. Brzezinski noted that we are seeking a process that will go ahead. The Secretary noted that sovereignty is not mentioned in the agreement, but that this is an underlying reality. The Secretary said there must be some kind of a misunderstanding. Kamel appeared to believe that we support the Israeli claim to sovereignty. This is not so. All the Secretary had said is that Israel may be expected to make its claim to sovereignty. The United States does not support that claim. Brzezinski added that we will not force the Israelis. We will, however, create conditions that will change the situation in the Arab favor. El-Baz said that Egypt can endorse this concept if any reference to sovereignty is omitted. The Secretary said we will not say anything on sovereignty. (This concluded a long, turgid talk on the sovereignty issues.) Settlements: The Secretary then turned to the matter of the Israeli settlements. He pointed out that we consider them illegal. In Sinai, we believe they should be eliminated over a period of time. In the West

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX To implement it, however, one must look at alternatives. Detailed plans have never been developed. Boutros Ghali said that one of the American viewpoints seems to be to postpone all basic problems regarding the Palestinians for five years. The Egyptian view is to have some general principles so that the program can be sold to the Palestinians and the other Arabs. If it is different in Sinai and the West Bank, it makes it difficult for Egypt. Egypt would like the maximum of general principles which can give security and guarantee to the Palestinians. He suggested that a freeze and abolition be applied to Sinai settlements as well. El-Baz said Egypt accepts the concept of freezing. The starting point should be that settlements are illegal and ways should be sought to liquidate the settlements everywhere. In the West Bank one must look for a special formula to liquidate the settlements over a period of time. Dr. Brzezinski said we are not entirely seeking to postpone these issues. We recognize there is a difference in the West Bank/Gaza, and the problem that this poses for Egypt. The Egyptian judgment will have to prevail. The resolution of the Sinai and West Bank problems cannot be identical. The emotional context of the West Bank problem is difficult. The United States is seeking to reverse fundamental trends. We would like to solve the Sinai effort right away, depending on the Egyptian judgment. In the West Bank, we want to begin a process that is a fundamental reversal. In five-years time, the situation should be greatly changed. Kamel observed that any proposal on settlements should include a freeze and a statement that they are illegal. Quandt asked if the Egyptians want the Sinai settlements dealt with separately. Kamel responded in the negative. El-Reedy asked about the reaction to Palestinians outside the West Bank. Should there be a role for them? Saunders said that the people must begin to think of alternatives. The present situation is unsatisfactory. The process we are talking about begins something called Palestinian. El-Araby referred to the displaced persons and to the refugees. Saunders said we are talking about more than a million people. How can all of them be moved? The displaced persons number about 100,000; the West Bank cannot absorb all of these. Time will be needed to settle the matter. Quandt observed that Dayan agrees with the Egyptians on this matter. There will be terrible human difficulties. But all agree that the Palestinians have rights. El-Araby said these rights and principles should be reaffirmed and then a mechanism should be set up to implement them. El-Baz talked of restating the principle and working out modalities for implementation. Atherton commented that if one gets a framework and a reversal of present trends, some Pales-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel (Lewis)1 Camp David, September 8, 1978 [Omitted here is Lewis’s brief handwritten notation on bilateral U.S.-Israeli discussion beginning at 5 p.m., Thursday, September 7. For the memorandum of conversation of this meeting, see Document 34.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Draft Text Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders)1 undated A FRAMEWORK FOR PEACE IN THE MIDDLE EAST AGREED AT CAMP DAVID Anwar al-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of Egypt, and Menachem Begin, Prime Minister of Israel met with Jimmy Carter, President of the United States of America, at Camp David from September 5 to , 1978, and have agreed on the following framework for peace in the Middle East. They invite other parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict to adhere to it. Preamble The search for peace in the Middle East must be guided by the following: —After four wars over thirty years, despite intensive human efforts, the Middle East, which is the cradle of civilization and the birthplace of three great religions, does not yet enjoy the blessings of peace. The people of the Middle East yearn for peace so that the vast resources of the region can be turned to the pursuits of peace and so that this area can become a model for coexistence and cooperation among nations. —The historic initiative of President Sadat and Israel’s warm reception of his mission have created an unprecedented opportunity for peace which must not be lost if the peoples of the Middle East are to spare this generation and the generations to come the tragedies of war. —The provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration of Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation Among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and the accepted norms of international law and legitimacy now provide accepted standards for the conduct of relations among all states. —The only agreed basis for a peaceful settlement of the Arab- Israeli conflict is United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 sup-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Nations. They also undertake to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice with respect to all disputes emanating from the application or the interpretation of their contractual arrangements. 3. In order to achieve peace between them, they have agreed to negotiate within three months from the signing of this “Framework” a peace treaty between them.4 In response to Egypt’s offer of full peace and normal relations, Israel has proposed the restoration of the exercise of full Egyptian sovereignty in the Sinai up to the internationally recognized border between Egypt and Israel. Security arrangements, the timing of withdrawal of all Israeli forces and settlements,5 and the elements of a normal, peaceful relationship have been discussed and will be defined in the peace treaty. 4. They will participate in negotiations on resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects. The solution must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and enable the Palestinians to participate in the determination of their own future. To this end, they agree that agreements relating to the West Bank and Gaza should be reached in three stages:6 (a) Egypt and Israel hereby agree that, in order to ensure a peaceful and orderly transfer of authority, there should be a transitional period not exceeding five years. They further agree that the Israeli military government will be abolished and withdrawn as soon as a government shall be freely elected by the inhabitants of these areas to replace the existing military government. This transitional arrangement should derive its authority from an agreement concluded among Israel, Jordan, and Egypt. To negotiate the details of a transitional arrangement, the Government of Jordan will be invited to join the negotiations on the basis of this agreement.7 Palestinian advisers selected by Jordan and Egypt may be members of their delegations. The establishment of the new regime should give due consideration both to the principle of selfgovernment by the inhabitants of these territories and to the legitimate security concerns of all the parties. (b) Egypt, Israel, and Jordan should meet to negotiate an agreement to end Israel’s military government in the West Bank and Gaza and to establish the elected interim government there.8 This agreement would define the authorities of the interim government. It would in- 4 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “promptly.” 5 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this clause, Vance wrote “from Sinai.” 6 A blank half-page follows this phrase. At the bottom of the page, a typewritten notation reads “. . . more.” 7 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “full autonomy.” 8 In the left-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Vance wrote “X.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 6. During these negotiations10 no new Israeli settlements will be established, and there will be no expansion of facilities in existing settlements. 7. Jerusalem, the city of peace, must not again be divided by the instruments of war. It is a city holy to Christian, Jew, and Muslim, and all must have free access to it. For peace to endure, each community in Jerusalem must be able to express freely its cultural and religious values in an acceptable political framework. An agreement on relationships in Jerusalem should be reached in the negotiations dealing with the West Bank and Gaza. 8. They agree to consult with each other and with other interested parties on a just solution of the refugee problem. 9. Synchronized with the implementation of the provisions related to withdrawal, they shall proceed to establish among them relationships normal to States at peace with one another. To this end, they undertake to abide by all the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. Steps taken in this respect include: (a) Full recognition. (b) Abolishing economic boycott. (c) Ensuring the freedom of passage through the Suez Canal. (d) Guaranteeing that under their jurisdiction the citizens of the other Parties shall enjoy the protection of the due process of law. (e) Encouraging the free movement of people and goods. 10. In all of the negotiations described above, they will arrange to guarantee the security, sovereignty, territorial integrity and inviolability and the political independence of each State negotiating peace through measures such as the following: (a) The establishment of demilitarized zones. (b) The establishment of limited armament zones. (c) The stationing of United Nations forces or observer groups as agreed. (d) The stationing of early warning systems on the basis of reciprocity. (e) Regulating the acquisition of arms by the Parties and the type of their armament and weapons systems. (f) The adherence by all the Parties to the Treaty on the Non- Proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Parties undertake not to manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. 10 Vance put brackets around the phrase “During these negotiations,” underlined “these negotiations,” and placed a checkmark in the left-hand margin adjacent to the sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. Can Egypt and Israel reach any kind of agreement just between the two of them (by implication, without the US as a party)? Sadat said no. 2. Will Sadat agree to an Israeli military presence in the West Bank/Gaza after five years? Sadat said no. 3. Will Sadat agree that the Yamit/Rafah area could be joined to Gaza district? Sadat said no. 4. Will Sadat agree to open borders and diplomatic relations? Sadat said he would recognize Israel, but that the other matters pertained to sovereignty and he would not agree to them. 5. Weizman asked if Israel could keep the Etzion airfield near Eilat if they gave up Eitan in the north? Sadat said no, but he would help them build a new airport in Israel and they could keep Etzion for the two years until withdrawal was completed.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX over the other—all this would mean a defeat for the unity and independence of Lebanon as well as more violence, bloodshed and destruction. Thereupon, Syria assumed its national and brotherly responsibility towards Lebanon and sent units of its armed forces to stop fighting, restore peace, foil acts aiming at partition and maintain the unity and national safety of Lebanon. In this effort, Syria clashed with parties with whom we have political and emotional ties, including the Palestinians. The Syrian units made use of some of the means available to them to stop the fighting and to maintain the national balance in Lebanon, nothwithstanding the psychological effects produced on us by this use. But we regarded the interests of Lebanon and the restoration of peace to its territories more important than the suffering, burdens and losses we endured. Thus, fighting was stopped and peace was restored to all parts of Lebanon. 3. During the period of calm which followed, we tried to make the Lebanese Government play a more effective role in achieving national reconciliation and building up a national army which enjoys the confidence of all parties, because it is nationally constituted and because it owes allegiance only to the state and not to armed factions or to leaderships produced by the civil war. We did this in the belief that a country’s army should symbolize the national aspirations of its citizens as well as their desire for peace and stability. Unfortunately, however, no part of all this could be effected because the Falangists and the Chamounites placed obstacles in the way of the endeavors of the Lebanese Government to produce national reconcilation, commence a national dialogue, form a Council of Ministers embracing all parties, restore the institutions of the State and impose its authority in all Lebanese territories. In addition to rejecting the reconstruction of the Lebanese Army whose unity had been shattered by the civil war, they tied up the majority of its officers and military personnel with the “Military Council of the Lebanese Front” and thereby prevented the President of the Republic of Lebanon and his government from taking any effective measures related to the armed forces. They furthermore resorted to all means to achieve their aim—including threats of murder and terror—and did all this so that officers of the Army would serve them and would not serve the State of Lebanon. 4. During that period we displayed a measure of tolerance and flexibility beyond belief. We did this in the hope that time would persuade the deviating parties to go back to the right path and to restore to the central Government of Lebanon and authorities usurped by them. In fact they have been exerting authority to levy taxes, control education and public services and commit incredible acts of brutality against citizens in the areas over which they have imposed their authority. The Falangists and the Chamounites who performed these acts adopted

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX defend law and public order without awaiting a specific order, the act being of the very essence of their tasks and duties. 9. In this connection, reference should be made to the campaign currently being launched by the Israeli information media on the subject of an alleged liquidation of Christians in Lebanon. I very much wish that in relation to this campaign you would recall the acts and practices of Israel against the Palestinians—Christians and Muslims alike. When the Christians were hard pressed in the civil war in Lebanon, Syria alone assumed the responsibility for relieving pressure and restoring balance to the Lebanese arena. I hope you are not unaware of the fact that the overwhelming majority of the Lebanese Christians are opposed to the policies and practices of the Phalangists and Chamounites, as has been declared by a large number of their leaders. Moreover, the Christians living in the areas controlled by the peacekeeping forces enjoy excellent conditions of life. If the whole question were sectarian in nature, why is it, it may be asked, that fighting breaks out only in a limited section of Beirut? The fact is that the Christians in Lebanon, like the Muslims, are opposed to the acts of violence practiced by the Phalangists and Chamounites with Israeli instigation. They are all in favour of the unity of the country and of restoring the authority of the State to all parts of Lebanon. 10. It should also be noted here that the talk now being carried on by the Israelis and Zionists concerning alleged persecution of Christians—who constitute part of our nation and cannot be subjected to persecution by anyone—is reminiscent of the European practice in the 19th century—which is now part of history—of using the pretext of the protection of minorities in order to cover intervention in some areas and to impose European colonialism. A more important consideration is that this talk will lead the Islamic world to talk about the fate of the Muslims of Lebanon, considering that Lebanon, by its very social structure, consists of several sects and communities. Such trends, Mr. President, will surely lead to the destruction of the national unity of Lebanon, which is a matter of the utmost significance to all the citizens of Lebanon. 11. While thanking you for the letter in which you expressed concern over the present situation in Lebanon—a concern which I share with you, I believe that the United States can greatly help the sister state of Lebanon by exerting pressure to make the Israeli Government stop its intervention in Lebanon and discontinue the military, material and political support which it gives to some armed groups—a support that encourages acts which contradict what both our governments have declared concerning the security, peace, sovereignty and unity of Leb-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX aegis of the Arab self-governing council. Would it be possible for the U.S. to finance this resettlement? The Secretary replied that he would not rule it out and asked whether Dayan could provide a rough estimate of the cost, which Dayan said he would do. (Later in the day, Rubenstein told Ambassador Lewis that a very rough estimate of the cost involved would be $200 million.) Dayan then said he was hard pressed to know how best to pursue the question of detailed negotiations over Sinai here at Camp David. Would it have to be done between Begin and Sadat, or rather between Sadat and Weizman? (At this point in the conversation Weizman and Tamir along with the other participants joined the discussion.) Secretary Vance asked Weizman if he would please review his understandings with Sadat and Gamasy with respect to security zones in the Sinai. Weizman replied that Sadat insists that the air bases must be totally out within two years along with all Israeli settlements. He would agree to limiting his troops across the Canal to one infantry division with approximately 200 tanks between the Canal and the Mitla Pass. Various “frontier force” units would be spread out East of the Mitla. (Weizman said that this was all a bit confusing, however, since Sadat at one point in Salzburg4 had talked about needing only one brigade of troops throughout the Sinai.) There would be UN forces stationed at Sharm el-Sheikh and elsewhere along the eastern borders of Sinai, although Sadat really would prefer to have all UN forces out. Any electronic early warning systems retained would have to be based on the principle of reciprocity. (Here Weizman added that the Israelis would prefer to give up electronic warning sites of their own in Sinai if having them meant that there would have to be Egyptian sites within Israel proper. But perhaps U.S. monitoring sites of the type now at the Sinai Field Mission could substitute.) Weizman said that Sadat had spoken of a general thinning out of his overall forces, cutting back substantially from the present level of 750,000 men under arms. Weizman then made clear that he saw no difficulty making firm decisions on the various security zones once Israel had made a clear decision to get totally out of Sinai. But he made clear there was no such decision at present because the Israelis cannot accept Sadat’s insistence that their settlements be dismantled. One other unresolved issue was whether or not Sadat would insist on having his own military aircraft east of the passes at bases like Bir Gifgafa. 4 Reference is to the July 13 meetings between Sadat and Weizman in Salzburg, Austria. For documentation on these meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX mid-afternoon, after Sadat had returned from his meeting with President Carter.2 The Egyptians had thereafter had a brief meeting with Sadat, who had given them some instructions. Kamel then said that the Egyptian side had found the American paper3 “perplexing.” It was not “coherent.” It had given them a great deal of trouble. Things are scattered throughout the paper, and the Egyptians were having trouble following exactly what has been meant. The Secretary asked about the nature of Kamel’s concerns. Kamel said the Egyptian side feels it is necessary to study our paper carefully. It is now in the process of doing so. The Secretary stressed that we want the Egyptian views on where they believe the paper is deficient and what should be done about it. Ghorbal stated that the Egyptians are doing exactly that. He indicated that the Egyptians agreed with what Eilts had suggested, namely, that the Egyptians present us with specific textual suggestions. The Secretary then again asked Kamel for precise indications of where the Egyptians believe our paper is deficient. Reading from a handwritten memorandum, Kamel indicated the following: A. First, the Egyptians believe our paper is a departure from previously expressed American positions. Specifically, in the withdrawal language on the West Bank, there is no mention of the ’49 lines. The Egyptian side had expected that there would be a reference to a return to the ’49 lines with minor recitifications. The Secretary told Kamel that this subject had been discussed between Sadat and President Carter. The language included was that agreed upon by Sadat. Kamel was a bit nonplused, but responded that we should recognize that the Egyptian side must first study the document before agreeing on specific language. There must have been some misunderstanding if President Carter got the impression that Sadat is in total agreement. Sadat, Kamel pointed out, is “shy” and wants to be polite. As Kamel understood it, Sadat had only agreed with President Carter that the paper would be referred to the Egyptian Delegation in order to obtain the latter’s observations. These were the instructions that Sadat had given to the Egyptian Delegation. Sadat wants the Egyptian Delegation to scrutinize the paper. Kamel apologized profusely for any wrong impression that might have been given. Ghorbal added that Sadat had read what President Carter gave him, but that Sadat’s comments had been preliminary and off-the-cuff. They were neither complete nor were they intended to be a final judgment. Kamel went on to say that Sadat had said he would agree to anything so long as land and sovereignty are excluded. “We are Egyp-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Kamel insisted that the way the term is used elsewhere in the paper is also different. There were frequent references to the “inhabitants” rather than to the Palestinians. The Secretary thought that “Palestinians” is used throughout the paper. Kamel said this is not the case. D. Kamel then turned to another objection, namely the reference to the refugees. This, he noted, departs from previous statements on the subject. There is no reference to UN Resolution 1945 or to other UNGA Resolutions having to do with the Palestinian refugees. Moreover, Palestinian and Jewish refugees had been mentioned in the same context. The Secretary commented that he was aware of the Egyptian views, but that he thought they might be wrong. The Jewish refugees also have rights. Ghorbal insisted that the equation distorts what had been agreed upon unilaterally with respect to the Palestinian refugees for many years. The Secretary noted that we have talked about the admission of displaced persons and refugees to the West Bank and also about the need for an overall settlement of the refugee problem. Ahmed Maher stated that the Jewish refugee matter is a totally different problem. The doctrine of Israel, he recalled, is that Jews anywhere in the world should go back to Israel. This is the essence of the “return law.” How in such circumstances, he asked, can the Israelis argue that people who are returning under this law can properly be considered as refugees. The Secretary urged that the Egyptians read the appropriate language again. He thought that if they consider it carefully, it should not give them too much problem. Kamel commented that the Egyptians have always taken it for granted that displaced persons should be allowed to return to the West Bank and Gaza. Under our language the Israelis have a veto on these people as well as the refugees. The requirement for unanimous agreement gives them this veto. The language of our paper, he stressed, deeply troubles the Egyptians. The Secretary responded that part of the language on this subject comes directly from Sadat. He would be happy to look at any other language that the Egyptians might propose, but he wanted to stress that Sadat’s very words were used in some of the language having to do with displaced persons and refugees. Again, Kamel was nonplused. He recalled that when the Secretary was in Alexandria, he had tried to explain to him that Sadat is looking as an objective to a real peace, but that the President’s phrasing is not always felicitous. The Secretary again noted that we will look at any language the Egyptians care to suggest. We cannot guarantee to accept it, but they could be sure that we will carefully study it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Kamel contended that a major problem with the paper is that all of the obligations are on the Egyptian side. He continued that the only Israeli obligation is to negotiate. Ghorbal reiterated that in many instances there has been an erosion of previous American positions. The United States should not allow this to take place. The Secretary again asked that the Egyptian ideas be given to us. Kamel said this will be done, but he pleaded that we take into consideration the overall effect that the document will have in the Middle East. The United States, he emphasized, needs a strong Sadat. Sadat is a proud man. What is at stake is implementation of Resolution 242 and the establishment of peace. Eilts pointed out that great care has been given in developing the document to ensure that Sadat is not discredited in the area. The Secretary affirmed this. Ghorbal noted that this is essential. Kamel observed that the Egyptians hope the present meeting will come out with something positive. But there are things in the American paper that Egypt can never accept. He reiterated that the sole Israeli obligation is to negotiate. The Secretary denied this, noting that the Israelis also have the obligation to withdraw and to negotiate their secure borders. Withdrawal, he noted, is fundamental, withdrawal in return for peace and security. Kamel reiterated that the West Bank language in our paper is unacceptable. Ghorbal added that it is not consistent with previously expressed American principles. Negotiation of minor changes has always been the American concept. Egypt and the United States must be sure that the language is not simply the language that Israel wants. Unless this is done, it will defeat the purpose of the entire effort. Ghorbal expressed appreciation for the efforts of President Carter, Secretary Vance, and the United States Government. Eilts asked how tomorrow’s scenario will work out. Kamel noted that Sadat will meet with President Carter at 10:30 and with the Egyptian Delegation afterwards. Sadat had indicated that he wants to see the Egyptian paper at that time. The Secretary suggested that it is important that Sadat see the Egyptian paper or at least have the Egyptian Delegation’s ideas before he meets with President Carter. The Egyptian Delegation was clearly embarrassed. Ghorbal said the Egyptians will try to arrange this. If there is no time for Sadat to read it before his meeting with President Carter, the Egyptian Delegation will alert us to their idea later. Kamel reiterated this, but expressed personal frustration that Sadat seemed to be unwilling to read the Egyptian paper before he meets with President Carter. He wants to do so afterwards. Eilts suggested that, if the Secretary and Kamel agreed, he would be willing to go over to Sadat’s bungalow and suggest, in behalf of Secretary

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX he understood this, but that it would have been much easier for the Egyptians to swallow had we given them a copy of our initial paper at the outset. It is now viewed in Egyptian eyes as a U.S.-Israeli paper no matter what we say about it. Kamel had not wanted to say this to the Secretary, but we should know that this is one of the principal Egyptian gripes about it. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to Dayan’s idea of an ultimate fallback position for Camp David centered on agreement with regard to the West Bank and Gaza procedures and prospects. In this connection, he stressed that the difficult language of general applicability is intended to apply ultimately to peace treaties, and there are no peace treaties anticipated for the West Bank and Gaza until the five years have elapsed. He therefore believes it would be sad to hang up over general language for this area when agreement on the actual procedures may be within reach. With regard to joint patrolling with Egyptians and Jordanians, Dayan said again that he would not rule out joint Egyptian-Israeli patrols on the narrow 3-mile international border between the Gaza Strip and Sinai. He very strongly rejected any possibility of involvement by Egyptian police or military with the Gaza police, but would accept Jordanian police advisers in Gaza, if needed. He was negative about joint coastal patrolling of the Gaza Strip, but did not absolutely rule it out. What came through most clearly was Israeli determination not to have Egyptian military involvement inside Gaza ever again. Jordanian involvement would be acceptable, and would be consistent with the Israeli desire to join the Gaza to the West Bank for future administrative purposes. Dayan talked at some length during our conversation about Sadat’s recently reported rejection of UN forces along the buffer zone between Israel and the Sinai. He said that, contrary to what they had understood about Sadat’s views earlier, they now were told that Egyptian civilians would have to man the air bases at Sharm, Etzion, and Etam. He said he could not see any way in which this would be acceptable, while on the other hand a UN force could perhaps operate or administer all three airports for civilian use, if the US continued unable [or] unwilling to take over Etam. Etzion, for example, would be a very useful civilian airport for Eilat, assuming freedom of movement back and forth across the border between Eilat and Etzion; but this arrangement would only be feasible if it were under UN control and not available overnight for Egyptian military to re-occupy it, as would be the case if Egyptian civilians were administering it or the other airports. The same reasoning ran to the use of the port facilities at Sharm. (Defense Minister Weizman had made some of the same points to Secretary Vance on September 113 with regard to the airfields, although he had stressed the great desirability of retraining Etzion for a much longer period for Israeli military use. If it had to be given up for military purposes, he said it would be vital for Israel to obtain a promise in the agreement to use the air space over the buffer zone along the fron- 3 See Document 43.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prior to discussing the U.S. paper3 in detail, he wished to outline a number of points on which the U.S. and Egypt are in agreement: (a) the desire to keep and to preserve the relationship between our two countries, (b) concern that a comprehensive and just peaceful settlement be reached. The results should be such that it will attract others to join, (c) whatever settlement is reached must “fortify” Egypt and strengthen the moderate states of the (Middle East) area in order to enable them to meet the “dangerous trends” that are now spreading in that area, (d) we must prevent chaos from developing in the area and be alive to the dangers of Soviet penetration. This means that conditions should not be created which have the effect of distorting the U.S. image in the area. The Secretary said that we agree on all four points. He called the maintenance of the U.S.-Egyptian relationship vital. There must be a comprehensive settlement. We wish the result of the Camp David meetings to fortify Egypt, to protect Sadat, and to underscore Sadat’s paramount position in the Arab world. We have great respect for President Sadat as a true leader. We agree that world chaos should be avoided as should anything that jeopardizes the moderate forces in the area. Kamel went on to say that the Egyptian side has carefully studied our paper. He was happy that we welcome any proposals that the Egyptians might wish to put forward. The Egyptian proposals, he said, aim at creating a balance between the obligations of the parties. As he saw it, the American proposal in its present form will in no way obtain Saudi approval. He thought that we are in agreement that Saudi support is needed. Hussein will also be reluctant to join. Hussein’s participation, Kamel stressed, is essential. The Egyptian position, Kamel recalled, is explained in the paper which the Egyptian side had earlier presented to us. It is based on (a) a balance of obligations between the parties, (b) insuring Israeli withdrawal to the ’67 lines except for minor rectifications, (c) insuring the security of all parties, (d) respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all states and for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, (e) the participation of all parties. Kamel then asked el-Baz to present the details of the Egyptian ideas. El-Baz first explained what he called the “Egyptian approach” to the U.S. formula. The Egyptians had come, he stated, with the objective of reaching agreement. By this they meant agreement with the “other party.” A fortiori they wish to reach agreement with the U.S. in order to see if there is common ground between us. The Egyptians are positive 3 The specific version of the draft Framework paper is not further identified. See footnote 53, Document 28.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX provision, in particular, should give no problem, since as early as October, 1956, Israel accepted the concept of compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, (d) the concept of UN Security Council guarantee of borders. The latter, el-Baz argued, should be in the interest of every party to the dispute. The Secretary explained that these omissions were prompted by our belief that if certain declarations are cited, the Israelis will wish to add their own list of citations. We want to achieve the objectives of the Egyptian proposal within specific reference to a series of documents. On compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, he noted that when the Israelis signed this agreement, they specifically excluded its applicability to Arab- Israeli matters. The Israelis do not believe that the ICJ is unbiased. If there were some method other than the ICJ, it might be more palatable. On borders, the Secretary pointed out that we have covered this in paragraph 7 of the American paper. Our language is simpler, but the Egyptian concept is included. El-Baz commented that Israel appears to be seeking to force Egypt to accept only one method in resolving disputes. This method is uninterrupted negotiations, even if these lead to no progress. Article 33 of the United Nations Charter, which the American paper cites, speaks of other methods of resolving disputes. Israel regrettably thinks it can deal with the Arabs on the basis of the de facto situation. The Secretary suggested that the Egyptians make their suggestion on this point. Nabil el-Araby observed that the methods of settling disputes are contained in Article 33 of the United Nations Charter. The article leaves it to the parties to choose the method they wish to employ. Why should the method of direct negotiations be singled out? The Secretary responded that we have not singled out any method. The ICJ language has been taken out. El-Baz then commented that in the Egyptian paper, there had been the proposal that all parties agree to the NPT. The Egyptians had assumed this would meet with enthusiastic American approval. The (nuclear) issue creates a special element of tension in the area. It gives psychological and physical concern to both sides. There is no need, el-Baz argued, to accommodate the Israelis on this point. El-Baz then said he wished to make some specific comments: A. The Palestinian problem: This, he noted, is the crux of the issue. The formulation and concept to resolve it must be clear. The sovereign rights of the (Palestinian) people must be clear. He understood that the Egyptian and American positions on this are similar. If one begins from this assumption, one must go on to say that in principle, Israel is obligated to withdraw in the West Bank/Gaza in accordance with the “inadmissibility” language. El-Baz stated that, in recognition of the sensitivity of this problem, Egypt has accepted the concept of a transitional period. It did so in an

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX American concept. But the parties must agree at the beginning on pertinent principles to be applied. This should not be left to the end, otherwise the self-governing arrangement will simply be perpetuated. The Israelis will have a veto. Leaving the issue vague, as the American paper does, poses a problem for the final settlement. The Secretary observed that if one tries to eliminate Israel at this point, one is prematurely forcing a decision on the sovereignty question. The Israelis are reserving their claim to sovereignty in the West Bank, but are not now asserting it. The United States and Egypt believe that the people of the area should decide. El-Reedy contended that it will be difficult to proceed with two interpretations of this issue. If a way is left for Israel to assert sovereignty, it will cause trouble. The Secretary said we cannot stop the Israelis from doing so. El-Baz argued that this is a basic issue. The Secretary agreed, but said we had agreed not to face it now. El-Reedy said that if Israel is to determine the future of the West Bank/Gaza, Israel will always believe that is its objective. El-Araby argued that the sovereignty issue should be faced squarely. El-Araby stated that when the right of self-determination is mentioned, this means the final step. It should be decided by the Palestinians living there, either through plebiscite, referendum, etc. No one but the Palestinians should participate. Egypt accepts negotiations with the Palestinians and Jordanians on security measures, but not on deciding the final status of the West Bank/Gaza. The American paper confuses this issue. El-Baz asked what happens if Israel does not reach agreement with the Arabs? The American proposal omits any clear and unequivocal obligation on the part of Israel to withdraw from the West Bank/Gaza with the possibility of minor rectifications that do not reflect the weight of conquest. This has been the constant United States position. El-Baz also noted that the Aswan formula4 has not been reproduced in full in the American paper. The term “people” had been omitted. The Secretary said that he was willing to put this back. El-Araby next indicated Egyptian unhappiness with the “amalgamation” of the Palestinian refugees and displaced persons. The Israelis, he noted, are given a veto in our paper on the return of displaced persons. In the case of the refugees, El-Araby acknowledged, Israel has a say in accordance with UN resolutions. However, UN Resolution 237 of 1967,5 which the United States had voted for, governs the status of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Saunders suggested that the Egyptians provide us with appropriate language. The Secretary asked whether the use of the term “consensus” will solve the Egyptian problem. The Egyptians responded unanimously that it will not. Saunders pointed out that the Israelis are a party to the problem during the transitional period. El-Baz agreed to provide us with pertinent language. El-Baz then referred to the paragraph in our paper on Jerusalem. He expressed understanding that the problem is difficult and sensitive. But, he pointed out, Arab Jerusalem is part of the West Bank. Neither the United States nor Egypt recognize the amalgamation of Arab Jerusalem into Israel. Jerusalem, he insisted, is included in the Israeli obligation to withdraw. Egypt agrees that the city should not be redivided. He drew a distinction between the issue of sovereignty in East Jerusalem and that of the life of the people. The Secretary pointed out that our paper says that Jerusalem should not again be divided. El-Baz noted that the United States also agrees that Jerusalem is not a part of Israel. The Secretary observed that trying to solve the Jerusalem problem now is a mistake. It will simply create problems. He suggested it be left to the Jordanians for the future. Kamel observed that we want Hussein to come in. El-Baz stated that if this is our common concern, the United States formula is harmful. The “future relationship” phrase used in the American paper, he contended is Israeli phraseology. The Secretary pointed out that it is not, it is our language. El-Baz insisted that two sovereignties in Jerusalem should not be allowed. The issue should be handled first by Israeli withdrawal, and thereafter by agreement not to redivide the city. The starting point should be nonrecognition of the Israeli occupation. Unfortunately, the phraseology in the American paper leads to the conclusion that the Israelis may remain. The Secretary pointed out that we are simply saying that the ultimate arrangements for Jerusalem must be worked out some time in the future. Atherton suggested that the final sentence in the paragraph on Jerusalem should take care of the Egyptian concern. The Egyptians insisted it will not. The Secretary asked whether the Wailing Wall should be under Jordan. El-Baz said it should be so far as jurisdiction is concerned. The Jews might have the right to visit, and claimed this is already taken care of by the reference to freedom of access to religious shrines. El-Reedy pointed out that internationalization of Jerusalem is another possibility. The Secretary wondered whether anyone would support this. El-Baz did not answer the question, but urged that nothing be included to prejudge the final outcome. Doing so would mean that the status quo will be perpetuated. The Secretary observed that the more one goes into detail with respect to Jerusalem, the greater

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX where it is in UN Resolution 242. El-Reedy stated that it is in 242 because it is also in the UN Charter. Egypt suggested that there might be a general part of the paper to cover fundamental principles. The issue, he pointed out, would not be important if the Israelis had not come up with the idea that the “inadmissibility” language is not binding because it is in the Preamble. The Secretary said he believes it should be in the Preamble. Perhaps the matter could be treated by citing the entire Preamble. El-Reedy noted that the American paper had also added to the pertinent preambular language the phrase, “within secure and recognized borders.” This is not in the UN Resolution 242 Preamble. El-Baz noted that because the Israelis insist that because the “inadmissibility” language is in the Preamble, it is not important. For that reason the Egyptians believe it should be in the operative language. The Secretary pointed out that the Israelis “climb up the wall” with any such suggestion. El-Baz suggested that this shows their intentions. El-Baz then referred to para 7 on page 12 having to do with the possible inability of Jordan to join in the negotiations. This, he insisted, does not help and could be offensive to Jordan. The Secretary responded that the phrase is intended to show that the negotiations would go ahead even if Jordan does not participate. Kamel observed that the Egyptian side is proceeding on the assumption that Jordan will join. The Secretary said we hope so, but cannot be sure. El-Baz thought it is not necessary to provide for such a contingency. It goes without saying, he argued, that if Jordan does not participate, Egypt will go ahead. The Secretary noted that the language is for Egyptian protection. El-Baz argued that Egypt does not need it. Boutros Ghali thought that the matter might be handled by a side letter. El-Baz then referred to para B–2 on page 12 having to do with diplomatic, economic and cultural relations. He contended that diplomatic recognition does not require immediate diplomatic or other relations. Sadat, he claimed, is clear that diplomatic relations should not be provided for at this stage. On page 13, El-Baz referred to para 3–E on the deployment of armed forces. He noted that the Egyptians had proposed regulating the acquisition of arms in order to stop the arms spiral. This, he noted, had been taken from the original Israeli proposal of last year. The Secretary thought the entire paragraph might be eliminated. The police issue could be taken care of on page 4. The Egyptians seemed agreeable, but El-Baz insisted that what is also needed is a reference to a general reduction of armaments. He reiterated that the Egyptian language had been taken from the September 77 Israeli draft.8

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ofir5 for civilian purposes only; d) the right of free passage by ships of Israel and other nations through the Strait of Tiran, the Gulf of Suez and the Suez Canal; e) the construction of an international highway between the Sinai and Jordan near Eilat; and f) the stationing of military forces; steps listed below (will be resolved by negotiations between the parties.) Stationing of forces —Within an area lying approximately 50 kilometers (km) east of the Gulf of Suez and the Suez Canal, no more than one division of Egyptian mechanized or infantry armed forces will be stationed. —Only United Nations forces and civil police equipped with light weapons to perform normal police functions will be stationed lying west of6 the international border and the Gulf of Aqaba, varying in width from 20 km to 40 km, and east of the same border approximately 5 km in width. —in the area not included above, border patrol units, not to exceed three battalions, will supplement the civil police in maintaining order. The exact demarcation of the above areas will be as mutually agreed during the peace negotiations. Early warning stations may exist as mutually agreed to insure compliance with the terms of the agreement. United Nations forces will be stationed in the Sharm el Sheikh area to insure freedom of passage through the Straits of Tiran, and will be removed only if such agreement is approved by the Security Council of the United Nations. Normal relations will be established between Egypt and Israel, including: full recognition; termination of economic boycotts; and mutual protection of citizens by the due process of law. INTERIM WITHDRAWAL Between three months and nine months after the signing of the peace treaty, all Israeli forces will withdraw east of a line extending from a point east of El Arish to Ras Muhammad, the exact location of this line to be determined by mutual agreement. 5 In brackets above this word, Carter wrote “Sharm al Sheikh.” 6 The remainder of this phrase was inserted from an attached typed page.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ment and suggested that we all adjourn to Holly Cabin rather than continue the discussion in two places. The Secretary agreed. While arrangements were being made to move to Holly, Dayan said that of the three zones mentioned in the paper, so long as Weizman agreed with the deployments described for the two westernmost zones, then he had no problem. All of the problems, as he pointed out, are in the zone from 20 to 40 kilometers west of the old international frontier between Sinai and Palestinian mandate. He did not see a way to reach agreement at Camp David on all of the complex problems in that zone, and suggested leaving negotiations on these issues for the next phase, retaining the status quo while those negotiations went on. Secretary Vance asked Weizman whether the dispositions of forces

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Union “is prepared, acting together with the US, to play a positive role in the settlement in the Middle East and in securing at last a durable peace there. We both had a good ‘asset’ here—last year’s joint Soviet- American statement. And the line of action charted therein is something that we should go back to. Any other steps, including the ones being taken most recently, do nothing but make the Middle East conflict still more deeply seated without solving its main issues. The fact that the USSR and the US are now practically following different roads in Middle East affairs cannot but have a negative effect both on the situation in that area and on our relations.” An unofficial translation of the Brezhnev’s letter and a Russian-language original version are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev-Carter Correspondence:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Camp David were not successful. In this connection, Messrs. Dayan and Weizman emphasized the importance of trying to get an extension of the presence of UN forces under the second disengagement agreement when the issue arises next month. Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1 Camp David, September 15, 1978 To Pres. Sadat & P.M. Begin: We are approaching the final stage of our negotiations. With your approval, I propose that today we receive your most constructive recommendations, that tomorrow (Saturday) be devoted to drafting efforts, and that we conclude the meeting at Camp David at some time during the following day. We will, at that time, issue a common statement to the press, drafted together. Additionally, we should agree not to make any further public statements prior to noon on Monday. Please let me know if you object to any of these proposals. J.C. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel (Lewis)1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Note Prepared by President Carter1 undated Settlements in West Bank and Gaza Late in the evening, Saturday, September 16, 1978, Prime Minister Begin, Foreign Minister Dayan, Attorney General Barak, Secretary Vance and I were concluding discussions on the final wording of the section on the West Bank and Gaza.2 Section 6 referred to the Israeli settlements, and as drafted in the American proposal, stated: “6. After the signing of this framework and during the negotiations, no new Israeli settlements will be established and there will be no expansion of physical facilities in existing settlements unless otherwise agreed by the parties.” Prime Minister Begin objected to this language, and began to make several alternate proposals. They included: (a) a fixed time (three months) during which no new settlements would be constructed; (b) prohibitions against civilian settlements only; (c) right to build a limited number of new settlements; etc. All of these proposals were rejected by me. Finally, we agreed on the exact language concerning the settlements, and that the paragraph would be removed from the West Bank- Gaza section and included in a letter from Begin to me. I told him it could not be a secret letter and the Prime Minister replied that the text would be made public. The agreed text was: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Handwritten Note Prepared by the Ambassador to Israel (Lewis)1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX I’m willing to work with you, but can’t violate my promise to Sadat. MD—But not at Camp David! Had we known we had to argue here with you over Jerusalem, we wouldn’t have come! This for first time, 4 hours before the end, we’re presented with US position which will be totally negative. All our agreements over settlements are not nearly as important as this letter over Jerusalem. MD—makes distinction again re certain places in East Jerusalem. JC—Sit with Carter & draft. If can’t accept, then let’s adjourn. MD—I don’t know. Perhaps only referring to this point might sell. I really don’t know. Sinai JC—Do you agree that UN observers on your side would also not be withdrawn without SC approval? Ezer—Yes.3 JC—Sadat doesn’t want El-Arish, when under Egyptian flag, for negotiations. JC—Sadat has given on internat’l waterway. Won’t accelerate dip. rel. beyond 9 months initial completion of withdrawal. MD—What happens after Camp David? JC—Re Oct. 24 deadline, if Knesset agrees to remove settlements, he will extend. If not, he will go to UNSC. Sadat wants get Knesset debate over before negotiations. Meanwhile, make arrangements. Begin said 2 weeks. MD said perhaps, but could go a little longer.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX not let him reply. Finally, I asked Prime Minister Begin to please let Barak answer. What Begin had asked Sadat was: ‘Do you think the Knesset should be under pressure when they vote? Sadat said, ‘No, I don’t think the Knesset should be under pressure.’ This was the total conversation. Begin therefore assumed that he could write any language he wanted concerning negotiations versus the Knesset vote. “I asked Barak to come with me. Begin excused him, and we went to my cabin. I checked their language very carefully and finally thought of a way to say it that was in the final letters and satisfactory to both Begin and Sadat. Susan [Clough] typed it up. I wrote a note to all our people: ‘This is the exact language to be used. Do not use any other language on or off the record.’ We firmed the issue up, literally at the very last minute. Only then did I realize that we had finally succeeded.” (Carter, White House Diary, page 243) The note referenced by Carter, and to which he appended the handwritten message quoted above, reads: “There is one major issue on which agreement has not been reached. Egypt states that agreement to remove Israeli settlements from Egyptian territory is a prerequisite to a peace treaty. Israel states that the issue of the Israeli settlements should be resolved during the peace negotiations. Within two weeks the Knesset will decide on the issue of the settlements.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 53,

Negotiating the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX King Hussein. I would appreciate a thorough briefing, Mr. President, but on the subject of participation . . . If you don’t mind, sir, I would like to be able to, with the Government, over a whole day to go over details of exactly where we stand. Then hopefully we should be able to be guided by God to take whatever decisions will serve the area in the best possible way. President. So you will not make any statement against participation until after you get a briefing from us, is that correct? King Hussein. We won’t be making any statement whatsoever until after I have had a chance to really absorb all that has happened. President. Can I tell Secretary Vance to send someone to meet with you and go over the questions that you might have? King Hussein. I would appreciate that very much indeed, Mr. President. President. We will do that. I know that you are coming to see me before too long, but I would like to give you this briefing very quickly. King Hussein. Thank you very very much. As you know, I have not yet received it officially. I only arrived back in Jordan a few minutes ago. I hope that it will be possible very soon to respond to your kind invitation. President. I’m going to see Secretary Vance in just a minute and I’ll tell him to be in touch with you through diplomatic channels to give you a thorough briefing. King Hussein. I hope Mrs. Carter is well. Give her our regards and respect. President. I’ll do that. Thank you very much, sir. King Hussein. All the best. President. Good bye.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the same map in their respective discussions with Gamasy and Weizman in order to avoid any misunderstanding. The arrangements worked out by them are to be brought to President Carter’s personal attention. The President wishes to obtain a full summary3 of the tentative decisions reached in the Gamasy-Weizman talks. Such a report will be requested from the Israelis, and President Sadat promised also to provide an Egyptian summary of such agreed decisions.4 3 A summary document of the Gamasy-Weizman talks at Camp David, which primarily addressed the military dimensions of an Israeli withdrawal from Sinai, has not been found. For Carter’s commentary on the progress of these talks, see Keeping Faith, p. 381. 4 Brzezinski initialed at the end of this paragraph. Memorandum for the Record1 Washington, September 19, 1978 SUBJECT Conversation with Dr. Brzezinski, 19 September 1978 1. I congratulated him on the success of the Summit. I asked what we could do to help from here. He indicated that we are trying to find ways to help Sadat survive. These are not to be symbolic actions but actions that would really be of support. a. David Aaron has suggested that because there are reports of dissatisfaction within the military about their lot in life that we might help here. Specifically, we might build barracks or otherwise help to improve the material conditions of the soldiers. This goes to a report we promulgated that General Gamasy had found lower ranking officers willing to criticize his standard of living. I said I had my doubts as to whether we could really get at this because barracks wouldn’t do for many of the people; they need better housing for their families, but that I would have a look at just what the dissatisfaction of the Egyptian mili- 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX We look forward with great pleasure to your visit with us here, and especially to meeting your lovely bride. You have my warm regards and best wishes. Jimmy Carter Letter From President Carter to Syrian President Assad1 Washington, September 19, 1978 Dear Mr. President: I want to add a personal note to my message to you of September 17, 1978,2 in which I informed you of the results of the talks at Camp David. Your country’s concerns have been very much on my mind in the past two weeks. I would appreciate very much hearing from you directly in order to avoid any possible misunderstandings. Let me emphasize a point that I made last night in my speech before a joint session of Congress3—the peace we seek in the Middle East is a comprehensive one. The general Framework document signed by Egypt and Israel specifically deals with principles applicable to all fronts of the conflict. United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 in all its parts remains the agreed basis for a peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. I also stated in my speech that there must be a just solution of the refugee problem which takes into account appropriate United Nations resolutions. I know of your deep commitment not only to Syria and the Arab Nation, but also of your concern for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, which Israel has now, for the first time, recognized. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Department of State to the United States Observer Mission in the Sinai1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and Dayan. The Cabinet reportedly decided last night that the settlement will be removed.3 8. There is certain to be greatly heightened interest and focus—as well as controversy—over the settlements issue as a result of the Camp David Accord calling for a freeze on settlement development for at least 90 days. Israel has steadily expanded its settlements in the occupied territories since the 1967 war. There are five types of civilian settlements, in addition to para-military Nahals. The most successful civilian settlements are associated with large kibbutz federations. The kibbutz is a communal settlement, in which the land is leased from the State, and worked collectively. A moshav is a smallholders’ community, in which each settler works a separate piece of land leased from the State. A dormitory settlement is a type of bedroom community, where most residents work elsewhere. A regional center is a larger community, surrounded by four to six small agricultural communities, for which is provided administration, support, and services. And finally, an urban center is a community planned and built by the government. 9. The 48 settlements on the West Bank, pose the greatest problem, as far as pressure for new settlements is concerned. Comparative photography of one such community on the West Bank, Shiloh, illustrates the rate at which one of the settlements can be expanded. A comparison

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX was more for internationalization. For us this meant internationalization of both the Israeli and the Arab sides of Jerusalem. Jordan has been consistently in favor of Palestinian selfdetermination. Before Camp David we sent President Carter and President Sadat a letter outlining our position.5 We had assurances from Cairo that this was also the Egyptian position and we thought a total solution and a comprehensive settlement was also their goal. Throughout the many months of the past we talked about nothing other than a comprehensive solution, and we argued with others in the area when they said Egypt would go its own way (for a separate peace). Previous to that, we were all working for a unified Arab delegation to Geneva. With the Sadat initiative6 everything changed, but Egypt said they were pursuing a comprehensive settlement even just before they left for Camp David. We very much appreciate U.S. efforts in pursuing a solution to the Middle East problem. And we have carefully read the two documents coming from the Camp David meeting. These documents suggest that they provide a framework for a settlement. We hope this is the case and have many questions. One: Do these documents in fact provide a framework for a comprehensive and final settlement? Two: There is a question of the five-year transition period. In our mind, are Israeli attitudes that prevail in the last eleven years going to continue to prevail during this five-year period? Three: There is the question of the Israeli military presence and the withdrawal to specified locations for security purposes. What specified locations? What security purposes? Four: What are the details of the transition arrangements including the Jordanian role for the maintenance of security. Whose security and in what way? Against what threats? We have already positioned troops along our border with Israel for many years to prevent hostile infiltrations from attacking Israel. How would this new situation differ? Five: During the five-year transition period Palestinians are supposed to participate. In what and from where? What freedoms will they enjoy? What rights will they enjoy and to what degree? Six: Is the West Bank/Gaza formulation supposed to be a total solution to the Palestinian problem? Who are the Palestinians who have the right to join in the negotiations? Seven: There is discussion of a Jordanian/Israeli peace treaty. On what basis? 5 See Document 17.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tional period as described is so vague, it could result in an unacceptable end result in five years. Three: Apart from some insubstantial changes in the Israeli position, the Camp David framework does not assure Israeli withdrawal to its pre-1967 borders, self-determination for the Palestinians, a resolution of the refugee problem or the future role of Jordan. It is, therefore, not possible to conclude from Camp David that these questions will be answered affirmatively at the end of five years of negotiations. This is precisely the situation that we have faced for the past eleven years with respect to resolution 242. Four: The two documents are also extremely different. The Israeli/ Egyptian document is extremely explicit as to terms and end result in contrast to the vague nature of the other document, particularly as concerns the end result. Five: Jordan is asked to participate in West Bank security arrangements aimed against Palestinian subversion, yet without knowing if there will in fact really be an end of the Israel occupation (that the subversion is presumably aimed at terminating). Six: President Carter seems to be departing from positions earlier in his Administration on the Palestinian question. Seven: If Jordan is expected to participate, the basis for it must be clearer and more balanced. We are not tempted to participate in the implementation of the Begin Plan.7 If the Begin Plan will be implemented anyway, with U.S. assent, why then involve Jordan? It would appear this Plan could be unilaterally implemented. Pardon us for our frankness. I feel bad personally after your long ordeal at Camp David to discuss things in this manner. However, it is my duty to ensure that there are no misunderstandings in our position regarding problems of such magnitude. We studied the results of Camp David but because of their gravity we had no choice but to make our statement8 of yesterday in which we said that Camp David does not constitute a binding legal document for us until a lot is cleared up and that we were not involved in bringing this document about. To tell the truth, we feel less let down by the United States than by our sister Arab state (Egypt), since there is no linkage between the two documents of Camp David. But this is something between us and Egypt and not for us to discuss at this point. We have received many requests from you to keep quiet on Camp David. However, we have a public opinion including many persons who have suffered the most regarding the Palestinian problem. We have been

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Israeli military occupation ends. In both the West Bank and Gaza, Prime Minister Begin has committed Israel in principle to withdraw in accordance with Resolution 242. —For the first time ever, a self-governing Palestinian authority will be created during the transitional period. This will take place in the West Bank/Gaza as the Israeli military government is withdrawn. We believe that if responsibly conducted, this should set in motion an evolutionary process which will enable the Palestinians to govern themselves. —Once started, we believe that this process will become irreversible so that at the end of the five year transitional period an outcome which meets basic Arab requirements will be almost inevitable. A major advantage of this approach is that it deals with the West Bank and Gaza in their totality, rather than talking about some form of partitioning of the West Bank—e.g. along the lines of the Allon Plan,10 or other forms of partition. —Next, the Israelis have recognized the “legitimate rights” of the Palestinians. The implications of the acceptance of this principle are very important. They should enable a political, economic, and social relationship to develop between the Palestinians and their neighbors which will, we hope, promote political stability and economic development in the area. —The document states that the Palestinians are recognized as a party to negotiations with Egypt, Israel, and, we hope, Jordan. They will have a real voice in determining their own future. —The settlements on the West Bank will be brought under agreed limitations. I might comment on what other documents say on issues not covered in the Camp David framework. In an exchange of letters we said that after the signing of the framework and during the negotiations there would be no new settlements in the area. The issue of future settlements would be decided by negotiations. There would be a freeze on new Israeli settlements. During these negotiations the future of the settlements would be agreed to among the four negotiating parties. —There is an Israeli commitment to work out procedures promptly on persons displaced in 1967, which have been such a great burden on themselves and on Jordan’s resources. 10 The Allon Plan, initially presented in July 1967 by then Israeli Minister of Labor Yigal Allon, would have returned approximately two-thirds of the West Bank to a “Jordanian-Palestinian state” while Israel retained control of the Jordan Rift Valley and mountain ridges to the west from Nablus to Hebron with Israeli military outposts along the Jordan River and the remainder of the West Bank demilitarized. The Palestinians were to have self-administration in an autonomous or semi-autonomous region, and Israel would remain in full control of a united Jerusalem with a possible Jordanian status in the Muslim quarter of the old city.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX those circumstances. We will review sympathetically what might be done to provide additional military and economic assistance to Jordan. —It goes without saying that we would also give Jordan full political diplomatic support through our contacts with other area governments and through our public statements. In this connection I should note that among the side letters to be published in connection with the Camp David agreements is a letter from us reaffirming our historic position on Jerusalem. We tried to resolve Jerusalem in the document. It was impossible. Therefore we agreed with Egypt and ultimately with Israel to state our positions in documents to be made public. Our position on Jerusalem remains that outlined by Ambas-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX for the transition period only. At the end of this period, there would be further withdrawals to be worked out by the parties. Three: What would be the Palestinian participation in the negotiations and what rights would they have? There are the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. They would not include Palestinians from outside unless by mutual agreement. On the rights of the Palestinians: The document refers to “legitimate rights” and says that any solution must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinians and their just requirements. The Israelis fought this hard but have now been willing to put this concept in a formal document. Four. How will the Palestinian problem be solved? The document says it will be resolved in all its aspects, another concept that Israel has consistently fought against. The document also addresses the refugee problem not only for displaced persons but in a broader refugee context. Five. To whom do the principles of 242 apply? The document says that 242 and its principles apply to all the parties. The negotiations in Paragraph 1 are not only between Israel and Jordan, but also on the final status of the Palestinians on the West Bank and in relation to their neighbors. It states that 242 applies in all its parts. There was big debate on this question because Israel knows what “all its parts” means. Six. How would the Palestinians determine their own future? The answer to this is contained in Paragraph 1C providing for two committees which would commence their work within three years and complete it within five years. Israel wanted to start after four years with no commitment to end it. This was a major step forward in our negotiations at Camp David. It provides for negotiations to determine the final status of the West Bank and Gaza and its relation to its neighbors. Paragraph 1C also provides “negotiations for the resolution of other outstanding issues by the end of five years.” Furthermore, the document must be submitted to elected West Bank representatives for approval. Seven. What is an elected representative? The West Bank inhabitants would be free to elect a number of representatives to govern the West Bank and Gaza during the transitional period. Anyone can run for the election even a PLO inhabitant of the West Bank and Gaza. This is another step for providing the participation of Palestinians. The document also provides (assuming this is acceptable to Jordan) for Palestinian participation in the work of the Jordanian/Israeli treaty. While Jordan may not agree to this concept, we found that the problem of the final status of the persons in Jordan and the West Bank,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX document had to have this element in it and we feel deeply that there must be a comprehensive peace in order for the framework to be durable. Thirteen. Is it possible that an unacceptable result could come about at the end of the five year period? The document provides that there must be a conclusion reached by the end of five years, regarding relations with the neighbors and the other issues. We have also stated that these negotiations are based on 242 and on all its parts. Obviously it requires negotiations and the outcome is not certain. But the document does state that the result must be accomplished by the end of five years. Fourteen. Ambassador Atherton noted that King Hussein mentioned that the Israeli/Egyptian document is more specific than the West Bank one. He pointed out that Secretary Vance said that in the former case you had two parties (Egypt and Israel) who were negotiating directly and could, therefore, reach a specific agreement. The other document was general because the other parties (Jordan, the Palestinians, Syria) were not there. Fifteen. Ambassador Atherton mentioned the question regarding the refugee problem and said President Carter in his speech14 to Congress stated the refugee problem must be solved under the relevant Palestinian refugee UN resolutions. Sixteen. There is a different tenor to President Carter’s earlier call for Palestinian rights and a homeland in contrast to the new direction that Camp David is alleged to take. We still support a Palestinian homeland and we promote this concept by (a) the transitional stage which provides for full autonomy and (b) allowing the Palestinians to choose their status and relations with their neighbors. We have made no change in our view on Israeli withdrawal nor on legitimate Palestinian rights. In fact, we added the concept of “just requirements” for the Palestinians. There has also been no change in our position of Jerusalem. This conclude the Secretary’s response to the King’s questions and the session turned to general discussion. IV Sharaf made the following point: If Jordan plays a role, it must be on a more solid basis. Selfgovernment during a transitional period makes sense only if the transition leads to a final solution. 14 On September 18, President Carter addressed a Joint Session of Congress on the outcome of the Camp David Summit and the agreements reached. The text of this speech

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX while covering a separate agreement being negotiated with Sadat which is unconnected with the West Bank document and is to be signed within three months. Jordan, therefore, absorbs the whole Palestinian question itself without being involved in any assured final outcome. We are, therefore, asked to erode our own credibility. One must take into account that the Israeli leadership is saying that Jerusalem is to be united under Israeli rule forever, that Sumaria and Judea will not be given up. We are not being over cautious in our position. How can one ignore this blatant situation. VANCE: Unfortunately, if there is no negotiation, then your objective of working for Israeli withdrawal is even less likely to come about. Begin only has two and a half years left. Once you start a process of self-government and negotiations there is a good chance—and even a near inevitability—that you can work out a solution. If there are no negotiations, the odds are very small that you will achieve any Israeli withdrawal. KING HUSSEIN: President Carter said that if we have any points on which we are not clear we should bring them up. We will, therefore, have to consult among ourselves and go to others in the Arab world. Our people must involve themselves in this issue. We must, however, be sure of the U.S. position on these positions in a very clear fashion. This may help to make up our own minds and to clarify the way that we approach our own people. I remember after Resolution 242 that Nasser said “I will not reopen the Suez Canal or discuss the Sinai until Jordan and the West Bank situations are dealt with.” Now we find the Suez Canal open and a peace treaty being signed over Sinai. We are talking now from a position of weakness with regard to Israel and this will be especially true if Egypt moves out of the conflict; in three or four years under such conditions Israel would not even be interested in what we are speaking about today. We need clear and, if possible, written assurances of what the U.S. position is regarding what lies at the end of the road. VANCE: Would it be helpful for us to provide written answers to your questions. KING HUSSEIN: Yes. It would help us to formulate our own options. But, in addition, we want a U.S. commitment and a description of your own position. MINISTER MAJALI: Does the West Bank include Jerusalem? VANCE: In the transition period, Jerusalem would not be included since there are conflicting claims in its regard. We believe it is occupied territory, however, and this is a conflict between us and Israel. MAJALI: Would Israeli settlements be included in the selfgoverning territory? And are the West Bank and Gaza 1967 borders?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX SHARAF: How much is this now a framework for other parties? VANCE: The document provides a broad solution which would include even Golan Heights. On the Palestinian issue there is as much in this for Syrian interests in that respect as for others. SHARAF: If agreement is not reached and Jordan does not take part in the negotiations, what is the situation regarding Israeli intentions on self-government on the West Bank? VANCE: Israel would like to proceed with the Begin Plan’s implementation, but Egypt does not accept this. The agreed procedure is that negotiations on this would start soon. Also, Egypt has an interest in the Palestinian issue in Gaza. KING HUSSEIN: The people in Arab Jerusalem would fall under what category? Do the people there exercise independent rights or are they considered Israeli citizens? VANCE: This was a problem we labored over for hours. How do you suggest we address it? MAJALI: At the end of the agreement, it calls for open borders, diplomatic relations, etc. In such a case, Jerusalem is no longer a problem since the door is open for the full exercise of the rights of its Arab population. No one would put up barbed wire. VANCE: This is a good point. Everyone agreed on free access to the Holy Places, that the Holy Places would be fully administered by each respective faith and that the city would no longer be divided. There was also agreement on free movement within Jerusalem. The hangup was on sovereignty. The U.S. position is that the status of Jerusalem must be negotiated by the parties. We have our own view but we can not compel the Israelis to accept it. We have stated that annexation was illegal but to enforce our view is a different story. KING HUSSEIN: This is a crucial question for us. VANCE: We recognize that. CROWN PRINCE: Why was Jordan mentioned as participating in the local police force, particularly since this would set a precedent for Jordan with respect to other aspects of the West Bank governing authority. VANCE: Jordan was included because of your expertise and the feeling that it would be necessary to have Jordan help operate the police force. This, however, is not mandatory and Jordan might not choose to take part. CROWN PRINCE: During the transition period would inhabitants of Arab Jerusalem perhaps become gradually acceptable as voters? VANCE: This was argued at Camp David and it could be possible after two years or so.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Hodding Carter, Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Joseph Twinam, notetaker Isa K. Sabbagh, interpreting Prince Fahd opened the meeting by referring to the rigors of present day diplomacy conducted by air travel. The Secretary noted that it must have been easier in the days of ship travel at the time of the Versailles conference.2 He said that except for Wilson’s involvement in Versailles, no American president has been longer involved in a diplomatic conference than was President Carter at Camp David. Fahd said that as difficult as Camp David must have been for those inside the camp, it was even harder on those outsiders like himself, since the insiders at least knew what was happening, while he could only guess. Fahd said that whatever the results, there was no denying that Camp David represents a good step forward which opens certain paths. The Secretary emphatically agreed and referred to the Congressional reception of the President’s report,3 which was unlike anything seen in the halls of Congress in decades. There was a spirit of joy and hope on both sides of the aisle, without regard to party affiliation. Fahd said he appreciated that a stalemate of many years was broken. He wished that all of the participants would heed Carter’s advice to refrain from making rash statements after the agreements had been reached. He continued that Saudi Arabia was greatly pleased by the Secretary’s visit, since it regards the United States as its greatest friend and always finds it useful to exchange views. The Secretary expressed appreciation at having been received on such short notice and asked if he could brief Fahd on the agreements. The Secretary said the President considered the results of Camp David so important that the President wanted him to come immediately to the area to brief Fahd and others and answer any questions. He appreciated Fahd’s suggestion that he go to Damascus. Fahd said he considered the Damascus visit a wise thing to do. King Khalid had sent a message to Assad urging calm and restraint. In the message the King sought to emphasize that President Carter from the beginning of the Administration had seriously and with much effort focused on the Middle East problem. The Saudis had advised Assad to bear with us and to give us a chance to move toward a common goal. 2 Reference is to the Paris Peace Conference, an international meeting convened in January 1919 at Versailles, just outside of Paris. The purpose of the meeting was to establish the terms of the peace after World War I.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The Secretary said this is correct but that the agreement provides a mechanism for admitting displaced persons in an orderly way. This is to assure that they will have means of support rather than having to go to refugee camps. Fahd asked if the number of persons permitted to return is to be limited. The Secretary replied that the limit would be imposed by the commission which would determine how many could return each year. He read Fahd from the agreement: “During the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing committee to decide by agreement on the modalities of admission of persons displaced from the West Bank and Gaza in 1967, together with necessary measures to prevent disruption and disorder.” Fahd asked if this provision applied only to the refugees of 1967. The Secretary said there was another provision for earlier refugees. He quoted the relevant paragraph: “Egypt and Israel will work with each other and with other interested parties to establish agreed procedures for a prompt, just and permanent implementation of the resolution of the refugee problem.” Fahd asked if all 1967 refugees have the right to opt to return. The Secretary said yes, but the committee will determine the number to return each year. The Secretary continued that he should add that President Carter had made clear in his speech to the Congress that all this should be in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions. When the Palestinian authority takes over in the West Bank and Gaza the Israeli military government is to be withdrawn, lock, stock and barrel. The thousands of Israeli military personnel in the cities and towns will be withdrawn. In our view, if the Palestinian authority conducts itself responsibly this would set into motion an evolutionary process which will enable the Palestinians to govern themselves. The Secretary continued that we fully believe that this process, once started, will be irreversible. At the end of five years an outcome which meets basic Arab requirements will be almost inevitable. The great advantage of the way this is structured is that it deals with the West Bank and Gaza in their totality rather than talking about partitioning the West Bank or Gaza. The Secretary continued that in this document the Israelis have recognized the “legitimate rights” of the Palestinians. The implications of the acceptance of this principle are great and obvious. For years Israelis have had trouble accepting this concept. Now they have signed a document saying, “The solutions from the negotiations must also rec-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in negotiating it. Finally, after long argument, Israel accepted this principle. The Secretary said that Israeli settlements on the West Bank would be handled in accordance with the letter to be published next week. In essence, Israel has agreed not to create any new settlements while negotiations are underway for a West Bank transitional regime. The question of future settlements will be subject to agreement among the negotiating parties setting up the regime. Fahd said this was good work on President Carter’s part. He read the Saudi government’s Arabic language translation of the appropriate section of the agreement. The Secretary continued there is an Israeli commitment to work out procedures promptly on the persons displaced in 1967. Dayan said that he thought most of the 1967 refugees will return and that a place could be found for them. Fahd said that the important thing is that the Palestinians outside the area be given the choice of returning. The Secretary continued that in addition to the gains he had just mentioned from the Arab point of view, the Camp David agreements offer important strategic advantages. They provide a basis around which moderate forces in the area, with the support of the United States and our friends, can rally and expand the position and influence of moderate Arabs in the area. The Secretary said he thought this of strategic importance. A major motivation in the President’s mind at Camp David was to strengthen moderate forces by means of establishing a peace framework that would break the stalemate which provided an opportunity for radicals to move in. This is a critical moment for the moderates as we look around the area. At this moment, we feel moderate forces in the Arab world are looking to Saudi Arabia and the United States for leadership. We believe and hope Saudi Arabia will play a key role in seizing the opportunity. We can understand that Saudi Arabia will want to consult with its friends in the Arab world. As the Saudis do so President Carter wants to make very clear he remains fully committed to the role of a full partner in seeing this through. Now, with Camp David achieved, we are not going to walk away and cease to pay attention. We are going to see it through. Fahd said that at this time not just governments but individuals in a position to be influential must do what they can with the stalemate broken to achieve a satisfactory solution. While there are others in Israel besides Begin who will take tough positions which are not in Israel’s interest, there are persons of reason and good will who recognize the logic of peace. But the paramount question of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza and outside of it is what will happen after the transitional period. This is what the moderate Palestinians will ask the Saudis.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Fahd continued another point is that the Palestinians living outside the West Bank and Gaza think that the agreements are keeping them out of the process. This is disturbing because they are likely to be the primary makers of trouble. Also, self rule may not be fruitful if Palestinians in the area hesitate to come forward to participate in it in deference to those Palestinians outside the area. The Secretary said that with respect to those Palestinians outside the area there is provision for the return of those displaced in 1967 and the sketching of guidelines to achieve prompt, just and permanent implementation of the refugee problem. Fahd said once the Palestinians outside realize that they have the choice of returning and participating in the administration and determining the future of the area, all would be well. If that is not clear he felt that things would not go well. He asked whether President Carter has in mind that after five years Israel will withdraw totally leaving the Palestinians free to determine their own lives. The Secretary said that the answer is yes, with the proviso that if necessary to protect Israel’s security, Israel could have specified limited areas in which limited numbers of military forces could be placed for defense. Fahd said he would like to pursue this. Israeli security points will not be effective but will only agitate the Palestinian population. Why should they be in Palestinian territory? Why not in Israeli territory? The Palestinians will not feel free if they are in Palestinian territory. The Secretary replied that after five years Israel and Jordan and Israel and Egypt will have negotiated treaties. There is no security problem there. The Israelis, however, fear Iraq. Fahd asked where the Iraqis would come from, through Saudi Arabia, or across Syria? He assured the Secretary the Iraqis would not interfere with Israel’s security. The Secretary replied that is the Israelis’ concern. Fahd said that it is his deep conviction that in its heart Israel is confident it is here to stay. The security concern is a fabrication. Real Israeli security lies in support by the United States and peace with the Arab states and in the willingness of the Palestinian people to live in peace. The Secretary said he agreed with this. In five years as the situation develops, the Israelis may come to feel that the security points are not needed. He wanted to make clear that we are talking possibilities. The agreement does not specify arrangements after five years. It simply says there should be provision for security but does not specify. Fahd stressed the importance of the psychological element that the Palestinians realize that they will be free after five years and that those outside the area will be free to return. If they realize this all problems will cease. He urged the United States not to lose sight of this.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX that the provision for displaced persons should help us to start dealing with that problem immediately. Fahd said that is fine but what is needed is something tangible. The Secretary said he understood and said he would see if we could do something to help. He would be meeting with the President Monday7 and would convey his remarks. Fahd urged him to do so and reiterated that if he had this from the President he would invite the Palestinians to talk. The rejectionists are now meeting and Saudi Arabia needs something to counterbalance. Fahd said that three days ago he had talked with Palestinian representatives, urging them to be calm and work for peace. He felt that he had calmed them somewhat but he was missing something in his presentation to them because they lacked assurances. The Secretary asked as a hypothetical question whether, if the U.S. could resolve the problem it has in talking with the PLO, a dialogue with them would be helpful. Fahd said the PLO would be delighted. Saudi Arabia would arrange the meeting. He asked that we think about it. Fahd asked if the Secretary could confirm that Sadat had written Assad that the Golan solution would be the same as the Sinai solution. The Secretary said he didn’t know whether or not there had been a letter but that Sadat had said that the Sinai agreement could be a model for the Golan agreement. Fahd asked if Golan were discussed at Camp David. The Secretary said there was no real discussion of the Syrian aspect, just reference to Syria and the fact that we had to have a framework applicable to all the countries. Fahd expressed appreciation for the Secretary’s patience with the Saudi concerns. He assured the Secretary that Saudi Arabia would like to support anything that the United States embarks upon. He expressed appreciation for the invitation to go to the U.S., saying that he was actually packed when he learned that the King had to go for medical treatment, thus he had to stay in Saudi Arabia. He said he was reserving the invitation as a rain check. The Secretary said that Fahd had a standing rain check. (At this stage Fahd asked his advisors if they had questions and Mansouri asked about Jerusalem.) Fahd said that Jerusalem is another large and urgent problem. There is no mention in the agreements of Jerusalem. This gives the impression that it is ignored and Israel is free to work its will. The Secre- 7 September 25. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Vance met with Carter,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX should stress that President Carter would like to see a Golan solution in order to relieve the great burdens on Syria and to permit the development of a close US-Syrian relationship. The best way to cause Assad to ponder the situation calmly is to assure him of President Carter’s deep interest in solving both the Palestinian problem and the problems of Syria. The Secretary said he could do that. Fahd said it is extremely important to assure Assad that President Carter wants to solve the total Palestinian problem. The Secretary noted the President had said that publicly the other night.10 Fahd said that it bears repeating face to face by the Secretary. He said the Secretary should urge Assad to calm the Palestinians down and to give us a chance. He should appeal to Assad to urge the Palestinians to avoid violence and not to mar the Arab image while President Carter is trying so hard for the Arabs. The Secretary thanked Fahd for his advice. In closing Fahd expressed his delight that the Secretary would be going to Syria.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX West Bank could be separated from negotiations for a Jordan-Israel peace treaty. This was why we saw them as linked and had proposed that elected Palestinian representatives participate in both sets of negotiations. 5. We had lengthy discussion of question of Israeli forces remaining on West Bank during and after 5 years. Assad pressed particularly hard as to whether there had been agreement behind the scenes for Israeli troops to remain after 5 years. I told him this question would be determined in negotiations for final status in which, I pointed out, elected Palestinian representatives would participate as well as the three parties. Assad said he noted Begin was saying otherwise, and I told him Begin was saying a number of things these days, presumably in anticipation of the vote in the Knesset. 6. Assad also pressed to know whether Golan had been discussed at Camp David. I said only in the general sense that all agreed that the negotiations for a Syria-Israel peace, when Syria decided to join the negotiations, would be governed by all the principles of Resolution 242. Assad said as far as he was concerned the Camp David Agreements were seriously “unbalanced.” They were specific on things the Israelis wanted—such as ending the boycott—but remained vague on things the Arabs wanted—such as withdrawal. I took issue with him and went through chapter and verse. This led to discussion of the withdrawal question with Assad asking whether the US position that withdrawal should be to 1967 lines with minor modifications had changed. I said it had not. 7. At end, Assad thanked me for these explanations but then summed up Syrian attitude which was standard Syrian hard line. He said he considered the Agreement to be completely in the interest of Israel. He did not see that it served Syria’s interest. He could not give it legitimacy except as an Egypt-Israel understanding. He said Sadat had regrettably slipped from the united Arab front and no single party could achieve peace on its own. 8. Assad said in spite of this Syria wants peace and will not be deflected from pursuing peace in accordance with Resolution 338. But there was a serious contradiction between 338 and the Camp David Agreements, because 338 calls for conference of all the parties whereas at Camp David only one on the Arab side had been there. There could be no compromise with Israel on territory or on Palestinian rights. 9. I rebutted Assad’s summation, asking him once again to focus on what the Agreements achieved and reflect carefully on the advantages, which I had detailed, of what they offered the Arabs. In particular, I pointed out they provided the Arabs with the prospect of changing the status quo which had not been in the Arab interest. I asked him, as I had earlier, to see Agreements not as an ending them-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ments and withdrawal. Could you please give Ambassador Eilts your thoughts on this matter? We also share an interest in the rapid initiation of talks to let the Palestinians form their own government, and to implement the West Bank and Gaza commitments. As provided for in the Framework agreement, Palestinians can participate in the talks as advisers to the Egyptian and Jordanian delegations from the outset. I would appreciate hearing from you the names of Palestinians whom you would judge appropriate for inclusion in your delegation, and also regarding Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza with whom discussions on the arrangements for self-government should be initiated. Finally, we want to move rapidly to work with you to help stabilize the situation in Lebanon. Ambassador Eilts will be prepared to convey your views to me personally on this vitally important issue. With friendship and respect, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister had agreed at Camp David to the American language on a settlements freeze. On that basis, the President had conveyed the GOI position to Sadat, who had in turn agreed to sign the Camp David Agreements. The President was thus left in an extremely awkward position, and I had no doubt that this Israeli interpretation would cause real problems in Washington. 6. Admitting he realized how badly this would go down in Washington, Dayan indicated he was extremely relieved that it was Barak who had made their record of the meeting. The President would certainly not doubt Barak’s honesty, and his notes show clearly that Begin’s memory of that evening was correct. Rosenne then read from Barak’s notes a sentence in which Begin said, “I shall think about it and I will write to you tomorrow.” According to Barak’s memcon, Begin repeated at the end of the meeting that he would consider the President’s proposal and convey his response in writing the next day. That response, in the form of a letter6 to the President, indicated the Prime Minister’s agreement only to a freeze on settlements during the Sinai negotiations. 7. I reminded Dayan that the President, having received that letter, wrote his language back in and returned it to Begin via Barak. There was no question that the President thought he had Begin’s agreement to the U.S. formulation and had acted with Sadat in good faith. 8. Dayan then speculated on the roots of the misunderstanding. He said that there had been whispering during the meeting in question and separate conversations between the principals from time to time. He did not doubt that the President believed his language had been accepted, but, Dayan repeated, that was simply not the case. The Israelis regretted the misunderstanding, but the Prime Minister’s letter to the President would commit the GOI to a settlement freeze for only the three months of the Sinai negotiation. Again trying to find a silver lining, Dayan stressed that after the three-month period, the issue of an extension of the settlement freeze would come up and “then we shall see.” But, the argument over whether the freeze was tied to Sinai or the West Bank was inconsequential since both negotiations should last no longer than three months. Rosenne said that Sadat has now publicly referred on three occasions since Camp David to Begin’s commitment for a three-month freeze on settlements. Therefore, he argued, Sadat can be under no misapprehension. 9. I responded that, given the complications of getting the Palestinians and the Jordanians to participate in the talks, three months was an extremely short period to conclude negotiations concerning the mo- 6 See Document 70.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX issue, I left Dayan in no doubt about how this conversation [garble— would?] be judged by the President and by you. Dayan did his best to minimize the disagreement, but I am sure he realizes what damage Begin’s adamant position can cause to his relationship with the administration. On the other hand, Begin is feeling extremely beleaguered by Gush Emunim demonstrators and the desertion of his oldest personal allies. He is very unlikely to budge at this moment of political hypertension. Lewis Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State, the Mission to the United Nations, and the White House1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX next three months, on the Golan Heights, in the vicinity of Beier Sheva and perhaps in the Jordan Valley. At the close of our meeting, while we were all standing preparatory to our leave-taking, I again reiterated to you my previous statement with regard to your proposed formulation, promising that I would think about it and convey my answer in writing the next day. This, too, is affirmed by Professor Barak’s minutes. And, indeed, on the following day, Sunday, September 17, 1978, I transmitted my written response through Professor Barak who brought it to your cabin. The text read: “Dear Mr. President, “I have the honour to inform you that during the agreed period for negotiations for the conclusion of the peace treaty,9 no new settlements will be established by the Government of Israel in Sinai, in the Gaza district and in the area of Judea and Samaria.” As shown by the record taken on the spot by Professor Barak, this was the only commitment I assumed at Camp David on behalf of the Government of Israel with reference to the settlement issue. Respectfully and sincerely, Menachem Begin End text. 4. When he had finished, Begin emphatically stressed that he could never have agreed to the U.S. formulation for two reasons. It would have meant an indefinite moratorium on new Israeli settlements on the West Bank and Gaza, and would give Arabs the right to veto Israeli settlement activities in those areas. He would never, never agree to such a thing. 5. Referring to the first phase of this controversy in the U.S. just after Camp David ended, Begin asserted that he had had a “horrible two days” with the media after the U.S. sentences had been given to the press. How did the journalists get those two sentences? Begin believed Doctor Brzezinski’s denial that anyone in the White House was responsible, but someone in the administration had done it. Saying that he was deeply hurt by this, Begin called the leak of the U.S. language unfair and destructive. The ink had not yet dried on the Camp David Agreements before a conflict had arisen between Israel and the United States, a conflict that was unnecessary. The letter to the President which he had just read to me was the complete truth and he would not agree to any other interpretation of what he had said at the September 16 night meeting. Begin then asked for my reaction to his letter. 9 Carter underlined “during the agreed period for negotiations for the conclusion of the peace treaty” and wrote “which peace treaty” in the right-hand margin.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX of three months, agreement will be reached on the modalities for establishing the elected self-governing authority in Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza Strip. Thereafter, the course of future settlement activity in those areas will be the subject of negotiations among the parties, including the representatives of the elected self-governing authority. End text.10 11. With only a moment’s hesitation, Begin indicated he could agree to my first sentence but that the second one was totally unacceptable. It meant that Arabs could veto Israeli settlements in Judea and Samaria which were Israel’s inalienable right. Jews had as much right to live in Hebron as in Tel Aviv. Under no circumstances would he commit himself to a freeze beyond three months. If the Sinai negotiations lasted six months, his commitment to no new settlements remained only for three months. 12. Was there no way, I asked, that the Prime Minister could state his readiness at least to discuss the future settlements issue with the parties after the three month period? Begin said no.11 He believed with all his heart that Israel had a right to settle in Judea and Samaria and he would agree to no language which prejudiced that right. 13. Weizman, who had joined us a few moments earlier, then said that in his judgment it was a gross mistake for the US to press the Prime Minister on this issue at a moment when the party he had led for so many years was in open revolt against him. Vigorously picking up this point, Begin contended that if he were to do what Washington was asking, “there would be a revolution in my own party”. 14. Winding up the conversation, I suggested to Begin that I transmit his long letter as a private oral message to the President. In that way, he could honestly say to the press if asked that he had not sent a letter to the President. I would also send the text of his short message although it had no status since it had not been signed. I urged him to do nothing more with either of his messages until I had an opportunity to report this conversation and to get Washington’s reaction. Begin agreed and said he was willing to send the long letter and make it private or public, send the short letter and make it private or public, send both letters and make them private or public, or send no letters at all. He was sure his memory of the September 16 conversation was correct. He had not agreed to the US formulation, and Professor Barak’s notes proved him right. 15. Comment: Throughout the conversation Begin was intense and emotional but always in control. He listened carefully to what I had to 10 Brzezinski wrote in the right-hand margin next to this text: “I suggested this to Lewis.” 11 Brzezinski underlined this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX raising group2 when the news came of the Knesset vote. I announced it to them and I pointed out to them the courage that you had shown. They gave you a standing ovation for three minutes. The Prime Minister: Mr. President, I appreciate your calling me. We spent seventeen hours debating in the Knesset without interruption. All 120 members took part. We got a big majority. I told them I would have resigned if I had not gotten a majority in my own party. It was a very serious debate. Some of my friends left me, and the opposition supported me. You will remember that I wanted to separate the issues in the vote, but when I got back to Israel, I read the press and it was strongly against that idea so I presented the agreements and the vote on the settlements to the parliament together. I decided there should be a single vote on the agreement and on the settlements. So we had it, and we won with 85 votes against 19. I told Ambassador Lewis how difficult it was for me. The President: I know it must have been difficult to have many of your close friends oppose you. I want to refer to one other subject. There has been an unfortunate disagreement between us on the question of the West Bank and Gaza settlements. I want to resolve it quickly. We have a difference of opinion. The Prime Minister: I sent you a letter3 through Ambassador Lewis. Have you received it? The President: No, I haven’t seen it yet. I also sent you a letter4 congratulating you on the Knesset vote. The Prime Minister: Thank you for your letter. I did receive it. I have now sent you a letter5 through Ambassador Lewis. Ambassador Dinitz will also have the details and he will talk to Secretary Vance. You know that Mr. Barak took notes of our meeting. I spelled out everything in this letter. The President: I am concerned about our misunderstanding. There was no thought of tying the West Bank and Gaza settlements to the Sinai negotiations. Nor was there any discussion of a five-year moratorium. I hope that we can get some language that is mutually acceptable. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, President and Mrs. Carter attended a Democratic National Committee fundraising dinner at the Washington Hilton Hotel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The Prime Minister: He is now a supreme court justice, but I have asked the president of the supreme court to let him have six months of leave so that he can participate in the peace treaty negotiations. I am very grateful to you, Mr. President, for your call. The President: I am giving a press conference this afternoon. I intend to minimize our differences on the settlements question. I am sure you will be pleased with what I say. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Secretary Vance will be discussing this issue at the UN4—he meets with the French Foreign Minister today5—and you will want to compare notes with him before you depart for Europe. Without knowing how Secretary Vance is handling this in his talks, let me make a few points: —An “all parties” conference on Lebanon is probably not in the cards, since the parties include Syria, the PLO, Israel, and the Christian militias, as well as the Sarkis government.6 I do not see these disparate groups all sitting down with one another. —There may be some prospect for us to organize talks among “friends of Lebanon”—France, Saudi Arabia, the Vatican, Jordan. We should be a bit cautious in taking our cues on Lebanon from Egypt or Israel in present circumstances. Both have their own axes to grind. —Lebanon’s problems will not be solved by a “new charter.” A fairly good political formula was worked out in late 1976 when Sarkis was elected President. (It provided for an equitable sharing of power among the various political communities in Lebanon.) With those caveats in mind, we should recognize that there will be no solution to the Lebanese crisis until the following steps are taken: —The Syrian army disengages from the areas of confrontation with the Christian militias in Beirut. This requires the introduction of a loyal Lebanese armed force. —The creation of a Lebanese army/gendarmarie loyal to Sarkis and responsive to his orders. (This seems to be politically impossible, but the effort has to be made.) 4 Vance referenced Carter’s September 28 remarks in his statement at the opening of the UN General Assembly in New York on September 29, stating that Carter had “made clear” his “determination to spare no effort to assist in finding a solution to the Lebanese tragedy.” The current UN force, Vance argued, “has done much to stabilize the situation in that part of the country, and we call upon all to support this effort to reassert Lebanese sovereignty . . . As the President said yesterday, it is time for us to take joint action to call for a conference of those who are involved and try to reach some solution. It may involve a new charter for Lebanon.” (Department of State Bulletin, November 1978, p. 49) 5 Vance discussed the situation in Lebanon, Carter’s September 28 statement, and his UNGA speech with French Foreign Minister Louis de Guiringaud on September 29. In telegram 251591 to Paris, October 4, Christopher summarized the conversation, reporting that the French “expressed keen interest in possible USG initiative for a conference on Lebanon and urged full consultation with France and others before any such meeting be called.” Vance explained to Guiringaud “that USG was still examining all options to break Lebanon impasse,” emphasizing that “no decisions had yet been taken,” but promised the French “full and early consultations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780405–0833) 6 In a telephone conversation on the evening of September 29, Parker raised Carter’s press conference remarks with Boutros. Parker reported in telegram 5700 from Beirut, September 30, the Lebanese were “disturbed that idea of this importance would be floated without consulting them.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the Department of State and the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX had a bilateral deal as early as last November, but wanted to negotiate a framework for all parties. Sadat, however, could only act for Egypt at Camp David; he could not negotiate further for Palestinians. In fact, Atherton noted, there was no other party who could negotiate for Palestinians at Camp David. Acknowledging that Camp David Agreements did not have everything Palestinians desired, he said that choice became either what was attainable or nothing at all. The U.S. is convinced that Accords do move the process forward and represent significant changes in Israeli positions. Clearly Accords go beyond SC Resolution 242 and Palestinian problem is now recognized by Israel for first time as having political and territorial dimensions; not just a refugee problem. Although all issues were not resolved at Camp David, Sadat gave up no Arab positions there, Atherton concluded. 6. Ramallah lawyer Shehadeh was concerned about use of term “West Bank” rather than “occupied territories” in Camp David Agreements as this might make it difficult to bring East Jerusalem into negotiations. Israelis will want to consider East Jerusalem as outside purview of negotiations while Shehadeh noted it is essential for Arabs that it be included. At this point, son of Gaza mayor Shawwa defended Sadat by asking if anyone could have gotten more. For him, the most important thing was ending the settlements. Hikmat al-Masri agreed that ending settlements was 70 percent of Palestinian position. Expressing apologies on behalf of mayors who did not attend, Nazzal said he had just seen several of them who wanted to relay two questions—(1) why was U.S. meeting with Palestinians now and not before? (did GOI approve?), and (2) why not deal with PLO who are the real representatives of Palestinians? 7. After dinner, group discussion resumed with Atherton responding to Nuseibeh’s request for briefing on what other Arabs were saying. After describing reactions he had gotten in other places, Atherton described his Amman stop where he found the King undecided. There was a debate going on in Jordan. He said that Jordanians took his explanations at face value. However, when he asked Jordanians what it would take to get them in process, Atherton reported that they were unable to answer. Jordanians have asked questions of U.S. and wish to continue dialogue with us, Atherton said. 8. Atherton then explained in detail Camp David Accords and urged that Palestinians should focus on positive rather than negative aspects. He counselled them to focus on wording of Agreements rather than subsequent statements by either Israelis or other parties. 9. During following wide-open discussion period with all Palestinians participating, following were themes and concerns raised: (a) Israeli settlements—this was primary preoccupation. Freij, Hikmat al-Masri and others stressed need for Israeli commitment to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 11. In a final statement, highly respected Hikmat al-Masri said that all present appreciated this first opportunity to speak to high-level US official and asked that Atherton carry back to Washington all of the points raised. He reminded Atherton that despite willingness of those present to convey personal views, they could not speak on behalf of all Palestinians; “only Arafat or the King can now represent us.” 12. Nuseibeh said that West Bank/Gaza would attempt to prepare paper which would point out shortcoming in Camp David Agreements as seen by Palestinians. 13. Comment: This was a meeting “whose time had come.” Palestinians who attend wanted to hear high-level expression of US policy and were prepared to ask serious and thoughtful questions. Recriminations and polemics were noticeably minimal. Granted that group was composed of relatively moderate leaders. Nevertheless, all West Bank/ Gaza participants were genuine Palestinian nationalists. It was unfortunate that mayors could not hear Atherton’s authoritative explanations and clarifications. Nevertheless, I am sure the word will soon spread and I think (via al-Masri, Freij, Shehadeh and Nazzal) our dialogue with West Bankers/Gazans has had a significant boost. End comment. 14. (Ambassador Atherton made no comment to the press either before or after this meeting.) 15. Foregoing was reconstructed from memory by ConGen and Embassy participants after Ambassador Atherton had departed.6 He may wish to comment. Newlin 6 Atherton departed for Cairo where he briefed Sadat on September 30 on his meeting with the Palestinians. At the outset, Atherton explained that the meeting “had been at our own initiative” and that Vance had told him in Damascus that such a meeting

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Gromyko wanted to speak briefly on some specific aspects the President had touched upon. Middle East With regard to the Middle East situation he had to say that the Soviet Union took a different approach to the actual state of affairs in that area. He would note that both sides agreed that the situation there was complex and dangerous. As for methods to resolve Middle East problems and the specific political steps necessary to ensure a settlement of the Middle East problems, our respective standpoints were entirely different. Regarding the Camp David meetings, of course the President would know that the Soviet Union did not share his views concerning the results achieved and would not associate itself with the process and methods used. The Soviets were against separate “deals.” Gromyko would say that the United States had acted rudely toward the Soviet Union despite the common understanding achieved last year, to the effect that we would take concerted action with respect to the Middle East. He noted that the United States had gone a separate way, demonstratively disregarding the previous understanding with the Soviet Union. As for Camp David, if anything was accomplished there, it was that Israel had obtained what it had been striving for from the very beginning, while Sadat had received nothing and had in fact lost everything he had. At the same time Syria and Jordan and the Palestinians had been completely circumvented, producing great disarray in the ranks of the Arabs. Was this really the path to peace and calm in the Middle East? The Soviets did not believe so, and no one could convert them to the views of the United States or Sadat or Begin on this score. They had their own assessment and views. That the Soviet Union wanted peace in the Middle East was well known throughout the world. It wanted to see the states in the Middle East live in peace as independent sovereign states, and this, of course, included Israel. The Soviet Union had stated this hundreds of times for all the world to hear, and its position was well known. It was equally well known that the Soviet Union wanted to do all in its power to safeguard the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. Now he could only say that they would have to wait and see how events developed in the future. Gromyko asked the President not to consider him a pessimist. The Soviets were optimists and firmly believed that eventually all the problems would be resolved for the people of the Middle East. The Soviets had never had any idea of pushing Israel into the sea. On the contrary, they had upheld Israel many times in the international arena, certainly to a much greater extent than the Israelis themselves were doing by their ill-considered extremist statements. Gromyko concluded his

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX contain, the Lebanese crisis will require international support.” “Equally important,” Vance continued, “it will require pressure on Israel to reduce significantly and ultimately to end its military relationship with the Maronites” and “particularly to refrain from employing their presence in Lebanon to alter the political balance. Syria will also have to keep the Palestinians under control.” Vance’s suggested initiatives called for inviting greater United Nations participation, including UN military and police forces, the appointment of a special UN representative to Lebanon, and the expansion of the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Southern Lebanon (UNIFIL) to include

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The text of Brezhnev’s response is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 61, Soviet Exchanges: The United Nations Security Council made a formal call for a ceasefire in Lebanon on October 6. Syrian armed forces declared a unilateral ceasefire in Lebanon on October 7. (Joe Alex Morris, Jr., “Syrian Forces Declare Beirut Cease-Fire,” Los Angeles Times, October 8, 1978, page A1) Following this, the Department of State issued ceasefire implementation instructions to the Embassies in Beirut, Damascus, Jidda, Kuwait, and Tel Aviv. (Telegram 256088 to multiple posts, October 7;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Attachment Draft Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat7 Washington, undated Dear Mr. President: Now that the Israeli Knesset has approved the “Framework for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel,” as well as the withdrawal of all Israeli settlers from Sinai according to a timetable within the period specified for the implementation of the peace treaty, I believe we should proceed to begin the talks to conclude peace between Egypt and Israel. I would like therefore to8 extend to the Government of Egypt an invitation to send its Foreign and Defense Ministers9 to Washington for talks to begin on October 12 with their Israeli counterparts. I am today sending this same invitation to Prime Minister Begin. I have asked Secretary Vance to represent the United States at these talks, which we are prepared to arrange to be held at an appropriate site in Washington. With all best wishes, Jimmy Carter10 7 No classification marking. The letter as amended by Carter was sent to Cairo on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Comments of King Husayn on his Perception Of U.S. Pressure on Jordan to Join the Middle East Peace Negotiations and on his Recent Discussions with Saudi and Gulf Leaders 1. In King Husayn’s contacts with the United States, and in particular in three letters2 and one telephone call3 he has received from President Carter, Husayn has discerned the following theme: entering the negotiations is a difficult and risky course, but the King has taken risks in the past; furthermore, not getting involved holds far more risks. These and other messages—indicating that if Jordan “falls into line” its military and economic needs will be satisfied—add up in the King’s mind to an implied threat. (Comment: In a separate conversation, Jordan Armed Forces Commander in Chief Lt. Gen. Bin Shakir stated that during his June 1978 visit to the U.S. he was told by a U.S. Presidential Advisor that Jordan had been too “passive” about getting into the peace process.) At one point, Husayn noted that he will never reach the level of importance that Israel has in U.S. eyes, and that he can never turn to the Soviets. He said, “I may go down.” 2. Very evident throughout the conversation was Husayn’s frustration with the Saudis. He described Crown Prince Fahd as indecisive and ineffective while having all the power in the world at his disposal. He urged Fahd that they set up a committee of two to discuss “alternatives”, as time was running out. Fahd agreed in principle; when Husayn asked when they could meet for a follow-up, Fahd said he would have to check first with King Khalid. This apparently exasperated King Husayn, who figured that getting Khalid’s clearance could take weeks. In Saudi Arabia, Husayn observed, nothing gets done right and nothing gets done on time. (Comment: Though Husayn did not mention Saudi aid to Jordan, we can probably safely assume that he got no definitive answer from Fahd on this score either.) 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Preliminary Views on the Conduct of the Egypt-Israel Negotiations in Washington Major bilateral issues between Egypt and Israel have been resolved and, while the negotiations will take some time because of the care and detail involved, it should not be difficult for the two sides to move steadily to agreement on the precise terms of a peace treaty. In our role as participant and chairman of the talks we face no obstacles as serious as those at Camp David on this aspect, although there are a couple that have not been discussed and there will be snags where our own intervention will be important in moving issues to resolution. The main issues we face in the talks opening October 12 are: (a) how to engage the two sides in discussion of West Bank/Gaza issues, if possible reaching further agreement on at least some issues, so as to improve the prospects for Jordanian and Palestinian participation in West Bank/Gaza negotiations; and (b) related to this, whether the Egyptians will at this stage try to reintroduce some link between implementation of their Treaty with the agreement on the West Bank/Gaza. Organizing the Talks on Bilateral Issues Our own approach to the Egypt-Israel peace treaty, as you know, envisages a fairly short basic treaty text supplemented by two annexes that spell out (a) the withdrawal and security aspects, with an accompanying map, and (b) commitments to peace in specific terms. Even if the two sides decide to approach it differently from the point of view of a Treaty text, the basic division of work we have sketched out appears logical. This would suggest that the talks could, very soon after opening, break down into 3 working groups that would work on (a) the basic Treaty text; (b) a military annex; and (c) an annex detailing commitments to peace and normalization of relations. (The Israelis have signaled their wish to proceed first with the commitments and normalization of peace aspect; we assume they can be talked out of this since 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX General Richard Lawrence, Military Member Herbert Hansell, Legal Advisor George Sherman, Spokesman While part of the delegation, I would not plan to spend full time with the talks. With the Egyptian-Israeli talks launched, I would plan to devote my time—in addition to tending other NEA matters—to preparing for the West Bank/Gaza talks. Engaging the Two Sides in West Bank/Gaza Issues The Egyptians will be all for this, although we do not know how far Sadat is prepared to go in slowing down progress on an Egypt- Israel treaty to achieve a further stage of understanding on West Bank/ Gaza issues. Boutros Ghali, in his latest conversation2 with Hermann, continues to deny any formal linkage but says Egypt will be expecting a “gentleman’s agreement” with Israel that progress on West Bank/Gaza issues should be synchronized with movement toward agreement on an Egypt-Israel treaty. He warns that the pace of Egypt’s willingness to see normalization of relations put into effect will be affected if Israel is “stiff-necked” about moving further on West Bank/Gaza issues. The Israelis will be prepared to talk about the West Bank/Gaza but will be reluctant to make any further concessions prior to Jordan entering the talks. In particular, the issue of the settlements in the West Bank looms as crucial, and may have to be isolated if we are to progress on other issues. The credibility of the Framework will be seriously vitiated in Arab eyes if Israel is allowed to continue to “create facts” on the ground, and this would also weaken Arab confidence in the U.S. role. On the other hand, it will be the hardest point for the Israelis to give ground on because to do so will strike at Begin’s ability to maintain, for his domestic political purposes, that the Camp David Framework leaves room for an essentially “Israeli solution” for the West Bank and Gaza. Thus, with the Israelis signalling us that they want to talk immediately about normalization of relations, and the Egyptians telling us this will be linked to progress on the West Bank and Gaza, West Bank/Gaza issues will probably emerge early as the crux and potential sticking point of the talks. It will be important to make our own early assessment of Egyptian intentions, because regardless of Boutros Ghali’s intentions, it will be Sadat that ultimately decides to bring into play the sanction of delaying progress on the bilateral treaty, and we will need to tailor our approach accordingly. We believe the best approach

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX lasted about 25 minutes. Only Bill Quandt and David Aaron were present. Highlights: Brzezinski focused immediately on the essentiality of using the Israel-Egypt treaty negotiation to make progress on elements of the other framework, although he recognized this might carry us only so far on the latter if Egypt wanted to wrap up its peace and didn’t really worry about more than a fig leaf for the other. In this context, Brzezinski said what is lacking is contact with Palestinians. If we are to be talking about questions of interest to them as an adjunct of the coming negotiation, we should/must be in touch with them, and quickly. I said this is very much in our minds and a paper3 is being developed for the White House which sets out alternative levels of relationship ranging from what we have now at one end of the spectrum, to direct discussion with the PLO at the other, but several in-betweens. Brzezinski said he would like to see this paper soonest. I ventured our thought about bringing Walid Khalidi to Washington and sketched out how this might be done. (HHS: See attached4 which Mike and Morrie already have). Brzezinski commented that he liked Khalidi and twice said, “Fine, that is a good approach.” Comment: in the context of other remarks by Brzezinski, I think we now have a green light on the Khalidi idea which does not exclude other approaches as well as they will be outlined in the paper we send forward. End Comment. Brzezinski asked who would handle the side negotiation on the West Bank framework with the Israelis (which he thought the President should open as soon as Dayan comes to Washington), the Egyptians and Palestinians. He emphasized twice that State should handle diplomatic relationships with the Palestinians as contacts by the White House had a difficult domestic dimension. Quandt and I said you had hoped to hold yourself available for the side of the coming negotiation dealing with that Framework and Brzezinski said that was fine. Quandt said that in discussions with Palestinians, such as Khalidi he would like to share the responsibility with you. Brzezinski didn’t exactly demur but emphasized that White House officials should in general steer clear of Palestinian contacts; it “should be a diplomatic responsibility.” 3 Not found. 4 Document not attached and not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President turned to the question of the UN zones envisaged in the framework agreement. He had talked2 with Waldheim who thought the present UNEF of about 3,000 personnel could be used. If the number were increased, Security Council action would be needed and would risk a Soviet veto. In response to the President’s question, both Weizman and Dayan thought that UNEF with its present strength could do the job. The President added that we are prepared to leave the Sinai Field Mission in place for a period of time if Israel and Egypt wished. Reverting to the earlier discussion, Dayan said the key question was whether Israel could be assured that Sadat would agree to full normalization a few weeks after the interim withdrawal. The President replied that Sadat says he (the President) had forced him to accept diplomatic relations and open borders. The President had told Sadat this was in his interest, in order to have a means to discuss routine problems as they arose. The President said he would pursue with enthusiasm the objective of immediate normalization following the interim withdrawal. Dayan said it was not a question of having an Egyptian Embassy in Tel Aviv per se; he was worried about what might happen after two or three years if relations had not been fully consolidated. The President said he intended to marshal all possible U.S. help to consolidate normalization of Egyptian-Israeli relations— e.g., trade missions, capital investment, etc. Sadat was impulsive and could be brought to support this objective if handled correctly, but he could also be impulsive in negative ways. The President then asked how soon Israel envisaged complete withdrawal from Sinai. Weizman said not before three years because of the airfield construction problem. Israel was squeezing itself back into a small area and needed the best possible new airfields. The President said we would like to help expedite Israel’s airfield construction. With respect to Israel’s interest in using Sinai air space for training purposes, the President said he could not reveal Sadat’s position but thought that Sadat sees this as an inducement to expedite the withdrawal process. If the talks go well on both sides and we can get Sadat in a good mood, the President believed he would agree to Israeli training in Sinai air space. If Sadat agreed, however, it would be as a good faith gesture; he is not required to do this. Weizman said Israel would seek Egypt’s agreement to this, for unarmed training in specified corridors. 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Waldheim in Orlando,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX that West Bank/Gaza elections could be held as a first step toward establishing a Palestinian administration and the withdrawal of the Israeli military government. Secretary Vance said preliminary work could be done in Washington on how to organize elections and a local administration. The President asked how Palestinians could be brought into the process. Dayan responded that if the Palestinians see the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations progressing, they will join. In response to a question by the President, Dayan said he was referring to their joining a short time after the Egyptian-Israeli treaty was signed. This could not be done, however, in the next two or three weeks. With respect to Hussein, Secretary Vance said he had three choices: to join the negotiations, to stay out but encourage Palestinians to join, or to reject negotiations entirely. The Secretary said he doubted Hussein would reject totally but was not certain precisely where Hussein would come out given the many pressures he is under. Dayan thought it most likely Hussein would give a green light to the Palestinians while not committing himself. Hussein would watch carefully how the Washington talks would progress. If a treaty is signed in two to four weeks, the chances were that the Palestinians would join. Dayan said it would have a negative impact if in the Washington negotiations we seem to be patronizing the Palestinians by negotiating for them. Secretary Vance said he saw another problem. While there is no linkage between the two frameworks, Sadat sees them as part of the same context. He needs to show that he has not forgotten the Palestinians. If there is no movement on West Bank/Gaza issues, Sadat will have problems. Dr. Brzezinski stressed that we needed to keep in mind Weizman’s distinction between a “separate peace” and a “first peace.” Weizman responded that if West Bank/Gaza issues are rushed too much, nothing will result. Once an Egyptian-Israeli treaty is signed, Israel should seek to implement what it has promised by moving toward West Bank/Gaza self-government. If Israel demonstrates that it is prepared to go ahead—and Israel can do this—this will help Hussein. The President then commented that he had honored his pledge to have no contact with the PLO. If he goes to Cairo, however, Sadat wants him (the President) to meet with some Palestinians. How far, the President asked, could he go in this respect? The President said he does not want to violate his promise to the Israelis but could not check the credentials of Palestinians Sadat might ask him to meet. Dayan said he did not know which Palestinians Sadat might bring to Cairo. The President commented that perhaps Hussein could choose them. Dayan said this would be better. If the issue to be discussed was the selfgovernment proposal, they should be Palestinians who live in the West

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX fifty kilometers wide, but the President knew that Sadat wanted it to be only twenty to forty kilometers and he has agreed to this. We have, therefore, suggested a line that is about twenty-five kilometers wide. Our lines are not final, however, and are meant to be the basis for negotiations. If Egypt and Israel cannot reach agreement easily, we will try to help. There is also a question, the President noted, of demilitarized zones on either side of the interim withdrawal line. There should be some buffer in this area, and this needs to be decided. A ten to twentykilometer zone would be good. This is not written into the agreement. There might also be a U.N. force, simply to inspect this area. This has not been discussed yet with the Israelis. Finally, the President mentioned that he hoped that the press arrangements during the talks could be similar to those at Camp David. We want to keep the negotiations out of the news. The President said that he also hoped to use the talks in Washington to lay out a plan for the West Bank and Gaza. He understood that President Sadat felt disgust with the attacks that had been leveled against Egypt, but he would not want to give up on Hussein or the Palestinian Arabs. We need to try to move to reach an understanding on the authority of the self-governing body, on who will represent the Palestinians, and on the timeframe for these talks. It will be best not to inject these issues into the formal Israeli negotiations, but Egypt should prepare a list of questions for the President. Then we could act as an intermediary with the Israelis. It is better for Israel and Egypt to meet together directly to deal with the Sinai issues, but on the West Bank and Gaza there is little that can be done now without Jordan and the Palestinians. Therefore, it is preferable for the Egyptians to deal with the President and for him to talk to the Israelis. The United States can be the intermediary. We don’t want some dispute over Jerusalem to disrupt the Egypt-Israel treaty talks. As those move forward, then we can advance on the West Bank and Gaza. President Sadat has asked the President to come to Egypt for the signing of the peace treaty. The President said he was inclined to accept, although he had not given a formal response. If he did go to the Middle East, he would want to talk to President Sadat about how to help bring the other parties into the negotiations. When they see the Egypt-Israel agreement being finalized, their opposition will dissipate. Minister Hassan Ali said that President Sadat appreciates President Carter’s efforts in the Middle East. He said that Egypt had some differences with the Palestinians and with King Hussein, but that Egypt hoped that by giving some impetus to the West Bank and Gaza talks this will help encourage moderate Palestinians. President Carter said that he had a list of questions from King Hussein that he had not yet

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Minister Boutros Ghali said that he had met with many Palestinians and with the Arab ambassadors, as well as with the French leaders just recently. They all asked the same question: Won’t Egypt lose leverage over the West Bank/Gaza negotiations after the signing of a treaty with Israel? If the West Bank/Gaza negotiations are postponed, sooner or later there will be real problems in the Middle East. The Minister said that some correlation must be found, and some exchange of letters or some gentlemen’s agreement must be reached. This is very important. This is more important than the points that the President had reviewed in his opening comments. Minister Boutros Ghali said the President had also spoken of normal relations. This question had come up also in the Egyptian Parliament. Questions had been raised concerning how far Egypt could go toward normalization while foreign troops were on its territory. This can be answered, but it was harder to answer the question about the lack of any direct correlation between the two agreements. Boutros Ghali has spent his full time on this question. New members of the government are even asking these questions. Some have asked why President Carter has not yet received a letter on the settlements. President Carter said that he considers the framework agreement on the West Bank and Gaza to be binding on Egypt, Israel, and the United States. His own reputation is at stake. He wants to know from the Egyptians how we can move forward, especially if Jordan stays out, and if the Palestinians refuse to participate. What could be done in those circumstances? The President said that he had also spoken to Dayan about the settlements. President Sadat’s memory was that there would be a freeze on settlements for three months, and that then consultations would take place. The President and Prime Minister Begin disagree over whether the period referred to was the Sinai negotiations or the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. President Carter said it was not meant to refer to the Sinai negotiations, since it was being discussed in the context of the West Bank and Gaza. There should not be any new settlements set up during the negotiations for the self-government. Later there should be consultations among the parties. Dayan has reemphasized that there will be no new settlements for a period of three months beginning tomorrow. The West Bank/Gaza talks should also be concluded in this three-month period. Dr. Brzezinski and others reminded the President that this had not been specified in the framework agreements. The President stated that the best way then to avoid any problems of timing would be to get King Hussein into the talks as soon as possible. There would be nothing to prevent him from having his delegation made up of Palestinians. They could be from Jordan or from the West Bank, or by mutual agreement, from outside these areas. The Pres-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX treaty negotiations complicated by disagreements over details on the West Bank and Gaza. The President said that he would be available day or night. If there were any problems that could not be resolved, Ambassador Atherton could call on him. He would be prepared to come over or to receive the delegations at the White House. The President hopes as much agreement as possible can be reached at the outset. The President would then help resolve areas of disagreement. He has already reviewed maps and believes that the lines suggested are fair, but these are just suggestions. The lines suggested are somewhat favorable to Egypt, and Israel may oppose them. The President has tried to meet President Sadat’s needs, but the Israelis have not yet seen the map. Mr. al-Baz said that the Egyptians are assuming that the negotiations will go forward in the new spirit of cooperation and they should not be particularly difficult. The President said that the Egyptians should feel free to turn to him whenever necessary. Ambassador Atherton understands this. He asked Minister Hassan Ali to convey his deep friendship to President Sadat and his appreciation for Sadat’s constructive attitude. He reiterated that he is very eager for early success. The meeting ended at 6:15 p.m. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Egypt and Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Report Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Yasir ‘Arafat’s Preference to Deal Directly with the United States Government rather than to Discuss a Middle East Peace with Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat 1. The following information was obtained [less than 1 line not declassified] October 1978. Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat recently gave Major General Shawqat, the head of Military Intelligence, permission to probe Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Chief Yasir ‘Arafat’s views on the Camp David Accords and on continuing Middle East negotiations. Yasir ‘Arafat conveyed a message to General Shawqat via an emissary on 12 October to the effect that he, ‘Arafat, does not trust President Sadat and would prefer to deal directly with the United States (U.S.) on the matter of peace in the Middle East and the role of the PLO. 2. Given the nature of the message, General Shawqat chose not to pass the message to President Sadat and instead sent his own emissary to contact ‘Arafat for clarification of ‘Arafat’s precise views and desires. General Shawqat’s emissary was expected to return with ‘Arafat’s more precise views on 19 October. 3. General Shawqat has been appointed by the Egyptian Government to maintain discreet contact with the PLO. General Shawqat expressed the view that Yasir ‘Arafat believes the U.S. Government is sincere in its efforts to bring peace to the Middle East and desires to be fair to all parties. General Shawqat believes, therefore, that Yasir ‘Arafat would indeed want his own direct contact with the U.S. Government. 4. (U.S. Ambassador to Egypt’s Comment: In our talk earlier this week, Shawqat also mentioned to me ‘Arafat’s alleged desire to engage in a direct dialogue with the U.S. He did not cast it in terms of a new effort, but rather as a continuation of ‘Arafat’s longstanding desire to have direct association with us. ‘Arafat’s desire to do so, Shawqat claimed, is intensified by the recent Camp David Accords. I reminded Shawqat of our offer of last summer to engage in a dialogue with the 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Vance in Pretoria1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in three categories: (1) issues connected with the text of the treaty itself, (2) Israel’s desire for U.S. assistance in connection with its withdrawal from Sinai, and (3) the West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian aspect. I. Unresolved Issues in Treaty Text There are two main issues and several minor ones that remain to be resolved in the treaty text. The main ones are: A. Major Issues 1. How to correlate the Egypt-Israel process with language on a comprehensive peace framework. The Egyptians started out by proposing a number of additions to our basic treaty text, both in the Preamble and in the operative articles, that stressed the continuing commitment of the two sides to solve the problems of a comprehensive peace and the Palestinian issues. The Israelis immediately put up a stiff resistance. Following a meeting with Ghali, Dayan in an effort to be helpful suggested that all of the language along these lines could be embodied in an exchange of letters, either direct between Sadat and Begin or through President Carter. Sadat has agreed to this in principle, and it is now being considered by Begin. The two sides have not yet discussed the contents of such an exchange of letters, but Dayan insists it must not go beyond Camp David language. The Egyptians have now also agreed that, with respect to the treaty text itself, it will suffice for language on a comprehensive peace to be only in the Preamble, omitting anything along these lines in the operative articles—though they probably want more extensive language than Dayan has in mind. 2. The question of how fast normalization of relations will be put into effect. The Egyptians are not yet prepared to discuss this subject in specific terms as laid out in our draft Annex 3 (they are meeting today to try to develop a coordinated position). They have received instructions from Sadat to put emphasis on a phased schedule for normalizing relations. I met privately with Boutros Ghali today to stress the importance that we, as well as the Israelis, attach to rapid normalization, and that we regard this as implicit in the Camp David undertakings. The Israelis attach the most importance to an immediate establishment of diplomatic relations; they warned in a drafting group meeting this morning that if the Egyptians tried to stretch this out beyond the interim period, it would cause Israel to reconsider its commitment to conclude its interim withdrawal within a shortened time-frame. This is going to be a difficult issue, but we will not know the exact dimensions of it until we see what the Egyptians propose for the specific steps outlined in Annex 3. B. Minor Issues 1. Controlling third party acts of violence from either party’s territory. Israel wants more detailed and specific language than Egypt. The Egyp-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX standing on before overall agreement is possible, and we have recommended to the Egyptians that they authorize their experts to begin discussions now. 7. Review Clause. The Egyptians want a provision in the treaty for review after five years, which in their mind would be linked to the five-year period for a transitional regime in the West Bank and Gaza. For the same reason that Egypt likes this idea, the Israelis don’t. The Israelis have countered with language providing that the parties can open discussions about “amendments” to the treaty “at any time.” 8. Security Council Endorsement. The Egyptians have signaled that they want to embody in this treaty the language in the General Framework on Security Council endorsement. We have signaled to them our concern that this might give the Soviets a handle on the treaty that none of us want. The Egyptians said they would give some further thought to the matter. II. U.S. Assistance to Israel Weizman has persistently brought up at our bilateral meetings the extra costs that are entailed for Israel in a speedy withdrawal from Sinai. He hopes the U.S. will assist Israel financially to compensate for these costs, and also possibly with certain equipment which the Israelis would have to leave behind. Weizman has informally put a $2 billion figure on this and has made it clear he sees it as over and above the assistance on the two airfields that we are already committed to. He told me this morning once again that he is anxious to come to grips with this as soon as possible. He has experts standing by in Israel who could come here as soon as we signal that we are prepared to begin discussions on this aspect. Weizman said clearly to me this morning in private discussion that he does not see such assistance as a condition to the rapid conclusion of a peace treaty, but he has also said our response on this is likely to affect Israel’s final interim withdrawal schedule. At minimum, he wants the discussions on U.S. assistance to be underway as the final terms of the treaty are worked on. III. Israeli Gestures on West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian Question We have discussed with Dayan practical steps or statements of intention Israel might make, in conjunction with the signing of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty, to encourage Hussein and the Palestinians to begin negotiating, such as: —Reduce military government presence and give more responsibility to the existing local authorities. —Amnesty for Palestinian detainees. —Withdrawal and redeployment of some Israeli troops. —Permit political meetings in the West Bank and Gaza.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX some unilateral gestures to demonstrate its goodwill in dealing with the West Bank and Gaza issues. 3. The President suggested that Israel might want to let the Egyptians put in some phrases dealing with the broader peace framework so long as they did not affect the substance of the treaty. Dayan mentioned amnesty for political prisoners, and removal of military headquarters from some cities, such as in Gaza, as the type of unilateral gestures that might be possible. The President suggested that the Israelis might ease the ban on political activity in the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan said that they would consider this, but that it might create problems for Sadat, since there might be demonstrations against him. 4. Dayan’s third concern was the speed of normalization. He fears that the Egyptians are weakening their commitment to the establishment of diplomatic relations at the end of the interim withdrawal. They are speaking of gradual normalization. In the economic and cultural areas, Israel can accept this, but not in the diplomatic area. Israel has already agreed to speed up the pace of the withdrawal, so that al-Arish will be returned within two months, Rash Muhammad within four months, and all of the rest of the area up to the interim withdrawal line, by the end of six months. This was done on the assumption that the Egyptians want to move quickly on the normalization of relations. The President said that he agreed with the Israelis on this point. 5. Dayan also mentioned the problem of one Israeli settlement located to the west of the interim withdrawal line. Some arrangement should be made so that this settlement is not required to withdraw before the others. 6. Dayan also raised issues in our bilateral relationship. He spoke first of the need for some form of American guarantee that the agreement will be carried out in good faith. Dayan’s second point concerned financial assistance to help carry out the withdrawal of forces. Weizman explained the difficulties that Israel would confront beyond those of building two new airfields. The President agreed that an American team could consult with the Israelis, but that they would not have authority to make any commitments. 7. Finally, Dayan turned to the question of the cost involved in relocating the settlers from Sinai. The President made clear that he would not be prepared to ask Congress for funds for this purpose in light of the well-known American position on the illegality of settlements.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 4. Concerning the question of linkage, the President said that he thought our answers2 to King Hussein would help to clarify our own views on this. He told Ambassador Atherton to give a copy of the answers to the Egyptian delegation.3 There was some discussion of the question of priority of obligations, the arrangements for a U.N. force, free passage in the Strait of Tiran, and other minor problems. Concerning the question of Gaza, the President expressed his view that it should be mentioned in the text that the final status of Gaza was not decided by the establishment of the border between Egypt and Israel. 5. Finally, the President indicated that he would like to be able to come to the Middle East in the near future, and that his own schedule would permit a visit in late October or early November.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX would distort its balance. Dayan thought this might be overcome by having Sadat put whatever the Egyptians wanted in his letter, while Begin, without repudiating Sadat’s letter, would stress the points that Israel wanted in his reply. They also talked about Egypt’s desire for gradualism in the normalization of relations, which Dayan, even before seeing the text for Annex III, clearly found disappointing and not in keeping with Camp David understandings. 5. Dayan took a firmly negative position about putting comprehensive peace language in this treaty beyond the single agreed preambular paragraph. When I asked him whether he did not recognize that Sadat had a political problem about this and that it was in our joint interest to help strengthen him in Arab world, as well as to find language that might help bring Hussein and moderate Palestinians into negotiations, Dayan expressed impatience over Israel’s constantly being asked to worry about Sadat’s problems when in fact Israel had taken the extraordinary step of returning all of Sinai to Egypt and had difficult problems of its own. 6. President met separately in afternoon with senior members of Is-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX them further and get into details during his meeting with Saunders on Oct 19.5 He welcomed, however, Saunders’ offer to outline US thinking and philosophical approach which had resulted in Camp David Agreements. King made point of restating his familiar position on Jerusalem and questioned Saunders closely on status of US disagreement with Israel on West Bank settlements issue. 3. Following introductory remarks by Saunders, King who had clearly been briefed by Sharaf, replied that he considers that the US and Jordan are engaged in a very constructive dialogue which Jordan hopes to pursue. He observed that the US and Jordan have similar objectives but appear to be working at the problem from different directions. Half joking, he suggested that the US has attempted to avoid making the framework as tight as it might be. In a later remark, which is probably indicative of the strategy he will pursue at least until after the projected Baghdad summit, Hussein said he would continue for a period of time to pester us with questions which he jokingly said the US “will continue to try to evade.” 4. Hussein said, in a more serious vein, that Jordan needs something in hand to assure it that there has been no erosion of the US position on the shape of a final settlement. Decrying the fact that Jordan has no external guarantor, he said he wished that he had a commitment from the US similar in fact, if not in depth of sentiment, to that enjoyed by Israel. Jordan, he emphasized, is being asked to enter into the framework negotiated at Camp David from a position of great weakness. The results of Camp David, he stated, had come as a complete surprise to Jordan. Nevertheless, he said he had been seriously considering what Jordan might do to bring about a starting point for further progress. Scattered throughout his discourse were references to his unhappiness at what he perceives as Egyptian strategy and, at one point, he stressed that Egypt must realize that it is not the “shepherd” with Jordan and other Arabs playing the roles of the “flock”. Hussein also felt obvious discomfort with the Saudi role which he felt put Jordan on the line without quote anything in terms of meaningful support. End quote. King also repeatedly stressed with bitterness continuing Saudi support for the PLO. 5 Saunders again met with Hussein at Hashemiya Palace in Amman, following the former’s return from Jidda, on October 19. Following the ninety minute meeting, during which Saunders’s trip to Saudi Arabia, the upcoming summit of Arab leaders in Baghdad, and Hussein’s continued study of the U.S. responses to his questions were discussed, Saunders concluded: “In short, King Hussein is not yet prepared to join Camp David framework negotiations on West Bank/Gaza himself—at least not before Arab summit—but he is prepared to encourage West Bankers to participate in Egyptian delegation and to discuss mechanics of Egyptian recruitment efforts with Egyptians. (Tele-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 7. If Jordan were to decide ultimately that it could not take up the negotiations offered by the CDA, Saunders asked, what would be its attitude toward the inclusion of West Bankers in an Egyptian delegation? Hussein replied that Jordan had made it clear that it would not stand in the way of West Bank Palestinians and will support whatever action they decide to take. Jordan has already begun increasing its contacts with the West Bank, he said, but needs time to organize its compaign. Asked whether those West Bankers who might be inclined to participate in negotiations could be supported effectively against those with PLO connections and those who oppose the CDA, Hussein said this was possible but would require more resources than Jordan possesses. The Saudis, he said, are tipping the balance in the West Bank and elsewhere by their generous financial support of the PLO. Saunders asked what US could do to help. The King replied: (1) provide Jordan with materials (such as answers to questions) for a dialogue with West Bankers, (2) “Ask your friends (read Saudis) to make up their minds”. 8. Saunders closed the discussion by saying that he looks forward to a more detailed discussion of US responses when he returned from talks in Saudi Arabia. Once again, he emphasized that the replies are straight-forward and honest reflection of precise US position. To have gone beyond them in terms of specific commitments about the results of negotiations would have been a disservice to the spirit of frankness that characterizes US-Jordanian relations. He added that Hussein has received statements of the US view on issues, such as Jerusalem, which are important to him and to all Arabs and that he had President Carter’s commitment by word and deed to continue as a full partner in the negotiations until a successful conclusion is achieved. Saunders pointed out the strong congressional and public support the President enjoys for his efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and the high priority that objective has for the President. He suggested that Hussein ponder these important considerations along with the other elements of his decision on Jordanian policy. In closing, King Hussein suggested he now had a better understanding of US strategy at Camp David and is sympathetic to giving fullest consideration to our views, in particular on ways to maintain pressure for Israeli withdrawal and West Bank self-determination. 9. Saunders comment: Jordanian policy toward West Bank/Gaza negotiations and Baghdad summit8 is still very much in flux. Today’s reading had to be that Jordan is not likely to make a decision before Arab summit, but there is a serious interest and increasing activity with West Bankers which Sharaf promised to discuss with me in more detail Thursday. Jordanians keep stressing the risks in joining a process 8 Ibid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the coincidence of these Israeli statements with some of the at least superficial aspects of the Camp David Accords were an element contributing to reserve with which he has been treating Camp David. 3. King said he hopes we appreciate his efforts over past 11 years during which he undertook extensive clandestine contacts with Israelis, involving considerable risks, during which he tried his best to move towards peace. He said that in a sense his previous wife (Queen Alya) met her death (in night helicopter crash) as a result of this effort because it was necessary to do extensive night flying in royal helicopter to provide a cover for the use of helicopter for night meetings with Israelis. King added that he personally would be ready to meet his death “this minute” if that would help to bring a sound lasting peace to the area and that “nothing is too great” for him to undertake to advance that goal. 4. King said he deeply appreciates all you have done and are doing for peace in MidEast and wishes to convey his gratitude and respect to you, and his hopes to continue our dialogue. King mentioned your handwritten letter3 to him in which you referred to your awareness of risks to his position but to greater risk of not taking steps to continue momentum of peace process. 5. King said that he will need a little time to look closely at the evolving situation and to consult and discuss Jordan’s possible role within Jordan and with Arab moderates. He said that “before he takes the plunge he would like to know where the shore line is since Jordan is not a good swimmer”, unlike Egypt, which is more isolated from heartland of Arab world, any miscalculation could involve Jordan in fighting on several fronts. As a result Jordan must work on the Arabs for some support. In this respect, he noted particularly that Saudis with their fixation with PLO were not rpt. not giving him support he would need to enter negotiations. I will be following this up in Saudi Arabia.4 West 3 See Document 61. 4 Saunders met with Fahd on October 18. They discussed the U.S. answer to Hussein’s questions. The Embassy transmitted a summary of the meeting in telegram 7469 from Jidda, October 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850036–2409) In addition, Saunders held a meeting with Kamel, Adham, and Turki on October 18 and a final meeting with Saud, Turki, Adham, and others on October 19. Saunders dispatched a report of all his meetings with Saudi officials in telegram 7470 from Jidda, October 19. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the treaty is signed in President Carter’s presence, here or at Jabal Musa, he is prepared to accede to a request from President Carter that ambassadors be exchanged as soon as diplomatic relations are established. Mubarak made a point of saying that this concession is for President Carter and should not rpt not be mentioned to the Israelis, the Egyptian delegation or be included in the treaty. Moreover, Mubarak said, Sadat’s willingness to do this is contingent on a specific inclusion of Gaza in the treaty. (D) On Gaza, Mubarak said Sadat considers it essential to include a reference to moving ahead on Gaza in the Sinai treaty lest failure to do so isolate Egypt in the Arab world. Sadat wants the self-governing body to be set up in Gaza without delay. The Israelis should withdraw their military forces to security points that are agreed upon without delay. Sadat would like these points included in the Sinai treaty, but Mubarak indicated that the President has an open mind on this subject—so long as progress on Gaza is synchronized with the progress on implementing the Sinai treaty. Specifically, if as President Carter has suggested, the Israelis have completed their interim withdrawal in Sinai in six months time, a self-governing body should by that time have been negotiated and established (perhaps on the last day or the day before Sinai withdrawal) so that “self-rule” is in effect in Gaza at approximately the same time as Phase I of Sinai withdrawal is completed. Sadat wants President Carter to know that if new leaders cannot be found in Gaza, the present ones would be acceptable for this purpose. Sadat is prepared, in accordance with his letter to President Carter, to begin negotiations on a Gaza settlement immediately and without waiting for Hussein’s or West Bank agreement, so that there can be synchronization between Sinai and Gaza. In making these points, Mubarak stressed that Sadat believes that he cannot go it alone in Sinai. There must be some parallelism between Sinai and a Gaza settlement. Sadat was confident that President Carter understands this from their talks at Camp David. 3. I told Mubarak that I would, of course, convey President Sadat’s views. I reminded him, however, that Sadat had agreed that there be no formal linkage between the two framework documents. President Carter has spoken of the need for an inter-relationship between the two sets of negotiations, but I doubted that the Israelis would agree to including Gaza in the Sinai treaty. A Gaza settlement, I pointed out to Mubarak, would be based not upon the Egyptian/Israeli framework document, but upon the comprehensive framework. Hence, while we also appreciate the need for an inter-relationship between the two processes, they are not part and parcel of the document under which negotiations are now taking place. Mubarak insisted that Sadat needs a specific relationship between the Sinai agreement and the establishment of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State Vance in Geneva, the White House, and the Embassies in Egypt, Israel, and Jordan1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 8. The breakdown is more a reflection of the present sour political mood, however, than any inherent difficulty over military issues. As soon as things get moving at the political level, we expect Tamir and Magdoub will very quickly dispose of what problems remain. Newsom Telegram From the Department of State to the Consulate General in Jerusalem and the Embassies in Egypt and Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —2. The parties agree to the stationing of United Nations personnel in areas described in Annex I. The parties agree not to request withdrawal of the United Nations personnel and that these personnel will not be removed unless such removal is approved by the Security Council of the United Nations, with the affirmative vote of the five permanent members, unless the parties otherwise agree. —3. A joint commission will be established to facilitate the implementation of the treaty, as provided for in Annex I. Article V Freedom of Navigation —1. Ships of Israel, and cargoes destined for or coming from Israel, shall enjoy the right of free passage through the Suez Canal and its approaches through the Gulf of Suez and the Mediterranean Sea on the basis of the Constantinople Convention of 1888, applying to all nations. Israeli nationals, vessels and cargoes, as well as persons, vessels and cargoes destined for or coming from Israel, shall be accorded nondiscriminatory treatment in all matters connected with usage of the canal. —2. The parties consider the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba to be international waterways open to all nations for unimpeded and non-suspendable freedom of navigation and overflight and undertake to respect each other’s right to such navigation and overflight. Article VI Priority of Obligations —1. Each party ensures to and agrees with the other, in recognition of the parties’ commitments to each other in this treaty, that there will be no conflict between its obligations under this treaty and any of its other obligations, including those under any other international agreement, whenever made. Each party also assures the other that it will respect its obligations under the United Nations Charter in its dealings with all states. —2. The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations under the present treaty. —3. They further undertake to take all the necessary measures for the application in their relations of the provisions of the multilateral conventions to which they are parties, including the submission of appropriate notification to the Secretary General of the United Nations and other depositories of such conventions. —4. This treaty does not affect and shall not be interpreted as affecting in any way the rights and obligations of the parties under the Charter of the United Nations.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX told Sadat that he could not agree with this.7 He would not be able to go on with the negotiations if Sadat were to insist. The President feels that the line should be around the settlement. If Sadat does agree to this, he will not allow the settlers to go into Egyptian territory from the settlement. The President said that he had also informed the Egyptians that they could only have SAM-7 missiles across the Canal. Weizman said that this would be no problem. The President said that all other missiles would have to be west of the Canal. The Egyptians have referred this to Cairo and they will provide an answer soon. They understand that they can move their other missiles up to the Canal. The President said that he had also discussed the question of the timing of normalization. The Egyptians have talked of a seven-month period for normalization and the exchange of ambassadors. This was not specified at Camp David. The President’s first suggestion had been full normalization at the time of signing the peace treaty. Sadat had objected. He said that normalization could take place at the time of the interim withdrawal. The President said that he understood the Israelis wanted the exchange of ambassadors to be within one month of the interim withdrawal. The President had recommended to the Egyptians that they accept this one-month provision, and that it would be to their advantage. Israel is withdrawing faster than required, and will be out of al-Arish within two months. Israel has also offered open transportation between al-Arish and Gaza. The President asked if that was correct. Dayan said yes, although there might be some check posts along the way. The President said the Egyptian delegation would ask Sadat’s views on the settlement issue and the exchange of ambassadors. On Gaza, the President said he thought the Israelis understood the problem and asked if they had found a solution. Barak replied that something along the lines of the “question of Gaza will be solved according to the framework agreement” might be adequate. The President [asked?] if Israel could accept the language in the text as it now stands. Barak said that he had called the Prime Minister who had said the language was unacceptable. This is not a legal problem, but it is one of public opinion. It could imply that Israel accepted the status of Gaza as it was previously and that Israel had given up its claims. Barak had suggested “the issue of the status of Gaza”. Begin gave no answer to this. Barak had also suggested this language to al-Baz and had not gotten any reaction. The President noted that Sadat does not want to acknowledge that Gaza is a part of Israel. Dayan said that we might refer to the Camp 7 No record of this exchange has been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX question the viability of the treaty if the broader framework were not to be implemented. The President said that this was not a new concept. The Sinai framework itself was predicated on the acceptance of the general framework. Barak said that Israel’s problem was that any mention of the general framework as the basis for the Egyptian-Israeli treaty would seem to make the Egypt-Israel treaty conditional upon the implementation of the broader framework. If this is mentioned, somewhere in the treaty there must be a sentence that the treaty stands on its own. If that is included, then Israel does not care how much reference is made to the broader framework. Rosenne suggested language which would make the treaty completely separate from the broader framework agreement. Barak said that this would balance off any reference to the general framework. If this were included, the Egyptians could even add language in the preamble referring to the comprehensive peace. But if this sentence were not in the treaty, then no reference could be made to the broader framework. The President said that he did not believe that Sadat could agree to the Israeli language. He insists that there is some tie between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the comprehensive peace. The Sinai agreement was meant to be part of a general framework. This is why he was able to agree to it at Camp David. He needs to be able to make some specific reference to the broader framework. It seems to the President that the Israelis were moving backwards. Barak said that whatever connection existed between the two frameworks still remained, but out of the framework agreement on Sinai there was not going to be a specific treaty, and it should stand on its own. It is a contract between two parties. Rosenne said that the United States had made reference to the treaty standing on its own. The Israelis do not want to point to a separate peace with Egypt, but in legal terms the Egypt-Israel treaty should not be dependent upon anything else. Israel will still adhere to the broader framework agreement, but Israel needs some guarantee that the language in the preamble will not pose any conditions. The President said that if the Israelis could convince Sadat, it would be okay with him. But he would personally not try. He would not propose this language to Sadat. He would not say that there was no connection whatsoever. Two framework agreements were negotiated at Camp David. Everyone knew it at the time that they were linked. Sadat only signed the Egyptian-Israeli framework on the premise that the West Bank and Gaza framework was viable and agreed upon. Rosenne said that there was a difference between a political link and a legal link. The President said that the Israelis were wasting time on this issue with him. He would not propose a completely separate agreement. Rosenne said that this caused a serious problem. The Presi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Hansell said that the preamble language did not constitute a binding obligation. It could not be grounds for the termination of the Egyptian-Israeli treaty if the general framework were not implemented. Atherton added that the Egyptians have not seen that as setting a condition on the Egypt-Israel treaty. Barak said that he was afraid it could provide a legal basis for breaking their obligations. The President added that Egypt merely wants Israel to say in the preamble that it will reaffirm its commitment to the framework agreement. If after doing so, you were to declare sovereignty over Gaza, the Egyptian-Israeli treaty won’t be worth anything. Barak said that politically that was true, but not legally. Israel wants the legal structure to be correct. The President said that Begin had shown courage in taking a strong position on the removal of settlements. Sadat has also shown courage in breaking with the other Arabs. He has said that he will negotiate in the place of Jordan. Now Israel is suggesting that the framework might not go forward, but Egypt has said that it will negotiate. Barak asked what would happen if the Palestinians were to boycott the elections. The President said that there was no possibility that Sadat would declare the Egyptian-Israeli treaty null and void in that event. Barak replied that Israel is trying to find a way of stating the legal principle that the treaty will stand intact in those situations. Israel remains bound by the framework. Israel is not backing out of its obligations. Israel does not want the legal structure laid for an argument about the validity of the Egyptian-Israeli treaty. The President said that Barak was not trying to help solve the problem that exists. If Israel cannot accept the language in the preamble, then perhaps other language could be drafted which would say that if the general framework could not be implemented because of the actions of third parties, this would not be an obstacle to the Egyptian- Israeli treaty. Barak said that this suggestion helped, but there could be a situation in which Egypt might say that Israel was to blame for the non-implementation of the West Bank/Gaza framework. In reply, the President said it was impossible to cover every eventuality. If the Egyptians want to attack Israel, they will find some pretext. The President urged that we return to the kind of spirit that existed at Camp David when the agreements were signed. We want to remove obstacles. The Israelis know what Sadat needs in terms of his credibility in the Arab world. There has to be some reference to the Camp David agreements. The President said that he would be able to get Sadat to drop some references in the preamble, but not everything. Pretexts can always be found to break agreements. The Israelis might want to draft a paragraph dealing with the contingency in which the Palestinians and the Jordanians cause the problem for the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. But generally he has the impression that the Israelis are trying to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX problem. If it does, the Israelis should suggest another paragraph to include in the preamble. If the President can understand the Israeli concern, he’ll recommend to the Egyptians that they accept. But he has already gone to the Egyptians on the Israelis’ problems, and he has tried to get favorable action. He has not seen any comparable effort by the Israelis. They wait for the Egyptian draft, we modify it, and they keep pushing for better advantage. The President said that he found this very frustrating. He said that the Israelis were trying to undo the degree of linkage that had been established at Camp David. He knew that the Israelis had wanted none in the first place, but he could not understand why they now wanted to drop things, such as the U.N. Security Council endorsement of the treaty. Sadat also wants Israel to help out on international waterways, but Israel has not been forthcoming. On the points of importance to Israel, such as Suez passage, settlements, and others, the President has tried to help. If the Israelis now insist on the language they want in the text of the treaty, they are trying to undo any linkage at all. The Egyptian-Israeli treaty is based on the overall framework agreement. Sadat made sure that Israel would understand that at Camp David. He told this to the Israelis. Now the Israelis are trying to undo that minimum degree of linkage. Sadat has his integrity at stake. The President has told Hussein and Fahd and Assad that the two agreements are related. We have said that Sadat has not agreed to a separate peace treaty. For Israel now to create the impression of a separate peace would cause Sadat great problems. The President does not personally care about this issue, but he cannot accept the Israeli position in good conscience. Israel should be helping Sadat solve his problem. He cannot say that the Egyptian-Israeli treaty stands completely on its own. The Israelis know that there is an interconnection. Dayan said the President had referred to a political linkage, but not a legal linkage. The President agreed, and Dayan said that this is the Israeli position. Israel does not want a legal linkage. The President said that if the Jordanians and the Palestinians do not want to negotiate, neither he nor Sadat would use that as a pretext for saying that the Egyptian-Israeli treaty should not be honored. The Israelis could write something to deal with this situation. Dayan said that if there could be some statement on political linkage without implying legal linkage, the Israelis might be able to accept it. Barak was afraid that this might provide a pretext for not honoring the treaty, but the President replied again that a pretext can always be found. The Egyptians recognize that Israel wants to have influence in the West Bank and Gaza and in East Jerusalem. They know that Israel wants to keep settlements in the Golan. They are not forcing Israel to take a stand on these issues. They are not predicating this treaty on assurances that the Egyptian position

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egypt. This would preclude Soviets coming in and maneuvering in the Gulf of Aqaba. The President suggested that the parties accept this and the Israelis agreed. The President then showed the Israelis language that we would be prepared to use in a letter dealing with the U.N. force or a multilateral force if the U.N. would not agree to station troops in Sinai. This would be a letter from the United States to Israel. It should be kept secret for now, otherwise the U.N. will not act at all. Dayan said that the Israelis were concerned about the situation in which the United States might do its best to keep the U.N. force intact, but that it would fail. The President said that he would have to talk to Congress about the extent of the American obligation. Dayan said that he would ask the Cabinet not to publish the text of this letter. The President said it would be very embarrassing to him if it were published. He does not want to consult with Congress until we are closer to agreement on the treaty. Dayan agreed to this idea. The President asked what problems would remain if the Egyptians were to accept what had been decided on this evening. Barak pointed to three other problems. One was the linguistic problem on page 1. The Israelis would like to say “upon completion of the interim withdrawal”, rather than “after completion of the interim withdrawal”. This would mean that the Suez Canal would be open immediately. Atherton suggested that specific reference to the passage of Israeli ships in the Suez immediately should be put in Annex III, and Barak agreed. The President said that Egypt wanted to delete the reference to terrorism on page 3. Dayan said that he would have to refer this to the Cabinet, but that he would suggest that no reference be made to terrorism. The President suggested that some other word might be included. Weizman said that he would also recommend the deletion of the word. Barak then turned to Article VII on arbitration. The Prime Minister wants to reopen this issue, and now favors an arbitration commission of four members, two from each party. If each party agrees that a deadlock has been reached in the talks, by agreement they would name a fifth. But it should not be automatic that there would be a fifth member. The President said that the Israelis were going on their agreement to Article VII and that it would be hard for the Egyptians. Dayan said that they could leave it as it is now, and there might be a problem on other points. The Israelis then might want to reopen this one as well. The President asked whether they would agree that there would be a fourperson commission and if both agree there is a deadlock, then they will choose a fifth member. Barak said that this would be okay. The President said that he could agree to language as follows: “If the parties agree

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. After Begin welcomed my visit and asked if I were tired as a result of my travels, I recalled that the President had remarked in connection with the Camp David meetings that making peace is harder than making war. I added that I had experienced some of the truth of this during my visit to Jordan and Saudi Arabia where some of the agonies of making crucial decisions related to peace were as evident as in Israel. Begin thanked me for recognizing the problems he faces, adding with evident feeling that some circles in the US always thought of ways to help out Sadat without realizing that others have problems as well in the aftermath of Camp David. “I have problems of my own,” Begin said which are internal in distinction to the external pressures on Sadat. “For the first time in thirty-five years, since January, 1944, there is division among my closest long-term associates in the Irgun.2 This has never happened before, but now, a group within the old Irgun, men with whom I have risked my life, have been writing a letter in which they denounce the CDA and the policies of the Begin government.” All I ask, Begin noted is that it is recognized in justice that others besides Sadat have problems. 3. I responded to Begin’s remarks by saying that, in some respects, I thought that the difficulties he faces are harder than those of others because he has to work them out within a democratic process. He agreed, stressing that half his old friends and comrades-in-arms in Herut3 either abstained or voted against the CDA in the Knesset. Sensing, I think, that his dilemmas were understood, Begin asked what I could tell him about King Hussein’s readiness to participate in the peace negotiations as a result of my recent talks with him. I told Begin that Hussein is not yet prepared to enter the process, giving some of the flavor of Hussein’s agony in facing what he had characterized as one of the most difficult choices in Jordan’s history. I said he faces divisions within his country, feels he has no Arab support and believes he was let down by Sadat. Before Hussein reaches a final position, I commented, he must go through the Arab summit process which is already in train. I added, however, that Hussein has confirmed to us that he is prepared to encourage his friends and supporters on the West Bank to cooperate with the efforts leading to negotiations and will put his weight behind the West Bank aspect of the CDA. Begin inquired whether Hussein 2 Irgun Zvai Leumi was a militant Jewish underground movement in Palestine, founded in 1937 by former Haganah (precursor to the Israeli Defense Forces) commanders. The Irgun is most remembered for its July 22, 1946, attack on the King David Hotel, the British headquarters in Palestine, killing 91 soldiers and civilians, and the April 9, 1948, raid on the Palestinian village of Deir Yassin. Menachem Begin headed the Irgun from 1943 until 1948. 3 Founded by Begin in 1948, Herut formed a constituent part of the Likud alliance of Israeli right-wing political parties from 1973 until 1988, when Likud transformed itself into a unitary party.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX vious commitment from the United States to consult on such matters. He said that he had received copies of the answers only two days earlier and had an opportunity only to begin his study and that he is finding new things in the document every time he reads it. He expressed an intention to write to President Carter, implying that he would deal with some of the points on which he disagrees. 7. The next hour of the meeting was given over to Begin’s pointby-point discussion of his disagreement with specific aspects of the US replies. It was agreed that he would proceed through the document without my responses until the end. Begin’s comments, keyed to question numbers, follows.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX under way in Washington. Begin said he was sorry but on this question he was speaking from the heart as well as the brain. Focusing on para 2 rpt 2 of reply 4(a), Begin drew attention to the phrase that “the final status of Jerusalem could be different . . .” from the rest of the West Bank. He said this could be interpreted as meaning that Jerusalem in toto is part of the West Bank.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX him I did not intend to do so). He said he had no objection to my meeting with West Bank and Gaza Palestinians as he understood I would be doing that evening. He added, however, that he felt our Consulate General in Jerusalem was too active and should not take over the Israeli job of dealing with Palestinians. No American, he asserted, should negotiate with the West Bankers and Gazans since that, under the CDA, is an Israeli task. He said he knows that officials of ConGen Jerusalem sometimes have contacts with these people and are exercising an Israeli right. Begin said he had just received an intelligence report of threats against those who had met with Atherton. He said he is watching out for them but faces significant security problems, including the availability of large quantities of explosives in the area. He said he would soon be writing President Carter and would outline the security problem. In closing, Begin wished me success in my mission. 32. Ambassador Lewis said he would like to make one point before the meeting broke up. Under the American distribution of responsibilities, it is Embassy Tel Aviv that has responsibility for contacts in Gaza and the ConGen which carried out the function in the West Bank. What both are doing, Lewis stated, is exactly what I had said I was doing. We are quietly explaining the CDA and taking soundings of views. We were not negotiating. We had no intent to suplant the Israeli role. We are all on the same team, trying to implement the CDA and bring peace to the Middle East. We recognize the security problems related to our contacts but also know that the local inhabitants incur risks by their contacts with Israeli officials too. Begin nodded assent. If Begin has any question about what we are doing, Lewis said, he could ask and we would tell him frankly. I added that I held a similar meeting with Palestinians on the East Bank and believed I was sensitized to the problems associated with such contacts. 33. Comment: Begin was quite tense when the meeting began (he barely looked at me while shaking my hand), but loosened up as our talk went along, after I expressed recognition of the personally difficult time he had been having and gave him a chance to talk about it. Although markedly distressed with our replies to Hussein, he periodically punctuated his comments with humorous asides. He was always courteous, and emotional only when discussing the Jerusalem issue. 34. At the same time, he had obviously pored over our responses in his lawyerly way. He seemed genuinely hurt and unable to understand why we had departed from the agreed CDA language in responding to the King. My explanation appeared to make no dent on him and I think we can expect soon a lengthy letter to the President from Begin enumerating the Prime Minister’s grievances. The meeting served its purposes, however, in letting him put his initial reaction on the record and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President began by reviewing his talks2 with the Israelis. He said that they had shown flexibility and that they would be going back to their cabinet with a number of specific recommendations. He gave the Egyptians copies3 of the revised treaty text. In the preamble, the reference to reaffirming a commitment to the framework agreement would be left in, and in addition there would be a letter4 in which the Egyptians and the Israelis would commit themselves to begin negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza within one month of the signing of the treaty. The President urged that they both sign the same text. The Israelis have no objection to what the Egyptians put in a separate letter of their own concerning their views on the West Bank and Gaza. The Israelis will have a different letter on that topic. It is up to Egypt to decide what to put into a separate letter. The President said that he would suggest the deletion of a couple of the paragraphs in the preamble and suggested one addition referring to the Egyptian-Israeli framework agreement. The President asked if the Egyptians had received any new instructions on the timing of the exchange of ambassadors and Boutros Ghali said that they had not. The President then turned to the reference to Gaza in the treaty. He said that Israelis were prepared to accept reference to the issue of the status of Gaza. He might also propose a new sentence saying that the status of Gaza and the West Bank will be decided in accordance with the framework agreement at Camp David. The President said that he understood that Egypt does not claim Gaza as a part of Egypt, but does not want to acknowledge that it is a part of Israel. The Israelis reserve their right to claim sovereignty over this area. A map should be appended which would show the border between Egypt and Israel, as well as the boundary around Gaza. El-Erian said the idea which would be reflected is that Egypt has some responsibility under the general armistice agreements for Gaza. Boutros Ghali said that he would accept the language proposed by the President. Egypt will mention its special responsibility for Gaza in a letter. 2 See Document 96. Carter had also met with the Israelis on the afternoon of October 20. The President’s Daily Diary records that Carter met with Dayan and Weizman in the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX again said that a quick move to binding arbitration would cause him some problems. He would like to have some in-between step. El-Erian suggested a slight change in Article VII, paragraph 2. The four-member commission should be for conciliation, not arbitration. The President said that this sounded all right to him, but they should try to work out three stages. El-Erian suggested negotiations first, then conciliation, then arbitration. The President then showed the Egyptians the letter that he had drafted earlier in the morning. He would like Begin and Sadat both to sign this letter committing themselves to begin negotiations within one month on the West Bank and Gaza. In addition, the Egyptians could have their own letter using Camp David language on the West Bank and Gaza. Boutros Ghali asked if the letter would be part of the treaty. The President said that it would be signed on the same day. Israel has not yet seen the exact text of the letter, however, but they will reconfirm their commitment to the Camp David agreements and they will allow the full text to be annexed to this letter. It will say that within one month negotiations will begin on the West Bank and Gaza. This will establish a strong link between the Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. El-Erian said that if this letter were part of the treaty it would be great. The President said that it would not be in the text, but the same procedure would be used as at Camp David, with the letters being released on the same day. Boutros Ghali asked if it would be legally binding and the President confirmed that it would be. On this basis, the Egyptians agreed to the idea of the exchange of the letter. The President then turned to page 6 concerning the priority of obligations. He said that Israel wanted to be assured that if the Jordanians or Palestinians refused to participate in the West Bank/Gaza negotiations, this would not impede the implementation of the Egyptian- Israeli treaty. Boutros Ghali initially hesitated to react to the new language, but on reconsideration said that there would be no problem. The President then turned to page 5a. This deals with the question precedence. Some of Egypt’s mutual defense agreements are in conflict with the terms of this treaty. We have tried to find words in our treaties, such as the NATO treaty, which make it clear that the most recent treaty takes precedence. El-Erian said that this was a legitimate Israeli concern. According to the Egyptian constitution, a treaty requires that domestic law be in conformity with the treaty. The treaty is selfexecuting in that sense. Egypt has committed itself to end the boycott. Many Egyptian laws will have to be abrogated. Everything that has been based on the state of war will end. It is hard to say that in all circumstances this treaty will prevail. Therefore, Egypt preferred the first American draft, which simply said that “there will be no conflict.” Only

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said the whole text of the Camp David agreement should be appended in any case to the exchange of letters. It would be better not to start selecting different parts of the agreement. The President said that he also suggested a letter on U.N. forces. There could be a problem if the Soviets or the Chinese refused to approve the stationing of U.N. forces in the demilitarized zones. The United States wants to insure that the treaty would not fail on this account. The President would be prepared to send the letter which he showed to the Egyptian delegation. El-Erian said that the letter was acceptable. The President said that there could be troops from many different nations, provided they were mutually acceptable. If Begin accepts all of these suggestions, we will have resolved all of the difficulties. We will try to get the Israelis to drop any reference to Egyptian internal law. We also talked to them about the missiles, and have said that only SA–7 missiles should be allowed across the canal. The other missiles could move up the canal. This can be done as soon as the treaty is signed. This is acceptable to Israel. Boutros Ghali said this would be all right. Atherton said that three annexes remained to be completed. The one7 dealing with diplomatic relations was most important. It needs to be worked out in detail. Boutros Ghali said that he hoped to get answers from Sadat. The question of the settlement is also unresolved. He did not want to put the reference to one month for the exchange of ambassadors in the treaty. He asked if this could be handled in a letter. Egypt agrees and will do it. He will send a letter to Dayan if necessary. The President said that he would try to work this out. If Sadat agrees to do this within a month, perhaps he can refer to it in a letter along with the letter that says negotiations will begin within one month. The President said that he would try to get the Israelis to accept the idea of referring to this in a letter rather than in the annex to the treaty. El-Erian said the Israelis are also asking for a guaranteed oil supply. They want an advantageous position. They will already have a de facto advantage because of their location. The President said that he agreed with Egypt on this point. Atherton said the oil experts have not yet begun meeting and the talks could be complicated. The President said that he would not support the idea that Israel has any right to preferential treatment on oil. Maybe they can negotiate a five-year supply contract, but Israel cannot demand this of Egypt. This should not hold up the signing of the treaty. Israel should not have to be given preferential treatment. Boutros Ghali said that he agreed this should not delay the treaty. The President said that Israel already had some advantage 7 See Annex III.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX sador within one month. The Egyptians said that they would be prepared to give US an oral commitment, and that then we could send such a letter to the Israelis. The military delegations met3 during the day and have reached agreement on the interim withdrawal line, with the exception of the northern sector. We will meet4 with the Egyptians tomorrow to go over the annex on normalization of relations. Roy Atherton and I are preparing draft letters to Sadat5 and Begin,6 and these should be ready Sunday7 morning. Bill Quandt8 3 No record of this meeting has been found. 4 See Document 101.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX move an inch without the PLO, Jordan, Syria and Saudi Arabia,” Freij said. 5. Mayor Shawwa noted that democratic principles insured rule of majority, and most people in occupied territories supported the PLO. “How could Israel force another representative on them?” he asked. He mentioned that during recent meeting with Arafat he had proposed a transition period followed by complete Israeli withdrawal and a link with Jordan. Arafat had proposed this suggestion to executive committee and gained approval, Shawwa said. 6. Saunders said he was hearing same thing but in reverse from Arab states. Saudis said they couldn’t move, but Jordan could. Jordan said it couldn’t move, but West Bankers/Gazans could. Question was who would take first step. As for PLO, a new situation had arisen. CDA clearly recognized political character of Palestinian problem. In new situation, should PLO decide it could accept 242, USG would talk with it, but, he wondered, given Israeli attitudes whether that would much advance peace. 7. Al-Masri concurred that PLO must be involved, but “with a new formula; we could be the PLO.” The important thing, al-Masri continued, was to change the CDA to stipulate an end to settlements and guarantee self-determination for Palestinians. With that, Palestinians could go to PLO and Arab countries for support. 8. Saunders said he could guarantee continued US participation as a full partner, but not the final outcome. USG would certainly consider any reasonable counterproposal from a representative group of Palestinians, but the CDA itself could not feasibly be changed. Any proposal would have to take into consideration political realities. From his experience at Camp David, Israel had gone about as far as it could for the moment. There was no way the Americans could simply dictate sweeping alterations. Palestinians, he suggested, should consider tackling their problems in a logical sequence, making progress where that was possible, e.g. on powers of SGA, and use success at one stage to open new possibilities at another. “I am amazed that you are telling me, and I shall have to report to President Carter that you prefer continued occupation to self-government,” Saunders said. 9. Abu Ghazallah protested that Saunders was thus asking an unfair question, but Bakerjian asked: “Do we all want to reject even this modest step forward?” 10. Bakerjian asked whether USG could declare that sovereignty lies with Palestinian people in West Bank/Gaza, but, for practical reasons, there would have to be a transition period and an SGA. “In situations like this where sovereignty is historically confused, the USG holds that sovereignty resides with the people on the land and that their will must be expressed through an agreed method of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 101. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to President Carter1 Washington, October 22, 1978 SUBJECT Today’s Talks with the Egyptian Delegation We met with the Egyptian Delegation this afternoon for four hours to discuss Annex 3 which deals with normalization of relations. Boutros Ghali had received reports from his Ambassadors in the Arab world which caused him considerable concern over mounting Arab opposition to the prospective Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. He was also embarrassed by reports out of Israel that the treaty is virtually in final form. Boutros made one suggestion that he thought might help Egypt in the Arab world. At the time of the signing of the treaty, Sadat would write a letter to both you and Prime Minister Begin spelling out his views on a comprehensive settlement and on the West Bank and Gaza issues. The language of the letter would be taken from the Camp David framework agreements. Boutros asked whether you could reply to Sadat in a letter which would reaffirm our willingness to be a full partner in future negotiations and to work for a comprehensive settlement. Roy and I told him that we would like to see his draft language of their letter, and that we would seek to get your general reaction to this procedure. In the talks, we reached full agreement with the Egyptian delegation on a revised text2 of Annex 3. We will show this to the Israelis on Wednesday when they return,3 and we anticipate that they will find the draft acceptable, perhaps with a few minor problems. We do not see any major difficulties, however. Tomorrow4 the military delegations will seek to reach final agreement on the text of Annex 1. This will put us in a position by Wednesday when the Israelis return to accelerate the pace of the negotiations, with the objective of reaching full agreement by the end of the week. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX I have also suggested to your delegation that you and President Sadat exchange letters agreeing to begin negotiations within one month of signing the treaty to establish the self-governing authority. I consider it particularly important that this letter be signed and announced on the same day as the treaty is signed. As you will learn from your delegation, I am also prepared to send you a letter that I will be prepared to take the necessary steps to ensure that a UN or multinational force will remain in Sinai on a permanent basis. On three other issues of deep concern to you, I have made a personal appeal to President Sadat. I have asked him to accept an interim withdrawal line which will leave Neot Sinai under Israeli control until the final withdrawal is carried out. I have also urged him to accept a limitation on his surface-to-air missiles whereby only SA–7s or their equivalents would be allowed to accompany the mechanized division in Sinai. Finally, I have strongly advised President Sadat to send an Ambassador to Israel within one month of the completion of the interim withdrawal. I have told him I would be prepared to record this agreement in a letter which I would send to you, as Foreign Minister Dayan suggested. President Sadat had not yet given me his answers, but I am hopeful that he will adopt a positive attitude. Important work remains to be done by the technical experts on some of the issues dealt with in the annexes to the treaty, but it is my belief that we are very close to having an acceptable treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel. This is an historic moment and you can take well-deserved pride in having brought your people a long step toward the goal they cherish—to live in peace with all their neighbors. Mr. Prime Minister, it would be a great honor for me to join you to witness the signing of the peace treaty. You have my best personal wishes, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text. Christopher

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 104. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, October 24, 1978 SUBJECT Israeli Position on Oil Negotiations PARTICIPANTS David Korn, Director, NEA/IAI David E. Zweifel, NEA/EGY John Craig, NEA/RA Hanon Bar-On, Israeli Minister Joseph Vardi, Director General, Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure Elisha Ruih, V.P., Operations, Israeli National Oil Co., Ltd. Ely Rubenstein, Secretary to Foreign Minister Dayan Naftali Lavie, Press Spokesman, Israeli Foreign Ministry Eitan Raff, Economic Counselor, Israeli Embassy We called on members of the Israeli delegation at the Madison Hotel to learn about the Israeli position on the oil issue and what may have transpired during the course of October 23 Israeli-Egyptian discussions2 on this item. Bar-On recapitulated the Egyptian position as having been as follows. There should be early Israeli withdrawal from the area, a transfer of operating fields in good order, and cessation of exploration activity upon signature of the agreement. Any subsequent cooperation with the GOE (e.g. concessions in free areas) would be on the basis of international bidding practices. The same would apply to Israeli purchase of Egyptian petroleum at competitive prices. The Egyptians did recognize that, by reason of proximity, Israel would have a competitive advantage as a logical market for Egyptian crude. He then summed up the GOI position as follows. There is no question about Egyptian sovereignty in the area. The Israelis are prepared to lay aside previous legal argumentation during the current negotiations. During the Egyptian-Israeli meeting on October 23, claims were not discussed. Basic premises underlying the Israeli position are that any economic cooperation is positive and “peace building” should be 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Af-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ment. He reported that the GOI is “very eager” to buy Egyptian petroleum at current market prices; this would serve GOE interests as much as it does those of the GOI. According to Vardi, the October 23 discussions touched on the Israeli suggestion that at some future time a gas pipeline might be laid from the Egyptian Delta and Northern Sinai into Israel. This was not discussed at length. Again on the issue of Israeli future purchases, Vardi stated GOI willingness to accept the concept of international bidding (apart from production from the Alma field where the principle of payment-inkind would apply). The latter would involve renegotiation of the sharing arrangements between the Israeli proposed Neptune-INOC consortium (as operators) and the GOE. Mr. Korn asked how much oil the Israelis wanted to purchase from Egypt. After some consultation amongst themselves, Vardi spoke for the Israeli team, stating that they would hope for approximately 22,000 bpd during the second half of 1979; this amount might be doubled in 1980. He also volunteered that the GOI is prepared to help Egypt market additional oil, including possible re-exportation. When we sought clarification of Israeli thinking on the date of transfer, Bar-On, seconded by Vardi, stated that the present negotiating mandate for the team is to press for the transfer of the present operating arrangement to Egyptian suzerainty. If this transpires, the transfer could take place quickly. Contrarily, the Israelis hinted that Egyptian refusal to accept this formula might cause extended negotiations which, perforce, would delay the transfer. At the conclusion of the discussion, Vardi and Bar-On argued that AMOCO is a key actor in the considerations, and that that company, by seeking to hold the GOE to legal obligations, might impede progress. The thrust of this remark was that the USG should intervene to move AMOCO towards a compromise along the lines proposed by the GOI (Bar-On made this point to Korn again more specifically as the meeting broke up). We pointed out that we do not feel in a position to tell either of the two American companies what to do. Korn said Neptune’s Counsel, Bill Rogers5 of Arnold & Porter, had called at the Department earlier in the day and that we had suggested that he speak to the legal counsel for AMOCO. Finally, we noted that USG responsibility to private commercial firms is essentially to help protect such firms against uncompensated expropriation action. 5 William D. Rogers previously served as Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs from 1976 until 1977 and as Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs from 1974 until 1976.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 106. Memorandum of Conversation1 Jidda, undated Participants Crown Prince Fahd bin Abd al-Aziz Al-Saud John C. West, American Ambassador SUMMARY Crown Prince Fahd, in a two hour late night session at his Jidda home on October 24, outlined in detail the actions which he and SAG are taking to provide all-out support for President Carter’s efforts to implement the Camp David accords. Actions taken or underway include: (1) A message of “strong” support to Sadat including assurances of continued economic and political support. Specific assurances include commitment to $108 million in aid for purchase of military vehicles and a “set aside” of $350 million as down payment on purchase of F–5s. On political side, Fahd has guaranteed that Egypt will not be embarrassed at Baghdad Summit;2 (2) A message to King Hussein urging him to support the Camp David accords by at least encouraging Palestinians on the West Bank to join the process; (3) In communication with Iraq, making plain that the Saudis will not tolerate any action at Baghdad designed to embarrass or isolate Egypt; (4) To insure that Baghdad Summit does not embarrass Egypt, a “time bomb” understanding with YAR to raise the abortive October 15 coup3 as issue with consequent embarrassment to Libya and Iraq; (5) Visit by FonMin Saud to each of Gulf states to make Saudi position clear and secure support therefore. Further, the Crown Prince said he was summoning Yasser Arafat to Saudi Arabia and proposed to tell him in clear, unmistakable terms: (1) that Saudi Arabia is supporting the Camp David accords and strongly recommends that the PLO do likewise; (2) that if the PLO is truly the leader of the Palestinians, its leadership can be affirmed and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “First of all”, he said, “I firmly believe that President Carter was sent by God to help us secure a just and lasting peace in the Mideast. I have the utmost faith in his integrity and high motives. We cannot fail to support him in this time of need. And I want you to take to him personally what I am about to say to you.” “I was terribly pained,” he said, “Yes, actually in physical distress when I could not offer more support at our last meeting (October 18) with the President’s representative, Mr. Saunders.5 However, I could not tell him that I would do that which at that time I was not certain that I could do. So I had to be frank and honest although I’m sure he felt that I was negative and not giving the support which he would have liked.” “After that meeting”, he added, “I went into a period of deep thought and concentration on what I and Saudi Arabia could do to give the support to the President which he wanted, needed and deserved. As a result of that period of concentrated thought and study I would like to tell you what I have done, what I am doing, and what I am going to do” he added with a smile. “First of all” he said, “I sent a message to President Sadat that I would like him to send here a trusted emissary. He immediately sent his special advisor, Sayid Marii. I gave to Marii the strongest possible message of support for Sadat and Egypt. The message should make President Sadat feel strong, independent and good. I assured him that Sadat could count on continued support, both economic and political from Saudi Arabia. I told him that we would not allow any action to be taken against him as a result of the Camp David meeting.” Marii said that this strong message of Saudi support would definitely make Sadat heave a big sigh of relief and resume breathing comfortably. “Sayid told me that Egypt now needed badly some funds to pay for some military equipment. He said $108 million was needed now to pay for some military vehicles. I told him that this was no problem, and he could get it anytime.”6 “We then discussed the payment for the F–5s. I told him that we had a cash problem; that our oil production was down from last year; that the decline in the value of the dollar had substantially affected our purchasing power. However, I told him that I was setting aside $350 million now to be applied on the F–5 purchase; that I would work with them on the balance and it would be taken care of somehow. Perhaps the U.S. would help.” “I asked Marii to urge Sadat not to heed what he might hear or read about Saudi frigidity towards him, or that Saudi Arabia does not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “But,” added the Crown Prince with a somewhat mischievous grin, “Let me tell you what I have done to guarantee that the Summit will not get out of hand and be used by the Iraqis and the Libyans to condemn Egypt and the moderate Arabs.” “Just after the attempted coup in North Yemen on October 19”, Fahd said, “President Salih of North Yemen called and said he wanted to break off relations with Iraq and Libya because they were behind the attempted coup.” “Salih told me that sometime ago one of the YAR ministers met Qadhafi at a Libyan national celebration and that he (Qadhafi) said he had been fearing disturbing things about a possible uprising or revolt in YAR. He seemed to intend it as a friendly warning.” “I told Salih”, Fahd said, “that Qadhafi reminded me of the old Arab proverb of the man who commits the murder and then becomes a pall-bearer at the victim’s funeral!” “Salih sent FonMin Abdullah Asnaj to see me,” Fahd said, “and I advised him not to break off relations with these two countries, but to let them stew in their own juice for a while. I suggested, however, that YAR come to the Baghdad Summit prepared to raise that issue if the Rejectionists say anything nasty about Egypt.” “Both Asnaj and Salih have agreed to this,” Fahd concluded, “and what do you think of this as a political maneuver?” he asked. “A masterpiece, literally a stroke of genius” I replied. “I also have had a visit, at my request, from Abdul Hamid Sharaf, Chief of the Royal Diwan of Jordan,” Fahd said. “I explained to him our policy and told him to tell King Hussein that he should encourage the West Bankers and Palestinians to join the peace process. Hussein would thus exhibit his renowned courage and we would support him. He should urge the “inside” (West Bank and Gaza) Palestinians to agree to the Camp David agreements even if he (Hussein) could not yet openly do the same. I asked Sharaf to impress on his King that I think President Carter wants to see nothing but good happen to his Arab friends. Now is the time to support this unique friend, Carter, I concluded.”7 “I sent Prince Saud to the Gulf countries (Tonight he is in Oman) in order to explain our policy and urge them to take the right stand at the Baghdad Summit.” Fahd next turned to the question of the PLO. “I am inviting Arafat to come to Saudi Arabia,” he said, “and I am going to talk plainly and 7 Brzezinski drew a vertical line in the left-hand margin adjacent to this paragraph.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX afat with Saudi Arabia’s and the Crown Prince’s personal deep trust in President Carter and his administration. “I will tell him,” said Fahd, “that we did not rush to applaud or support Sadat’s Jerusalem visit or the Camp David agreements. But after careful study of the latter we’ve come to the conclusion that supporting Sadat’s and Carter’s efforts would produce such worthwhile results as no other Arab, or group of Arabs, could begin to bring about.” At this point Fahd, almost plaintively, urged me to reassure Saunders of his best wishes and appreciation. “I hope,” said the Crown Prince, “that what I’ve managed to do, and will continue to do, will make up for the stiff encounter last time with you and Saunders!” Fahd then discussed the situation in South Yemen (PDRY). He related that the PDRY President was constantly sending him messages seeking to patch up their relationship. He said he did not trust PDRY, but wanted at least to keep the lines of communication open and to continue to coordinate with the USG and the YAR. He then concluded with an emotional appeal to President Carter. “Please tell the President,” he said, “that Saudi Arabia is the real, true friend of the U.S. We have always been your friend, even in the days of Nasser. It was then that the voice of Saudi Arabia, and Saudi Arabia alone was raised in defense of the U.S. in the Arab world.” “I hope we have shown you in times passed as well as now how deep and meaningful that friendship is. It is not only a recognition of our mutual self-interest but also the mutual admiration and respect which has developed between our people as well as the leaders over the years. It has now reached its brightest point under the magnificent leadership of President Carter.” “I now ask you to plead with him for the sake of both our countries and our people to stop the Soviets from their expansion here. Draw the line and don’t let them go any further.” The Crown Prince said with obvious emphasis “Please tell the President that in us he has the most constant friend in the region. In me he has a person who is proud of this friendship. We therefore urge him not to lose sight of this friendship but, instead, to examine it and see whether or not it deserves America’s concern for our safety and security and her consequent determination to strengthen Saudi Arabia. Thus we can be more readily and adequately cooperative in driving away the Communist dangers encircling your interests and ours: so obvious even by only looking at your very clear maps!” concluded Crown Prince Fahd. “I will certainly give that message to the President,” I replied, “and while I cannot speak officially on this specific point for my government, I feel that your support of the Camp David accords will be of major assistance to our government in the formulation and implementation of the kind of Mideast policy which would meet with your satisfaction. If

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX well as horses, agriculture, etc. would be enjoyable topics for the King and the President. I thanked the Crown Prince as profusely as I could and assured him that I knew the President would be most happy and reassured at my report of the evening’s meeting. Fahd then requested again that we keep the matters discussed completely confidential, as much of the Saudi strategy depended for its success on there being no leaks. Isa and I took our leave shortly before midnight. Ambassador’s Comment Had we attempted to write Fahd’s script for the meeting, I doubt that we could have improved upon it. He gave back to us as the SAG position the rationale and argument which all of us including Secretary Vance and Assistant Secretary Saunders have been advancing for the last month with only limited apparent success. His actions including the messages to Sadat and Hussein are basically what we have wanted and asked him to do. His solution to the problem posed by the Baghdad Summit is in my opinion (and his as well!) a near genius political stroke. If he is as firm with Arafat as he indicates, it should at least defuse the opposition of the PLO. (Fahd recognizes and does not hesitate to use the leverage which money provides, and he knows as well as we do that Arafat’s sustaining power comes from the Saudis annual contribution of $40–50 million to him.) In reviewing and trying to assess in realistic terms the meaning and future results which should be forthcoming following this meeting with Fahd, I would like to offer the following precautionary observations: Fahd was in a good, relaxed, even exuberant mood; he had no staff or aides with him. From past experience, we know that he is far less restrained under those circumstances especially when talking only to Isa or me, or the two of us. His enthusiasm for his subject noticeably warmed as the evening progressed. As evidence of this, he asked at the outset how much time we needed and I told him 30 to 45 minutes. He said that would be fine as he did have some other visitors coming. The meeting actually consumed over two hours and I had to take the initiative to break it up. Therefore, it is possible that he stated the Saudi support in stronger terms than he might have done in a different setting. The ultimate test now is how Sadat and Hussein are reacting to the message Fahd sent them and if they interpret it as Fahd explained it to us. Of equal interest and importance will be to observe the effect of Fahd’s moves on Arafat and the Baghdad Summit.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dayan may also have in mind getting commitments from us on aid and codifying other bilateral assurances in a “memorandum of understanding.” In the first instance, I believe Secretary Vance should talk to Dayan about these issues. We also have a military team going to Israel on November 1 to survey the airbase problem. At some point, we may want Secretary Brown to talk to Weizman, but the Israelis do not yet have a very precise notion of what their military requirements will be in conjunction with the relocation of their forces. Before we commit ourselves, we should keep several points in mind: —The signing of the treaty should not4 become contingent upon any specific new commitment on our part to increase aid levels.5 —We should avoid tying ourselves to any specific project or item of equipment at this point. It might make more sense to think of a “peace package” for both Egypt and Israel which would commit us to a certain level of aid during the period of implementation of the treaty, but which would put the burden primarily on Egypt and Israel to determine their own priorities in how they use the aid.6 —In general, the simpler our commitment, the better. Eventually, we want to think of cutting back on aid to the Middle East, not increasing it indefinitely.7 4 Carter underlined this word. 5 In the right-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Carter wrote: “Be firm on this.” 6 In the right-hand margin adjacent to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “good idea.” 7 In the right-hand margin adjacent to this sentence, Carter wrote: “correct ”.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX damaging. Although I know you have mentioned in our earlier conversations the possibility of some small increases through family reunification, I do not believe that the reported decision is in the spirit of what we have discussed and what we are trying to achieve. I have to tell you with the gravest concern and regret that taking this step at this time will have the most serious consequences for our relationship. Moreover, I believe that it may also jeopardize the conclusion of the peace treaty which we are negotiating. Given the grave consequences for everything we have worked together to achieve, I must ask that you avoid any move on matters of this kind until they can be addressed in the course of the negotiations to establish the Palestinian self-governing authority for the West Bank and Gaza. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter End text. Vance 109. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX consistent with the spirit of Camp David and I know that you share my concern. I hope that the Government of Israel can be persuaded to desist from such actions which only complicate the peace negotiations in which we are all engaged in, and which we all want to succeed. I would like to assure you that your own efforts in securing a just and lasting peace in the Middle East are recognized by the whole world and I look forward to welcoming you to attend the signing of the peace treaty in the very near future. Jehan joins me in extending our very best wishes to both Rossalyn and yourself. With warmest personal regards. Yours sincerely Mohamed Anwar el-Sadat Unquote. 3. With respect to the point on the duration of the obligations, Sadat asked that I convey orally rpt orally his suggestion that language to the effect that the specific treaty obligations on Egyptian land be for 25 years could be included in a paragraph at the end of the document. Khalil noted that there is at present no language on duration included in the draft treaty. 4. Khalil indicated that Sadat wanted me to get the letter out right away. Eilts

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 111. Summary of Conclusions of a Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The estimates take into account geographic location, inflation (at US rates), time compression (three year design and construction period), and other factors; but the uncertainities are necessarily large. In particular, if the construction time was shortened from three to two years, costs might rise by as much as 50%. Also some degree of incountry procurement of material and labor is inevitable and, given Israel’s high inflation rate, this will drive costs up. I can provide further details on these estimates if you wish.2 Harold Brown 2 Brown added the following handwritten notation after this sentence: “We will continue to be both very tight-fisted on these costs and very non-committal toward Israeli requests. HB.” 113. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, October 27, 1978 SUBJECT Israeli “Thickening” of Settlements After seeing the President’s letter2 to Begin last night, Dayan informed Roy Atherton that there is no chance of getting Begin to reverse his decision. In brief, we will either have to back down or we are on a collision course. If we do back down or let this issue slide by, as I suspect we will, we should recognize that there will be consequences. Our credibility with both Begin and the moderate Arabs will be damaged. Begin will conclude that he can proceed as he chooses on new settlement activity in the West Bank. We should have no illusions about the effect this will have on our efforts to organize West Bank/Gaza negotiations. There 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 3. Secret; Sensitive; Eyes Only; Outside System. Sent for information. At the top of the memorandum, Brzezinski added the following handwritten notation: “Let me know what happened with Vance. ZB.” 2 See Document 108.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to talk” with the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO). Carter “explained that we had given our word of honor not to do so unless the PLO recognized Security Council Resolution 242. In the meantime, we would like the help of Saudi Arabia and Jordan to be go-betweens.” Khalid responded that “he and his government would be happy to be helpful.” He added, “The trouble with the Palestinians is that they are being pulled in every direction not only by the Communists, but also by some Arab countries!” “King Hussein,” Khalid continued, “could have his negotiating delegation made up of Palestinians. Egypt could have Palestinians in its delegation. This together with the West Bank and Gaza Palestinian delegation, could be a very good combination.” In response, Carter commented that this “is why we would be happy to have the influence of wise counsel such as that offered by Saudi Arabia prevail.” (Memorandum of Conversation between President Carter and King Khalid, October 27; Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —We took initiative today to say publicly that we have determined in light of all the circumstances that no trilateral negotiations should take place today. In our view, which we have conveyed to Egyptian delegation, there should be no trilateral meetings for next few days while we deal with this issue. —If Egyptian delegation were recalled, even if it were made clear this was for consultations with intention to return to Washington in a few days, onus for disruption of negotiations would shift in public mind to the Egyptians. Many would see a parallel with Sadat’s recall of his delegation from Jerusalem in January. As matters now stand, the focus is on Israeli decision with respect to the settlements and on our publicly declared position which makes clear we do not think this is the time to carry on business as usual. —With respect to East Jerusalem issue, it is our clear impression that this was an idea that was floated in Israel and has now been put on ice. (The Secretary made this point also to the Egyptian delegation.) Vance 116. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State and the White House1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 117. Letter from the Israeli Ambassador to the United States (Dinitz) to President Carter1 Washington, October 29, 1978 My dear Mr. President: I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the following message: “Dear Mr. President, This is the third letter I am writing to you today.2 I feel it my duty to do so at this crucial moment. My words are addressed to you not as by a Prime Minister to the President of the United States of America, but as man to man and, mainly, as friend to friend. My colleagues and I hear very often the argument that we must understand the delicate situation of President Sadat vis-a-vis the Arab World and the Rejectionists. Today, may I ask: What about my situation, my difficulties? To prove the point, I will inform you of the following facts: The men of the Irgun3 whom I led from the underground into a fight for liberty for five years are my most beloved friends. As far as I studied history, I can say that there were never cleaner fighters, nor more idealistic volunteers. For five years we were always together, through thick and thin, in good and bad days. Now, for the first time in thirty-four years a group of them is in ‘revolt’ against their brother and former commander. Nearly half of my own party members in the Knesset either voted against or abstained. Some young people dabbed on the walls of Zeev Jabotinsky House the words: ‘Begin—Traitor.’ I have to live with all this phenomena. Let me speak frankly: President Sadat’s regime is a dictatorship supported by the Army and a totally controlled press. We do not talk about democracy, we practice it. At the latest Cabinet session, of which I informed you, in order to gain a few votes I had to make an hour-long speech which was a real exertion not only in the intellectual sense of the word. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. The Begin government’s decision to thicken a number of settlements on the West Bank has raised our ongoing test of wills with the GOI on the settlements issue in the post-Camp David period from one of words to one of deeds. While Begin’s domestic political vulnerabilities, not to say his own deeply held convictions, make it nearly impossible that we could bring about a formal revocation of the decision, neither can we allow it to go unchallenged or to become just another in an ongoing series of steps toward unlimited expansion and proliferation of Israeli settlements in occupied territories. There are already suggestions by government sources that the U.S. is overreacting, that Washington will come to understand this and that the problem will fade away, this despite the extraordinarily stiff phrases in the President’s letter of October 26.2 Israelis, of course, have many examples in the history of our relationship which lead them to conclude that the U.S. will eventually back down in order to avoid a bilateral crisis. Because of this history, it will be especially difficult to convince Israel that on the settlements issue, we are prepared for a long and, if necessary, public and vehement disagreement. In the following paragraphs are set out what we believe are the options for American policy and actions on this crucial matter. 3. The problem: To limit to the greatest extent possible the scope of implementation of the GOI’s decision to augment existing settlements on the West Bank, and to dissuade the GOI from inaugurating any new civilian settlements, at least until negotiations over the establishment of the self-governing authority are completed. 4. Background and analysis: During the Knesset debate over the Camp David Accords, Begin assured his critics that the decision to withdraw from the Sinai settlements constituted no precedent for the settlements in the West Bank and Golan Heights, which are far more important to Israelis for both security and emotional reasons. He promised that existing settlements in those areas would be strengthened and new ones set up. Thereafter, Begin ducked the issue for several weeks. During the Cabinet debate over the draft Israel/Egypt treaty, and especially the linkage issue, which was conducted under the shadow of an extremely emotional overreaction to the U.S. replies to Hussein and to tendentious press accounts from Arab sources about the Saunders visit, Begin encountered unexpectedly strong criticism. He apparently felt this ministerial resistance could only be propitiated by an explicit decision to augment the West Bank settlements. The overwhelming nature of the Cabinet 2 See Document 108.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX freeze was in effect. Neither of these possibilities can be realized unless we are prepared through words and actions in Washington to prove our steadfastness and seriousness to Israel on this issue. Suggested below are two possible alternative strategies for achieving this purpose. 8. The options: A. Such an approach could include inter alia, the following measures: —Slow down or suspension of treaty negotiations with Egypt —Delay of discussions concerning U.S. commitment to assist Israel in building two Negev airfields —Indefinite suspension of Matmon C consultations —Conspicuous footdragging on already committed aid deliveries —Publicized recall of the Ambassador to Washington to discuss the settlements issue with the President —Consideration of having the President not visit Israel (or Egypt) in conjunction with the signing of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty —Plus measures outlined in option B. Pro —Could shock Israeli body politic into realization that unlimited continuation of settlement activity is incompatible with attainment of peace, even with Egypt, and immediately jeopardizes Israel’s allimportant relationship with the United States —Would demonstrate to the Arabs the seriousness of our commitment to minimizing further Israeli settlement activity —Recalling the Ambassador would be almost uniquely strong demonstration of our displeasure with Israel (Note: we do not believe this step has ever been taken during any previous confrontations with Israeli Governments.) Con —Such a massive response is much more likely to trigger a backlash against the United States and Egypt and be seen as attacks on Israel rather than as directed at the Begin government’s policies. Result could be rallying of support behind Begin and further acts of defiance in the settlement area, rather than the desired result of internal pressure on Begin and his government to desist from such activities. —Suspension of negotiations by Egypt because of the linkage issue would convince many Israelis of Sadat’s bad faith, lead to renewed accusations of Egyptian-American collusion, and run grave risk of aborting Israeli/Egyptian treaty, despite fact that agreed text is within reach.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in January, after which almost no new settlements were set up, as well as in the period following the GOI’s inadequate answers to the U.S. questions in March, which were changed to a more favorable formulation several weeks later —Will permit congressional and private friends of Israel to support the administration’s opposition to Israeli policy on a specific critical issue about which many of them share our concern rather than triggering an undiscriminating defensive reaction on their part as a more heavy-handed approach might do Con —Could produce the same kind of defensive and defiant reaction that option A would probably trigger —Might not convince Israelis of our determination to see this matter through. 9. Between these two options: I strongly recommend option B. However, I must add that the odds of achieving our goal of a de facto settlements freeze and great restraint on “thickening” are considerably less than 50–50, under option A, they would approach zero. 10. Whatever package of measures we decide to employ, we should begin immediately and proceed steadily. Each passing day may lead Begin and Israel to conclude that this bilateral conflict, too, like so many others, shall pass away. Lewis

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX withdrawal. This could take the form of a letter to you, and then you would write to Begin.6 —US Security Role. Israel will accept a US-manned early warning station7 in central Sinai which would provide information for both Israel and Egypt. Israel would also welcome a continuation of the US reconnaissance role. Dayan would like to talk further about our “responsibility”8 for the implementation of the treaty. —Side Letters. Israel has asked for a letter from us confirming that there is no “legal linkage” between the treaty and the West Bank/Gaza negotiations.9 Weizman also wants a letter from us stating that the timetable for Israeli withdrawal from Sinai will be contingent upon the completion of the new airfields in the Negev.10 —Memo of Understanding. Dayan wants to “review and update” all of our previous memoranda of understanding.11 —East Jerusalem. Secretary Vance has asked to see Begin in New York on Thursday to discuss Israeli plans concerning east Jerusalem.12 Egypt —Priority of Obligations. The Egyptian delegation has agreed to consider new draft language proposed by Secretary Vance. Their preliminary response has been quite encouraging.13 —Joint Letter. The Egyptians want some reference in the letter to a target date for holding elections for the self-governing authority. They also insist on making some reference to Egypt’s “special responsibilities” in Gaza.14 —Exchange of Ambassadors. The Egyptians will agree to the procedure suggested by Dayan whereby Sadat will write to you, and you will write to Begin concerning the exchange of ambassadors.15 —Security Arrangements. The Egyptians no longer favor an Americanmanned early warning station in Zone B. They prefer to have their own 6 Carter wrote “ok” and drew an arrow pointing to this sentence. 7 Carter underlined “US-manned early warning station” and wrote a question mark with an arrow pointing to this phrase. 8 Carter underlined “responsibility” and wrote a question mark with an arrow pointing to this phrase. 9 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “only if Egypt agrees.” 10 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “Camp David letter should be adequate.” 11 Carter wrote in the margin next to this sentence: “Be cautious.” 12 Carter wrote in the margin next to this section: “no.” 13 Carter wrote in the margin next to this section: “Cy work out.” 14 Carter drew quotation marks in the margin next to this section, indicating as in the above section, “Cy work out.” 15 Carter wrote in the margin next to this section: “ok.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX their governments (Tab B).4 Dayan’s position throughout the talks was to try to get the Secretary to deal directly with Begin on the remaining hard issues. I had a long talk with Dayan about the West Bank/Gaza issues. My oversimplified conclusion is that there is very little real prospect for getting agreement on the transitional regime for the West Bank/Gaza. For example: —Dayan claims that Israel did not agree at Camp David to abolish the authority of the military governor. In extremis, Israel would have the right to go back into the West Bank/Gaza. —While agreeing that the military government would be withdrawn, Israel has not agreed that this would happen immediately after elections. It might take several years to complete the withdrawal of the military government. —If the issues of future settlements, disposition of public lands, and the right of the Arabs in east Jerusalem to vote in the elections are raised now, the negotiations will drag on for two or three years. These questions should not be addressed now, but should await the election of the self-governing authority, after which they will be resolved in a practical manner. —Israel plans to establish about 18–20 new settlements in the Jordan Valley in the next five years. Therefore, the self-governing authority cannot dispose of all the public domain lands. Israel may need to keep 20% or so for itself. My prediction is that the Egyptian-Israel treaty negotiations will be concluded within ten days, depending largely on how Begin reacts. On the basis of my understanding of the Israeli position, I doubt if we will ever get very far with the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. 4 The tab was not found attached.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX have always recorded with satisfaction the repeated assurances and statements by the United States Government that what it sought was a comprehensive and just settlement. Despite this, one was led to believe that what emerged from the Camp David meeting was essentially the outline of a peace agreement between Egypt and Israel not connected in any legal or binding way with a comprehensive settlement on other fronts. If such a course is pursued, I fear that this might lead to a more radical polarization in the area leading ultimately to the isolation of Egypt and the causing of a major setback to the peace process on other fronts. Furthermore, there was a major difference between the two documents which emerged from Camp David regarding the question of the future status of the occupied areas. While the Egyptian-Israeli Accord was explicit on the question of Egyptian sovereignty over Sinai, the future of the West Bank and Gaza had been left open to negotiations. I believe that there was no balance in this, particularly as the document dealing with the West Bank and Gaza was very explicit in its provisions regarding the transitional agreements and the Jordanian role and responsibilities in them. Jordan was invited to participate in arrangements of administrative, legal, military and political character during a “transitional” period before knowing the shape or outline of the future settlement it is invited to conclude. We fear that at the end of the proposed transitional period, the results reached might be totally unacceptable. This particularly in view of the fact that Israel is repeating continuously its categorical claims about the final annexation of Arab Jerusalem, the expansion of the settlements in the occupied areas and the rejection of Arab sovereignty in the occupied Arab lands. Jordan was called upon to participate in security arrangements with Israel and for Israel, against potentially Palestinian subversion. Without any assurances that, as a result of the transitional period, there would be a just Palestinian solution based on self-determination and an end to the occupation. As I indicated to Secretary Vance, we feel in Jordan that the Agreements have not provided clear answers regarding the four main issues of a comprehensive settlement, namely withdrawal and future borders, Palestinian self-determinations, the basis for the solution of the problem of the Palestinian refugees and the future of Jerusalem. I also indicated to him, to your other envoys and repeatedly in public that Jordan will not close any doors which may lead to the termination of the occupation and the emancipation of the people under occupation in the context of a peaceful settlement. Our interest in the cause of peace is genuine and it has for long been a cherished objective of ours. In this spirit we formulated the questions that we addressed to your government for the clarification of the unclear aspects of the Camp David Agreements and the United States positions. I am very grateful that your government responded quickly to these questions and that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 122. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 2, 1978 SUBJECT Israeli Requests for New Commitments Dayan has repeatedly raised three issues with us: —How will the U.S. express its “responsibility” to “guarantee” the implementation of the treaty? In other words, what will we do if Egypt violates the terms of the treaty. —What economic/military assistance is the U.S. prepared to offer to offset the costs of peace for Israel? Secretary Vance has been very lukewarm on this issue, making it clear that we want to conclude the peace treaty negotiations first. —Which of our previous commitments are we prepared to reaffirm? —Will we confirm that if the new airfields in the Negev are not ready at the end of three years, Israel should not have to relinquish the airbases in Sinai? In the talks with my State colleagues, I have recommended the following courses of action: —Concerning our “guarantee” that the treaty will be implemented in good faith, the President would write one letter to Begin and Sadat spelling out our willingness to take these steps: continuation of Olive Harvest reconnaissance flights;2 commitment to help create a multinational peacekeeping force if U.N. forces are not available; a general statement that we will consult with both parties in the event of a breach of the treaty and that we will offer our good offices to resolve any disputes. There is no way that we can go much further in “guaranteeing” the treaty. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 123. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The Prime Minister read the language in the Israeli draft about Jordan. He then emphasized that the beginning of West Bank/Gaza negotiations must follow the exchange of instruments of ratification and not simply follow the signing of the treaty. The Secretary said we would need to see if this was possible under Egyptian procedures. Begin said Israel wanted to add a reference to “related issues,” since other matters (e.g., security) were also covered in the Camp David Framework. Continuing, the Prime Minister said Israel was prepared to say that elections should be held “at an early date.” It is impossible to predict when they could be held; could take three months or seven months. The Secretary replied that he wanted to make the counterargument. The letter could say that negotiations would take place “with the objective” of holding elections by a given date. This would not fix a date but only set a target. It would demonstrate that all parties were serious about carrying out the Camp David Framework. It would have a positive effect on people in the West Bank and Gaza and encourage their participation which is important for success of the negotiations. It would have an important psychological effect in the region generally. President Carter had asked the Secretary to stress this point. Begin said one cannot pick a date out of the blue; it may take six months. The Secretary asked why not say six months. Begin replied that the phrase “at an early date” means Israel is serious. The Secretary responded that it could do no harm to have a target date. The Prime Minister said that “an early date” means months, not years, but it could take three months or ten months. It will be necessary to decide the form of the elections, constituencies, perhaps political parties. Specifying the number of months would mean nothing but if a time period were included in the letter and then not met, Israel would be accused of bad faith. There was no predicting, Begin said, whether the people would agree. The PLO may threaten them and force a boycott. The Secretary said he would need to consult the President; he personally continued to think that naming the number of months was preferable and urged the Prime Minister to think further about our suggestion. Barak suggested using the phrase “within a short period.” The Prime Minister said Israel cannot accept specifying the number of months but would consider any other phrase. Barak said since we don’t know how long the talks will take, we should think in terms of a period of time following the end of the talks rather than from the beginning of the talks. The Secretary replied that this would not help and that he would have to talk to the President. Dayan said Israel would consider it if the Secretary thought the phrase

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The Prime Minister said he had never attacked Mr. Saunders personally. However, he wanted the Secretary to tell the President that the replies to Hussein5 had been the gravest matter in Israeli public opinion and in Israel’s future. If Saunders had said that Ambassador Yost’s speech6 was still binding, that East Jerusalem is occupied territory, this was a serious matter. The greatest wrong that had ever been done to a nation had been done in this case. Why should united Jerusalem not be recognized as the capital of Israel? The Prime Minister then recounted Jordanian actions in East Jerusalem and Prime Minister Eshkol’s message to Hussein in June 1967,7 despite which Hussein had attacked. There was now free access to the holy shrines and Israel had rebuilt the Jewish quarter, yet East Jerusalem was called occupied. This had been said in the middle of negotiations with Sadat. It makes Israel’s position difficult when Sadat hears what the United States says. The Prime Minister said he had not attacked Mr. Saunders but had spoken of the position of the United States which concerns Israel’s future. He had also been attacked, the Prime Minister said, and called a traitor by his friends, all because Israel wants peace. This hurt deeply. Furthermore, the Prime Minister said, the phrase “whatever settlements remain” as applied to the West Bank implies that the Camp David Sinai Framework is a model for Judea and Samaria and for the Golan. This is wrong. Turning to the preambular language (at “noting”), the Prime Minister expressed deep astonishment that this should be made a condition for the treaty. He could not change the decision of the Israeli Government, which must decide. Israel will consider this problem but he, the Prime Minister, could do nothing without the Government. Perhaps he could speak about it today to President Carter. The Secretary said he had discussed this very issue with the President that morning. Turning to the language on Gaza in Article II, the Prime Minister said that the accepted forum is to say “without prejudice to the position of either party.” This was a simple issue. The Secretary agreed it was simple. Egypt wanted to remove some language and Israel wanted to add language. The Secretary said let’s leave the present language as it was agreed ad referendum. The Secretary said Israel’s additional language does not change the substance. The words “the issue of the status of the Gaza Strip” reflect Israel’s position. This is not worth arguing about and should be solved by leaving the language as it is.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX vince the Egyptians to accept the word “prevail.” The Secretary said no; the Egyptians had not even accepted the present language but we thought they could be persuaded to. Begin said he would recommend that the Cabinet accept the present text as written while the United States checked to see if the title could be changed. The Secretary remarked that we were making real progress. Dayan noted that, in addition to the treaty text, we needed to complete the annexes and the appendix to Annex I. The Secretary said the Egyptians wanted an appendix, and we did not know if we could get them to move off that position. Begin then noted that the Israeli Minister of Energy had come to the United States to deal with the oil problem. This was a serious matter, and he hoped the United States could help; Israel needs Egyptian oil at market prices. The Secretary said there would be no problem about market prices. Dayan then commented that, leaving the annex aside, there were three problems which he thought could be worked out in Washington: the preamble, the Gaza language and the side letter. The Secretary said he thought the problem of the letter could be solved. Dayan said this still leaves two points. Egypt cannot simply say that if Israel does not agree to the present language, there will be no treaty. A further effort is needed to overcome these problems. The Gaza problem is meaningless. If the preamble is the only problem, we need to seek agreement on this. On the whole, Dayan said, we are not doing badly if the gap is down to one and one-half issues. The Secretary said this is real progress to which Begin replied “I came to make progress.” Begin then turned the conversation to bilateral issues. Begin began by noting that we are at a turning point in the history of the Middle East with the coming of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. The parties will go on to the next stage in the peace process but nevertheless this is a turning point. Israel must face what is going to happen with the evacuation of tens of thousands of Israeli troops from the Sinai and the relocation of installations in the Negev, Begin said. It is a matter of gravest concern if Israel cannot deal with the financial aspects of this move. He noted that he is not an economist, but he does understand the tremendous burden which will fall upon Israel as a result of these moves. “We don’t want to bring about a peace treaty which would be accompanied by complete bankruptcy.” It is not an objective possibility for Israel to bear the full costs of this move. Israel has therefore decided to request from the United States a loan to cover these costs. Israel is not seeking a grant; Israel’s record on repaying its debts is perfect. In this case, Israel would seek a loan for 25

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX reading the last sentences of Secretary Brown’s letter10 after Camp David to Minister Weizman. Begin noted in passing that the letter in the present negotiations on the exchange of ambassadors is satisfactory, and then he returned to the airfields. What happens, he asked, if it takes longer than three years to complete the airfields? He wanted an agreement that Israel would operate the two remaining airfields in the Sinai until the new ones could become operational. He felt this should be written as a protocol to the treaty. Secretary Vance responded that he could not at this point agree that there will be such a protocol which would change the basic agreement. The Secretary said he could tell the Prime Minister that the United States will work with Israel and we have confidence that the airfields will be completed in time. The Prime Minister responded by asking again, “But what do we do with our planes if the airfields are not completed? Where will we put them?” Secretary Vance again quoted from the Brown letter the portion that states U.S. understanding for the special priority which Israel attaches to this and Israel’s position that it cannot leave the Sinai until the new airfields are completed. The Secretary said he could not commit the United States to any more at this point. Weizman suggested that the problem might be helped if Egypt were to acknowledge its understanding of the Brown-Weizman letter. The Secretary noted that the Egyptians had already received a copy. Turning to the subject of aerial surveillance, Secretary Vance said the United States is prepared to continue providing such surveillance for three years. If there is to be any extension, it would be agreed by all three parties. The Secretary said the United States side would take up this subject with Egypt and noted that this was being done in response to an Israeli request. He summarized by saying that the United States is committed for three years. Beyond three years, the issue remains open. The Secretary noted to the Prime Minister that the United States had given the Israeli Delegation a draft letter relating to the UN Forces. The Prime Minister said the letter is satisfactory and the Israeli Government accepts it. Secretary Vance indicated his desire to move ahead quickly to complete Annex I to the treaty and suggested trying to do so in the next 48 hours. Dayan reminded the Secretary that we had also agreed to review commitments under the disengagement agreements. The Secretary suggested that we wait until after completion of the work on the treaty. 10 See Document 57.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 124. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 3, 1978 SUBJECT Status Report on Egypt-Israel Negotiations As you know, Boutros Ghali and Usama [al Baz] have left for Cairo2 and will probably not return until Tuesday.3 Weizman is meanwhile in Israel trying to get support for his proposal on withdrawal in phases to the interim line. In our talks with Dayan today,4 he stuck to a tough line, even reopening some issues, perhaps in anticipation that the Egyptians will do likewise after they return from Cairo. At present, several issues are still not resolved. 1. Serious Issues: —Preamble. Israel wants to delete language that notes that the Camp David framework constitutes a basis for peace between Israel and each of its neighbors. Dayan implied that the only way Israel could agree to this language would be if we were to write a letter stating that there is “no legal linkage” between the Treaty and the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. We have said this is not necessary and that the preamble cannot now be changed. —Gaza. Israel will not accept our suggested language (originally proposed by Barak) on “the issue of the status of Gaza.” Egypt will not accept the Israeli draft. They are both adamant. We have said we will stick with our draft. —Letter on West Bank/Gaza. Israel does not want a joint letter, does not want to refer to a target date for elections, and does not want to annex the Camp David Framework to the letter. Egypt insists on a joint letter, wants to set a target date, and wants to annex the Framework. Otherwise Sadat will want to include arrangements for Gaza in the treaty itself, which his delegation realizes is a non-starter. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX there as you know. Thus, an Egyptian presence is certain to facilitate the process. Second, the political climate there is much more conducive to prove to all Palestinians that the change we agreed upon in Camp David, to bring about in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, is both genuine and feasible. This formula is apt to whip up support in Jordan and the West Bank for joining in with us before it becomes too late. It is also certain to generate more enthusiasm among the Palestinians at large for the Camp David Accord. If I sign a peace treaty without having the agreement of the Israelis on what to take place in Gaza and West Bank, I would be concluding a separate agreement indeed. This could be in contradiction not only with the basic line of our policy, but also with what we agreed upon in Camp David. You will undoubtedly recall that I told Prime Minister Begin in the clearest terms during our tripartite meeting on September the 7th and the 8th that I refuse to conclude a third disengagement agreement, a partial peace settlement or a separate agreement. Needless to say that what I am proposing is the only course of action which serves the cause of peace. Postponement would lead to a veritable crisis in the near future and may abort all our previous efforts, and is apt to discourage and demoralize Palestinians who are willing to cooperate, leading to a situation over which we will have no control. Israel would also be expected to take certain measures in the coming few weeks to improve the political climate in Gaza and West Bank, and stimulate the interest of their inhabitants. Such measures include permitting political activities, granting amnesty to political prisoners and permitting the reuniting of families by the return of their displaced members. Dear President Carter, In order to overcome the other problems, which have arisen in the course of negotiations due to the insistence of Israel to have a privileged position, the normalization of relations with Israel can only be realized on treating her on equal footing with other nations within the context of our laws, the international law and the United Nations Charter. Friendship and cooperation would only grow if there is a sense of fairness. For the treaty we are going to sign with Israel will be an example and model for the others. I am sure that you agree with me that such a model needs to be a solid and well founded one to stand any test. In conclusion, please accept my best wishes and warm regards. Mohammed Anwar El Sadat. Unquote. Eilts

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egypt’s Objectives The letter4 that has just come in from Sadat concentrates entirely on the need for an “unequivocal commitment on what is to take place in the West Bank and Gaza in implementation of the Camp David Framework;” it does not mention any of the other issues over which the two sides are bargaining. From my meeting Thursday with the Egyptians,5 the West Bank/Gaza issue will clearly be the focus of the Egyptian delegation’s negotiating efforts now that Boutros Ghali has returned. How far they are prepared to push this remains a difficult question to answer, but they are starting off with a long list—e.g., setting dates not only for beginning West Bank/Gaza negotiations but also for the establishment of the self-governing authority and the end of the military government, plus a half dozen or so unilateral steps they want Israel to agree to now. Undoubtedly the delegation itself would be prepared to hold up progress on the treaty in order to achieve these commitments. But you will recall that at Camp David we dropped the paragraph on linkage when Sadat himself did not press very hard for it. The same pattern could repeat itself in the present circumstances. Sadat may be giving his advisors a license to achieve what they can for a period of time figuring that he will settle for whatever he can get rather than delay conclusion of the Treaty beyond a certain point.6 On the other hand, Arab pressures may be registering more keenly on Sadat in the wake of the Baghdad Summit7 than they were at Camp David. Secret resolutions8 were apparently passed at Baghdad calling 4 See Document 126. 5 No record of this meeting has been found. 6 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Excessive.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX devise a blend of pressure tactics and assurances which we would direct at Sadat to get him to back off most of his present demands as reflected in his latest letter and in the instructions given his delegation. We would at the same time need to insist on at least a bit more give from the Israelis—e.g., to set a target date now for West Bank/Gaza elections. —Alternatively, we can determine that it is in our interest to face up to and resolve at least some of the problems inherent in the West Bank/Gaza negotiations in the context of the Egypt-Israel talks, even if it means delaying the conclusion of a peace Treaty. If we do this it would be on the grounds that to postpone tackling these problems would make it even more difficult for us to get negotiations started and going somewhere once the Egypt-Israel Treaty is signed. The merits of these two strategies are finely balanced and we will need to consider the pros and cons of each course very carefully in making our decision. The Pros and Cons A case can be made that in getting Sadat to accept the ambiguities in the Camp David Framework about the West Bank/Gaza process we already issued a rather sizeable promissory note on the future in order to pay for the present, and that we should not compound this by attempting to postpone the tough issues any further. Our credibility in Arab eyes is already at stake in having announced publicly that we differed with Begin’s understanding of what was agreed to at Camp David about settlements and our inability thereafter to get him to stop or even exercise restraint in continued settlement activity. In his public statements Begin has taken the line that what he agreed to in the Camp David Framework was really nothing more than the Begin self-rule plan.11 This has fed the worst fears of the Arabs that the negotiations on the West Bank/Gaza will not be able to produce any real relinquishment of Israeli control over these areas. If we press Sadat now to abandon his insistence on further “linkage,” he might, in order to explain to other Arabs, let it be known that it was we who pressed him to drop his insistence on this matter. This will only deepen Arab suspicions of our commitment to a comprehensive settlement, and could make it very difficult if not virtually impossible to get either Jordan or Palestinians to step forward to join the process envisioned at Camp David, or to enlist Saudi support for that process. The actual signing of an Egypt-Israel Treaty will produce shock waves throughout the Arab world. So far Sadat’s course of action has been seen as a potential threat to the other Arabs, but it will come as a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX prove impossible, whatever we do, to induce Jordan and representative Palestinians to join the negotiations at the outset. That does not necessarily mean, however, that these negotiations need be stymied. We need to think in terms of a strategy of beginning the negotiations between Egypt and Israel while developing in support of those negotiations a network of our own private consultations with Jordan, with West Bank and Gaza Palestinians, and perhaps with some Americans of Palestinian origin in order to build confidence in the seriousness of the negotiations so that we might think of Palestinians either joining the negotiations at a later stage or at least standing for elections when they are called. Our ability to engage the Palestinians in this kind of dialogue concurrent with the formal Egypt-Israel negotiations, which could eventually become a kind of once-removed negotiating process in itself, will depend on the terms of reference we are able to develop on West Bank/Gaza negotiations between now and when they start. A Possible Course of Action In my judgment there is a sufficient amount at stake for U.S. interests to warrant using Sadat’s present posture to attempt to get more from the Israelis than they are presently offering on West Bank/Gaza linkage, though by no means all Sadat is asking. We need to calibrate what we try for under this strategy carefully in order to ensure that the risks are reasonable. We must obviously stop short of the point that we believe entails a serious risk of placing the Treaty as a whole in jeopardy. We will also want to keep sensitive antenna out to assess Sadat’s position, since we cannot be in the position of pressing Israel for things that the Egyptians themselves are not prepared to insist on. With these considerations in mind we suggest a course of action that will achieve something more for Sadat, but far less than he now seeks, on West Bank/Gaza “linkage,” and will also ask a bit more of Begin than he has indicated he is willing to give. If this course works, we will have avoided a protracted delay and probable suspension of the negotiations. If it does not work, we suggest a fallback we could go to in an effort to get things moving again when we judge the time is right. The fallback (see below) could also be viewed as an alternative to pursue now if we wanted to try for more for Sadat. The course of action I propose would be composed of the following components: 1. We would press both sides to try to wrap up all work on the Treaty so that the West Bank/Gaza issue could be isolated as the sole remaining obstacle before the Treaty can be signed. 2. We would tell the Israelis our understanding of what Sadat is asking for and then describe what we believe the minimum will be that we need to achieve if the Treaty process is not to be unreasonably de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX negotiated. These will include questions of title to land, control over land transfer, the responsibilities of the Palestinian police force, control over water resources, control of the bridges, etc. Laying out these issues would by itself demonstrate that a serious negotiation is ahead. —In addition to the discussion on agenda, we would have a discussion with the Israelis particularly on how to handle the question of the settlements during and in the negotiations. The purpose would be to explore possible understandings. If the Israelis question why we are doing this, the answer would be that President Carter made a promise to President Sadat on this subject at Camp David, and it was on that basis that Sadat agreed. Therefore, something must be done to clear up this misunderstanding. However, we would go beyond simply trying to sort out the Camp David misunderstanding and put the issue in the context of how settlements might be handled in the upcoming negotiations, but looking to the future, we might assure Israel that we are prepared to work for the right of Israelis to live in the West Bank, provided their living there is not part of a program of continuing land annexation. Aid Strategy and Public Posture On the question of aid, we would continue our consultations with the Israelis on the two airfields but would not respond otherwise to Israeli requests for additional aid for Sinai redeployment costs while our efforts go forward to get the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty completed and an agreed basis for West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Our position would be that the Administration will be delivering to Congress in January a message proposing authorization for a fund to support the peace effort. This would include everything from possible U.S. help with the costs of Israeli redeployment to assistance with a refugee solution, assistance for development in the West Bank and Gaza, and support for regional projects. We would tell the Israelis that we are not prepared to discuss the cost of evacuation from Sinai now. We would have the option of saying explicitly that we will not discuss this until it is clear how the West Bank/Gaza negotiations will be organized, or we could leave this implicit. When we are satisfied that Israel is working in good faith for implementation of the Camp David general framework, we could begin listening to the Israeli presentation on this subject, but we would hold off a response until sometime next year when we are satisfied with the progress in those negotiations.12 Publicly, we would try to seize the high ground, starting immediately making the following points: 12 Carter underlined this sentence and wrote in the left-hand margin: “mandatory.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 128. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, November 9, 1978 SUBJECT Negotiating Strategy In a strategy session at State this morning,2 two views were argued: —We should basically reject Sadat’s new demands as going beyond Camp David. The President should tell him that the Treaty text as it now stands must be accepted. In other words, we would not try to pin the Israelis down on any of the West Bank/Gaza issues prior to the conclusion of the treaty negotiations. It was generally recognized that this would reduce Israel’s incentives for moving seriously on the West Bank/Gaza, although we would continue to have some leverage in the form of aid. —We should meet Sadat part way in trying to clarify West Bank/ Gaza issues now. If we do not do so, he may be unwilling to sign the treaty; and it may be harder to move the Israelis later than it is now. (This last point is not unanimously agreed upon). If we took this approach, we would essentially try to establish two things with the Israelis: 1. The side letter on the West Bank/Gaza must include a target date by which elections will be held. 2. We would prepare and discuss with both sides a draft agenda3 for the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. It would specify talks on how the elections will be organized; the definition of powers and responsibilities; the powers of the local police; the initial redeployment of Israeli forces; and the question of reciprocal rights of residence and land acquisition. We would not necessarily expect the Israelis formally to accept the draft agenda, but it would give Sadat something concrete to point to as evidence that we, at least, will work seriously for the success of these negotiations. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX breakfast discussion3 with the President. In passing this on, Boutros said he emphasized that he was raising nothing new; all the points he made to the Israelis he has been making since the Washington talks began. What is new, he said, is President Sadat’s insistence that these are prerequisites for signing the peace treaty. He said the Israelis had seen a “new Boutros” tonight. Exchange of Letters There must be a timetable as follows: —Negotiations begin one month after ratification. —Elections five to six months after that. —Military government withdrawn one month after elections. —Redeployment of troops one month after the military government is withdrawn (this could be in an Israeli letter to the U.S.). Boutros said Dayan agreed to everything except fixing the date for the election but without that date, the others which follow are meaningless. Sadat insists on a timetable which makes clear that all of the above will be completed by the end of the interim withdrawal period. Boutros also asked for Gaza elections to be held first, which Dayan adamantly refused. Boutros said he heard for the first time tonight that Israel’s interpretation of Camp David is that the Military Governor will be transferred but not abolished. This obviously came as a disquieting revelation to him. Unilateral Israeli Moves Boutros said Dayan agreed on moving military government headquarters, an amnesty for political prisoners, and an end to restrictions on political activity but rejected any unilateral steps to permit the return of displaced persons for family reunification purposes. Boutros says he did not suggest it to Dayan, but would be prepared for these unilateral steps to be recorded in an Israeli letter to us. Gaza Boutros said Sadat is adamant on the need for an Egyptian presence; what he really wants is a military presence but Boutros knows this is not possible. He suggested a resident Egyptian Mission which the Israelis could describe as a consulate. Dayan said this might be pos- 3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Vance participated in a breakfast

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 130. Letter From President Carter to Israeli Prime Minister Begin1 Washington, November 11, 1978 To Prime Minister Begin, The successful conclusion of an Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty is in doubt. Only with your personal courage, determination, and direct involvement in the negotiations were the Camp David discussions successful. The Nobel Peace Prize was one of the recognitions of your contribution to peace. The same contribution is needed now. We have done all we can. Although we have been honored by the opportunity to work with you and President Sadat, there is a limit to what we can accomplish without some flexibility during these final days—by both Israel and Egypt. Public statements from both sides are damaging. Negotiations have limited authority. Renegotiation of mutual agreements have been demanded time and again. Secretary Vance must soon turn to other duties which have been partially neglected by both him and me. The present draft of the treaty and associated documents2 adequately fulfill the agreements reached at Camp David and protect the present and future interests of both nations. Further public statements deploring the negotiated language or public demands for unattainable concessions from the other side will make it impossible to achieve approval of the terms of agreement. It is obvious to all of us that, compared to any remaining differences, the advantages of a peace treaty are overwhelming. I urge you to approve the existing drafts brought to you by Secretary Vance. I will urge President Sadat to do the same. This, I believe, may be our final chance for the peace we all seek. Respectfully, Jimmy Carter 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tian President Anwar al-Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin. (Ibid.) The Department sent a copy of this revised draft in telegram 287408 to Cairo, Tel Aviv, and Jerusalem, November 12. (Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat: Very good, because it will be a bad thing for both of us here in the area if we don’t make the peace at least with Gaza. President Carter: At least with Gaza? President Sadat: Yes. It will be detrimental for both of us. President Carter: The part about having a separate language on Gaza creates problems because it tends to separate Gaza from the West Bank. President Sadat: Gaza was taken from Egypt. I am asking them to return Sinai and leave Gaza. This is difficult. Those who were in Baghdad5 must not get the upper hand. President Carter: What specifically do you want with Gaza, Mr. President? President Sadat: I want Gaza to go on the line that we have agreed upon in Camp David and in the timing of the withdrawal. President Carter: We have in the document the fact that negotiations will begin in one month. President Sadat: It is very essential to know when the first phase of the evacuation will take place. This is the most of Sinai that we will be receiving and will be celebrating. We shouldn’t do this without Gaza. President Carter: Suppose the Israelis agree to move their military headquarters from Gaza as a unilateral step? President Sadat: The full autonomy still remains. President Carter: We agree that the full autonomy will be returned to Gaza and West Bank, and that elections will be held before the end of next year. But, I hate to separate Gaza from the West Bank as a separate case. President Sadat: Gaza has been taken, as I told, with Sinai. It will not be that this is a separate agreement. We should be upset, you and me. President Carter: I don’t quite understand why you want to separate Gaza, because this was not the agreement at Camp David. President Sadat: I don’t agree with the West Bank and Gaza being separated. Gaza was taken from Egypt. I cannot accept Sinai and leave Gaza. President Carter: Mr. President, I am not specifically sure what you want them to agree to on Gaza. President Sadat: This Gaza land was taken from Egypt along with the Sinai land. President Carter: What I have in mind on that is to have the Israelis agree, whether as a unilateral step to permit political campaigning; po-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX be a self-government set up in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank before you give the entire Sinai back. It would not be a separate agreement. President Sadat: It would be a separate agreement without anything in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. The difficulty is that Gaza is something that they have already taken from Egypt. Our European friends are behind the idea of Gaza—Callaghan, Schmidt, and all the others. This I cannot accept. President Carter: What do you see as an alternative, Mr. President? President Sadat: If they agree about 1979, it is okay for me. The first phase of withdrawal in Sinai can be nine or ten months, but with it let there be Gaza and the West Bank. The West Bank can be at the end of the year, but Gaza should be linked with our timetable, Mr. President. President Carter: It would be hard for me to explain why we treat Gaza better than we treat the West Bank because the Palestinians move back and forth between the two. I thought that you and I had always agreed that we should not separate the Gaza Strip from the West Bank. President Sadat: I don’t agree with the first phase of withdrawal without at least Gaza. If it is Gaza and the West Bank, it is okay. I can wait until October for Gaza and the West Bank to come together with the first phase of withdrawal in Sinai. President Carter: When you say Gaza and the West Bank, you are talking about the self-government elections, correct? President Sadat: I am talking about the start of full autonomy with the first phase of withdrawal in Sinai. President Carter: In other words, you want the first phase of withdrawal in the Sinai to be the same time as the elections for the selfgovernment and autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza. President Sadat: Not the elections, but the start which will mean nine months from now. In one month we can sit down and discuss and then make the election, but in nine months the first phase of withdrawal will take place at the same time the autonomy starts. We should complete it before the elections. President Carter: The autonomy will start at the time of the elections. It is going to be a complicated matter, as you know, to arrange for the elections because its a long tedious process to get people registered to vote. As you know, women have never voted in those elections. I just believe that if you insist upon this it is going to delay the first phase of withdrawal from the Sinai even if everybody works as eagerly as possible to get the elections completed. I don’t believe that we can do it, Mr. President, before the end of 1979. President Sadat: No, this process will not take more than one month: but I am giving nine months from the first phase of withdrawal and the start of autonomy. I can’t take the first phase of withdrawal and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX time, complete elections and the establishment of a new government where people have never voted before. President Sadat: Mr. President, the first phase of withdrawal in Gaza is my responsibility. Gaza was taken from Egypt. I am ready to force this issue and I have given you my word that I am ready to proceed in both places, Gaza and the West Bank, if King Hussein is not going to do it. President Carter: Let me ask you this question then, Mr. President. What will be the reaction in the Arab world if Gaza is given special treatment and the process takes place in Gaza and does not take place in the West Bank? President Sadat: This will be a victory for both of us, because it is not a separate agreement in Sinai only. I have declared already that I [am] ready to force this on Gaza because I am responsible for Gaza. Whatever delays there are in the West Bank it will be done to their position with King Hussein. President Carter: I understand your position and we will do the best we can. President Sadat: Please, Mr. President. President Carter: I will try. President Sadat: You know I am ready to take any risk since you have known me. This time this will be detrimental for both of us. President Carter: Let me talk about a couple more things before we hang up. It is very important that you do two things, if you can. One is to emphasize in your public statements the positive aspects of the negotiations and the peace treaties to prepare not only your own people, but the rest of the world for the benefits of peace. I think there is an inclination on the part, and I am going to tell Begin the same thing, of Israel and Egypt to point out the problems with the negotiations because that is what we are trying to discuss at this point. People tend to lose sight of all the many advantages that will accrue to Egypt, the Arab world and the Middle East, if peace can be brought between you and Israel. Let it be possible for us to defend the Middle East against the Soviets, it would make it possible for you to turn your tremendous political and military support to Sudan and the Saudis and others. I hope that you will emphasize the positive result that will be achieved if and when a peace treaty is concluded. Please do that for me. President Sadat: Sure, Mr. President. President Carter: The other thing is that I need to have you to be as flexible as you possibly can on these individual points. I am perfectly willing to come over there to talk to Fahd and to talk to Hussein or to have them come over here to meet with me to try to encourage them to participate in the West Bank negotiations. I need for you to do the same

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (Temporary Disconnection.) President Sadat: We are ready to treat them according to the United Nations Charter like any other people in the world—like you, like the United States. But they want preferable positions. We don’t agree to this principle. These are small points, but believe me, it is very hard. At the same time I will be ready. I shall be telling all of them. As I have agreed with you, even the normal relations part before the Israeli withdrawal, I have done all I can, Mr. President. They are already greedy. They won’t buy everything? President Carter: Mr. President, they feel the same way about you and I think both of you are wrong. I think both sides need more peace. President Sadat: That is my oil. They think that it is theirs. President Carter: They want to have a chance to buy it, not take it, Mr. President. President Sadat: We are ready, Mr. President. We are ready to sell them. And in the future the difficulty with them is that they need nothing for the future. Well, I don’t agree to this at all. You know, Mr. President, I have seen other schemes in [missing text] and so and so. Well, they don’t give me any opportunity to do this. Opportunity for agreement. No Egyptian will agree to this. Imposing their conditions on us. I am ready for full recognition, normal relations, good neighborhood, a joint committee between us and them to put the whole thing together. I am sure in six months everything will be judged. [missing text] agree to put in the treaty such things like they ask for, because this imposes conditions. President Carter: I understand. When you go over the document with Ambassador Eilts . . . it’s one that I think is a sound document and fair and please go as far as you can, even though there are some parts in it that you may not like to accept, because there are parts in it that the Israelis do not like and I am trying to get them to accept it too—both of you in the spirit of compromise. President Sadat: I shall do, Mr. Carter, as I have always done with you. I shall work very close and I shall tell you on every point why I don’t like. President Carter: I understand. Make those differences as few as possible, Mr. President. President Sadat: [missing text] President Carter: Good luck to you. President Sadat: [missing text] President Carter: Thank you, sir. President Sadat: Good-bye.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX been increasingly obvious that the divisions, instead of becoming resolved, are becoming deeper. My hope is that, within the bounds of your own principles and beliefs of what is best for Israel, that you look with favor on the present draft6 of the treaty and the other documents attached. They are not exactly as you would prefer, or President Sadat would prefer, but I hope that you, along with President Sadat will be as flexible as possible. I talked with President Sadat this afternoon7 just before calling you. Prime Minister Begin: I will, of course, read with great attention your letter, but as I don’t know yet any news about the decisions that took place during the night. I can only say, Mr. President, that you didn’t tell me that the draft presented to me is, in my opinion, a deviation from the Camp David conference. I have told my friends that we hold true and faithful to the Camp David framework. We shall not deviate from it whatsoever. The demands brought by Mr. Ghali from Egypt are a deviation from the Camp David agreements. It is absolutely clear. I had heard that if the Government of Israel does not agree to set up a timetable corresponding to the time of withdrawal to the Ras Muhammad and al-Arish line, then the Egyptians will not fulfill their commitment to exchange resident ambassadors. Ezer Weizman might have said something to General Ali, which was his right, but he does not decide the issues, as none of your representatives do, Mr. President. The Government of Israel decides. If the decision of the Government of Israel goes against any hints given by Ezer Weizman, then that decision stands. The Egyptians cannot say you broke your promise. We didn’t break any promises. The decisions are, in a Parliamentary regime, with the Government of Israel, not even with the Prime Minister. I am also one of the Cabinet. At Camp David, the Israeli delegation had full powers of the Cabinet to decide. This is not the case. If the Egyptians threaten us with not sending ambassadors, then we shall ask them to agree that ambassadors will be sent before we start any withdrawal, after the documents of ratification come into force and the peace treaty itself comes into force, as actually it should be. The peace treaty is signed, confirmed, and ratified, then we should have normal relations as written at Camp David. We agreed to postpone it actually for ten months. This was a very great concession. Now we are threatened that there won’t be any ambassadors whatsoever if we don’t comply with their demands. So that is not the way to negotiate in good faith. We do negotiate in good faith. The draft letters about the changes that will take place with Egypt only, because Jordan does not join them, without the administrative 6 See Document 131. 7 See Document 132.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX later for the sake of peace. I brought it to Parliament. My old friends were in revolt against it. I don’t think that the peace talks should be suspended. For every draft I will give another draft. This is the nature of negotiations. President Carter: I think it is important that Secretary Vance explain to you personally at some length because some of the matters that concern you are not compatible with President Sadat’s position. He has never intended to reverse his commitment once it was made, as far as I know, on any issue. Although I went to him on the ambassadors, at the request of your own negotiators, who told me they would withdraw from al-Arish and the central part of the Sinai early, and on that basis I went to President Sadat and asked him for a one-month commitment on the ambassadorship exchange and that’s why he gave it to me. Prime Minister Begin: Mr. President, may I interrupt you for a moment. But everything was ad referendum. The Government makes the decisions, not our negotiators. President Carter: I understand, Mr. Prime Minister, but that proviso was not mentioned at the time that Dayan and Weizman and Barak all told me there would be an early withdrawal from el-Arish. But in spite of that, President Sadat told me this afternoon that he was not going back on his commitment to me to exchange ambassadors within one month. Prime Minister Begin: I got this information from my own friends yesterday on the phone. President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, I just talked to President Sadat on the telephone. I think the time schedule for the elections and the establishment of the self-government are very important to President Sadat. I think here again Secretary Vance can explain what President Sadat’s position is. I think that he is not as interested in an exact number of months as he is in the certainty of the elections being held. But I think that he has one advantage. Once he tells me something through his negotiators, that it is a final and definite commitment, I don’t have to worry about it. I live in a democracy also in which I know that I have to refer agreements made to the Senate if they are in the treaty form. It is very difficult to negotiate over and over with the Israeli Government on the same issues once we thought it had been concluded. Prime Minister Begin: No, sir, we don’t negotiate over and over. We found two points on which we did not agree. We proposed compromise proposals which were not acceptable by the other side. The Government has to take decisions. We don’t negotiate over and over again anything as far as we are concerned. When we got the draft letter, which was unacceptable to us, which Dayan told the Egyptian negotiating team, then again those five or six months are uncertain. We

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 134. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX can do. We have sent a team to Israel which will report the facts.5 Then we can make a decision. 2. In New York the Prime Minister had raised a new issue, namely, the loan request. We need to study this, the President needs to make a decision and then we need to consult Congress before informing Israel of our decision. We do not yet have the facts and cannot give an answer at this time. We must follow the regular budgetary process as does Israel. We are far along on the FY ’80 military and economic assistance question. We need time to give answers on these new items. The Prime Minister said he understood U.S. procedures but what would he tell his people. He hoped the treaty would be signed; then Israel would start to withdraw. He wanted to know tomorrow what the President would suggest. The Secretary said he could not promise a reply by a given date, but we would be glad to receive the memorandum from the Finance Minister. Dinitz interjected that it covers the airfields, special assistance, and regular FY ’80 assistance. The Secretary said we would need to study it to see if it contains sufficient facts for us to make a basic judgment. He could not give a decision now on whether we would provide further assistance or how much. The President has talked to Congress but needs more information about what is involved. The Prime Minister said there will obviously be additional expenses for Israel, and it is strange that the U.S. cannot say it will view Israel’s request favorably. The Secretary replied that we do not have the necessary information. Weizman suggested that the “second mission” be expedited to look at the other parts of the problem. The Secretary responded that he had not understood Israel expected a second mission. (Comment: Weizman’s reference was apparently to the postponed McGiffert trip.)6 The Secretary said we are awaiting data from Israel. Begin said this was logical. The Finance Minister would discuss the matter with Blumenthal, who would need instructions from the President. The Secretary responded that, if Finance Minister Ehrlich has the figures, he would ask Blumenthal to listen to them. We could not now, however, make a commitment on a grant or loan in any given amount. Begin con- 5 Reference is to the Department of Defense team tasked with surveying potential sites in the Negev for the relocation of the Israeli airbases in Sinai due to be closed upon Israeli withdrawal. The leaders of the group met with Weizman on October 17 to discuss four possible locations for the new bases. (Telegram 263281 to Tel Aviv, October 17; Na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Begin said he would try, noting that he had strong message from the Cabinet to the contrary. He then asked if the idea was that President Carter would send this letter to him and Sadat. The Secretary said the suggestion had been made that it would be better for President Carter to write the letter if this would be easier than a joint letter or an exchange of notes. The President was prepared to do this if it would help the parties, but he preferred an exchange of letters between them. Begin said he agreed with President Carter. He asked what is the rationale for a third country to write about the views of two other countries. The Secretary said the idea would be to record views we had heard from those countries, if this would help. Barak interjected that this had been the Israeli Delegation’s idea. Begin reiterated his question: why should the President of the United States write his views about elections in a third country? The Secretary recalled that at Camp David it had sometimes been easier and moved things forward when the President wrote on behalf of the other two. Begin said there was a difference. At Camp David they had dealt with specific issues—e.g., Jerusalem, Palestinian people or Palestinian Arabs of Judea and Samaria. Those were concrete problems different from the present issue. Begin said he had heard the first draft8 of the letter included a clause saying the treaty would be carried out independently of the West Bank/Gaza negotiations, but this had been deleted. The Secretary responded that this point was already in the treaty. Begin said that the “noting” paragraph in the preamble was already in the Camp David Framework but had not been deleted; therefore why delete the “independently” phrase. The Secretary replied that this was President Carter’s letter, and he preferred simpler language. But the parties must accept it, Begin said. The Secretary replied that he agreed it was up to the parties. Begin commented that he understood that Israel should change things when Egypt demanded it. The Secretary responded that the language deleted from the letter had never been seen by the Egyptians. Begin responded that he had never said that; he had made a general comment that, when Egypt demands something be taken out, it is taken out.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX underestimate importance he attaches to meaningful linkage formula. He wants withdrawal in Sinai to begin, but has come to realize need for some sort of synchronization of Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities if his tarnished Arab credentials are to be maintained. End summary. 1. Met this afternoon with Sadat, at his request, in Ismailia. Meeting lasted hour and a half. VP Mubarak and PriMin Khalil were also present. 2. Sadat recounted his half hour telecon of last night with President Carter. He was somewhat disturbed about some of the things that had been mentioned and said that he had summoned me to confirm to President Carter the positions that he had stated in telecon. He asked that I convey following to President Carter: A. President Carter had told him of a new American draft,5 which I would hand to Sadat. The President had asked that Sadat not make any alterations so that the existing gaps between the parties can be bridged and the text accepted as the final treaty. Sadat said he has no objection, but if there is no specific linkage between the first phase of Sinai withdrawal and full autonomy for the Palestinians, at least in Gaza, he cannot agree. President Carter, according to Sadat, had seemed perplexed at Sadat’s position. The President had noted that there is no legal connection between the Sinai and West Bank/Gaza problems. Sadat claimed that he made it clear that there is such a connection in the Camp David framework document. (PriMin Khalil then cited para B–2 of the “Framework for Peace,” which invites the other parties to proceed simultaneously to negotiate and conclude similar peace treaties with a view to achieving comprehensive peace. The “other parties,” Sadat and Khalil contended, include the Palestinians.) Sadat insisted that, contrary to Israeli charges, he has not sought to introduce any new element. Egypt’s position has always been clear on this point. GOE insists on timetable for Israeli actions re West Bank/Gaza. As President Carter aware, the Israelis want no fixed dates synchronizing Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities. If such a linkage does not exist in precise form and with dates, Sadat said, it will in effect mean that the Sinai treaty is a separate peace. Such a situation will be exploited by the USSR and the rejectionists, the latter, he noted, are trying to win the Saudis over. He had made it very clear, both in his speech to the Knesset6 and in the Camp David tripartite talks, that he will never sign a separate agreement. Unless the Palestinian question is resolved, there cannot be peace. 5 See Document 131.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Gaza, steps. He had sought to explain to President Carter his idea. On the day that the interim withdrawal is completed in Sinai, there should also be full autonomy celebrated in Gaza. This means that one month after signature of a Sinai agreement, Israel and Egypt should sit together to agree on a date for elections, Israeli troop deployment, abolition of military government, etc. President Carter had said the Israelis will not be ready before the end of 1979 for elections. Advance preparations are needed. Sadat reiterated that his response had been that he is not in a hurry to have the first interim withdrawal in Sinai. The linkage issue with West Bank/Gaza should first be settled. If it takes 10 or 11 months instead of the 9 months stipulated in the Sinai framework, this is agreeable. The peace process, he contended, should not be damaged through actions like completing a Sinai agreement without defining what happens when in West Bank/Gaza. President Carter had noted that two years after the establishment of a self-governing authority, the parties will sit down to work out modalities for (as Sadat put it) selfdetermination. Sadat had responded that in two years time, the USG will be in the midst of presidential elections. The Israelis, he charged, are deliberately seeking to stall in order to ease President Carter’s pressure on them. They are playing for time. Begin was in effect forced to sign the Camp David Agreements. It had never been his intention to do so. Begin is now trying to redress what he failed to achieve at Camp David. If Begin succeeds, this may indeed help him in the short run, but in the long run it will be against Israeli interests. F. Sadat also asked that I emphasize to President Carter the concessions that he, Sadat, had made in agreeing to normalization after the first withdrawal. He had done so even though the Egyptian/Israeli framework document says nothing about exchanging ambassadors so soon. He had given President Carter his word regarding ambassadorial exchanges and he will not go back on this. It will be difficult enough to have this happen when part of the Sinai is still occupied by the Israelis, but his people are behind him. However, if this takes place with nothing having happened re West Bank/Gaza, this will be bad. G. Sadat contended that he had been “hurt” when President Carter said that the Israelis claimed that he, Sadat, is now demanding more than the Camp David Agreements. He insisted that he is not doing so. He had always made it clear, including at Camp David, that a firm linkage was an absolute prerequisite to a Sinai agreement. With some show of testiness, he said that he did not like to be compared to the Israelis. H. PriMin Khalil interjected that the Israelis also object to a meaningful Egyptian presence in Gaza. Sadat said the Israelis will accept only a nominal Egyptian presence, but Egypt will not agree to this.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX there. As soon as the West Bank is ready to participate, whatever arrangements are worked out for Gaza could be expanded. I told him that I would report his comments, but reiterated that I thought this was a non-starter. 5. On Hussein and the Saudis, I said I could understand his sense of annoyance, but suggested that it is in GOE’s own interest to take steps to improve relations. Sadat said he is not prepared to do so now. “Let Hussein and the Saudis stew in their own juice awhile.” 6. Sadat had a bad cold and was by then showing signs of weariness. He asked that I get back to Cairo quickly to pass on his message without delay. I undertook to do so. 7. Comment: Sadat’s back is up. Whether this is due to the Baghdad Conference, various Israeli statements made publicly and to the Egyptian delegation suggesting a no-hurry approach on the West Bank/Gaza, the apparent Israeli reneging on a Sinai interim withdrawal timetable, the unresolved West Bank settlements issue, or a combination of all these, I cannot say. I suspect that all these factors have played a role. Of his several points, I believe Sadat’s principal one is achieving some kind of specific linkage between the Sinai treaty and West Bank/Gaza agreement. He insists that it was his understanding throughout the Camp David talks that, even though the two framework documents were separate, they would be linked in terms of implementation. He is concerned at what he believes will be an effort on our part to press him on outstanding issues rather than the Israelis. He fears he is being asked to compromise further on what is already a compromise. He is once again bitter about the Israelis and speaks of Israeli “arrogance.” Some of this is doubtless tactical bargaining, but he is genuinely concerned that he not appear to be concluding a separate peace with Israel. Hence, he is likely to continue to insist on some sort of implementation linkage, including if necessary delaying the initial interim withdrawal arrangements in Sinai by a few months. He wants withdrawal in Sinai to begin, but he has come to realize that some sort of specific synchronization of Sinai and West Bank/Gaza activities is needed if his already tarnished Arab credentials are somehow to be maintained. Eilts

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX resents a fair balance of interests.7 While the Israelis still wish to delete the references to the Camp David framework from the treaty preamble, we have told them that the present language is an irreducible minimum and that we will not support changes. I personally reemphasized this point to Prime Minister Begin. I strongly urge that, for your part, you not seek further changes in texts of the treaty and its annexes that have been worked out by our delegations. To do so would, in my view, lead the Israelis to re-open other issues of importance to you on which we have with great difficulty obtained their agreement. Secretary Vance’s meetings Saturday and Sunday focused on the two remaining major unresolved issues other than oil. They are, first, the question of what will be said in a side document about the manner and timing of the steps envisaged in the Camp David Framework for the West Bank and Gaza, and, secondly, the question of the phasing of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim line. As you know, the Israelis have resisted any specific timetable for next steps in the West Bank and Gaza, taking the position that there should be no linkage between these negotiations and the subsequent process in the West Bank and Gaza. They have been particularly opposed to mentioning a specific target date for the holding of elections. We have supported your position and we have finally persuaded Dayan to accept as a target date that elections should be held not later than the end of 1979. I propose that these assurances be embodied in a letter8 which I would write to you and Prime Minister Begin, if this procedure is acceptable to you. I am asking Hermann to go over with you9 the precise text of this letter. I believe a letter will be the quickest way to get agreement on the best possible language. It will be written to record the agreement of both sides in a way that will be no less binding than an exchange of notes. In addition, it gives me a chance to demonstrate the United States commitment to continued progress on the West Bank and Gaza. On the issue of phasing of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim line, Dayan and Weizman will support in the Cabinet debate the language which we have sent to you. Weizman and Dayan cannot guarantee acceptance by the Cabinet but consider it of the utmost importance that they succeed in winning Cabinet approval. Finally, we have asked the Israelis for a letter which they would address to us detailing certain unilateral steps they would take in the 7 See Document 131. 8 See Document 137. 9 Ibid.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX under consideration for a specific Gaza date would, in my view, be impossible and would look like a new demand on your part which was not included in the Camp David Accords. We will be a full partner in the next phase of negotiations and, as in the past, we can produce positive results by working together with you. We can let the world see that Egypt has not made a separate peace. By pressing forward, with our support, in the negotiations for the West Bank and Gaza these tangible, on-the-ground steps will be more convincing than any language we can agree upon today. We now have the components of a peace treaty package which is fair to both sides, and I am urging both you and Prime Minister Begin, with whom I also spoke on the telephone,10 to move as quickly as possible to give your final approval to these documents. It would help me, Mr. President, if you could give me your response as soon as possible. We are at a decisive moment which we must seize. Further negotiation will not yield significant gains for either side but could, on the contrary, place in jeopardy what has been accomplished thus far. Conclusion of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel will be a major achievement. It will be so recognized throughout the world and will strengthen our hands to forge ahead without delay toward the objective of a comprehensive peace which we set for ourselves at Camp David. With my best wishes. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text. 3. You should make certain Sadat understands that his delegation here has not signed on to those elements of the treaty package which their instructions do not permit them to agree to. In particular, the letter on the West Bank and Gaza and the new language on phasing of withdrawal to the interim line were shown to them for the first time Sunday. What we are doing in effect is asking Sadat to approve a package which his delegation’s instructions do not permit them to agree to in a number of respects. 4. One of the changes we anticipate making in the above text would be to add a new second sentence which would indicate that the President has read your report of your Monday conversation with Sadat. Vance 10 See Document 133.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX letter re West Bank/Gaza minus clause re December 17, 1978 date

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 7. Sadat closed by recalling that he had told Secretary Vance that a confrontation with Begin is needed. He had asked the Secretary whether the USG is prepared for “brinkmanship” and the Secretary had replied in the affirmative. What is now needed, Sadat said, is a confrontation between President Carter and Begin, if the latter remains adamant, in order to obtain the necessary Israeli concessions. I told Sadat that in a sense there is already a confrontation between President Carter and Begin. This is evident by the negative Israeli reaction to some elements of the treaty package. Begin is under no illusions as to President Carter’s view. I pointed out, however, that it is necessary to take one thing at a time. To escalate the confrontation with Begin to public dimensions would only rally public support for the Israeli Prime Minister. It would not achieve what both Sadat and President Carter want. What is needed is to conclude the Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty and then proceed with equal vigor on moving ahead with West Bank/ Gaza matters. Sadat said he disagreed. A confrontation with Begin is needed, as he saw it, if the outstanding issues are to be satisfactorily resolved. VP Mubarak, he reiterated, would amplify on his views. 8. As I was leaving, I noted that the treaty package is being deliberated in the Israeli Cabinet and Knesset. Many things will be said publicly which may seem outrageous. We urge that Sadat continue to avoid being drawn into public debate until the process is completed in Israel otherwise he will only weaken supporters of the treaty and give ammunition to critics. I said we would urge Israel to act in the same way. Sadat said he has no desire to engage in a rhetorical battle with the Israelis, but much would depend upon what comes out of Israel during the treaty debate. He recalled that GOE had made no public statement when Israel announced settlements expansion. Subsequently, Begin had pointed to Egyptian silence, claiming that this showed GOE has no objection to such expansion. This is clearly not correct and GOE will have to make a judgment on whether the protection of its interests requires answering the Israelis lest silence again be taken by Begin as acquiescence. 9. Comment: Sadat’s tough line continues. He was clearly disappointed in the President’s letter and unusually emotional in his comments. Sadat is a consummate actor and his performance was doubtless partly show. However, despite our efforts, he does feel that the treaty package, as presently constituted, is inequitable to him. He professes to believe that it will hurt him and, as he likes to point out, also President Carter in the Arab world. He is himself engaging in a game of brinkmanship, but I believe he will as a minimum insist on some change in the draft package if he is to sign it. I sense some unhappiness that Boutros Ghali may not have been tough enough in the negotiations. Hence, the dispatch of Mubarak at the very time Ghali is being recalled

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX package which has been presented of about $3.3 Billion is a great deal higher than is really needed to carry out the essential elements of the peace process relative to the Egyptian agreement. He has suggested that the sum of approximately $1.5 Billion spread out over three to four years, would be sufficient to take care of the essential elements such as the construction of the two new airfields, the building of roads and infrastructures in the Negev, and additional electronic surveillance equipment. Little mention was made of the form of such financial assistance but I get the impression that long term, low interest loans would suffice.2 (As a personal observation from me, it is my understanding that whereas direct loans by the federal government would constitute expenditures under the budgetary process, loans from other sources with federal government guarantees might only cause a budgetary impact of the differential between total interest costs and the interest charged on such loans.) Weizman had expressed some concern as no contact had been made with him during these current negotiations by our Defense Department, but I understand that this evening he is meeting with some representatives from the Pentagon. Concerning the type of expression of financial support which Weizman thinks would be adequate for the purpose of getting the Israeli Cabinet to overcome a sufficient amount of its concern about this factor is a message which includes language such as: “the United States Government will consider”, or “the United States Government will look into”, or “the United States Government acknowledges this financial need”, along with a caveat such as “subject to the review by the United States of the actual needs, and subject, of course, to Congressional approval”. Along with such language, some indication of your understanding and general support for such financial assistance should be sufficient.3 Weizman also indicated that he as Defense Minister is prepared to reassess Israel’s military requirements and would expect to have significant reductions in the projected needs as presently presented. Charney came back this evening after having been with Weizman following Weizman’s meeting here at the White House. Weizman apparently is anxious to be here to meet with the Egyptian Vice President when he comes on Wednesday.4 Presumably Secretary Vance called Weizman and urged him again to go back to Jerusalem in time to attend 2 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Give info to Harold.” 3 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Info for Cy.” 4 For discussion of Weizman’s meeting with Mubarak, see Document 140.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the fulfillment of President Sadat’s dream when he went to Jerusalem. It would [be] a tragedy if his effort were not to result in peace. It will help us for you to present the Egyptian position clearly. Your negotiating team in Washington has done a superb job. They are competent, tough negotiators. It is hard for the delegations from Egypt or Israel to negotiate when the leaders of their countries are not present. At Camp David, Begin or Sadat could make final decisions. This resulted in hundreds of compromises. This is more difficult for the negotiators to do since they are uncertain of what the reactions will be back home. General Ali and Minister Ghali have done a great job and they deserve credit and appreciation for that. I am concerned about the future of the negotiations. Our most serious problem is that public statements are made in Egypt and Israel which can become a source of diplomatic incidents. This did not take place at Camp David. Now all the proposals that are made are in the international news and this causes serious problems. We have tried to find common ground between the parties, and later Egypt or Israel rejects the agreements that have been reached by the negotiators. This has been frustrating for us but we will continue as a negotiating partner. Both Secretary Vance and I have many other responsibilities which we have been neglecting to some extent. We thought that the treaty negotiations could [be] done in a few days. We have other problems, such as with the Soviet Union, in Africa, Cyprus, NATO, and Nicaragua. We need a commitment now to succeed, and this requires understanding of the other side’s political problems, and there is a need for flexibility on both sides. No ultimatum can help. That would aggravate the already difficult problems. Your presence here will be constructive and we know that you speak for President Sadat. There have been some recent statements that have added a new dimension and I am sure that you will want to discuss them. We believe that to separate Gaza from the West Bank is a new development, if the news reports are accurate, and I am eager to hear directly from you on the Egyptian position. I hope your position will open the door quickly to a peace treaty. Vice President Mubarak: Thank you for your warm welcome. I met with Secretary Vance last night2 and bring you greetings from President Sadat. We want to thank you for the effort you made at Camp David. Ninety percent of the problems were solved there. The Egyptian people are aware of your efforts and appreciate them. 2 No memorandum of conversation of this meeting has been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX good relationship with Jordan. For there to be divisions among Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan causes us deep concerns. It makes the achievement of our common purposes more difficult, especially when Egypt and Saudi Arabia are in disagreement. My feeling is that President Sadat has not consulted enough with Saudi Arabia, and this makes my job more difficult. I asked President Sadat to talk with Crown Prince Fahd. Sadat said that he is punishing Saudi Arabia. I understand his concern, but I hope that you can keep in mind the concept that we have of the United States cooperating closely with Morocco, Sudan, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and perhaps Jordan. This could form a strong, continuing alliance of friendly countries which would present a common front. We have very good relations with each of these nations, as do you. Divisions among these countries could weaken our cause. Beyond this, we believe that all of the Arab nations and Israel need protection against the Soviet Union and their hired help in North Africa and the Middle East. In the past, the priority among the Arabs was to fight Israel. Their secondary concerns were with the Soviet Union. President Sadat has helped me to understand that the stability of the entire Middle East and North Africa could depend upon the achievement of an Arab-Israeli peace. Your five divisions in the Suez Canal area could be relieved and they could help to balance threats elsewhere. So much has already been accomplished, and there is now a feeling of common purpose between Egypt and Israel. You can’t expect to get the approval now of Syria, Iraq, and Libya. Vice President Mubarak: Not even of Jordan. The President: Jordan is weak, but we can’t get the Iraqis, the Syrians, and the PLO to approve what we are doing. President Sadat has shown great courage. There is no way that I could violate my commitments to President Sadat, and to others, by approving a separate treaty between Egypt and Israel. We didn’t need to go to Camp David if we were just seeking a separate agreement. If we had been willing to abandon the West Bank and Gaza and the Palestinians, then we had no need of Camp David. We don’t want a separate peace treaty. We cannot abandon the West Bank and Gaza and the Palestinian question. The Israelis have already made great concessions. It is hard for you and President Sadat to know how difficult these decisions are for Prime Minister Begin. He gave more in Sinai than the Labor Party would have given. They wanted to keep a corridor to Sharm el-Sheik, and they wanted to keep the settlements. They would not recognize the Palestinians’ right to self-government. Begin has made tremendous concessions, and President Sadat has also made generous concessions, but there is a tendency in Egypt not to see how far Begin has come. In the Camp David agreements, linkage is clearly spelled out. Camp David dealt not only with Sinai, but also with the West Bank, Gaza, and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX elections will definitely be held in five months would be difficult at best. If the elections can be completed in nine or ten or eleven or twelve months, this will be a notable step. The Israelis think that it can be done. Foreign Minister Dayan is getting to the end of his career, but he personally wants to carry out the elections and oversee the withdrawal of the military government. This is one of his great ambitions, to end the occupation. But to tie this together with a specific date could cast doubt on the treaty. If Israel agrees, that would suit me fine. Anything you agree to is all right. But I am afraid of what will happen if you set a coterminous date. The Israelis fear that even if they do their best, but if things fail, this could jeopardize the Egypt-Israel treaty. The entire process if very difficult. We have asked the Israelis for unilateral commitments to show good faith by allowing political meetings and the release of some political prisoners. They have said that they will do this as a unilateral gesture. I believe that we can be successful, and I hope that you will understand the special problems in Israel. I see the peace treaty as being signed, and then within one month, there would be negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza. There would be a registration of voters, elections would be held and the selfgovernment would be established. The first thing on the agenda would be to define the duties and responsibilities of the self-governing body. If the negotiations go well, which I anticipate, then there will be an increase in trust, despite some difficulties. I assume that you saw our answers to King Hussein. I assume that these satisfied you, although the Israelis do not like them. We will take these views into those negotiations. My preference is that Egypt and Israel will accept the treaty as it now is. If Israel is willing to link the elections in the West Bank and Gaza to the interim withdrawal date, I have no objections. I see Sadat’s offer to wait on withdrawal until there is proof of progress in the West Bank and Gaza as a generous step. But it could make the whole peace treaty tentative instead of final. The Israelis say they are prepared to negotiate in good faith. President Sadat doubts that. There are some doubts in Israel that President Sadat can prevail over the PLO. I have no assurance that the Israeli Cabinet will accept the present document. Secretary Vance: On linkage, there is now language in the preamble that is basically derived from an Egyptian draft. Vice President Mubarak: That’s okay. The President: I met with Weizman recently,3 and I have met with Dayan.4 They see that linkage is there. They are prepared to begin ne-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX people there. The PLO can make trouble in the West Bank, and that is why it will take more time. This is why we want to give a model. We want to be able to defend our agreement in front of the entire world. The President: The idea is generous, but it could create new problems. Israel distrusts Egypt and when you say that Gaza should go first, Israel sees Egypt as wanting Gaza back. We hope that you can consult with the Saudis and the Jordanians if possible. I don’t know what their reactions would be. I would guess that they would resent any unilateral move in Gaza. Let me clarify my understanding of your position. You want to sign the peace treaty, and as soon as it is ratified Israel will be able to use the Suez Canal and to enjoy free passage in the Gulf of Aqaba. Within one month, negotiations will begin on the West Bank and Gaza, and the Egyptian delegation will include some Palestinians from Gaza, and maybe some from the West Bank also. The negotiations will define the duties and responsibilities of the new government, and will establish modalities for the elections—how voters should be registered, and how the elections should be carried out. Then voters will be registered, and the election will take place and the selfgovernment will be established. The self-government might not be completely representative. Some people may boycott the election. Maybe only ten percent of the voters will vote in the West Bank and fifty percent in Gaza. We hope that Hussein will join and the Saudis will support this process. But if all of this is done in good time and in good faith, whenever those elections are completed, you want to have the self-government established, and then simultaneously you want the interim withdrawal in Sinai to take place. One month after the interim withdrawal, you are prepared to exchange ambassadors with Israel. Then there would be another two or three years before full withdrawal in Sinai—the earlier the better from our point of view—and then within five years of the establishment of the self-governing authority, the final status of the West Bank and Gaza will be determined in negotiations. You prefer to see the West Bank and Gaza kept together, but if Hussein and the PLO prevent the establishment of selfgovernment in the West Bank, then you favor progress in Gaza because of Egyptian influence there. If there is no progress in the West Bank, but there is some in Gaza, this would be adequate for your to conclude the interim withdrawal and to exchange ambassadors. Is this correct? Vice President Mubarak: Yes. Secretary Vance: When the peace treaty is signed, will the Suez Canal be opened to Israeli ships immediately? Vice President Mubarak: Yes, there is no problem. The only point is the full autonomy in Gaza. The President: I am trying to minimize what you demand from the Israelis. In the Camp David Agreement, it says that the military gov-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Sadat is in full control of the relationship with Saudi Arabia, we are in touch, but neither of us talks about it. The President: I am glad to hear this. Secretary Vance: I still don’t see clearly how you will explain to the Arab world that you are prepared to complete the process with Gaza, while leaving the West Bank out. The President: Let me try to answer. The world will see that Egypt prefers to move in both the West Bank and Gaza, and only if there are uncontrollable factors which prevent movement in the West Bank, Egypt would then continue with Gaza regardless. Vice President Mubarak: When Sadat gives his word, he never deviates. If it is only going to be in Gaza, we will tell you. If we say both, we mean both and as quickly as possible. The President: If you had the choice between getting progress in the West Bank and Gaza by next October or just in Gaza by next April, would you prefer October? Vice President Mubarak: Yes. We would prefer to finish with both, even if it takes three or four or five months longer. Secretary Vance: We still have the problem of how to explain this in public. The President: Only President Sadat can do this. He needs to emphasize the importance of keeping the West Bank and Gaza together. Otherwise he gives the impression of wanting to separate Gaza. Vice President Mubarak: I said there would be no separation. The President: I hope you won’t raise the question of the priority of obligations. I understand the problem and we have had tedious negotiations on this. We understand the problem posed by some earlier agreements with Arab nations. It is clear that the present treaty is in conflict with those obligations. We have looked at our own agreements, and we have contacted international lawyers, and we have tried to put in common internationally accepted language of what is necessary in cases of this sort. Secretary Vance can explain it to you. Vice President Mubarak: What is mentioned in the treaty will not do anything, but it will hurt us internally and the Communists and extremists will use it against us. They will say that Egypt and Israel are allies. The President: We can’t satisfy the Iraqis and the Syrians ever. Secretary Vance: If Syria is attacked by Israel, you can still help Syria. The President: And President Sadat can say that. Egypt has the advantage of being able to explain this in a positive way. He can defend his Arab brothers in Syria and Jordan if they are attacked by Israel. But

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President: That is very helpful. I am glad to get to know you. I have heard fine things about you. I know President Sadat has confidence in you. We should try to minimize our public demands and statements. They have a way of becoming matters of national honor. The Israelis also do this, and we hope that neither side will talk so much to the press. Vice President Mubarak: We were very upset about the Israeli settlements. When we decided to keep quiet, they said that we approved of what they were doing. The President: They say that Egypt doesn’t care and that this is just a U.S.-Israeli problem. Ambassador Ghorbal: When we talked to Weizman and Dayan, we took a very strong position on the settlements. Secretary Vance: One issue which you have been pressing has been an Egyptian presence in Gaza, especially the presence of Egyptian police. This is a very explosive issue with the Israelis. Are you still insisting on it? Vice President Mubarak: We are only interested in a symbolic presence. I’ll speak to Weizman. We don’t want police there to fight Israel. We know the situation in Gaza. We just want to send some police and have a presence. Secretary Vance: I hope you can get this cleared up. Vice President Mubarak: We mentioned it before. The President: This is an additional problem. Even if there are only fifteen police, it opens up a new area. One possibility might be that when negotiations take place, when there is a registration of voters, when the elections are held, there would be some kind of international monitoring. This could involve the U.N., or perhaps a joint Israeli- Egyptian presence. They could attest to the fairness of the elections. This would be the best way for there to be an Egyptian presence. Vice President Mubarak: We could think of an Egyptian-Israeli presence. The President: Why don’t you explore this with Weizman? Secretary Vance: The fear is that you want to take over the Gaza Strip. Vice President Mubarak: I’ll explain to him. We want to finish with this problem. We don’t want Gaza. The President: Try to make this clear to the Israelis. Vice President Mubarak: I’ll talk about the priority of obligations with him. I won’t tell the Israelis that we agree yet. Mr. President, if you want to see me while I am here, I will be available. Secretary Vance: There is only one other major issue and that is oil. There should be some way to work this through.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tians want. Mubarak explained that the Egyptians want a redraft of what they call the American letter, or the Israeli letter, and some slight changes in Article VI, paragraphs 2 and 5. Weizman told the Egyptians that he was not in a position to negotiate, but that he could report to the Cabinet on what was agreed and on what were the differences. He asked the Egyptians to put their positions in writing, and they said they would do so. Weizman feels that there are important differences, but they should not be exaggerated or distorted. Weizman said that he had the strong impression that the Egyptians do not want to break off the talks. Mubarak said that he would even [be] prepared to come back to Washington, if necessary. He was reluctant, however, to accept the idea of meeting with Prime Minister Begin or other Israeli leaders in Jerusalem. In brief, Weizman believes that there will be no break in the talks; Article VI is a problem; and the West Bank and Gaza issue remains to be solved. On the West Bank and Gaza problem, they want a time period that is somewhat less than the end of 1979. They did not raise the question of substages of withdrawal in Sinai. In private, Mubarak told Weizman that Egypt will not go to war again. Weizman said that he believed that, but it was not so easy to convince his government. The Secretary said that he agreed that the Egyptians want to continue the talks. He asked Weizman what issues he would take back to the Cabinet. Weizman said that he would have to raise the question of the letter, but that he would not reopen the question of the preamble. He would also report that the Egyptians want to change Article VI, paragraph 5. He also understands from the Egyptians that if the West Bank does not go as expected, the Egyptians are prepared to proceed with Gaza alone. Secretary Vance asked if the Egyptians would give them a written statement on Article VI and on the joint letter. Weizman confirmed that they would. He also expressed some question concerning Mubarak’s basic message to him. He did not seem sure what the Egyptian position was. The Secretary asked Weizman when he would return. The Minister said he would wait until Sunday.3 The Secretary said that he hoped that it would be clear that Weizman was only returning on a temporary basis for the Cabinet meeting and that he would be coming back to Washington. Weizman said that he would be seeing Mubarak again at three-thirty. Ambassador Dinitz explained that this would not be for the purpose of negotiations, but rather to get an idea of [what] the Egyptians really want. Weizman said that Mubarak had made it clear that he does not want Gaza as a part of Egypt, but that he does have to face the Arab world. Therefore, he wants a specific date and an Egyptian police presence in Gaza. Weizman said that 3 November 19.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 141. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1 Washington, November 21, 1978 SUBJECT Telephone Conversation between President Carter and Prime Minister Begin, November 21, 1978 President Carter: Good morning. Prime Minister Begin: Good afternoon or good morning to you. President Carter: I hope you had a nice . . . Prime Minister Begin: Today our Cabinet votes2 on a tremendous issue—namely, that we are prepared to sign the peace treaty with Egypt, if Egypt is prepared to do so. In other words, we give up our reservations. President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, that is very good news. We are very pleased to hear it. Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir. President Carter: We will encourage President Sadat as we have in the past to accept the treaty text without change. Prime Minister Begin: The text alone. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX economist, but it was absolutely made clear to me. The people should rejoice in the peace. It will be for them disaster. So, I ask the Secretary of State about the financial assistance, if it should be a grant. This is what I actually meant, although it was my mistake at first.5 Then we need a loan for a longer period of time which we shall repay. This is the form of help. Of course, I can only present it to you as a most serious problem not connected with the peace treaty. It will not be a linkage or condition. But I present to you with respect. These are the problems that we have still. Mr. President, thank you for listening to me. Now I would like to hear you. President Carter: All right, sir. Let me say again that the instruction by the Israeli Cabinet in approving the text of the treaty is very much appreciated, I know, by myself and the world. We will proceed to encourage President Sadat to accept the treaty text also without change, including, of course, Article VI which has been so troubling concerning the priority of obligations. I have no idea whether we will be successful, but we will be very eager to seek his approval of the treaty text. I don’t want to mislead you, however. I think that there is still one outstanding issue that needs to be resolved and that is concerning some assurance to President Sadat about the West Bank and Gaza, the elections, and the establishment of the autonomous self-government. President Sadat has expressed to me by telephone and also through Vice President Mubarak, who I also think met with Defense Minister Weizman, that he would prefer not to have the interim withdrawal from the Sinai until the election process has been completed. In our side-letter6 which was worked out, as you know, by your own negotiators, including Foreign Minister Dayan, there was a target date—I think the words used were a goal—of the end of 1979 for the conclusion of these elections. I have no particular views to put forward except that I think our draft of this letter is a fairly good compromise. We will, of course, continue our efforts to get President Sadat to agree with your views and vice versa. I will now be in touch with President Sadat to report to him on your communication to me by telephone this morning and also to encourage him to accept the draft of the treaty. I think that is very important that the negotiations continue and my expectation is that President Sadat will want some clear understanding with you, not through the treaty text, but through a separate letter that there be some definite commitment on the West Bank and Gaza. 5 In a marginal note on an earlier draft of this transcript, Carter underlined the word “grant” and wrote beside the paragraph: “He [Begin] said he asked for a loan—it was an error—he meant a grant.” See footnote 1 above. 6 See Document 131.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX be prepared to discuss this in more definite terms as the negotiations progress. Prime Minister Begin: Thank you very much, Mr. President. Now, Mr. President, I only want to say that there shouldn’t be any doubt in your mind or with President Sadat that we want to implement the autonomy. The two delegations must meet and reach an agreement on the autonomy. It will take some time. As it happened yesterday, four people were killed. The PLO is around. You will not wish and President Sadat will not want it, if the PLO should take over. We are in complete agreement. There will be two delegations. Then when we have the agreement, then there is the question of the elections, and it will not present any difficulty. Then the people wish either to elect or to be elected. Therefore, this is the reason why we took that decision. Indeed, on a timetable we cannot accept. What we want to do is to start the negotiations quickly, a few weeks after the signing. I think it is very reasonable. It is absolutely appropriate to take the first draft written by Ambassador Atherton on your behalf, Mr. President.9 This [is] the whole difference now. I hope it is reasonable, because this is an objective situation. We have the PLO with their submachine guns. We have made great progress. We want peace and the peace treaty, so let us sign the text. President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, let me ask you if you are opposed to agreeing that the negotiations themselves would start within a month? Prime Minister Begin: No, we are not opposed to it. President Carter: Let me ask you a key question. This is the key question in President Sadat’s mind. If we do not establish a definite date for the elections and autonomous government in the West Bank, would you be willing to delay the interim withdrawal without any date being specified until those elections can be held? If the peace treaty is signed without delay, and if Israel has access to the Suez Canal, and so forth, as is intended in the treaty agreements? Prime Minister Begin: I must admit, Mr. President, that I would hesitate to state my point of view. I need to consult with my colleagues. President Carter: This is just a possibility for resolving the difference and I am not trying to speak for President Sadat. I am not trying to speak officially on that. Prime Minister Begin: If the interim withdrawal does not start and is not completed, we don’t have the normal relations. I understand that as we are now that the peace treaty would only be signed and ratified. 9 Reference is to the initial negotiating draft of the treaty presented at the beginning of the Blair House talks. See footnote 2, Document 83.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Sadat was extremely negative in his comments about Begin, but concluded that we would have to deal with him nonetheless. Sadat repeated his belief that a confrontation between you and Begin is essential at some point. —Egypt will be patient even if it takes one month or more to conclude the negotiations. —Sadat wants to reassure you that there will be no military confrontation, that he will not suspend the negotiations and that he is prepared to have his delegation return to Washington whenever they are needed. —Sadat said there were still some bad elements in the treaty and that Boutros Ghali had been careless in looking after Egyptian interests. He specifically noted that Article IV places no time limit on the security arrangements in the Sinai and he again termed Article VI unacceptable. 143. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, November 22, 1978 SUBJECT Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and President Sadat, November 22, 1978 President Carter: President Sadat, this is Jimmy Carter. How are you doing? President Sadat: Good evening, Mr. President. President Carter: It’s a great pleasure to hear from you. How are you getting along? President Sadat: Very well. And you? I’m very happy. President Carter: That’s fine. President Sadat: It’s good to hear your voice. President Carter: Thank you for that. I’m glad to hear your voice too, good friend. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX self-government is established after the elections. Begin did not respond. He said that he was not qualified to respond to that. I told him that this was not an official suggestion, but just an idea. As you know, this is what you outlined Sunday before last when I talked to you.4 President Sadat: Right, Mr. President. President Carter: If we can conclude the negotiations on the treaty and accept it as it is and then concentrate on the letter which would tie the West Bank/Gaza self-government to the Sinai withdrawal or to a date to be concluded at the end of next year, that would put you in a very favorable position, and would open an opportunity for success. President Sadat: Hermann told [me] about this.5 I get your point, Mr. President. President Carter: Good. I just don’t want the world to think that we and Israel agree, and that you are the obstacle to peace, because obviously that has never been the case. President Sadat: For that I am really intending to make this reassessment and I can contact you in two days. President Carter: I will be looking forward to that. President Sadat: Very good. President Carter: How are you personally? Are you getting along okay? President Sadat: Very good. How are Rosalynn and the children? President Carter: They are fine and all of us are going to Camp David for our Thanksgiving late tonight. We have invited our family and Rosalynn’s family to join us there. President Sadat: Marvelous, marvelous. I wish you all happiness and success, Mr. President. President Carter: Thank you very much. I really appreciate a chance to talk to you. The other point that I want to make with you, Mr. President, is that whatever you can do improve the communication with the Saudi Arabians would be very helpful to us. President Sadat: Fahd sent me the ambassador today. President Carter: That is very fine. President Sadat: Yes. But we shall be doing it discreetly. President Carter: That’s understandable and I approve of that, of course. Well, good luck to you, Mr. President. President Sadat: Never worry about this question. President Carter: All right. 4 See Document 132. 5 See Document 142.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “public relations advantage” by refusing to accept the draft treaty. “Israel,” Sadat stated, “is asking for concessions in Egypt unparalleled by any other state;” Egypt, he felt, had “given Israel everything.” Similarly, Sadat countered Byrd’s argument that reopening negotiations on treaty language posed “danger” by stating that “he would prefer to see the text unravel than accept a treaty which heavily damaged his position or President Carter.” As currently drafted, the treaty for Sadat was “against the aspirations of the Egyptian people” and he could not agree to it. The Embassy transmitted a full summary of this meeting in tele-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Pursuant to our telephone conversation,5 I would like to share with you some thoughts on the present state of the negotiations and how best to proceed in the days ahead. I am doing so in the spirit of friendship that binds us together and in all appreciation of your relentless effort in the pursuit of peace. I am also undertaking this exchange of views with full awareness of the historic significance of the task we have assumed for the good of our two nations and that of mankind. I believe that the negotiations held in Washington have reached a crossroads. Much has been accomplished with your help and determination. However, what remains to be finalized could affect the outcome of our endeavor at present and in the future. I also believe that this could be achieved without any undue delay. As I stated before, most of the task was done in Camp David. There, we laid down the foundations of a comprehensive peace that addresses itself to all aspects of the conflict. Special emphasis was placed on the Palestinian problem as it was agreed that it remains the heart and core of the dispute.6 Thus, it was only logical that we made it crystal clear that any attempt to work for a separate agreement must be rejected. You would recall that I told Prime Minister Begin that it is absolutely unacceptable to us to conclude a separate agreement, a partial agreement or a third disengagement.7 This was the overriding theme in the Camp David talks. Hence, it should be clearly reflected in the outcome of the current negotiations which are held under the umbrella8 of the “Framework for Peace in the Middle East”. This should be achieved, not by the insertion of a few words, but by reaching agreement on specific measures to be taken on certain dates in the direction of transferring authority to the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. In all candor, I find the Israeli attitude in the Washington negotiations and the statements issued by members of the Israeli Cabinet rather alarming. Apparently, they are still thinking and behaving with the old mentality and complexes. The pre-initiative spirit persists, even though the Israeli people left no doubt that their yearning for peace is the paramount factor in their life. They received my message with enthusiasm and hope. To me, their response was gratifying. Nonetheless, the Israeli delegation remained seized by the worn-out concepts and the old suspicion. They fail to conceive the process as one of peace building for this generation and the generations to come. Their attitude toward the Camp David Accords is very telling. They want to pick and 5 See Document 143. 6 Vance underlined the final two sentences of this paragraph. 7 Vance underlined this sentence. 8 Vance underlined the phrase “held under the umbrella.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the West Bank and Gaza with a view to facilitate the implementation of the Camp David “Framework”.12 As the Israelis balked and insisted on omitting any reference in the treaty to the Palestinian problem, you proposed dealing with the issue as follows: A) Emphasizing the comprehensive nature of the peace settlement in the preamble;13 B) Spelling out the steps which must be taken for the implementation of the provisions of the “Framework” in the West Bank and Gaza in a letter to be exchanged between Egypt and Israel and signed simultaneously with the treaty.14 The content of that letter as inunciated (sic) by you was to include taking certain steps on specified dates,15 namely the entering into negotiation and the holding of elections for the establishment of the self-governing authority, in implementation of the Camp David plan for full autonomy. C) Obtaining a letter from Israel to the United States on measures to be taken unilaterally for the purpose of improving the political situation in the West Bank and Gaza, such as lifting the ban on political activities, freeing political prisoners and allowing the return of some displaced persons for the unification of families.16 Although the idea of an exchange of letters was at variance with our concept, we cooperated with it and submitted several drafts for the letter. Discussions of these drafts, together with the U.S. draft, revealed an Israeli reluctance to be committed to any step beyond beginning the negotiations. With this Israeli attitude, the proposed date for holding the elections kept moving backward, from three to six months and finally to a full year.17 After being conceived as a fixed time, it was watered down to a target date which might and might not be met.18 Furthermore, the form of the document was changed from a letter to be exchanged between Egypt and Israel to a note issued by the United States.19 This was done despite the fact that Israel has accepted for several weeks the form of an exchanged letter. I honestly believe that this 12 Vance underlined this sentence. 13 Vance underlined the portion of this phrase beginning with “you proposed” and ending with “the preamble.” 14 Vance underlined this sentence. 15 Vance underlined and highlighted the phrase “taking certain steps on specified dates.” 16 Vance underlined and highlighted this point. 17 Vance underlined this sentence. 18 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence. He wrote: “target is fixed date” in the right-hand margin next to it. 19 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence. He wrote: “form” in the right-hand margin next to it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ent with the “Framework for Peace27 in the Middle East” signed in Camp David. Nothing could be further from the truth, for the “Framework” does not contain one word that could weigh against such presence.28 The framework provided that the local police force will maintain a continuous liaison with Israeli, Jordanian and Egyptian officers.29 Furthermore, there is a provision concerning the participation of Jordanian forces in joint patrols and in the manning of control posts. There is another provision which allows the recruitment of Jordanian citizens in the local police. By analogy, the some (sic) concept could apply to the Egyptian presence in the Gaza Strip.30 Our responsibility with respect to Gaza is more sanctioned in legal and political terms than the Jordanian role in the West Bank. We have never claimed sovereignty over Gaza. No one questions our intentions there. In fact, a tangible Egyptian presence would reassure the Palestinian population, a factor which is certain to generate enthusiasm for the Camp David formula. Thus, we would be building a model which would be envied by Jordan and the West Bank inhabitants. In short, our presence in Gaza would facilitate the implementation of the Camp David formula.31 If we are to require an explicit mention of every detail in the Camp David Accord, why, then, is Israel insisting on many points which were never mentioned directly or indirectly in the “Framework”? Such points include the priority of obligations, the exchange of ambassadors one month after the completion of the interim withdrawal, setting a specific date for the conclusion of an agreement on trade and commerce, the conclusion of a cultural agreement following the interim withdrawal and the preservation of war memorials.32 Dear Friend, I have given careful consideration to your idea of treating the present draft of the treaty as final. I fully understand the reasons behind that, namely putting an end to limitless controversy that could go on indefinitely. However, I must confide to you that we have serious problems with certain provisions. It was for this reason that our delegation requested your assistants not to state that you considered the text 27 Vance underlined “they contend that such presence would be inconsistent with the ‘Framework for Peace.’” 28 Vance underlined this sentence. 29 Vance underlined “local police force will maintain a continuous liaison with Israeli, Jordanian and Egyptian officers.” 30 Vance underlined this sentence. 31 Vance underlined this sentence and the preceding sentence. He wrote: “good argument” in the right-hand margin next to it. 32 Vance underlined and highlighted this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX apt to continue and escalate in the future as we all know, thus creating a most unfavorable atmosphere. On the other hand, we find the provision of paragraph 5 of the same article extremely difficult to accept. Like that of paragraph 2, it is both harmful and unnecessary. It gives rise to future controversy and contention.39 As you certainly know, we proposed a solution to the problem which the Israelis raised with respect to the conflict of obligations. Following your conversation with Vice President Mubarak on November 15,40 I instructed our delegation to prepare a new draft41 which was submitted to Secretary Vance and subsequently discussed with Defense Minister Weizman before being forwarded to the Israeli Cabinet. We proposed deleting paragraph 5 and amending paragraph 4 to read as follows:42 —“The parties undertake not to enter into any obligation or take any action in conflict with this treaty.”43 I trust that you agree with me that this formula meets the concerns of the Israelis if they are genuine. It covers all obligations so long as the parties are undertaking not to take any action which is inconsistent with their obligations under the treaty. Why should Israel insist on the present offensive language? Is it not significant that they reversed their acceptance of certain provisions and concepts after they had secured certain benefits in return for their acceptance? A case in point is their sudden reversal of their position on the sub-phases of the interim withdrawal. This was done 26 days after informing both of us of their willingness to withdraw from El-Arish in two months and from the oil fields area on the Gulf of Suez in 4 months. This was also done after obtaining your support for their request of exchanging ambassadors within one month from the completion of the interim withdrawal. When you met with our delegates on October 17,44 you used two arguments in order to persuade us to accept such a demand. The first was that Israel accepted to reduce the time for completing the interim withdrawal from nine to six months. The second argument was that Israel has offered to withdraw from El-Arish within two months. In other words, their previous position was used to extract some benefits for them. By legal norms, a 39 Vance underlined this paragraph. 40 Presumably, a mistaken reference to Document 140. 41 Not found. 42 Vance underlined and highlighted the last two sentences of this paragraph. He wrote in the right-hand margin: “Rejected by Israelis.” 43 Vance underlined this sentence. 44 See Document 89.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX I firmly believe that the negotiations should continue until we conclude a treaty we can accept without reservation. I would like to sign a treaty which is likely to start a new chapter in the history of the area and put an end to controversy, not one which adds to the old grievances or gives rise to endless claims and counterclaims. With this in mind, I appeal to you to reopen the text of the treaty for certain rectifications which are necessary to redress the existing imbalance between the positions of the parties. The Israelis have to demonstrate the same flexibility and understanding we showed. I do not like anyone to misinterpret your request concerning the finality of the present text as a means of applying pressure on the cooperative party. Thus, I welcomed the statement Secretary Vance made on November 25 on the state of the negotiations and the draft proposals.46 I also hope that my message to Prime Minister Begin47 will persuade him to cooperate. Before I conclude, allow me to raise a less significant point relative to the duration of the security arrangements which is a matter of concern to the Egyptian people. We would like to be sure that entering into negotiations for the purpose of amending these provisions becomes mandatory upon the request of either party. So long as these measures are intended to solidify the structure of peace, they should be subject to review as the normalization of relations between the parties reaches different horizons. Here, what is needed is a minor linguistic adjustment rather than the introduction of a new text. I am sure that you will be able to find the proper formula for that. My confidence in your sense of fairness and good judgment has no limit. May God Almighty grant you all the support you need while you discharge your awesome responsibilities. With best wishes and warm regards, Mohamed Anwar el-Sadat Unquote. 3. Mubarak noted that PriMin Khalil will also be presenting an oral message.48 Asked what that oral message was, he said it will simply be an elaboration of some of the points in the written message. Among 46 Reference is likely to an interview with Vance which appeared in the The New York Times on November 25, in which Vance was reported to have stated that “acceptance by Israel of the draft text of a peace treaty with Egypt was insufficient in itself to permit the conclusion of negotiations” and that the “draft text did not meet Egypt’s insistence on a timetable for Palestinian autonomy on the West Bank of the Jordan and in the Gaza Strip.” (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Says Israel and Egyptians Need to Continue Talks,”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX strike a deal. I was and I am still determined to make peace. If our commitment to that great cause is profound and unwavering, then our task should transcend words and legal formulations. Then also, the challenge before us ceases to be a contest of oratory and scoring points here and there. It becomes converted irreversably to one of winning the hearts and minds of our peoples and enabling them to look beyond the unhappy past. It was in this spirit that we entered into direct negotiations with you in a sincere attempt to build new bridges for the future. These negotiations reached their high and low points as we went deeper into the core of our complex problem. We have achieved some progress. However, I feel that valuable time has frittered away in futile arguments and discussions about issues of little or no real significance. Apparently, some are still seized with the notion that the solution could be reached at the expense of the other party. Still others remain captives to concepts like that of David and Goliath instead of being inspired by the brotherhood of Ismail and Isaac. Evidently, some old barriers do exist and it is our joint responsibility to break them. A few days ago, one of your colleagues chose to speak of the present state of affairs in terms which are in clear contradiction with the new spirit of peace. He said that Egypt must not forget that part of its territory is occupied and could remain occupied. We reject that logic and I am sure that the vast majority of the Israeli people shares our view. It might be appropriate to remind you of what we have offered to enable you to make the necessary decision for the establishment of peace. First and foremost, we proved our willingness to look seriously and sympathetically to your need to feel secure. Of course the need for security is mutual and not confined to you alone. Still, we lent an attentive ear to your concern for security in view of certain historical and psychological factors. This must not go unappreciated. Nor should it be misinterpreted or abused. We offered you full recognition, not as a mere formality but as a dynamic process of coexistence that includes diplomatic relations, economic and cultural exchange for the mutual benefit of our two peoples and infact for the good of the entire region. By conventional norms, this process can take place only after the completion of withdrawal. However, I accepted the request of our good friend President Carter to start the process after the completion of the interim withdrawal. I did so as a token of my full confidence in the future as well my faith in our peoples who are going to be the final arbiter. We said, and still maintain, that we are most willing to establish with you normal relations that exist between good-neighbors. No discriminatory barriers shall stand in the way of free movement of people

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX that formula. On the contrary, we should add to it and give it every chance for success. In my view, you should not attempt, or appear to attempt, to evade your obligations under the Camp David “Framework”. Since we agreed that certain steps shall take place in the immediate future to effect a transfer of authority to the inhabitants of West Bank and Gaza,9 I frankly see no reason why we should not agree on a timetable for these steps. You have asked for a timetable for such steps as the exchange of diplomatic relations,10 the conclusion of an agreement on trade and commerce,11 the conclusion of another agreement on cultural exchange and the conclusion of a civil aviation agreement.12 Is it not equally, if not more, important to fix a timetable for the envisaged transformation in the West Bank and Gaza? An argument has been advanced in this respect which we do not find convincing. It is said that you do not want to be bound to produce certain results which require the cooperation of a reluctant party. My answer is that one should not assume the worse if we really believe in the necessity and wisdom of the course we are taking. If the implementation of any of these steps is hindered because of reasons beyond your control, you will not be held responsible for that.13 There is always an assumption of rationality. Furthermore, I must tell you in all candor that you are not doing much to encourage the moderate elements among the Palestinians to cooperate. On the contrary, much of your acts and words seem to be designed to dissuade them from joining in with us. I need not list to you any examples of these deeds and words for you are quite aware of them. If the Palestinians are left with the impression that the self-government plan, and not the administrative autonomy as you call it, is a sham, they will remain embittered and the voice of reason will be drowned among them. As you well know, peoples never abandon their cause in the face of neglect or force. You might recall that your predecessor Ben Gurion14 once said: “forgive . . . but never forget”. This admonition applies to the Palestinians too. The issue of “linkage” underwent much distortion and confusion. Let me tell you that we are not seeking that linkage as a means of shirking our commitments or breaking our promises. If we make a commitment, we intend to honor it fully regardless of the cost. Our 9 Carter underlined “authority to the inhabitants of West Bank and Gaza.” 10 Carter underlined “exchange of diplomatic relations.” 11 Carter underlined “agreement on trade and commerce.” 12 Carter underlined “cultural exchange” and “civil aviation agreement” in this sentence. 13 Carter underlined this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX a—withdrawing your proposal on the sub-phases of the interim withdrawal;17 b—Going back on your offer to reduce the period of the interim withdrawal to six months;18 c—Opposing, after consenting to, the formula of an exchange of letters on the West Bank and Gaza;19 d—Opposing a tangible Egyptian presence in the Gaza Strip.20 e—Reversing your previous position on the elimination of the arms race;21 f—Insisting on deleting a paragraph from the preamble after having accepted it.22 That paragraph spoke of the necessity for maintaining the balanced and reciprocal implementation of the Parties’ corresponding obligations. Again, I am not stating the abovementioned for the purpose of chastizing your Government or attributing malice to anyone. I am simply urging you and your colleagues to reconsider your position and take a new look at recent events as well as ways and means for breaking the present impasse. I do not want to see a resurgence of suspicion and ill-feeling as I am mainly concerned for the future. I hope you will find it possible to respond to this new initiative in the same spirit which prompted me to write to you. With best wishes, Mohammed Anwar El-Sadat 17 Carter underlined “withdrawing,” “sub-phases,” and “interim withdrawal” in this point. 18 Carter underlined “reduce the period” and “interim withdrawal to six months” in this point. 19 Carter underlined “an exchange of letters on the West Bank and Gaza.” 20 Carter underlined this point. 21 Carter underlined “the elimination of the arms race.” 22 Carter underlined “deleting a paragraph from the preamble after having accepted it.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX b) A full-press effort to get Sadat to accept the treaty; perhaps with a public interpretation by him of Article VI to the effect that it does not negate his defense commitments and a Saudi blessing for this position; c) Followed by a similarly energetic effort to get Israel to accept the target date and to initiate a substantive dialogue with the Palestinians and a negotiation with Egypt on the scope of authority for the autonomous regime. 4) How is it to be done? a) Have the Vice President go back with Khalil to tell Sadat that U.S.-Egyptian cooperation will in effect come to an end unless Egypt accedes to the treaty, but if Sadat does agree, then the US would engage in long-term military and economic cooperation with Egypt and with the Saudis on behalf of regional security and specifically to contain Soviet influence. We would need to tell Sadat specifically what we are prepared to do in the military assistance field for this approach to have credibility; and we would have to tell him that if he accedes to our request that we will proceed as in c) below. b) Have him repeat essentially the same message to the Saudis; c) Then—if he is successful—proceed to Israel and tell Begin that Israeli failure to accept the timetable and to begin positive movement on the West Bank/Gaza will mean that the US will take the entire matter to the UN Security Council, and consequently that the U.S.- Israeli economic-military relationship will not be allowed to perpetuate a stalemate which will inevitably radicalize the Middle East and reintroduce the Soviets into the region; d) For the above to work, we must be genuinely prepared to be as direct and blunt as is stated above; so far, we have never managed to be and we have always backed off at the last minute. In fact, I am not sure that anyone on your team could carry this out in the proper manner, and perhaps, in the final analysis, the only way would be for you to do it by letter, maybe reinforced by an additional verbal message delivered personally by the Vice President. 148. Editorial Note President Jimmy Carter met with Egyptian Prime Minister Mustafa Khalil at the White House on December 1, 1978. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met privately with Khalil in the Oval

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX lying these paragraphs but with the language in which they are expressed and which he seems convinced will increase his vulnerability to charges he is making a separate peace and abandoning his obligations to other Arabs.” On the proposed side letter, the Department noted the talks with Khalil made clear Sadat’s attachment to the idea that Israel “will not be held responsible if West Bank/Gaza steps cannot be implemented because of reasons beyond Israel’s control—i.e., because Palestinians and/or Jordan refused to cooperate. Khalil has emphasized to us that this point was introduced in [an] effort to meet concerns which Israelis have expressed on this score” and that this point could be incorporated into the side letter. The Department concluded: the “Egyptians are clearly waiting hopefully for positive Israeli response to Sadat’s letter” (see Document 146), viewing it as “a serious effort on their part to suggest a basis for resuming negotiations.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840148–2548) 149. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT New Egyptian Proposal (U) On instructions from President Sadat, Prime Minister Khalil gave us this morning2 a new Egyptian proposal (Tab A). Simultaneously, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 3. Secret; Outside System. Sent for information. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the memorandum, indicating that he saw the document. Brzezinski added the following notation to the top of the memorandum: “For the 5:30 p.m. meeting.” An additional notation in an unknown hand on the first page of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Tab A Egyptian Proposal7 December 4, 1978 1. The peace treaty between Egypt and Israel will be signed after

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “In order to achieve peace between them, the parties agree to negotiate in good faith with a goal of concluding within three months from the signing of this framework a peace treaty between them, while inviting the other parties to the conflict to proceed simultaneously to negotiate and conclude similar peace treaties with a view to achieving a comprehensive peace in the area.” This is our commitment. With respect to the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, it is an absolute commitment. It is not predicated on any other factor, including acceptance of the invitation as quoted above. Certainly, we both seek a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East. As you know, I have never suggested to you to conclude a separate peace with Israel. The envisaged peace treaty between our countries constitutes the first indispensable step towards the broader settlement we seek. In order to make this momentous prospect possible, the Government of Israel a fortnight ago took the decision that it was ready to sign the draft Egyptian-Israel peace treaty as it stands.3 In so doing, the government expressed its willingness to forego two amendments to the draft which it had held to throughout the negotiations. Those amendments are important, but I will not dwell on their significance now because of the action we took in favor of what we hoped would lead to the immediate achievement of our common goal. As far as the text of the peace treaty is concerned, it seems that the obstacle in the way of our two governments putting our signatures to it—a turning point, indeed, not only in our mutual relations but for the whole region—is your insistance on changing or deleting sections of Article VI and, I am informed, also Article IV. These articles, as they read, were negotiated and renegotiated by our delegations. They are vital and indispensable. In this context may I comment on your remark about “legal formulations.” To put it simply, everyone tends to display a preference for his own formulation while showing little sympathy for that of his partner. Beginning with the paper you read to President Carter and myself at Camp David4 and continuing through all the other Egyptian draft documents, I have found numerous “legal formulations.” I say this without any recrimination. We should both agree, surely, that this is in the nature of things, for after all, we are dealing with political documents that should have proper international standing. Hence, by definition, they are formulated in judicial language. The “legal formulation” to which you address yourself in seeking to change both the letter and substance of Article VI of the draft peace treaty is an immediate

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “Egypt, Israel and Jordan will agree on the modalities for establishing the elected self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza.” Had Israel sought to resort to “evasion” we could have declared that since Jordan—as one of the three above-mentioned parties—does not join now the negotiations, they should be held in abeyance. We have not said so, on the contrary, we have agreed that, notwithstanding the absence of Jordan, Egypt and Israel will conduct the negotiations with the aim of achieving an agreement. No further proof is necessary, if any, of Israel’s sincere intentions towards its commitments. Elsewhere in your letter you employ the phrase, “what you call administrative autonomy.” You put it as a negation. This is unjustified. At Camp David we agreed on autonomy, on full autonomy for the inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and Gaza. We did not agree on sovereignty. We did not agree on a “Palestinian state,” nor on a nucleus for such a “state.” As the text declares, we both clearly agreed on a freely elected “self-governing authority (administrative council)”. This is the commitment we have both underwritten. As far as a timetable is concerned, it is of course not indicated at all in the Camp David Agreement. Moreover, as I have already mentioned, we have to negotiate freely together with the aim of reaching an agreement in accordance with the Camp David Framework on the modalities, the powers, the responsibilities and other related matters concerning the administrative council and its election. We, perforce, object to a timetable in connection with this matter. The example you give in your letter to determine the timetable for the exchange of diplomatic relations, for the conclusion of an agreement on trade and commerce, for the conclusion of another agreement on cultural exchange, or of a civil aviation accord—all these are proof of my thesis that a timetable cannot be applied to the matter of autonomy under the given circumstances. Each of the elements you mentioned are under the absolute control of the two sovereign states concerned, the states that sign the peace treaty and its specified annexes. This is not the case with regard to the issues concerning the autonomy. As matters presently stand very many, if not all the elements are beyond our control. To hold an election one needs an electorate and candidates. At present, we have neither and they cannot be forced. I could send you a collection of original, exact quotations by PLO men threatening every Palestinian Arab with death if he dares support or cooperate with the autonomy scheme in any way. Recently, in Judea and Samaria, three meetings were held in which thousands participated. Words of incitement of the worst kind were voiced. We reacted with restraint although in other countries such inflammable incitement is either not tolerated or is punished. To my deep regret you, too, Mr.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Camp David, the agreement, the evening at the White House, the joint reception by the Congress of the United States and the actual detailed negotiations on the peace treaty. I feel it is the duty of both of us to overcome the remaining hurdles and strive to find the common language and understanding in order that we might, insofar as it depends upon us, realize all that we have undertaken and put our signatures to. In conclusion, therefore, I put to you two positive proposals—one: let us sign the peace treaty as formulated on November 11, 1978. Two: let us, a month after the exchange of instruments of ratification, commence our free negotiations on all the issues relating to the aforementioned elected administrative council. I can but repeat what I told you on the phone when congratulating you on the Nobel Prize award “. . . and the real prize is peace itself.” Let us give peace to our nations and joy to the world. With best wishes, Menachem Begin. End text. For Cairo: As noted previously, Prime Minister Begin requests that original of letter be delivered to Sadat, not telegraphic copy. Lewis 151. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, December 5, 1978 SUBJECT Financial Support of Israeli and Egyptian Security Measures Implementing the Peace Treaty This memorandum describes one Middle East aid issue, not treated in the OMB papers, that may need to be resolved by the time of 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX capacity is already fully mortgaged and movement of these airfields would not enhance that capacity. Option A is to make incremental grants to Israel and Egypt in FY

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Forthcoming Presidential statement on Palestinians at outset of West Bank/Gaza negotiations. (We could repeat most of our previous statements and hint at willingness to expand direct contacts with Palestinians of various persuasions.)7 (S) —Our willingness to lean on the Saudis now, and eventually the Jordanians, to gain their support for the peace process. (S) —We should frankly explain that U.S.-Egyptian relations will be hurt if Sadat is seen in our public opinion as responsible for failure of negotiations. This is a political reality, not a threat nor a wild reaction. (S) Tactics for Israel (U) Our short-term problem is with Sadat, but our more fundamental problem is likely to be Israel’s unwillingness to agree to real powers for the self-governing authority. Begin needs to understand: (S) —Whatever the treaty may say, the quality of the peace between Egypt and Israel, as well as our relations with Israel, will be influenced by how the full range of commitments at Camp David are carried out.8 (TS) —We will oppose future settlement activity by reducing our aid budget by whatever amounts the Israeli government allocates to support of the settlements. We do not intend to subsidize illegal settlements and we will so inform Congress. We will also vote against them in the U.N.9 (S) —A positive Israeli response on the target date will be followed by early agreement on bilateral economic assistance10 issues. Until this issue is resolved, we cannot make decisions on aid. Disbursal of aid will be conditional on actual progress on the West Bank/Gaza. (S) —If Israel is seen as responsible for the deadlock in negotiations because of a failure to honor the spirit of the Camp David agreements, U.S.-Israeli relations will be adversely and tangibly affected. We would not be able to continue our intermediary role and the U.N. Security Council might be seized of the Middle East issue. (TS) Summitry? (U) In my judgment, Vance may be able to persuade Sadat to accept our proposal, but I am not optimistic. In any event, Begin is likely to 7 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.” 8 In the margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “OK.” 9 In the margin next to this sentence, Carter wrote: “OK.” 10 In the margin next to this word, Carter wrote: “?”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said that we prefer to keep the text of the treaty as it now is. But if there is a difference between having no treaty at all and a treaty with an interpretive letter, would Israel be better off with no treaty? Dinitz said no; it would be better to have the treaty. The question of collective self-defense is already covered by reference to the U.N. Charter in Article VI. The President repeated that our preference is to accept the treaty text as it is. If Sadat is adamant, he has the right to reopen this issue for negotiations. (S) Ambassador Dinitz said that Israel had agreed to a form of political linkage by accepting four references in the preamble to the Camp David agreements. While opposing any mention of a target date for elections, Dinitz said that if a target must be set, he would make two personal suggestions. The target date should be after the period when normalization of relations should have begun, for example, 12 months after ratification. Second, there should be no conditionality between the successful conclusion of the negotiations to establish the self-governing authority and the completion of the interim withdrawal and the beginning of normalization of relations. (S) The President said that this would be difficult for Sadat to accept. If there is a normalization of relations at the end of nine months, an exchange of ambassadors, and if Israel and Egypt cannot agree on the modalities for elections and for the powers of the self-governing authority, this would put Sadat in an indefensible position with the other Arabs. He would have taken his own land back and not achieved any agreement on the West Bank and Gaza. The President said he feared that in those circumstances the treaty might then be abrogated by Egypt, along with claims of Israeli bad faith. Sadat does not feel that Begin is sincere in his determination to carry out the Camp David agreements on the West Bank and Gaza. He needs assurance that there will be some time constraint working on Israel. (S) The President said that we have considered a proposal to remove the nine-month deadline for the interim withdrawal and to tie the withdrawal to the establishment of the self-governing authority, while maintaining the three years deadline for the full implementation of the Egypt-Israel treaty. In any event, the President said that he was worried that the whole discussion of target dates might become moot if agreement were not reached by December 17th. This would set a horrible precedent. (S) Ambassador Dinitz said that he agreed that it was important to reach an agreement by December 17th, but the difficulty of doing so demonstrated why a target date for the West Bank/Gaza elections was unwise. The President said that the alternative to setting a target date may be that there will be no treaty and there might then be a possible rapid deterioration in relations between the two parties. Egypt and Is-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 154. Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, December 8, 1978 To President Sadat I extend to you my warm friendship and best personal wishes—to you and your family. Secretary Vance will deliver this brief letter to you as he comes to pursue with you the historic peace which your courageous initiative has made possible. We must not fail. The triumph of radical elements who have attacked you would indeed bring the prospects of a dismal future to the entire Middle East. With the threat of disarray in Iran and further intrusion of Communism among your friends, the success of your noble effort has now become of even more importance. We are close to a settlement and a treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel, based on the vital harmony between your country and mine which was so effective at Camp David. It is extremely important that you and I present to Israel and to the world a proposal which is obviously generous and fair and which fulfills the letter and spirit of the Camp David accords. A crucial element of those accords is a time limit on the current negotiations of three months. As you know, only a few days remain. A violation of this timetable by the two principals would set a very bad precedent and would cast doubt on any future time agreements of the new treaty. You know that we are committed with you to a comprehensive peace settlement. We have proven this in every negotiating session. Secretary Vance, in accordance with my personal instructions, will explore with you every feasible option in assuring that this goal is reached. The long range strategic necessity for you and me to stand together is obvious—whether or not the Israelis ultimately carry out their obligations and commitments. The Middle East must be kept stable. Our friends must be protected. The focus of others must turn away from the destruction of Israel toward peace, stability and the repulsion of alien forces in your region of the world. I am glad to have you as a partner in this great endeavor. Your friend, Jimmy Carter 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Geographic File, Box 14,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX had thought of an alternative. I then read to him the revised note on the exchange of ambassadors, the key element of which was the exchange of resident ambassadors one month after the establishment of the selfgoverning authority. I explained that we felt this change was justifiable, particularly in light of the fact that the Israelis had withdrawn their previous agreement to withdraw in sub-phases. Sadat reflected for a moment and said, “I think that solves my problem. You can consider it agreed.” In brief, as of this evening, he feels that we have found an adequate solution to the linkage problem. We will have to explore with his advisors tomorrow to make sure that they understand fully that Egypt would still be obliged to establish diplomatic relations after the interim withdrawal, but that the actual exchange of resident ambassadors could be delayed until the self-governing authority had been inaugurated. 5. Turning to Article 4 of the treaty, I read him our interpretive note,4 including an additional sentence which states that a review will be held after five years. He said that this was acceptable and that we could consider this issue closed. 6. On Article 6, I gave him a copy of our draft letter and our legal opinion.5 I explained that Article 6 does not mean that the Egyptian- Israeli treaty “prevails over” his other treaty obligations. I expressed my opinion that we should only send this letter to Egypt, and that he should confirm this as his interpretation. He said that he would have to consider this further, but that it helped meet some of his concerns. I also urged him to leave paragraph 2 of Article 6 as it now stands. Once again, he seemed to understand my reasoning, but said that he would need to discuss this with his advisors. 7. In conclusion, I urged him to leave the treaty text as it now stands, relying on the interpretations of Articles 4 and 6 that we had discussed. We could then focus all of our attention on the side letter. I told him that this would help change public opinion, which has put him on the defensive for not having agreed to the treaty. Sadat mentioned that he still hoped for some reference to Egyptian police in Gaza, which I termed a non-starter. He asked me to raise it with the Israelis again, but indicated that he would drop this if it does not work. He clearly does, however, want some Egyptian presence in Gaza. He then said that he thought we had the basis for an agreement, but that we were in for a period of confrontation with Israel and we should be ready for it. He said he wants to wind things up before the 17th, but we 4 The text of this draft of the U.S. interpretive note on Article 4 has not been found. 5 No copies of this draft letter and legal opinion have been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX gether with the other texts which we worked out yesterday3 and today4 with the Prime Minister, we now have U.S.-Egyptian agreement on a package which is along the lines of the one we hoped for and which will enable us to demonstrate in Israel that Sadat has shown considerable flexibility. 2. Sadat’s advisors fought the Article VI question to the very end, arguing that we should insist on an interpretive note that would be annexed to the treaty, therefore requiring Israeli concurrence. In overruling his advisors, Sadat stressed to me that he was doing so in order to create a “package deal” that would have to be put to the Israelis on a this-is-as-far-as-I-can go basis. He said candidly that the Egyptian concern was that the Israelis would put his concession on Article VI in their pocket and then bargain for further concessions on the other issues, by which he means primarily the approach we have worked out on the West Bank/Gaza side letter and exchange of ambassadors issue. Sadat said, “I must make it clear Cy, this is a final position and there is no room for further compromise.” 3. After Sadat made this decision, Khalil asked what we would do if the Israelis refused the package. Before I could answer, Sadat commented he was prepared to wait “a month or two” if necessary to get Israeli agreement. Addressing the Prime Minister, Sadat said the important thing was that he would be fighting “this last round” with the U.S. at his side. He said it had taken us nine months to get Begin to 3 On December 11, Vance met with Khalil, Ali, Boutros Ghali, and al-Baz to go over the formulations of the linkage letter, and the interpretive notes to Articles IV and VI. Summarizing the meeting, Vance noted: “In general, I believe the Egyptians were impressed by our concept, which I discussed with President Sadat last night, of linking the exchange of ambassadors to inauguration of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza. They seem to have made a constructive effort overnight to solve a number of points, and although we still have a problem on Article VI, I feel we are in a good position to take things up in Israel having demonstrated that some definite progress has been made here.” (Telegram Secto 14033 from Jerusalem, December 12; National Ar-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. Secret Nodis Cherokee entire text. 2. I had two meetings with the Prime Minister today, the first with his small negotiating group, and the second with about one half of the Cabinet present. Dayan and Weizman were present on both occasions. We will be meeting privately tomorrow morning before another large meeting.2 I may also pay a farewell call on the Prime Minister later in the day before heading back to Cairo to report to Sadat that evening. 3. At this point the results at this end are about what we might have expected. The Israelis reacted negatively and argumentatively to most of the elements of the package that we brought from Cairo.3 To what extent this is an initial reaction that may to some extent soften over time is difficult to judge at this point. Toward the end of our second meeting there seemed to be one or two glimmers, particularly from Dayan, to suggest that the Israelis may become somewhat more flexible when they have had a chance to think about the proposition. 4. I started out by stressing the strategic objectives we shared in shoring up the forces of stability and moderation in the region, and said an Egypt-Israel peace would be an important component of this. I followed by outlining the degree to which the Egyptians had made concessions from their previous positions, and then explained the rationale for each document which had been developed. 5. They were most disappointed, as we might have expected, about the proposal to link the exchange of resident ambassadors to the inauguration of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan at one point said that he would rather go back to the wording of the Camp David Accords for Annex III without any mention of ambassadors than to accept the concept that an element of this treaty is conditional on steps in the West Bank/Gaza. Begin argued strenuously that such a proposition was totally outside of, and contrary to, the Camp David Framework. They tried to depict Sadat’s withdrawal of his offer to exchange ambassadors one month after completion of withdrawal to the interim line as a violation of faith, and I had repeatedly to remind them that Sadat had originally offered this in return for subphasing, and when the Israelis withdrew that, Sadat, felt free to withdraw his offer as well. I pointed out that Sadat was making only one aspect of normalization of relations out of many contingent upon West Bank/ Gaza developments, but Begin insisted that to establish conditionality on one point would set a precedent for the other aspects of normalization as well. 2 See Document 158.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and Sadat. At their urging, I will see Begin alone tomorrow morning4 to repeat the message before we meet further. They will be helpful, and all three are almost desperate not to lose the treaty. We explored some possible approaches, but the political complications within the Cabinet are serious obstacles. Vance 4 See Document 158. 158. Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Department of State and the White House1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 159. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, December 16, 1978 SUBJECT Relocating Israeli Airbases from the Sinai to the Negev At Camp David you indicated that, subject to Congressional approval of the necessary funds, that the United States would help in the relocation to the Negev of Israel’s two Sinai airbases at Eitam and Etzion. In pursuance of this agreement, on September 28, 1978, I sent a letter to Israel’s defense minister2 proposing that our two governments consult on the scope and costs of the two new airbases. In November 1978, I sent a survey team to Israel to begin these consultations. A summary of the team’s report is attached.3 Eitam and Etzion presently accommodate up to four aircraft squadrons (120 planes). Israeli plans had called for expansion to five squadrons in 1979 with subsequent further expansion to an eventual 8 squadrons. Israel is asking for U.S. assistance in building airbases to accommodate 5 squadrons within three years. This would require constructing three bases, given the available land in the Negev. The cost would be about $1.5 billion. I recommend we confine any assistance on our part to no more than the basing of the 4 squadrons now at Eitam and Etzion, and leave to Israel the full expense of any expansion. This would entail construction at two sites in the Negev (Ovda and Matred) rather than three. The cost for construction of the two bases, accommodating two squadrons each, would be $988 million for operational facilities and $57 million for necessary (family housing and recreational facilities for example) but non-mission essential facilities, for a total of $1.045 billion. This does not include costs for off-base infrastructure and related expenses such as road construction and maintenance, utilities, port and terminal expenses, and the like, which we have assumed Israel would bear. One way we could reduce the U.S. contribution (alternative forms of which are discussed later in this memo) below $1 billion would be by agreeing 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX pare and support legislation before the Congress. DoD personnel have been instructed to make no commitments to the Israelis on amount, or nature of assistance, and I believe they have observed those instructions. Harold Brown

Negotiating the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Tab A Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter4 Washington, December 18, 1978 Attached is a draft of white paper which was completed over the weekend. When you have had a chance to go over it, I would appreciate the chance to talk to you about it. I have reservations as to how much this really advances the debate. Perhaps it might be better simply to release the documents, which speak for themselves, and handle the questions and amplification either by on-the-record or background sessions with the press. Cyrus Vance5 Attachment White Paper Prepared in the Department of State6 undated EGYPTIAN-ISRAELI PEACE NEGOTIATIONS Where They Stand on December 17 On September 17, 1978, at the end of the historic meetings at Camp David, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin set for themselves a goal of concluding a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel within three months. Since October 12, difficult but productive negotiations have taken place between their delegations at Blair House in Washington with the help of the United States. While it has not been possible to meet their goal, these negotiations have produced the main elements of a treaty package. But several issues remain to be resolved. Some reflect basic differences. Others are less important. In the United States’ view, these few remaining gaps can be closed. The United States, as a friend and partner of both parties, remains committed to helping Egypt and Israel resolve these issues in a continuing negotiation. 4 No classification marking. 5 Vance signed “Cy” through this typed signature. 6 Secret; Nodis. Carter wrote in the upper right-hand corner of the paper: “It’s a factual & balanced analysis. J.C.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The complete treaty package now before the Governments of Egypt and Israel contains the following documents: —a Protocol concerning Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai and accompanying security arrangements; —maps delineating the line for an interim Israeli withdrawal and the security zones to be established in the Sinai and the Negev after Israel’s final withdrawal; —a Protocol concerning the normalization of relations between the Parties under conditions of peace; —a set of letters and interpretive notes. In those documents, the two Parties have reached agreement on: the basic text of a peace treaty, the Annex on withdrawal and security arrangements, the maps, virtually all of the Annex on the normalization of relations, the beginning of the next round of negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza one month after ratification of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. There are three principle outstanding issues: —How to express the relationship between the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty and the political process in the West Bank/Gaza which both sides agreed at Camp David should be negotiated and set in motion. Egypt wants assurances that the sequence of steps leading to Palestinian autonomy will take place within a specific timeframe. Israel agrees to start negotiations promptly, but takes the position that it is impossible to determine when those negotiations can be concluded. Israel does not want implementation of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty conditioned on other negotiations. Egypt has insisted since President Sadat’s visit to Israel in November, 1977, that Egypt can make peace with Israel only in the context of progress toward peace between Israel and its other Arab neighbors.8 This issue is touched on in two proposed letters—one specifying the time period within which these negotiations would be concluded and another in which Egypt relates the exchange of ambassadors to inauguration of a Palestinian self-governing authority. —How to define the relationship between the obligations under this Treaty and those under other international obligations. Israel wants the obligations under this Treaty to have priority over Egypt’s commitments to other Arab nations. Egypt has insisted on the right, under the UN Charter, to honor the several mutual defense pacts it has with other Arab States in the event of armed attack against them. These issues are dealt with in Article VI of the Treaty. —Both sides agree to the principle of a review in Article IV of the Treaty and that any changes must be by mutual agreement. Egypt wants it made explicit that review is mandatory upon the request of either side and has suggested a fixed date for review. Israel agrees that review should be mandatory if either side requets a review but does not accept the mention of a review in 5 years. 8 Carter underlined “other Arab neighbors” and wrote “Palestinians, W Bk/Gaza” in the right-hand margin next to it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX November 13: Egyptian Acting Foreign Minister Boutros Ghali returned to Egypt to consult with President Sadat. Egypt did not agree to two Treaty articles and the West Bank/Gaza letter. November 15–18: Egyptian Vice President Mubarak visited Washington. November 21: The Israeli Cabinet approved the Treaty text and Annexes while rejecting an Egyptian draft of a West Bank/Gaza letter and not approving a U.S. draft. November 30– Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil visited December 4: Washington. December 8: Secretary Vance left for Egypt and Israel. The Outstanding Issues The differences between Egypt and Israel have been reduced to very few. Both Parties are now prepared to accept the Treaty text,9 subject to Egyptian request for two clarifications, Annex I on withdrawal and security arrangements, the maps, and Annex III with the exception of disagreement on one sentence. Side understandings relating to Annex I had been agreed, and extensive work had been done on a letter which would deal with the West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Because of the sharply divergent positions taken by Egypt and Israel on this last issue, the United States had put forward a compromise draft calling for negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza to begin one month after the ratification of the Egypt-Israeli Peace Treaty with a goal of concluding those negotiations and holding elections not later than the end of 1979. After extensive discussions on November 11–12,10 the Israeli negotiators accepted the U.S. proposal subject to approval by the Israeli Cabinet. The Cabinet on November 21 did not approve the U.S. draft. The Egyptians initially rejected the U.S. draft, but accepted it during Secretary Vance’s talks in Egypt December 9 On December 15, the Israeli Cabinet issued the following statement: “The GOI is prepared to sign without delay the draft peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, including the annexes as formulated on the 11th of November 1978 with the approval of the United States Government. Full responsibility for the fact that the peace treaty has not been signed rests entirely with the GOE.” The Cabinet rejected the three new “demands” from the Egyptians, as “inconsistent with the Camp David Framework or are not included in it and change substantially provisions of the aforementioned peace treaty.” Moreover, the GOI rejected “the attitude and the interpretation of the United States Government with regard to the Egyptian proposals.” (Telegram Tosec 140109/316098 to the Secretary’s Air-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “The provisions of Paragraph 2 of Article VI of this Treaty shall not be construed in contradiction with the fact that this Treaty is concluded in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement in accordance with the provisions of the Framework for Peace in the Middle East agreed at Camp David.” Israel has not yet responded formally to this proposal. —Paragraph 5 states that in the event of conflict between the obligations under the Treaty and those stemming from other international undertakings “. . . .the obligations under the Treaty will be binding and implemented.” President Sadat was troubled that the Article might be seen as abrogating legitimate defense commitments undertaken by Egypt pursuant to the Arab League Charter. Egypt has indicated willingness to accept a U.S. legal opinion “. . . . that the obligations which Egypt assumes under the proposed Treaty text would not prevent Egypt from legally coming to the assistance of any state with which it has a collective security or mutual defense agreement in the event that state is the victim of armed attack by a third state.” It is also true that Egypt would have no duty or right to assist an Arab country in initiating an attack on Israel. It seems to the United States that each of these problems with the Treaty text has a solution that is consistent with the agreements reached at Camp David and with the interests of each Party. The Letters —The letter concerns the establishment of a self-governing authority on the West Bank/Gaza. President Sadat agreed that negotiations for the West Bank/Gaza agreement should begin one month after the ratification of the peace Treaty but was concerned over having no assurance that they would progress satisfactorily. Rather than a good faith target date, he wanted a firm date set for the establishment of Palestinian autonomy in the West Bank and Gaza; furthermore, he wanted this date to coincide with the date of Israel’s withdrawal to the interim withdrawal line in Sinai, which was the starting point, under the Camp David Framework Agreements, for beginning normal relations, including diplomatic, economic and cultural relations, and the termination of economic boycotts and barriers to the free movement of goods and people. During Secretary Vance’s recent trip to Egypt, however, President Sadat accepted the idea of a target date to be stated as “not later than the end of 1979.” No part of the implementation of Annex III, except the exchange of ambassadors, would be coupled with that date. —The letter concerning exchange of ambassadors. As described above, Egypt had earlier agreed that, in order to maintain the momentum of rapid implementation of the Treaty, ambassadors would be exchanged within one month after completion of the interim withdrawal. Egyptian negotiators regarded this as a significant concession while Israel

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX fervently hope that the spirit of Camp David will be speedily revived so that the work you and all of us invested there shall not have been in vain. It is a pity, indeed, that the target date of December 17 was not met. But, with a clear conscience I can say that the fault was not ours. We did our very utmost, just as we remain ready now to sign that draft which was agreed upon in the prolonged tripartite conferences. Certainly, we do not lose hope and believe that the peace talks will be resumed so that, after all the ups and downs of the last year, the new year of 1979 will be the year of peace. My wife joins me in sending to you, to Mrs. Carter and to all your family our very best wishes for a Happy Holiday and a Happy New Year. Yours respectfully and sincerely, Menachem Begin” Respectfully yours, Hanan Bar-On3 Charge d’Affaires ad interim 3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 162. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, December 26, 1978 SUBJECT Status Report on Egypt-Israel Negotiations (U) As Secretary Vance has no doubt informed you, the talks with Dayan and Khalil in Brussels went surprisingly well.2 The two men 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ported to their respective leaders, they will contact Secretary Vance and a decision will be made on when and where another meeting should take place. (I anticipate a meeting in Washington or Europe in about mid-January.) (S) While the tone of the talks was constructive, I do not think we are much closer to solutions on the most difficult issues. Dayan may also have difficulty, as he has in the past, in delivering Begin on some of his proposed compromises. At best, we may be able to resolve the differences over the interpretive notes in another Dayan-Khalil meeting. That would leave the “linkage” issues—the target date and exchange of Ambassadors. I doubt if these points can be resolved without a Carter- Sadat-Begin Summit, perhaps in February. (S) 163. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State and the White House1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX committed at all times to supporting the said state with her material needs and almost unlimited military strength, and concurrently be the sole impartial and objective mediator with Israel’s opponents.4 That is why, sir, I suggested to you in my letter just before the Camp David meetings,5 that it may be wise, in the face of possible Israeli intransigence, to consider returning to the United Nations Security Council which sponsored Resolutions 242 and 338, from which the Geneva conference emerged, to seek guidance and to regain the momentum for a comprehensive lasting peace.6 The Arab Summit at Baghdad7 affirmed the Arabs’ objective of seeking a just and comprehensive peace based on total Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied in June of 1967. The summit placed great emphasis on the essential Israeli withdrawal from Arab Jerusalem, which is of equal importance to hundreds of millions of believers in God. It emphasized the resolution of all aspects of the Palestinian problem in accordance with United Nations Resolutions, and the granting of the unconditional rights of self-determination to the people of Palestine. Following all these developments, I suggest again that this troubled Middle East, which threatens the interests and lives of many in the world, and even world peace, can only be saved by regaining the momentum for peace, in accordance with my earlier suggestion, regardless of what has or may transpire between Egypt and Israel.8 I see no other option or possibility.9 We must maintain the search for a comprehensive settlement of all the issues, with all parties concerned in the area, including the Palestinians. Initially with the help and direct involvement of the Security Council, and then with the help of the United States and the Soviet Union, and possibly some of our European friends, including France and the United Kingdom. I have written to you, sir, most frankly and candidly, which is, I believe, the only way I could as a friend. I am happy to contribute all I can for a better future for this area, and for the people I am honoured and proud to serve, as did my forefathers throughout Arab history. I hope to hear from you, and look forward to meeting you whenever you deem the time and circumstances appropriate for me to visit you.10 I wish you good health and every good fortune in the new year. 4 Carter underlined this sentence. 5 See Document 17. 6 Carter highlighted this sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX now be possible to resume the talks and finish the task we set for ourselves at Camp David. As always, I am keenly aware of the commitment which you and I share for a secure, peaceful and prosperous future for the people of Israel. My prayers will be with you and the Cabinet this Sunday as you decide how to take another step toward peace. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text. Vance 165. Memorandum From the President’s Special Adviser for Middle East Affairs (Sanders) to President Carter1 Washington, January 3, 1979 SUBJECT Observations on Where We Stand. I have returned on January 1st from a week on the West Coast, and would like to take this opportunity, as we begin the New Year, to relate how the Jewish community views our actions, our policies and the current status of the peace process. Unfortunately, everything I heard reinforced my apprehensions (expressed in my memo to you dated December 14, 19782). Jewish opinion in the country is almost totally agreed that the Administration is insensitive to Israel’s concerns about the peace treaty and its security requirements. In the view of the community, our posture is not only a cause for concern in the current talks, but portends real pressure on the Israelis in the upcoming West Bank negotiations. The opinion has obviously been influenced by negative editorial comment in the major metropolitan newspapers. For example, in the week following Secretary Vance’s trip to the Middle East, we were criticized by a host of newspapers, including the New York Times, Wash- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 5. No classification marking. At the top of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “c.c. Cy, Zbig. J.” 2 The memorandum has not been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX I believe that our discussions3 in Brussels have been very beneficial in defining the points of difference, and in explaining the logic behind our points of view concerning these differences. The meeting also gave us the opportunity to discuss the latest world developments in the Middle East, with special emphasis on Iran, Turkey, Afghanistan and various Arab and African countries. I have fully explained to you and to Mr. Dayan, the utmost importance of achieving a comprehensive peace between Israel and its neighbours, as a factor for ensuring the Arab world against foreign aggression or internal destabilisation. I also stressed the importance of linking the question of the settlement in the West Bank and Gaza with the signing of the peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. Moreover, I made it clear that it would not be in the interest of peace in the world, and particularly in the Middle East, if Egypt were isolated from the other Arab and African countries, as a result of concluding the peace treaty with Israel. Such a situation would be against the interest of security in the whole area. It would also make it more difficult for Egypt to assume its natural and essential role as the defender of other Arab countries when threatened by aggression or destabilisation attempts. During our meeting, I also pointed out the fact that all the other Arab countries, even the hardliners among them, have not rejected the principle of solving the Arab-Israeli confrontation by peaceful means. It is also worth noting that the pact of the Arab League,4 signed in 1945 before Israel was created, does not contain any provision that may be construed as being directed against Israel. Furthermore, the Arab League Common Defense Treaty,5 which was signed in 1950 and came into force in 1952, does not contain a single word against Israel. Thus, if peace is established, this treaty cannot be interpreted as directed against Israel. Rather, it will be the instrument enabling Egypt to cooperate with the other Arab countries for mutual defense, and for the maintenance of peace and stability throughout the region. I also stressed that the treaty between Egypt and Israel, along with the solution of the Palestinian question in all its aspects according to the Camp David Framework, must be of such a nature as to attract the Palestinians and the other Arab countries to accept it and participate in the peace process, not to isolate Egypt, force even the moderate Arab countries to take a harder line and reflect negatively on the constructive role of the United States in the peace process.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX You will also notice that all important elements of the settlement mentioned in the Framework, had been included in the last Egyptian American proposal. The Framework also mentions that the transitional arrangement will be for a period not to exceed five years, and that it begins when the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza is established and inaugurated. The Framework also mentions that negotiations to determine the final status of the West Bank and Gaza, will take place not later than three years after the beginning of the transitional period. Thus, fixing a date for the establishment and inauguration of the self-governing authority is of utmost importance, it completes the time-table adopted by the Camp David Agreement, because, if such a date is not mentioned, then the inauguration of this authority will be left to the unilateral will of Israel. It will also mean that it may start after an unlimited number of years, which would practically make the treaty between Egypt and Israel a separate solution. In such a case, it will neither attract the Palestinians nor the other Arab countries, to accept it and participate in it. It will also cast great doubts about the real Israeli intentions concerning the future of the West Bank and Gaza. Such doubts are reinforced daily by official statements coming from Israel. The Israeli contentions that they will be held responsible in case of the refusal of the other parties concerned to participate, is not really valid. Such a matter has been taken care of in paragraph 2 of Article 6 of the draft treaty which stipulates: ‘The parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations under this treaty without regard to actions or inactions of other parties’. The same point is stipulated in the Camp David Framework under paragraph C of the associated principles. Article 5 states ‘the United States shall be invited to participate in the talks on matters related to the modalities of the implementation of the agreements, and working out the time-table for carrying out the obligations of the parties’. B. Concerning the interpretative note attached to the treaty: As you are aware, the Egyptian position concerning Articles 4 and 6 of the draft peace treaty was consistently unchanged. Egypt has accepted the American proposal of the interpretative note as a means to bridge the differences between Egypt and Israel. We still believe that they represent the most reasonable compromise, and that your support in this respect is the only way to convince Israel to accept such an interpretation. In Brussels, Mr. Dayan proposed as a solution, that each party would forward his questions to the United States, who in turn would put down answers that are acceptable to both parties and will be attached to the treaty and constitute an integral part of it. To our great

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dear Secretary Vance, I will now attempt to suggest a future course of action in order to overcome the present situation. In this regard, you will agree with me that it is very difficult to enter into any negotiations with all the preconditions set by the Israeli Government. If we accept to start negotiations in these circumstances, it will relieve Israel from its responsibility for not accepting the interpretative notes and the joint letter of December 17, 1978,10 and Israel will seize this opportunity to try to convince the whole world into believing that Egypt will be responsible if the negotiations fail. Your support is essential to overcome the present stalemate, for the benefit of world peace. Israel must realise the dangers that its position creates for the whole world. The special relations between the United States and Israel should be directed towards establishing peace, security and stability in the Middle East. We do not ask you to put pressure on Israel, but rather to open Israel’s eyes to the serious dangers which would result from a situation where Egypt would be isolated and unable to assume its role in the defense and stability of the Arab world. The Americans, as full partners in the peace process, should also convince Israel that the insistence of the extremist religious groups to build new settlements or reinforce the existing ones, is a very serious matter which has already had its impact in the Islamic countries, feeding the animosity of extremist governments hostile to Israel and to the United States. In our opinion, the two sides must agree on the main principles concerning the solution of the points of differences. This can be achieved through you, either by holding a meeting with Mr. Dayan alone, or a meeting between the three of us. I do not think that a meeting on the technical level would be beneficial. On the contrary it might further complicate matters. Another suggestion would be for you to resume shuttle diplomacy. I very well know your responsibilities, and very tight schedules but I also know that you are the only one who can assume such a delicate mission. You could also think of inviting the parties to forward their suggestions to you, or, as Mr. Dayan suggested, to submit questions concerning the points of disagreement, the answers to which would be agreed upon by the two sides. I believe that we would then be ready for a new round of negotiations. 10 See Document 160.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX hensive peace to which peoples in the Arab world and the world at large aspire. The Cabinet affirmed Egypt’s keen desire and readiness to continue exerting all possible efforts to conclude a peace treaty with Israel according to the above-mentioned principles which will ensure durability and stability for the comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East. The Cabinet also reviewed the Egyptian forthcoming diplomatic moves in all directions to inform all countries of the developments of the situation. Unquote. 3. Signed original11 will be pouched to the Dept, attention NEA/ EGY, for delivery to the Secretary. Eilts 11 Not found. On January 10, Lewis met with Begin to discuss the contents of Khalil’s letter. Lewis reported that Begin “rejected Khalil’s and Sadat’s proposition that because of recent events in the area Israel should be more responsive to Egypt’s latest proposals in the treaty package. He went over in lengthy and familiar terms Israel’s position on the outstanding issues. Indicating he would like to resume Ministerial level negotiations as soon as possible, Begin strongly suggested that these talks occur in this area, and said that the Sinai Field Mission would be ideal. He said it would be preferable for the Secretary to come to the area this month to chair the meetings; not for a ‘shuttle,’ but if that were not possible, he hoped he could come at least by early February. He showed no interest in a trilateral Ministerial meeting in Washington.” (Telegram 622 from Tel Aviv, January 10; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX utility and timing of Ministerial talks designed grapple with West Bank/Gaza side letter problem. 3. Khalil thought our concept makes sense and said Atherton/ Hansell will be welcome. He wondered, however, whether Dayan and Begin will be prepared try to work out issue at Atherton/Hansell level. I said that we have not yet sounded out the Israelis on the subject, but we believe they will be receptive. We wished first to get preliminary Egyptian reactions prior to Khalil’s departure for Khartoum later today. As I had earlier said to him, our present thinking is tentative and we will not be in a position to make formal proposals for another day or two, i.e. until after we have also sounded out Israelis. 4. Assuming Israelis agree, Khalil asked that Atherton/Hansell come to Cairo January 17–18. His reason is that he will again go to Khartoum on January 19 and will remain there for Sadat’s speech the following day. Thus, he will not be available at the end of next week. He made point that Atherton/Hansell discussions will be with him and not with Boutros Ghali. 5. Alluding to the Article VI problem, Khalil emphasized that it is not only para 5 of that Article that needs be covered in legal interpretation, but also para 2. The latter, he stated, is “very important to Egypt” in connection with the proposed side letter on West Bank/Gaza. The Israelis must not be able to claim that para 2 of Article VI vitiates the binding nature of any linkage letter. He recalled that he had told President Carter that USG had added para 2 of Article VI. President Carter had explained that the USG purpose had been to meet Israeli concerns with respect to possible Palestinian refusal to cooperate. The final clause of para 2, however, President Carter had said had never been intended to call for an independent Egyptian/Israeli peace treaty. The Secretary had even expressed a willingness to delete the final clause, although this idea had been overtaken by our decision close text. Hence, USG had decided on interpretative note route. This is agreeable to GOE, but Khalil reiterated such an interpretative note must cover paras 2 and 5. The whole exercise, he contended, must be in the context of the Camp David Accords, not as Dayan had just put it, “stand on its own feet.” 6. Khalil said that he will wait to hear from us upon his return from Khartoum, probably on Monday, January 15. He understands that we have not yet approached the Israelis and that our tentative idea should for the time being be kept in strict confidence. 7. About an hour later VP Mubarak telephoned on another matter. It transpired that Khalil had told him about our idea. Mubarak also indicated his agreement and his understanding that for the time being it should be treated in strict confidence. Eilts

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 4. Dayan agreed fully on importance of resolving remaining treaty text issues and gave his personal opinion that this was achievable. He agreed it was important to show results from Hansell’s and my visit. To achieve this, he said, it was important to persuade Begin of the points I had made to him, so that Israeli negotiating team would be given the right instructions. In response to Lewis’ question as to whether Begin would have problems with the Cabinet even if he agreed to some variations on Sadat’s proposals, Dayan replied that, if Begin were convinced, he could carry the Cabinet. He urged that we have several sessions with Begin while in Jerusalem and arranged on the spot for an initial meeting at the end of day. 5. Dayan showed no interest in getting into details of treaty article problems but came back several times to problem of how to resolve problem of West Bank/Gaza side letter. He is clearly increasingly attracted by the idea of concentrating on getting agreement with Egypt for establishing autonomy regime in Gaza and felt that in Brussels4 Khalil was more receptive to this idea, even if no parallel results were achievable on West Bank, than he had expected. He thought Egyptian- Israeli negotiations could well lead to agreement on West Bank/Gaza autonomy regime in nine months so that Sadat would not have to send ambassador to Israel before autonomy regime was in place in Gaza. It would simply not work, however, for Sadat to make ambassadorial exchange conditional on this; Sadat would have to drop this idea, Dayan said. 6. Meeting with Begin was relaxed, serious and free of polemics. At Dayan’s suggestion, I went over much of the same ground with Begin that I had covered with Dayan at lunch. I stressed the President’s and your commitment to finish the Egyptian-Israeli negotiations. Both Lewis and I made clear that your inability to respond at this time to his desire that you come to the area reflected no diminution of your commitment to help complete the negotiations. I noted other urgent foreign policy demands on your time and your desire to have a better sense of the prospects for success than was now the case. Begin listened thoughtfully to my presentation and at no time engaged in recriminations about your December visit.5 7. In his comments, Begin dwelt at some length on overall trends in the area which clearly weigh on his mind. He cited concerns that Iran would be lost to the West if Khomeini takes over there, current Palestinian National Council meeting in Damascus, talks about Syrian-Iraqi union and King Hussein’s recent statements6 and visit to Damascus.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 169. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the Vice President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Clift)1 Washington, January 19, 1979 SUBJECT Status of Egypt-Israel Peace Negotiations (U) The negotiations have been stuck for the past month over two sets of issues: —Minor points associated with the text of the treaty: an interpretive note to Article IV dealing with the right to review security arrangements; an interpretive note to Article VI (2) on the relationship of the treaty to the Camp David agreements; our legal opinion on the relationship of this treaty to other treaties as defined in Article VI (5). —The “linkage” issues: the text of a letter on West Bank/Gaza negotiations, including the question of a “target date”; the timing of the exchange of ambassadors to coincide with the establishment of the selfgoverning authority in the West Bank/Gaza. These will be the most difficult problems to resolve. (S) Atherton has been able to make only modest progress in his talks with the Israelis. He has been told that Article IV can be settled if the Egyptians drop their insistence on a mandatory review of security arrangements after five years.2 In addition, the Israelis have proposed the text of a draft letter which would clarify some of the legal controversy over Article VI (5).3 It includes language that would amount to a blank 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX progress. He expects that he might be able to finish off the treaty issues, but that a summit toward the end of February might be needed to resolve the final “linkage” problems, as well as oil and aid questions. (S) 170. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, January 30, 1979 SUBJECT Middle East Strategy (U) Secretary Vance has sent you a report on the results of the Atherton mission (Tab A). In brief, the only promising result was the possibility that both Egypt and Israel might agree to drop the idea of asking for our legal interpretation of Article VI (5).2 Otherwise, no real substantive progress was made in twelve days of talks. Atherton’s conclusion is that the remaining issues cannot be solved in isolation and must be settled at the political level as a package. (S) Before we take any new initiative, we need to ask ourselves some hard questions about the developments surrounding the negotiations: —Time is working against the Camp David approach. The longer the negotiations go on, the greater the likelihood that any agreement reached will only be a separate Egyptian-Israeli treaty. Our own political realities must be taken into account. —Neither party wants to appear overly anxious to conclude the talks. They both know that we will be tempted to ask further conces- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX While both leaders want to proceed to wrap up the Treaty, both are having trouble with their respective political constituencies and this fact has increased the perceived advantages for both in bargaining hard over the remaining issues. In addition, events in Iran have probably caused both sides to stiffen as they have perceived increased risks in concluding a peace Treaty, resulting from potential area repercussions of what is happening in Iran. Israel is more concerned than ever about giving up Gulf of Suez oil fields without ironclad Egyptian supply commitments. It is also more determined than ever to ensure that Egypt will be firmly committed to peace and normalization regardless of developments elsewhere in the area, before giving up the security of its position in Sinai. The Egyptians for their part stress increasingly that the peace Treaty must not isolate Egypt and thus weaken its ability to play a leading role for stability in the area. They therefore want the Treaty package to include credible evidence that they are not making a separate peace. As a result of these perceptions, the “linkage” issue has taken on even greater importance for both sides, with Egypt determined to maximize, and Israel to minimize the linkage between their bilateral Treaty and implementation of the Camp David Framework for the West Bank and Gaza. Following Atherton’s trip, it is clear that both sides see all of the remaining issues, and not just the West Bank/Gaza side letter and ambassadorial-exchange question, as “linkage” issues which can only be dealt with and resolved together, if they are to be resolved at all. This, more than the intrinsic difficulty of any one of the three Treaty text issues Atherton tried to resolve, probably accounts for their unwillingness to make significant headway during his trip. The linkage question is fundamental to both sides, and they want to see how all of its parts will be dealt with before trying to resolve any aspect of it. It is also clear that, if these issues are to be discussed with any hope of success, this must be done at the political level. Begin must be intimately involved on the Israeli side, either through moving the talks back to the summit or through ministerial-level talks in the area where Dayan can have frequent direct access to him. It is also clear from Atherton’s talks that the Israeli Government is so locked into its rejection of the proposals5 I took to Jerusalem from Cairo last month that it cannot agree to any of them in their present form. It is equally clear, however, that Sadat cannot agree to any major departures from the substances of those proposals. The issues we confront, therefore, are twofold: (1) whether we can find new ways to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX though we have not explored possible formulations sufficiently to know whether it can be made to work. Oil—Khalil indicated to Atherton a possible opening for resolving the problem of a supply commitment to Israel. On the one hand, he firmly maintained the Egyptian position that, while Israel will be able to purchase its requirements on a commercial basis from Egyptian sources once there is peace, Egypt cannot put this understanding in writing. On the other hand, he suggested that arrangements which would assure a fixed supply to Israel could be made on a companyto-company basis, with the Egyptian Government giving its permission to the selling company (presumably AMOCO) to enter such an arrangement with a company purchasing oil for Israel. 171. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 1, 1979 SUBJECT Secretary Vance’s Middle East Strategy Paper (U) The paper at Tab A2 describes the essential substantive problem in the negotiations concerning the “linkage” issue. It recommends that we try to repackage the outstanding issues by persuading Sadat to drop the direct conditionality between the exchange of ambassadors and the holding of West Bank/Gaza elections in return for a stronger letter on the Palestinian issue. (S) Secretary Vance also suggests two procedural steps: a ministerial meeting in the area and a summit. I understand that he is increasingly leaning toward the idea of a summit without a prior ministerial meeting. (S) What I find lacking in this discussion is a sense of broader regional strategy and the importance of time. We have a window, I believe, of about two months within which to conclude the Egypt-Israel negotiations. It is becoming more difficult, not less, to bring about accommoda- 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 172. Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Secretary Brown thought that FMS credits to Egypt were more salable in Congress than arms sales to Saudia Arabia, although the former required US funding and the latter did not. Mr. Christopher felt that until a peace treaty had been signed, we should not plan on large-scale consultations even on a survey team to Egypt. Secretary Brown said we could take the line that we want to do it, but we can wait until after a treaty is signed. Mr. Christopher agreed. Mr. Mcgiffert wondered if that applied to all five items on the list. Mr. Christopher said that there could be talks about what the Egyptians might want from us. The first point was certainly alright. They need to know that it is a good thing to diversify their sources of supply. Secretary Brown said that when we tell countries to go elsewhere for their source of arms, they take it as a lack of interest from us. Mr. Christopher said we should not hold out the hope that we will be the sole source of arms for Egypt and also provide money. Secretary Brown said that may be difficult, since the Egyptians just came out of that kind of relationship. We need to talk to the Saudis about the level of support for Egypt. Admiral Turner said that it will be difficult to turn Sadat away from his concept of being a Middle East policeman, but there are real dangers in our encouraging that role. There is a danger that he will ignore his domestic problems, ignore the military dissatisfaction with such a policy, and that he could end up generating the same kind of problems that we have just seen in Iran. Secretary Brown said perhaps our position should be that he would be in a better position to play that role after a peace treaty was concluded. Mr. Christopher said he hoped we would not divert Sadat from the hard problems of a peace treaty and domestic problems. Mr. McGiffert said he thought it would be bad if Secretary Brown goes to Egypt and offers only a few contingency possibilities. That would have a negative effect. Mr. Christopher said that some APCs could be offered after the treaty is signed with the numbers to be determined later. Mr. McIntyre noted we already provide $750M in SSA to Egypt. Secretary Brown then turned to Israel. He noted that the specific proposals called for security consultations on a regional basis. This would be something new in our security discussions with the Israelis. He would also need to talk about the relocation of the air bases. Our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Mr. McGiffert wondered how he could possibly be quiet on the entire list. Mr. Saunders said that there were certain items that they had requested that certainly could be granted which didn’t cost money and could be incorporated within the current aid levels. Secretary Brown said he was afraid that such discussion would not send a positive signal. However, he thought he could avoid making new financial commitment. Mr. Saunders said he didn’t think it would be so negative. He thought the general objectives spelled out in the paper were excellent and provided a good basis for talking seriously with them about security needs. We could also discuss their specific needs and relate those to the situation in Oman and Yemen and elsewhere in the region. Secretary Brown said that that was true as far as the Saudis, and that it was easier since there were no financial problems there; however, on the Saudi case there were Congressional problems. Mr. Christopher wondered what you could say to the Israelis on any of these subjects without making a commitment. Secretary Brown said there are some things on the list that could be discussed without any new financial commitments. By discussing the study, we could show we have done something on the airfield situation. We can assure them that some work can be done on the airfields without an impact on the Israeli economy; however, no decision can be taken at this time. He felt that what was required was a decision memo for the President which had to be done immediately for him to examine some of the critical specific issues.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Egypt and Israel will negotiate the modalities for elections and the powers and responsibilities for the self-governing authority in both the West Bank and Gaza. —Egypt and Israel will state that they favor the establishment of a self-governing authority in both the West Bank and Gaza, as provided for in the Camp David frameworks, but are prepared to begin implementation in Gaza first if that proves to be easier. —In practical terms, this would mean electing a Gaza regional council, which would presumably later merge with a comparable body in the West Bank. It is hard to know how administrative functions would be carried out—presumably a Gaza regional branch of each administrative unit would be formed. —To the degree that Gaza can genuinely be treated as a model for the West Bank, the greater the chances that other Arabs will not condemn it merely as a “separate” Palestinian agreement designed to cover for a “separate” Egyptian-Israeli treaty. (S) Even if the “Gaza first” approach is followed, several sticking points will arise: —The status of present Israeli settlements and future settlement activity. —The nature of any Egyptian presence. (Sadat wants police, and we have spoken of “liaison officers”. The Israelis oppose anything that suggests a special Egyptian responsibility for Gaza.) —The status of public lands and control over water resources. —Likely opposition on the part of the large refugee population which has had close ties in the past to the PLO. In brief, if the responsibilities of the Gaza self-government are extensive, there will eventually be support for whatever is proposed. We cannot, however, expect active Gazan participation in the negotiations. Instead, we will end up doing most of the negotiating with Israel, with Sadat making occasional suggestions, and with Gazans discreetly hinting at their preferences through indirect channels. (S) We should not place much stock in the idea that the “Gaza first” approach will lead to early agreement. Nor will Sadat and Begin work this out directly. We will be stuck with the unwelcome job of moving the negotiations forward. It will not be an easy task. In light of this, I would prefer to make the marginal extra effort to treat the West Bank and Gaza together, at least at the outset. I really believe that it is illusory to think that we are significantly simplifying our problems by trying to split off Gaza. (S)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX situation in your region. Recent trends make clear there is a tide running against the kind of stable and moderate Middle East we both seek. Developments in Iran have contributed to this trend. I know they are of great concern to you, not only because of their immediate impact on the supply of oil to Israel, but also because of their broader implications for the region and for Israel’s security. As I told Ambassador Evron recently, we attach great value to the contribution a stable, strong and democratic Israel can make to security in your region. It seems to me self-evident that the single greatest contribution to stability in the Middle East would be the early successful conclusion of the Egyptian- Israeli peace negotiations. This would create a new reality with which those forces that have been hostile to the Camp David Frameworks would have to reckon. In the absence of early progress in the negotiations, I fear this opportunity may be lost and the security of our friends in the region as a whole will become more vulnerable. Despite the difficulties that have prevented completion of the Israeli-Egyptian negotiations, I continue to believe that we can achieve the objectives we set for ourselves at Camp David. It is clear to me that all of the remaining issues are closely interrelated and need to be dealt with and resolved together. It is also clear that we must address ourselves to this task as a matter of some urgency, before time begins to work against us and in order to free our energies to deal with our common strategic concerns in your region. The question is how best to proceed. As you know, Mr. Prime Minister, I recently said that I would, if necessary, be prepared to meet again with you and President Sadat. I do not believe, however, that we have sufficiently tested whether such a meeting is necessary or would be fruitful. I want to suggest for your consideration, therefore, that the negotiations be resumed at the Ministerial level in Washington among Prime Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance. I would be happy to make Camp David available for these talks, so that the three Ministers and their aides would be able to work in private, without interruption, and away from the pressures and glare of the news media. If it is convenient, I suggest that the Ministerial talks begin soon after Secretary Vance and I return from our forthcoming visit to Mexico,6 specifically, on Wednesday, February 21. I am also communicating this suggestion to President Sadat. I recognize that Foreign Minister Dayan and Prime Minister Khalil would need to consult closely with you and with President Sadat, respectively, as the talks progress. For this reason, I would anticipate

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 175. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX at your earliest convenience, Mr. President, and meanwhile send to you my warm personal regards and continued high respect. Sincerely yours, Jimmy Carter End text. 4. We believe it would be desirable to announce7 that Ministeriallevel talks will resume at Camp David as soon as this has been agreed by both sides—hopefully in the course of this week. Our intention would be to issue a brief statement along the following lines: Quote: At President Carter’s invitation, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin have agreed that negotiations between Egypt and Israel should be resumed at Ministerial level. Prime Minister Khalil, Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance will participate in these talks, which will begin at Camp David on February 21. In agreeing to these talks, all sides have affirmed their commitment to the Camp David Accords and their determination that these negotiations be completed as quickly as possible. Unquote. Please ascertain GOE reaction to an announcement along foregoing lines. 5. I would like you and Sam Lewis to return to participate in these talks. Perhaps you could come back on aircraft with Secretary Brown who, we understand, will leave Cairo Sunday, February 18. This would give us a chance for in-house discussions with you and Sam before talks with Khalil and Dayan begin. Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Concerted measures to counter radical forces that now provide a base for the intrusion of Soviet influence. —Cooperation in oil matters that builds on the common interest of the U.S., its allies, and the region’s moderate states in security and economic development. You should emphasize our conviction that a new strategy for peace and security in the region will require new policies on the part of the U.S. and the governments of the region, demanding the resolve to effect them at home and internationally. We will do our part, but will expect in return enhanced cooperation from each of the states that you will be visiting. Saudi Arabia In addition to a review of regional security along the lines indicated above, you should discuss with the Saudis the nature of the “special” relationship they say they desire. You should seek their views on specific security concerns. At their initiative, this could include discussion of oil field security. You should agree to more systematic security consultations, including the possibility of some joint contingency planning directed at threats from Soviet surrogates in the region. In conversations with Saudi leaders it should be emphasized that it is vital that American policy have the support of the Congress and the American people. You should note that it is a reality of our political system that the success of our cooperation with them on security issues is dependent in considerable measure on U.S.-Saudi cooperation in the peace process and on economic issues. With regard to specific arms transfer issues, you should indicate that a decision on air munitions will be made by me after my conversations with Fahd. You might also indicate to the Saudis that, subject to my final approval after the Fahd visit, we expect to continue with the modernization program for two Army brigades and four National Guard battalions. Following the discussions with Fahd, I will review also the issue of nominal FMS credits for third country military assistance. Egypt President Sadat believes that Egypt can play a constructive regional role in support of moderate states and in limiting Soviet influence, provided a peace treaty with Israel can be achieved and Egypt receives American support. Egyptian leaders should be encouraged to think realistically in these terms, consistent with their objective of alleviating Egypt’s economic problems, and to focus on specific situations, such as Sudan, Oman, the Emirates, and Yemen where an Egyptian contribution to security may be possible. We should seek to initiate the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX cation. You should encourage him to adopt a supportive role toward the peace negotiations, particularly as they turn to the West Bank/Gaza issues. You should also open the prospect of greater U.S. assistance in meeting his legitimate security needs in the future as Jordan becomes more actively involved in the peace process. You should specifically: 1. Discuss Jordan’s security requirements now and during a period of protracted negotiations about the future of the West Bank, reaffirming our commitment to continue with military modernization programs which have already been agreed. 2. Agree to consider Jordan’s additional defense needs, but without commitment to a favorable outcome. 3. Agree to continue detailed defense consultations through the existing Joint Military Commission in the spring with regard to Jordan’s future security requirements. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 177. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —An emboldened Palestinian movement which is exploiting its relationship with Iranian revolutionaries in order to enhance its image as a force to be reckoned with. —Early signs of greater assertiveness among Egypt’s own Muslim conservatives on such sensitive issues as Egypt’s relations with the US, Israel’s designs on Arab territory, and inequities and decadence in Egypt’s political and social system. [handling restriction not declassified] Sadat has countered these pressures with the argument that regional stability depends now more than ever on a just Middle East peace settlement. Implicit in this argument, however, is a notice to the US and Israel that a stable peace must include greater satisfaction of Arab demands and greater assistance to Egypt and other moderate Arab governments. [handling restriction not declassified] Israeli perceptions of the Iranian crisis seem to have reinforced their determination to nail down specific language and commitments ensuring that a peace treaty with Egypt outlives President Sadat and minimizes as much as possible the need for US security guarantees. The Israelis have not substantively changed their negotiating positions, but they have in recent months dug in their heels further over a number of issues they consider vital, including: —Guaranteed access to quantities of Egyptian oil equal to those Israel currently obtains from its operations in the Gulf of Suez; —US commitments to provide generous financial assistance and advisory support to facilitate Israeli military relocation from the Sinai to the Negev; —Ironclad language in the treaty minimizing if not neutralizing Egypt’s options to intervene on the Arab side in future Arab-Israeli conflicts. [handling restriction not declassified] The Israeli leadership believes that one effect of the Iranian crisis has been to deepen Egypt’s reluctance to depart from Arab consensus attitudes. Foreign Minister Dayan and others in the leadership anticipate that Sadat, in an effort to reaffirm his solidarity with Arab interests, have taken a tougher position on major negotiation issues still at impasse. This assessment has probably contributed to the stiffening of Israel’s own negotiating posture. [handling restriction not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to continue forcefully to assert our willingness and ability to oppose direct Soviet aggression in the area. But most important of all, we need to do our best to forestall development of internal instability. Our influence is necessarily limited on this score, but the steps outlined above may help to enhance it. In particular, assistance in sensible economic development is needed. Several leaders stressed in private that this took priority over arms, though this wisdom did not extend to moderating their own long lists of arms requests. My trip had four main objectives. Pursuant to your instructions, the first was to restore confidence among the moderate states that the United States understands the dangers to the region and intends to act to protect its interests. This was achieved. But there will be backsliding unless we now follow through on the commitment to play a more active role in the Middle East—in frustrating Soviet interference, in displaying some modest presence of our own, and in cooperating more actively with the moderate states in security terms. The second objective was to stimulate the development of a general strategy for the region. I outlined the major elements: close cooperation between the United States and the individual states, concerted actions among moderate states, bilateral politico-military consultations about hypothetical contingencies, a potentially greater US military presence, cooperation on economic issues (oil) and economic assistance, and, above all, rapid progress on Arab-Israeli peace. In response, the countries’ leaders acknowledged a commonality of interest. However, not surprisingly, the Arabs do not see Israel as having a regional security role, and tend also to criticize each other’s efforts. Several urged a US military presence in other countries “which are weak and need it” but see it as a lightning rod in their own (the exception was Israel, which would welcome such a presence for reasons both plain and, to us, unattractive). It is quite obvious as well that each country views US interest in promoting regional security as a lever to obtain more US arms for itself. This presents opportunities for the United States as well as problems, for we may be able over time to establish some degree of implicit linkage between bilateral arms supply relations and regional cooperation. The third objective was to emphasize the peace process, and its importance for regional strategy. I did this at each stop. I pressed hard the argument that sustained progress toward peace would make an essential contribution to the security of the region. While all professed dedication to peace, recognized the threat to stability posed by its absence, and wished to exclude the Soviets from the negotiations, reactions to the Camp David Agreements were along predictable lines. Sadat and the Israelis are wedded to the Camp David process, but holding to their positions that progress be on their terms. Each is

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tant; no other country in the region can play a comparable role. The expanded relationship must, of course, be paced by the peace talks; our survey teams will tide us over until May–June. Also, we will face a difficult task in adjusting Egyptian appetites downward to fit the threat and competing economic development needs. You also asked that I report on the view of the regional states toward a greater US military presence. Israel favors a US presence, preferably one in Israel, but even one in the Arab states would be all right with them. Dayan and Weizman raised the possibility of our taking over the Sinai air bases. Weizman distinguished between a naval base at Haifa, which he said would not be antagonistic in an Arab- Israeli context, and other kinds of ground or air bases which would be. Neither Egypt nor Saudi Arabia wants a base on its soil, although they might acquiesce in a US base in some other Arab country. Sadat thinks a US base would be a sign of Egyptian weakness and showed no interest in a US presence in the Sinai. The Saudis did not think direct Soviet military action sufficiently likely to warrant the political risks to them that, in their view, would follow from a major US military presence. Some Saudis thought a US presence somewhere else in the Gulf was worth considering, but it is by no means clear this represents a consensus. It may be that, on reflection, one or more of the Arab countries may be interested in a form of US presence less intrusive than a military base, such as periodic aircraft deployments, joint exercises, and the like. It may be that we can develop arrangements for use of facilities in a crisis, perhaps with some pre-positioning of critical items. This would give us some of the military advantages of a base with fewer of its political burdens. We will learn more about this as our security consultations progress. There remain two other “presence” questions. First, the possibility of base facilities in another country, such as Oman. In 1977 Oman agreed in principle to our use of Masirah, the former British base, but at a very high cost. I did not get a clear view of Saudi Arabia’s or Egypt’s attitude on such a base, although I understand Crown Prince Fahd had expressed reservation about the idea in late 1976. We should examine this further within our government and perhaps with Saudi Arabia, to see whether the question should now be reopened with Oman. More importantly, I believe we ought to promote assistance from moderate Arab states to Oman to replace the capability withdrawn by Iran. The sooner this is done, the more South Yemen will be discouraged from seriously considering renewed efforts against Oman. Second is the question of increasing US military presence offshore. I believe we should carefully consider augmenting the Middle East Force (which now consists of 3 ships) and expanding the facilities

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Arabia. In the case of Egypt, we should substantially increase our program, post-treaty, both quantitatively and by extending significant FMS credits. We should not, however, lend our assistance to force structure expansion in any of the four countries, and we should in particular encourage post-treaty force structure reduction in Egypt in exchange for our help in modernizing its forces. In Saudi Arabia we should encourage the development over time of a more professional army, not based solely on heavy and sophisticated equipment, but equipped and tailored to the environment and the Saudi capabilities to absorb. We should recognize that, at least in the case of the Army, the prospects for real military capability are very limited. 3. We should not encourage at this stage build-up of arms in the Gulf states. This issue needs further analysis. 4. The most serious threat to security is likely to be internal instability. We should review in depth our assessment of the political, economic and social conditions in Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the Gulf states to make sure our policies are best designed to minimize the development of internal instability in those countries. This is particularly important in the case of Saudi Arabia, for reasons that are self-evident. It is also true in Egypt, where former MOD Gamasy told me privately he is worried about the effects on Army morale and attitudes of an eroding economic position military personnel experience in their personal lives. Where we have to make a choice we should give priority to economic assistance designed to promote internal stability over arms transfers. 5. We should plan further speeches and statements—by you and others—built around the themes of my visit. This declaratory policy will help maintain momentum and credibility. In doing this, we should recognize that declaratory policy is no substitute for action and, indeed, can be counterproductive if not matched with concrete implementing steps. Harold Brown

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President commented on the strategy paper and noted that it would be best to put forward any U.S. proposals in complete privacy to Dayan and Khalil. If their advisors are present, they will be obliged to take harder positions. Amb. Lewis agreed, but added that ultimately Prime Minister Begin will have to be involved personally in the negotiations for them to succeed. The President added that if this were true, we would have to leave something for Begin to do and to take credit for. Amb. Eilts added that President Sadat was also expecting to be invited to a summit. The President said that the only new idea that he had involved splitting off Gaza from the West Bank. We should perhaps encourage Sadat to withdraw his offer to represent Hussein’s interests in the West Bank. This would let him off the West Bank hook. Sadat does not care as much about the West Bank as he does about Gaza. If he can represent Gaza, this would allow him to conclude a separate treaty with Israel and to embarrass Hussein. This would let him claim that he has done his part, while increasing pressure on Jordan. Otherwise, the President said he had no new ideas on how to proceed. The Vice President said that there is widespread expectations that there will be a summit. It is important then to state that a summit will only take place if progress is first made at the Foreign Minister level. The President said that perhaps he should send a personal message to both Begin and Sadat asking them not to reject any individual points in the proposals that we will put forward. We want to avoid any public confrontations. We need to show progress, and then try to pin down details at a later date. It would be better for both parties to reject our package, but not to go into the details, and to acknowledge that progress was being made. If there must be a summit, the President said, there should not be too much delay. Amb. Eilts added that the most serious problem for Sadat would be the timing of the exchange of Ambassadors. The President acknowledged that he would have to deal with Sadat directly on that issue. Both Ambassadors Lewis and Eilts agreed that the “Gaza first” approach made sense. Amb. Eilts added, however, that if this is to work, it must involve a significant degree of authority in the hands of the self-government, and it must be seen as a precedent for the West Bank. Dr. Brzezinski added a comment on procedure. He said that the President himself would have to be directly involved in the negotiations. The success or failure of these talks would be of political importance. The President might consider meeting both Dayan and Khalil at the outset to stress the regional security concerns that underlie our policy. This should add a certain urgency to the negotiations. Dr. Brzezinski also said that he felt it would be a mistake for the Ministers, after having been softened up at Camp David, to go back home not having

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX emboldened the Palestinians. Ambassador Lewis felt that the increased national consciousness of the Israeli Arabs was more of a problem. The Vice President added that he felt the Israelis were worried about the loss of public opinion here, and Ambassador Lewis agreed. Secretary Vance reminded the group of Dayan’s statement that “Israel cannot afford to win another war”. Ambassador Lewis said that Dayan was the most aware of all Israeli leaders of the U.S. connection and its importance. The President said that when we get to the question of oil, we should check with the Egyptians to make sure that the language of any letter is satisfactory. Sadat may want to sell the oil to us rather than to Israel. Dr. Brzezinski asked whether we ought to convey the point that this was the last effort that we would be able to make in bringing the negotiations to a successful conclusion. Secretary Vance said that he had already told Ambassador Evron that, the President stated that we should not be saying that publicly. We do not want to be seen as giving up on the Arab-Israeli conflict, but practically everyone should recognize that we cannot start over from scratch. There is a tenacity to Sadat, that he cannot hold in limbo indefinitely. Ambassador Eilts agreed that if the talks fail, Egypt will go back to the Arab world. Ambassador Lewis added that the Labor Party favors a quick settlement, and Secretary Brown noted that the Labor Party supports the Gaza first option. Ambassador Lewis said that the Israelis widely believe that this [is] the last serious round of talks. We don’t need to say it publicly. Secretary Vance added that the process of erosion is clearly under way. The President asked about Egyptian-Saudi relations and Ambassador Eilts said that Sadat wants Saudi support, but does not see it as crucial at this stage. He feels that the Saudis will have to be confronted with a fait accomplı´. The President added that there is no place for the Saudis to go once the treaty is signed. They have to work with the United States and Egypt. Secretary Brown said the Saudis will take a negative public line, but in private they will not be so upset. Discussion ensued on the comparative strength of various personalities in the Saudi ruling family, and it was generally agreed that Fahd remains the single most important figure, but that Sultan and Abdallah have been gaining in influence as well.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX proval for any positions he wants to recommend. He speaks of returning by mid-next week, with Begin if necessary. By contrast, Khalil says that Sadat will only come to a summit to sign an agreement, not to negotiate. My impression thus far is that both sides do want to reach an agreement, and are worried about the regional situation. But each feels that the other side should make [the] most of the remaining concessions. The Egyptians are quite anxious to maintain the appearance of a common position with us, while Dayan is particularly interested in negotiating U.S.-Israeli bilateral agreements on aid and assurances that we might provide in the event the Egyptians do not honor the treaty. This leaves us with a large and difficult agenda ahead and the good feelings of the first day will come under considerable strain if we get down to specific cases. It would be a serious mistake to ease up the pressure on either side at this point, and if there must be a break in the negotiations, it should be as short as possible and should be followed by a summit immediately. We do have a chance to bring these talks to a successful conclusion, but it will be a close thing. Tomorrow we will put forward a good draft on the West Bank- Gaza negotiations and the so-called linkage problem. We have some ideas of possible alternatives to introduce into the negotiations at a later date, but we want to hold back some of these ideas in the first round. 181. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, February 22, 1979 SUBJECT Second Day of Camp David Talks (U) As Dayan and Khalil turned their attention to specific issues in the negotiations today, there was a noticeable backsliding in comparison to yesterday’s relatively positive atmosphere. Dayan stuck to a narrow 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 182. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Third Day of Camp David Talks (U) The atmosphere in the talks between Vance, Dayan, and Khalil was considerably better today. We submitted a new draft letter,2 along with suggestions on the other outstanding issues. Khalil showed some flexibility on the question on the timing of the exchange of ambassadors, and we appear now to have agreement on the easiest of the issues, Article IV. (S) Dayan now sees the question of a target date, Article VI of the treaty, and the exchange of ambassadors as the remaining difficult issues in the negotiations with Egypt. In addition, he has presented us with an outline of a memorandum of understanding which he would like us to respond to. (S) I anticipate some serious difficulties in the talks Saturday3 and Sunday,4 but I think that we can expect to conclude this round of talks by Sunday afternoon with a package of proposals5 for Dayan to take back to the Cabinet. The most difficult decisions for us will come in the next round of the talks, when we will be obliged to address bilateral issues and to deal with Begin directly. (S) If you have the time on Saturday or Sunday, I think it would be worthwhile to talk with both Dayan and Khalil about broad regional developments. (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX From the Israeli point of view, there has been no progress this week; if anything, the other way. At Blair House2 there were fewer disagreements. The latest U.S. draft on article 6–2 involves adoption of the Egyptian position, and thus the Egyptian proposal has become the U.S. proposal. I would like the Prime Minister to come and reach agreement, but in my report I will have to say that there was no progress from the Israeli point of view. The gap is now wider than at Blair House. Vance: The Blair House formulas were ad referendum. What is really left is article 6. (Discussion of article 6—of the difficulties of finding good language.) Dayan: Other elements include full withdrawal and full normalization. Now we are told that ambassadors would be linked to the autonomy issue. The President: Your version of history is not compatible with mine. The ambassador issue arose subsequent to the Camp David agreement. Besides you can have a situation where one is obligated by treaty to have an ambassador. As a final step there should be a commitment to exchange ambassadors, but even then each side can withdraw the ambassador. In any case we are operating under narrow time limits, but if a treaty is signed other Arab countries will have to accept it. The Gaza negotiations could be separated to some extent and that might be constructive. Finally, I hope Prime Minister Begin will come over here. We must avoid a breakdown. Also, we need to have bilateral talks. Our budget is in the final stages. We therefore need to discuss these matters with someone who has authority. The importance of all this is very high to the United States and to the world at large. The United States will accept whatever the two of you can accept; there is no U.S. position as such. (To Dayan) Have you agreed on the statement3 that I can now read to the press? Dayan: Yes.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 185. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State and the White House1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 186. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 RP M 79–10104X Washington, February 27, 1979 SUBJECT Possible Arab Acceptance of an Egyptian-Israeli Treaty [handling restriction not declassified] The White House suggestion that the Arabs would accept a treaty if presented with a fait accompli may have been prompted by two statements made during Secretary Brown’s recent visit to the Middle East.2 [handling restriction not declassified] —The Secretary told Sadat that he had found the Saudis less critical of the Camp David Accords in private than in public, and that King Husayn was “less intent” on pursuing the issue at the UN or Geneva. [handling restriction not declassified] —Sadat, during his conversation with Brown, said that all Arabs but the “rejectionists” (presumably Syria, Iraq, Algeria, Libya, and South Yemen) and Kuwait (because of its large Palestinian population) would accept a treaty. [handling restriction not declassified] We do not believe that either statement should be interpreted as indicating that Syria, Jordan or Saudi Arabia would “accept” a treaty based on the Camp David Accords. Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia would “accept” the “present draft” treaty only in the sense that there is little they could do to prevent it. Our reporting [less than 1 line not declassified] is nearly unanimous in its rejection of the CDA as not sufficient from the Arab point of view. That view, if anything, has hardened. [handling restriction not declassified] It is, of course, theoretically possible to devise terms and linkages that would satisfy most Arabs. Broad Arab support could be secured by a treaty that provides for specific time-tables making performance 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services, Directorate of In-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 187. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 27, 1979 SUBJECT Analysis of Substantive Positions in Camp David Talks (U) The proper point of comparison for the most recent set of proposals put forward at Camp David II is the package carried by Secretary Vance to Israel last December.2 Although these were Egyptian proposals, we stated that we thought they were reasonable. The table below compares the December proposals with those that we presented to the two delegations on February 25.3 (S) December Proposals Camp David II Article IV Included mandatory re- At Israeli request, dropped (Review of view after five years. mandatory review after security five years. arrangements) Article VI Paragraph 2 interpreted Same language dealing (Priority of to mean treaty is being with paragraph 2, but inobligations) concluded in “context cluded as part of a more of Camp David acgeneral statement on all cords.” Lengthy memof Article VI. No substanorandum giving our tive change. On paragraph views on paragraph 5 5, both sides preferred to (how this treaty relates drop legal memoranda to other obligations of and replace by simple the parties). note. Israelis object to statement in note that Article VI establishes no priority of obligations other than that of the U.N. Charter. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 188. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1 Washington, February 27, 1979 PARTICIPANTS The President Prime Minister Begin The President: How are you? Begin: Wonderful to hear your voice. The President: I got your letter2 to the effect that you could not negotiate with Prime Minister Khalil at a summit. Begin: I apologize, but after hearing a report from the Foreign Minister, I felt it would not be useful. We need to reflect for a while and then decide how to proceed. The President: For me it would be better if we could meet later this week. It is late in terms of the Congress, particularly as to budgetary matters. Later than this week would delay any future participation by the Egyptians. Begin: When should I come? I need to consult my colleagues in the Cabinet. The President: I was hoping that we could meet this Thursday3 or Friday.4 Begin: I could leave Friday and arrive late Saturday. We could talk on Sunday. I could spend the sabbath in New York City. I cannot leave tomorrow. At the earliest I could leave Thursday a.m. The President: I hate to quibble, but the end of this week is better for me. Is there any way you could be here Wednesday night? Begin: I could leave Thursday morning and be with you Thursday evening and Friday, until the sabbath. The President: That would be better for me. We will provide you with transportation from New York. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 66, Middle East: President Carter’s Trip to Jerusalem and Cairo:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President: Will you let me negotiate for Egypt and make concessions for you?3 Sadat: On the linkage and priority issues I cannot. The President: I won’t do anything until I get back to you. I will keep you fully informed and appreciate your attitude. I look forward to seeing you. Sadat: The whole thing is nearly complete. All it needs is your decisiveness with the Israelis. Look at what is happening in the area. The President: I will do the best I can, but don’t overestimate what I can do. Be patient and trust in me, and we will have success.4 Sadat: We will help you. We have given them everything already. The President: I will negotiate with Begin and be back to you as soon as possible. Sadat: I shall never let you down. 3 A handwritten notation next to this sentence reads, “(laughter).” 4 A handwritten notation inserted after this sentence reads, “You overestimate our influence with Israel, & they overestimate my influence with you.” 190. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: I am grateful to you, Mr. President, to Secretary Vance, and to your colleagues for the efforts that you have made to save our people in Tehran.3 This was a great service to Israel and we will not forget. I would like to say something that I said before. I will have to quote myself from the first time that I met you in July 1977.4 At that time I said that the free world was shrinking, that it was becoming an island battered by hostile winds. This was the truth. Since that time, the Soviets have taken over six countries: Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, South Yemen, and now Cambodia. Saudi Arabia is in direct danger from South Yemen. They are a rich people, but they are weak. Libya is pro-Soviet. Iraq and Syria are under Soviet influence, and the Baath parties in those two countries are coming together. There are between two and three thousand Soviet advisers in Syria. There are more Soviet tanks in Syria—2,800—than in Egypt—between 2,200 and 2,400. Jordan has aligned itself with Syria and Iraq. Now we have the upheaval in Iran, and we must ask ourselves about its meaning. We see this as an awakening of Islamic fanaticism, just as in the Middle Ages. It could be contagious. Iraq has a majority of Shiites. Sadat has had to warn his own people about the fanaticism of the Muslim brotherhood. Sadat sees this problem and he knows what happened in Iran. It could happen in Egypt, where the poverty is so much of a problem. When Sadat was in Jerusalem,5 he talked of inviting me to Cairo, but he could not do it. I believe it was because he could not guarantee my security. There are nine million people in Cairo, a city full of slums and poverty. The Nile Valley is very narrow. I told the President that the United States has only one stable ally in the Middle East, and this is Israel, whose stability is inherent because it is a democracy. This is also true of the United States, where change comes by the ballot, not the bullet. In Iran, a mighty Army collapsed in twenty-four hours in the face of fanatical masses. The story has not reached an end in Iran. Khomeini 3 On February 13, in the midst of the Iranian revolution, the Israeli Embassy in Washington requested that the United States provide refuge to remaining Israeli officials in Iran should they find themselves in “physical danger.” (Telegram 37964 to Tehran,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President: That is the text that Israel wanted, and now Egypt has accepted it. The Prime Minister: It says nothing about a review in five years. First I will deal with Article 6. The delegation of Israel was presented with the following proposal by the American delegation at Camp David. This refers to the second paragraph of Article 6. (The Prime Minister reads paragraph two of the text). The note concerning the fifth paragraph of Article 6 provides for the unique priority of the United Nations Charter and does not acknowledge “any other priority”. Now for the analysis. (The Prime Minister reads Article 6, paragraph 2 in its entirety). If we were to accept this note, I would say that we would be interpreting away the content of Article 6 paragraph 2. The words which say that the treaty is concluded “in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement” would mean that peace must be achieved between Israel and Syria, Israel and Jordan, Israel and Lebanon, and autonomy must be established in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza. Israel wants this comprehensive peace; it does not want a separate peace. If there is a separate peace, then there is still hostility on the northeastern front. They have 5,600 tanks there, and 1,000 combat planes. Israel does want a comprehensive peace settlement, but it is not up to Israel or Egypt alone to reach this. Sadat cannot persuade Assad. He cannot bring Jordan to the table. These are beyond his control to do. So what may happen? Israel will sign a treaty, and we will withdraw. But these words would allow Sadat or to his successor to say legitimately that if there is no comprehensive peace, Egypt can take back its ambassador, or can declare that parts of the treaty are null and void. It is absolutely clear that this would be the meaning of this interpretive note. The second sentence of the interpretive note is even more serious and dangerous, although the first is bad enough. Article 1039 of the U.N. Charter is referred to and this establishes a unique priority, but the note goes on to say that there is “no other priority”. If we were to accept this, then this would automatically give priority to Egypt’s obligations to the Arabs over its commitments in the treaty. Egypt has agreed with all of the Arab states in 1950, through the Arab League, that implacable enemy of Israel, to enter a defense relationship. Egypt has an alliance with Iraq and Syria, dating from 1962. The aim of that treaty is the liberation of Palestine, which means the destruction of Israel. Most important is the defense treaty with Syria of November 1966, which was invoked in 1967 and again in 1973 against us.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President: Do you object to the concept of dividing the two? Prime Minister Begin: The Camp David agreements talk about a single autonomy for Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza District. This is my preference. We may talk of this subject of a difference, but in writing we must stick to the Camp David accords. Second, it is written that Egypt will assume Jordan’s role. Where is this in Camp David? Did we ever agree that Egypt would assume Jordan’s role? The Camp David accords say that Egypt, Jordan, and Israel shall negotiate for the self-governing authority or administrative council, a vital concept, but it has become clear that Jordan will not join the peace-making process. So Israel said that it would negotiate with Egypt alone. Let me explain. We had the right to say that until Jordan joins there would be no such talks. It is vital to have Jordan along with Egypt. Egypt has no role in Judea and Samaria, and was only in occupation of Gaza because of an illegal act of aggression which gave Egypt no rights there. Egypt has nothing at all to do in Judea and Samaria. Nonetheless, we undertook to negotiate with Egypt on the modalities, the powers and responsibilities of the administrative council in Judea, Samaria and Gaza. We did this to prove that there was no Israeli intention to avoid negotiations if Jordan stayed out of the talks. We wanted to banish this idea, and to show our goodwill. So we are prepared to negotiate with Egypt alone. This is our concession, which we can give and we can take back. We are not obliged to do it under the Camp David Agreements. We can wait for Jordan. The President: In the Camp David Accords, it said that Egypt would assume the Arab role. Prime Minister Begin: It only said that in a letter,14 not in the Camp David Agreements. The President: All of the letters were discussed at Camp David. We never heard before of an Israeli objection to that letter. We heard that Dayan would prefer reference to Egypt taking the Jordanian role, rather than the Arab role. Secretary Vance: Khalil, Dayan, and I talked about this recently at Camp David. Dayan said he preferred reference to Jordan’s role instead of an Arab role, whereas Khalil preferred to talk about the Arab role. Dayan said that reference to Jordan’s role was reasonable and he would refer this to the Cabinet. Prime Minister Begin: On behalf of the Cabinet, I say this is unacceptable. It is preposterous that Egypt can take the Arab role, but Egypt cannot take the Jordanian role either. 14 See Document 57.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX dent, we will claim our sovereignty and others may claim their sovereignty. If that happens, then the autonomy will go on. We will never agree to refer to the self-governing authority without mentioning the administrative council. Let me explain why we do not want a target date. We must have a guarantee that there will not be a Palestinian state first. This would be a mortal danger to us. Arafat has taken over the Israeli Embassy in Tehran. There have been meetings in Nablus, the ancient town of Shechem. Thousands of people showed up and there was a proclamation that the Arabs should liberate Jerusalem and Jaffa. In such circumstances, we cannot accept the idea of a target date. As that date approaches, the PLO will use its Kalashnikovs to intimidate the population. After Mr. Saunders met with the Palestinians in Judea and Samaria,18 we had to guard them to protect their lives. We cannot set a target date, because then there would be no candidates and no electors. It should be possible to introduce autonomy within six months, but it might take as long as two years. This is a question of life or death to Israel. We shall leave all of Sinai. But in seven hours the Egyptian army can be on our southern border. In the east, if the PLO takes over, they will be on the mountains with their Soviet weapons, and we will be in the valley with only eight miles between us. All of our children will be in the range of their guns, and all our airfields will be closed, because of their fire. This would be a mortal danger to Israel. It would be peril to the free world if there were a Palestinian state that became a Soviet base in this area. The PLO sent arms to Khomeini. There would be Soviet generals in Bethlehem. Does this free world need a Soviet base in Judea and Samaria? With all due respect, this would not be wise, it would be a grave danger. Israel must have iron-clad guarantees that there will be no Palestinian state. You have said that there should not be a Palestinian state in your public remarks. But some people give advice that autonomy is just a first step, so any target date is impossible. I understood from our talk last night that you might consider the phrase “as expeditiously as possible” as a substitute. The President: I was also talking about that as the formulation on the timing of the exchange of ambassadors. Prime Minister Begin: I’ll come to that. We have prepared a counterdraft of the letter. We propose using this phrase “as expeditiously as possible”. This is as far as we can go. Egypt has suggested that autonomy might first be established in Gaza. They also talk of Egypt assuming the Jordanian role. The transi- 18 See Document 100.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and others who might surprise you. We have not turned to the United States. Oil to Israel is not wasted. But if we have no oil, then our tanks and planes cannot move and we would be in deadly danger. This is a matter of life and death. We now have oil in the area of Sinai from which we will withdraw. Israel now gets 1.6 million tons from those wells. In six months this will be up to 2.5 million tons. I want a commitment from Sadat in writing

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Secretary Vance: They would be there to be helpful. President Carter: We still think that this could be a useful idea. Prime Minister Begin: This is not my idea. Egypt has nothing to do with Gaza. President Carter: They will be part of the negotiations. Prime Minister Begin: We can discuss Dayan’s idea. If we deal only with Gaza, and if Egypt drops all interests in the question of autonomy in Judea and Samaria, then we can consider this. President Carter: You talk of Egypt intervening in Judea and Samaria, but we agreed at Camp David that Sadat would negotiate if Jordan did not join the talks. This was discussed by us. You never objected to Sadat representing Arab interests. Prime Minister Begin: I never agreed. I only said Israel was ready to negotiate with Egypt alone, if Jordan does not join. This was to show our good faith. President Carter: I agree. What is the difference? Prime Minister Begin: We did not agree that Egypt will replace Jordan. Egypt cannot make peace for Jordan. President Carter: When Sadat sent a letter23 concerning the Arab role, you made no objection. Sadat is not trying to intervene in the West Bank. He is trying to help in the negotiations. Prime Minister Begin: This is a genuine misunderstanding. I have not given any commitment. President Carter: You have a right to object. Secretary Vance: We never suggested that the self-governing authority could declare independence. Prime Minister Begin: You should write that it is an administrative council. Secretary Vance: That can be added. Ambassador Evron: In one draft, the words administrative and council were included, and then they were dropped. Secretary Vance: This is not a big problem. Mr. Rosenne: The Prime Minister objects to dropping administrative council, and he objects to the reference to full autonomy for the selfgoverning authority. Camp David talks about full autonomy only for the inhabitants. The self-governing authority does not have autonomy. Secretary Vance: What is the difference? Mr. Rosenne: We should refer to the administrative council and the goal of autonomy for the inhabitants. The powers of the administrative 23 See Document 57.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX achieving an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. It was realized that the Egyptian-Israeli agreement was a first step. It is obvious to you and to me that we missed the three-month goal and the prospects are not good now. Sadat originally wanted a fixed goal for the establishment of the self-government before withdrawal had been carried out in Sinai. Now he will accept a target date. In his message24 to you when he raised the question of Gaza first, he said that if the Palestinians or others refused to participate, Israel would not be held responsible. There has to be some element of good faith on both sides. We cannot envisage every possibility for abrogation of the peace treaty. Sadat feels that he made major concessions on the question of setting a goal. He won’t hold Israel responsible if others fail to participate. You have apparently discounted Sadat’s message and are afraid that he will use the idea of a target date as an excuse to break the peace treaty. I don’t believe that Sadat wants that. Prime Minister Begin: I remember President Sadat’s letter. I sent you a copy of my reply.25 We have had experience. We decided on a target date for the treaty negotiations at Camp David. When that date passed, Israel was then blamed for the failure. The target date was not met. The Egyptians blamed us, and not only the Egyptians. Israel should not be in a position to have to justify herself. Israel is blamed even though Israel was ready to sign the treaty. But this is not the only issue. The target date will be a stumbling block to the autonomy. Don’t forget the PLO and their Kalashnikovs and their ability to intimidate the population. We cannot guard everyone. The PLO is a reality in Judea and Samaria. They will not let autonomy be introduced. If we set a target date, it will be dangerous. I contend that we should take the Camp David Agreement as it is. There were three parts to the Camp David Agreement: an Egypt-Israel Treaty; autonomy for Judea and Samaria; and an invitation to others to join the negotiations. We should follow the same sequence. There should be a treaty, then autonomy, then an invitation to others. There should be no target date, and we should simply say “as expeditiously as possible.” President Carter: Do you see any interrelationship among these three elements? Prime Minister Begin: That is a very dangerous phrase. At Camp David we heard this phrase of interrelationship, but we also heard the word “unconditional,” and then it was all right. But it is very characteristic, and I told this to my colleagues, that the word interrelationship would remain, but we would hear no more of the question of unconditionality. That is a fact. If we can say that there is an interrelationship 24 See Document 146. 25 See Document 150.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: I also agreed to start the negotiations on autonomy one month after the treaty. President Carter: There is nothing in Camp David that says the treaty must precede the West Bank /Gaza negotiations. It might go a long way to removing obstacles to the peace treaty negotiations. It could help overcome the linkage problem. This might be the only door to keep open if there is a deadlock. Prime Minister Begin: I will tell you what I have told my colleagues. There should be no judicial linkage. The American view is that there is a political linkage. President Carter: That’s right. Prime Minister Begin: But I say there is no judicial linkage and there is no political linkage, there is just a time linkage. We are prepared to start the negotiations on Judea, Samaria, and Gaza almost immediately. But there can be no political linkage, only a time linkage. Secretary Vance: On the question of the annexed documents, there is no mystery. You had it in your own counterdraft. Mr. Rosenne: We met on Saturday at Camp David to talk about the agreed minutes. The draft we got on February 24th had different language on Article 6. Secretary Vance: We are not talking about Article 6. I am talking about the annexed documents. This was mentioned in our first draft, and your counterdraft included it. Mr. Rosenne: Previous drafts had said that there would be just one annexed document. This was only the document on the autonomy. We object to having both documents annexed. When we included in our draft that both documents could be annexed, it was because there was a sentence that said that implementation of both frameworks would be independent of each other, and there was a phrase about unconditionality that was dropped, but the two documents were left. Egypt also did not want the two documents. At least Khalil was prepared to delete the first two pages of your draft. Our position is that we object to both documents being annexed with the deleting of the phrase about independent implementation. Secretary Vance: We talked about the problem of full autonomy for the inhabitants. On the question of “other related issue,” there should be no difficulty. Prime Minister Begin: But we want it understood that this means security for Israel in the transitional period and beyond. Secretary Vance: There is no problem. On Article 6, paragraph 5, let me review how we got to this point. Originally there was language that this treaty would “prevail over other treaties.” This was dropped. Agreement could not be reached on that. Then we reached agreement

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: We are grateful to you, but this language cannot be accepted by Israel. It is written that this treaty is in the context of the Camp David Frameworks and a comprehensive peace. Mr. Baz will one day advise the Egyptian ruler to abrogate the treaty unless a comprehensive peace has been achieved. You can be sure of this. Ambassador Blum: Article 3128 of the Geneva Convention would allow Mr. Baz to make such a legitimate interpretation. Secretary Vance: We tried to use the language of the Vienna Convention, but you rejected it. Prime Minister Begin: This is the first time that I have ever heard that something Mr. Baz said might be legitimate. President Carter: Will you agree to delete Article 6 entirely? Prime Minister Begin: No! It is the soul and the heart of the peace treaty. (The Prime Minister quotes the language of Article 6). If Syria does not join in the comprehensive peace, the treaty must still stand. If this Article is deleted, it would cancel the peace treaty. If I may quote Dr. Kissinger in this room, he used to say that what Israel is being asked to give is tangible, and what the Arabs promise is intangible. Egypt gives us a peace treaty and recognition and for that we should not be thankful. They should have done it in 1948. This is what Sadat gives us, plus an ambassador who can be recalled. In return we give him Sinai, two wonderful air bases, our settlements, and this represents the greatest sacrifice ever made for peace. If Article 6 is not left in the treaty, then the treaty stands on whether the rulers in Damascus will make peace or not. If Article 6, paragraph 5, is weakened Egypt, could go to war at any time. This article must stand as it is. It is the soul of the peace treaty. President Carter: Let me close by saying that we will meet again on Sunday.29 I suggest that we each get together with our own sides to discuss these issues. Prime Minister Begin: We can meet again on Saturday night. President Carter: We can decide on our next meeting at a later time. Before closing, I want to say that we have talked today a lot about words and technicalities. You seem to be assuming that Egypt is looking for written excuses to attack Israel. This is the same fear that you had two or three years ago, but there have been changes since then.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX There was a change when the two of you exchanged visits. We all agreed to work for a comprehensive settlement. You are afraid that Egypt will renege on its treaty commitments, and Egypt fears that you will not carry out the West Bank/Gaza agreement. Neither of these fears is warranted. We want to avoid a hardening of positions by either of you. We cannot lose this opportunity. You expressed my views yesterday when you said that talks were in a “deep crisis”. We are all concerned. Where do we go from here. This is very serious. If you show no flexibility, then Sadat will not accept the agreement. If he shows no flexibility, you won’t accept. I would then see no reason for more negotiations. We hope you will try to maintain the spirit of Camp David and to search for accommodation. Let us make the final attempt today to put together some new ideas. I hope you won’t reject the idea of negotiating on the West Bank and Gaza, or maybe Gaza alone, rather than dropping everything. You know Hussein’s views on going to the Security Council. Others favor a return to Geneva.31 Sadat could withdraw from contacts and go back to the Arab world where he would have support from the militant Arabs. I want to avoid this. To be frank, the language differences to me are relatively inconsequential compared to what has been achieved, and they are in some cases very minor. If you assume that Sadat does not want peace, they may take on very great significance. If Egypt were to accept totally your views, Egypt could still allege you broke your word and then could go to war. That could be suicidal for Egypt, because of Israel’s military capability. It is hard to imagine that happening. But that possibility can’t be overcome by a mere change in language. I don’t know how to express my concern more clearly. The whole effort could be abandoned. We want to avoid this. Prime Minister Begin: I want to clarify one misunderstanding. I have never said that Egypt is looking for an excuse to make war against Israel. I tried to explain that we cannot sign any document which legitimizes a revoking of the peace treaty or making war on Israel. The peace treaty with Article 6 could be broken. I have read history and I know that treaties are torn up. I remember about the neutrality of Belgium. I know that this may happen and we must all take risks. In Sinai, even with the demilitarized zone, there would be no resistance if Egypt decided to send its army back to our border. Israel needs three days to mobilize reserves and then Israel can fight everyone. If there is surprise, there would be a high cost. Egypt is building tunnels underneath the Suez Canal. Why? Israel has taken all of the risks so far. But Israel will not openly sign a document that would legitimize a war against her.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dr. Brzezinski: If there is bad language, it could be construed to legitimate war. The language that you want makes the signing of the treaty almost impossible for Sadat for political reasons. Therefore, it might be better to have no article at all. Prime Minister Begin: I want Sadat to have a good standing in the Arab world, but we cannot sacrifice ourselves on the alter of Sadat’s prestige in the Arab world. Mr. Rosenne: Don’t forget that the preamble already establishes in six different paragraphs a linkage to the Camp David frameworks. The linkage is there. Secretary Vance: We had the concept of “prevailing over”, and it has now been dropped. Each treaty stands on its own feet. That was accepted. It was Foreign Minister Dayan’s statement that caused the added problems. Prime Minister Begin: Prevailing over, supremacy over, all of that is good language. This is the weakest version, but we need at least this. Secretary Vance: Would you be willing to say that this treaty does not prevail over, but stands on its own along with others. Prime Minister Begin: No. It is no equal. The others are hostile to Israel. We need to solve the problem of what happens in the event of conflict. Ambassador Blum: In Europe, it is common in treaties to abrogate principles in previous treaties that are in conflict. We have not insisted upon this. Secretary Vance: You have said that this treaty should prevail over the other treaties. Mr. Rosenne: We gave that language up. Secretary Vance: But Dayan stated it publicly and it has not been retracted. Prime Minister Begin: We gave up the word prevailed. Secretary Vance: But you haven’t said it does not prevail. Mr. Rosenne: The draft at one point was titled “priority of obligations”. Dayan said that only where there was conflict between these obligations and others, then the terms of this treaty should be honored. Egypt’s objections came later. President Carter: We’ll work on this later today. (At the end of the meeting Prime Minister Begin handed Secretary Vance a letter32 on oil.) 32 Not found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX confidence in the President. He also appreciated the President’s candor and said he wished to analyze situation as he sees it. He then spoke along following lines: — (A) Just as President Carter does not want anything to harm Sadat and Egypt, he, Sadat, is concerned that nothing that happens damages President Carter’s position. This, Sadat thought, is especially important since, as he views situation, Begin is simply playing for time. Begin is against everything that was signed at Camp David. Begin was “forced” to sign CDAs against his desire and has ever since been seeking to undermine the CDAs. Begin first violated the December 17 target date and is now playing his “last card” in order to try to return the situation to a pre-Camp David configuration. At minimum it will be several months before Begin can be brought around to sign treaty. — (B) If we agree that joint US/Egyptian actions should not harm either President Carter or Egypt, Sadat viewed this as an important starting point. This should mean that our policies be identical. If this is agreed upon, Sadat thought it essential that a new, bold initiative be taken before the House, Senate, American and world public opinion in order to demonstrate who is genuinely interested in peace. Sadat said he could guarantee European support for such an initiative. He thought that the majority in the U.S. will also favor his position when it is fully explained. Time for confrontation (with Begin) has come. He did not wish to leave the initiative in Begin’s hands. Why should we appear to be defensive before House, Senate, American and world public opinion? Best defense, Sadat noted, is an offense. — (C) He had given Israel everything that is reasonable between equal parties. But he would not accept Israel as a “super power,” as Begin seems to be demanding. If we agree to Begin’s demands and views, he was sure that the Israeli PriMin will only ask for more. 5. Alluding to his comment that a new initiative is needed, Sadat outlined following scenario that he has in mind: — (A) He would ask me to tell the waiting press after our meeting that I had given him a preliminary report on the talks with Begin. Before commenting himself, he would want to get a full report on today’s session. He had asked me to meet with him again tomorrow morning in order to provide him with a full report. At that time he would also give me his responses. (I did so with press after our meeting.) — (B) After our meeting tomorrow, Monday,4 he plans to announce that he had talked with President Carter this evening and that he had received a follow-on report of the Begin talks. Here he noted parenthetically his hope that the message he will receive from Presi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX — (E) In meeting with congressional committees, Sadat intends to brief them on current area situation. He noted Numeiri/Mengistu meeting in Freetown had been a failure and that Qadhafi had only a few days ago spoken of concluding a military pact with Ethiopia. He also alluded to the PDRY attack on YAR as further evidence of the deteriorating area situation. The Sudan, he contended, is now in grave danger. He might have to act to defend it. In saying this, he did not mean that he contemplates an attack against Libya, but that he has to take into account that the Sudan is now likely to be threatened both by Ethiopia from Eritrea and in the west from Libya. He saw situation developing in accordance with Soviet desires. Soviet purpose, Sadat insisted, is to neutralize Egypt. For this reason, he noted, GOE is prepared to assist Oman and Somalia. He hoped Congress would recognize seriousness of situation and be willing to assist him in meeting it without insisting on previous conclusion of treaty. — (F) Sadat continued that he will invite House and Senate “to write a treaty as they would between USG and any friendly state” for use with Israel. He would sign it without reading it. His sole condition is that treaty must be on equal basis and not rpt not try to make “super power” out of Israel. Later in our talk he modified his earlier statement somewhat by saying that President Carter and he should, during their upcoming meetings, agree on what they regard as a fair and just treaty and present it to the Congress for endorsement. — (G) The primary purpose of his visit to the U.S., Sadat reiterated, is to place the Israeli problem before the American Congress and people in proper perspective after the Iranian situation. Everything in the area, he pointed out, is heading toward area-wide “hatred” for Israel. He hoped that USG will not accept Israel as its “vanguard” in area because this would mean that USG receives same “hatred.” Israel will do nothing without getting something for it. — (H) After he had asked Congress and American public to “relieve me of my commitment to you because Israel is not ready” Sadat said that he would call UN Security Council to meet in order to discuss situation. He would discuss details of what he has in mind when he meets President Carter. USG support will be necessary. — (I) Sadat reaffirmed that he remains committed to the two CDAs and is prepared to reaffirm this. — (J) Towards end of our meeting Sadat indicated that he hopes to come back with USG commitment to increase economic assistance to Egypt for development purposes (“Carter Plan”) and to provide arms for use in meeting Soviet threats to Middle East and Africa. 6. If President Carter disagreed on certain points or has other views, Sadat said that he will be pleased to have them. He hopes it will at the very least be possible to agree on general lines. If what he pro-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 192. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX convince them later. Now let me come to the first paragraph in your draft. I need to study it more. I would like to ask for an adjournment. There is some difficulty here. Secretary Vance: Let me explain. Prime Minister Begin: As far as saying that there is no separate peace, that is a first step, we have already done this in the preamble. This still implies that Egypt’s ruler could one day say that the Camp David Agreements foresaw comprehensive peace. If there is no such peace, then they could abrogate the treaty. We need more study at this period. I’ll consult today with my colleagues. Secretary Vance: This says that the treaty will not be construed as being in contradiction to the Camp David accords. It is a truism. Mr. Rosenne: There is a problem here. The Vienna Convention4 in Article 30, paragraph 2, says that where a treaty is referred to in relationship to previous treaties, the previous treaties should be understood to prevail. Could this be put in a letter concerning the autonomy rather than as part of Article 6? It would make it easier. President Carter: You want us to put this elsewhere? Mr. Rosenne: We don’t want it attached to Article 6. Secretary Vance: We would have to think about that. This says nothing in the treaty that purports to contradict Camp David. Mr. Rosenne: But there are six references in the preamble to the Camp David frameworks. Article 6 refers to the independence of this treaty. If there is a problem of interpretation, you could say that the treaty depends for its interpretation on language in the preamble which refers to Camp David. For example, if Israel were to withdraw and Egypt were to say that the framework agreements had not been carried out. They might say that they do not have to normalize relations, but Article 6 says that the treaty is independent of any other instrument. Prime Minister Begin: We are among friends. There is a possibility that we could leave these three lines as you suggested them, but we would like to add lines from the middle of the second paragraph. In other words, we would like to say that this first sentence does not derogate from the language of Article 6, paragraph 2, which we would then want to quote in total. This is not a final proposal. Secretary Vance: Let’s leave this. Prime Minister Begin: This would add symmetry. We could use the same language “does not derogate from”.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and asked him to agree to an early exchange of ambassadors. He agreed with my proposal. Later your proposal was withdrawn. Sadat then called me, and he said that it was wrong for the Israelis to have withdrawn its proposal. Sadat said that he would not go back on his promise to me about the ambassadors, but he had made no commitment directly to Israel. Could Israel return to the idea of accelerated withdrawal? (Ambassador Blum enters the room at 2:30.) Prime Minister Begin: We cannot go back on this. We do not rule it out. We agreed to set up a mixed commission to discuss this. The government decided that this commitment cannot be made a priori. The committee must decide. President Carter: When would the mixed committee meet? Prime Minister Begin: After the ratification of the treaty. (Lengthy discussion in Hebrew with Ambassador Blum.) President Carter: It might be good if you could keep this language confidential within your Cabinet. Prime Minister Begin: I’ll do my best. Ambassador Evron: Do you plan to call President Sadat this afternoon? President Carter: I won’t tell him about this on the phone. I’ll just tell him that we made some progress. Prime Minister Begin: We still have the problem of oil. President Carter: The Egyptian position is that when other issues have been concluded, they will be forthcoming on this. I have talked to Sadat. We can guarantee your supply of oil. With our guarantee and with Sadat’s willingness to sell you oil, we can reach an agreement. If the oil must come from the Sinai wells, I am not sure that Sadat will agree. Prime Minister Begin: We know of your 1975 commitment.6 It could raise psychological problems in the United States. We want other independent solutions. We have several sources. We don’t want to have to invoke the U.S. commitment, but we may have to in the future. We need oil to safeguard our lives. We only need 2.5 million tons. Egypt doesn’t need the oil. President Carter: There may be more problems in Egypt on this than in the United States. Our country is deeply committed to Israel. We don’t expect it would cause any problems for us to supply you with oil. Prime Minister Begin: We need an iron-clad guarantee from that source.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Evron: Or we could use the words suggestions. Secretary Vance: I like the word suggestions. 193. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Egyptian President Sadat1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 194. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Egyptian President Sadat1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (9) Israel-Egypt peace blow to USSR & victory for me & U.S. Arab opposition—will it fade? Can Sadat handle it?8 (10) Threats from any spread of radicalism in the Mid East. (11) Get Sadat’s ideas on the concept of a broad security consultative arrangement in Mid East/N Africa region.9 (12) Post-treaty steps re Saudis & Jordanians? Syrians? Iraqis?10 (13) Post-treaty steps re Palestinian problem?11 (14) Cautiously seek Sadat’s assessment of U.S. military and/or monitoring presence in Sinai (Etzion).12 Zbig: Your assumption & demeanor should reflect absolute conviction that proposals on peace treaty are in Egypt’s interests. Do not acknowledge any doubt about this. We must implement Camp David accords together. Sadat should not insist on speaking for W Bank Palestinians.13 8 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “Begin anti- Soviet.” 9 Under this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “(Brown visit)” and “broad strategic initiative needed. US-Egypt—his ideas needed.” 10 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “how to widen the scope of our relations.” 11 Below this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “West Bank.” 12 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “peace related.” Below this sentence, Brzezinski wrote “(15) Need your assessment. Tell him what you’re doing.” In the right-hand margin, next to this 15th point, Brzezinski drew a box within which he wrote: “The beginning of a strategically [important?] relationship.” 13 In the left-hand margin next to this sentence, Brzezinski wrote: “you prevailed.” Under this sentence, Brzezinski added two separate notes. In the first, he wrote: “broader strategic perspective which [only?] a President can have—not a legalistic approach.” In the second, Brzezinski wrote: “Presidential level—[ignore?]” In the right-hand margin, Brzezinski wrote: “he had to have: 2 things.—[target?] date.—no previous treaty.— Begin? will never [interpret this?] language on 6.” Next to this last point, Brzezinski added, “this [draft?] does not prevail.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 197. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the President is prepared to insist that Begin sign a peace treaty in the course of his visit. In response to my query, he indicated that he would not be prepared to go to Jerusalem but would welcome the President and Prime Minister Begin to Ismailia in order to sign the agreement. I pointed out to Sadat the psychological importance of inviting Begin to Cairo and, after some exchanges, he conceded that this was psychologically important and said that he would be willing to invite Begin here, immediately after the President’s visit to Jerusalem. 4. Third, with regards to our specific language, Sadat made only indirect comments which seem to indicate that he himself was not raising any objections and was prepared to accept it. He went on to raise additional issues, such as oil, indicating a willingness to be accommodating. My impression is that you will have his support on our new formulations unless tomorrow his colleagues talk him out of it. 5. Fourth, Sadat was extraordinarily delighted by your willingness to consider the issue in a wider security context. He interrupted me several times with exclamations to the effect that this is “marvellous, marvellous” and that it represents his own thinking exactly. In fact, he told me that to him the regional security issue is now the more important one. 6. You will note in the more detailed account which follows that he is anxious to give us some “secret weapons” to take to Jerusalem, though the issue of ambassadors still gives him difficulty. Having noted his uneasiness over that issue, I did not probe any further but merely registered the point that you will discuss it with him in greater detail. The most important “secret weapon” he wishes to offer, but please note that it is only to you and that it is not to be incorporated in any formal agreement, is the willingness to build an oil pipeline from the Sinai to Israel. 7. Insofar as the conversation itself is concerned, I started by covering all of the points that you asked me to make. Sadat listened very attentively, interrupting only to express agreement regarding my characterization of Begin’s motives, regarding the impact on U.S. domestic politics of the Middle Eastern crisis, and particularly regarding the point that the U.S. wishes to see a strong Egypt. At that moment he interjected with a number of comments, expressing enthusiastic approval of your approach, stressing the positive results for the U.S. of a friendship with a militarily and economically strong Egypt. 8. After I handed him our proposed new language, Sadat read extremely carefully and out loud. With respect to Article VI, he simply said “ah-ha, you made it neutral,” and then asked Roy Atherton to come in in order to make certain whether that would or would not be part of the treaty or would be a side letter (and Roy told him that it would be attached to the treaty). Regarding the target date language

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Arabia through planes and pilots, but it is important for the U.S. not to exaggerate the Saudi role. The Saudis are indecisive and incapable of action. 14. With regard to Syria, he sees the internal situation as rapidly deteriorating, and he expects a major and violent change this year. He believes that the Syrians would be interested in discreet arrangements with the U.S. 15. With regard to Iraq, he reiterated the point that discreet arrangements with the U.S. are timely and that the U.S. has much more in common with Iraq than Iraq has with the Soviet Union. He encouraged us to move towards a relationship. 16. He was scathing and contempuous of King Hussein. He accused him of already now trying to undermine the Camp David Accords, and he urged that we dismiss him altogether. He emphasized the strong position he has in Egypt, which he believes is based on the fact that the Egyptian people no longer have a complex over Israel. That complex was shed during the 1973 war. 17. In talking of the Arabian Gulf, he stressed that he enjoys a great deal of support in Bahrain, Abu Dhabi, Qatar, and Oman. That support cannot be openly expressed but the fact is that there is sympathy for his policies. Turning to other regions, he asserted that he will shortly be transferring 200 tanks to Somalia, and he would wish them replaced by us. He expressed the view that the situation is deteriorating in Libya and may soon get out of hand. In his view Algeria will henceforth pursue more genuinely neutral policies, and considers that to our collective advantage. 18. Finally, at the very end of the conversation he floated the idea that Egypt might propose, after the Israeli withdrawals from the Sinai have been completed, that U.S. forces be made part of the UN Sinai force. He thought that this might provide an international cover for the introduction of an U.S. military presence in the Sinai. At the same time, he expressed reservation regarding Begin’s idea that Etzion be made into an U.S. airbase. 19. Throughout the discussion he emphasized his desire to work closely with you either in reaching accommodation with Begin or in working together in spite of him. He also responded favorably to my strategic overview of your policies.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin. History must not say of us that peace was not achieved because of failure of will or of serious effort. Peace is too important to us all—to you and to your people as well as to mine—for us to leave any stone unturned, no matter how difficult the obstacles. My trip is taken in that spirit and in the conviction that a treaty between Egypt and Israel is a necessary first step in the process of achieving peace between Israel and each of its neighbors. I fully understand the major role that Jordan can play in enabling us to move quickly beyond this treaty, if it can be achieved, to negotiations on the issues of concern to you and to the Palestinians. I therefore want to keep you as fully informed as I can of the developments in the next few days, so you will be able to develop your policies in full knowledge of the facts. Jordan and the United States have vital interests in common in preserving the national independence and integrity of each state in the Middle East and in resolving the causes of conflict which open the door to exploitation by outside powers. We will continue to work closely with you on each of these fronts. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text. 3. Guidance for your talk with the King when you present letter being sent septel.3 Vance 3 See footnote 2 above. 200. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (McIntyre) and the President’s Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, March 7, 1979 SUBJECT Financial Assistance to Israel and Egypt We have discussed with you a number of times previously the implications of various levels of US assistance which might accompany a 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (4) submit annually for approval to Congress a request for military and economic assistance. The possible additional measures include: Materiel Support (1) joint planning with Israelis for US logistical support without European bases being available, thereby implementing Sinai II commitment (2) a commitment to follow-through on such plan in an emergency (3) creation of Israel WRM —earmark items in US inventory: for example, from CONUS equipment of POMCUsed divisions —alternative: build up general stocks (4) put in President’s budget an item called “Israeli contingency fund” to use if requirement—which could be a war or something less— arose. (5) pre-position some US materiel in Israel which could be diverted to Israel if appropriate. (6) extend Sinai II oil guarantee3 for additional definite period. Arms Sales (7) commitment to expansion and/or modernization of Israeli forces (8) cut off supplies to countries opposing Israeli in war —variant: to “aggressors” against Israel (raises question of what happens if Israel preempts). (9) Change Israel’s PD–134 status —equal to NATO —almost equal Exercises (10) US maritime exercises in Israeli waters. (11) US exertion of maritime rights in international waters relevant to Israel, e.g., Suez. 3 In the Memorandum of Agreement Between the Governments of Israel and the United States, signed in Jerusalem on September 1, 1975, the United States pledged to “promptly make oil available for purchase by Israel” to meet all its domestic oil needs should Israel be unable to meet all its “normal requirements” for domestic consumption.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 202. Summary of Meetings1 Washington, undated

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subject: Prime Minister Begin reports on Israeli Cabinet decisions of previous night and Prime Minister Begin responds. Begin explains reason for removing reference to comprehensive peace in note to Article 6, paragraph 2. Begin explains rejection of language in West Bank/ Gaza letter on Gaza First and Egyptian liaison. Offers language to the effect that Israeli will consider proposals on Gaza first in next phase of negotiations. Begin insists that Egypt must supply 2.5 million tons of oil annually over long term at market prices. President Carter says that Egypt will not accept this arrangement on oil and asks for Israeli reconsideration. Prime Minister Begin says he can go back to the Cabinet again, but not today. Other Cabinet members discuss importance of oil.10

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subphasing of withdrawals/ambassadors—Cabinet also to review this. It would be helpful to have diplomatic relations—also El Arish would be evacuated. (Cy reads details of subphasing withdrawals.) Targetting language—o.k.—“can” changed to “will” Gaza—prolonged discussion. Could not arrive at acceptable language. Israelis would not agree that formal commitment be made to start with Gaza and Egyptian presence. Agreed to free passage. Israelis finally agreed if Israelis can move freely in Egypt, then Egyptians can do so in Israel, West Bank, Gaza. After diplomatic relations, Consulate or Cultural Center could be established—maybe on the fringes of Gaza. Sadat: This depends on opening Egypt to Israelis? The President: Even before treaty is signed any Gazan can travel to Egypt. After one month the negotiating teams can travel. The highway between Gaza/El Arish can be opened within three months. After normal relations, consulate or cultural mission. Khalil: Designated liaison offices? The President: No designated liaison offices but consulate OK. Israelis do not want to split off the West Bank from Gaza—not write it into documents. Secretary Vance reads the proposed letter. The President: It’s a very good letter, and it leaves you flexible. Khalil: Wouldn’t it be better to have Gaza first? The President: It’s better to have a genuine invitation to Hussein stand—for a while at least. Khalil: When does the five-year transitional period begin? The President: If the West Bank Palestinians and Jordan refuse to participate, Sadat/Carter would have to resolve the future of the West Bank without their participation because the clock has run out. So we fall back on the Camp David language. I would like to induce Hussein and the Palestinians to take part. Khalil: Suppose Hussein doesn’t come in? He can block the whole thing. Discussion about implementation letter doesn’t cover it. Discussion of this issue and intent of Camp David. The President: I would like to have your approval of what we have negotiated, including U.S. position on oil and phased withdrawal/ambassadors (if Cabinet approves). Sadat: Ambassadors—one month after? Yes, if the Cabinet approves the withdrawals. The President: One month after interim withdrawal—we need your approval. I would like to ask two more things as gestures of goodwill: —Open the borders to movement of people, maybe in three months after El Arish.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 203. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX your generosity. I just hope that God will help in your mission. You can count on us as peace loving friends in happiness and in sorrow. President Carter: I hopefully pray that in spite of difficulties that I’ll never disappoint you. You are the most admired person in my country. That is a justified feeling. The situation in the Middle East has greatly changed since I first met you. We have just a few more hours together. When I get to Israel on Sunday,4 I’ll start the substantive talks. I’ll try to conclude the talks as quickly as possible. It shouldn’t take long. The differences that remain are relatively minor compared to the past. Begin and Dayan have behaved well in the last few days. They have not made any claims of victory, they have been cautious, and there is an attitude of hope. Even in New York,5 Begin struck a very moderate tone. This is possibly a good omen. I know that Begin is strong, courageous, and honest. He has made difficult sacrifices in Israel. He has gone further in his actions than his predecessors. He has suffered at home. He can get his own party to support him. I’ve tried to understand Israel politics. The Israeli people are as anxious for peace as those in Egypt. This may also be true in Syria. The leaders are not in step with the people there. I hopefully expect that after a few months of difficulty, the attitudes of the people in Jordan and Syria will change their leaders’ attitudes. We’ll do all that we can to prevent punitive actions against Egypt. We will use our maximum influence with Jordan and Saudi Arabia to get them to accept the accomplished fact. I’ll let them sound off for a while, but I intend to quietly lean on them. Then I will do all that I can to bring it to an end. I’d like to leave the Middle East with the peace treaty. If I go back, it will be hard to reopen the negotiations. President Sadat: Right. President Carter: On the prospect of the SALT talks, I need to meet and to prepare for those. My hope is that if the Israelis provide me with a good surprise, we can conclude and sign the whole thing early next week. If so, I would like to leave with good feelings between Egypt and Israel. There should not be a grudging acceptance. There will be problems in the future and they can be worked out with cooperation. Israel can exaggerate little difficulties. Within the limits of expectation, we are trying to put a good spirit into the whole process. A negative reaction in the Arab world will be minimized if they see that there is not a grudging acceptance. If they see things hanging by a thread, then Hussein may try to stir up the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. No 4 March 11. 5 Following his meetings with Carter in Washington, Begin visited New York March 6–7, where he gave a series of speeches to Jewish-American groups. (Edward Walsh, “Begin Urges U.S. Jews to Back New Peace Plan,” The Washington Post, March 7, 1979, p. A17; Edward Walsh, “Begin Says Treaty Now Up to Carter, Sadat,” The Wash-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX a joint board headed by the Prime Minister. We should drop all of our work on this board. We can guarantee your investors what is needed. We can have feasibility studies. On the other question, do your best to get an agreement. Vance has heard Prime Minister Khalil. From my side, you have full authority to reach an agreement. You know the situation here and there. You join us as a full partner for years to come. You have my authority to do what can be done. If Israel refuses, that is a new situation. But let us be identical. Secretary Vance: The Prime Minister has given me a note7 on unilateral actions. We’ll raise this. President Carter: Let us review the contents of the note. We’ll try. Prime Minister Khalil: I have the greatest esteem for you, and as you know, I spent many years in the United States. I want U.S.-Egyptian relations to be close. I am a staunch defender of peace on a solid basis that can be defended. President Carter: I’ll never forget this. Prime Minister Khalil: I cherish your idealism. President Carter: Your contribution at Camp David gave us an education [on] the issues that made this possible. When you came, there were bad prospects. I need a Prime Minister Khalil to run my government for me. Minister Sayeh: If you’ll allow me, I’ll be brief. Due to certain elements, our economy is growing at about nine percent annually. After 1967, we fell to zero. Due to the open-door policy of President Sadat and due to the economic help of the United States, the economy is improving. We now have democracy and the rule of law. There are no confiscations or expropriations. Private investors have confidence, as do foreign investors. All is working well. If I may add, we are with the IMF on economic reform. The IMF always wants higher prices. With all this, these need to be done in a non-traditional way. We are one and one-half million housing units short. We now only have 80,000 new units being built. We won’t catch up. This is causing big problems. We can’t have an open or a closed door if we have a poor telephone system. We always have problems of sewage and water supply. We are beginning to work on rural electrification which is very important. The public sector is very poor and needs to be renewed, but we have 10–15 billion Egyptian people tied up in it. It needs help. We need a nontraditional approach. Your one billion dollars helps, but we need massive help. I sense that you want to use American investment. I am ready for it. Coca Cola is already moving. The boycott has ended. Peace, and 7 A copy of Khalil’s note has not been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 204. Memorandum of Conversation1 Jerusalem, March 11, 1979,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX minister in Washington,3 we clearly saw the difficulties. If there were not difficulties, we would have solved these problems long ago. But I

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX countries object to all of this. They are against Sadat. Now there is a very serious problem on Israel’s northeastern front. They have 5,600 tanks there, and 6,000 guns. Israel has more than 3,000 tanks. That means they have a two to one ratio. We can defend ourselves only through counter-attack. We cannot withdraw to Haifa or Tel Aviv. If we reach the gates of Damascus, and this is possible, Syria may invoke its agreements with Egypt. Egypt would then be obliged to come to Syria’s aid. If these words “are not inconsistent with” are crucial instead of “do not derogate”, it means that Egypt will start a war while having a peace treaty with Israel. Therefore, we cannot accept. President Carter: Egypt is not trying to attack Israel, nor is the United States. The top sentence was added at the request of Egypt.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Secretary Vance: I will read the letter. (The Secretary reads the text of the draft letter). Prime Minister Begin: We’ll have to break with consultations to discuss this. There are improvements compared to the drafts submitted at Camp David. There is a return to the Camp David language, but there are problems. I will start with page 3. You have changed the word can to will. I remember that we agreed on can. And you accepted the phrase “as expeditiously as possible”. Mr. Rosenne: The Prime Minister suggested the change “as expeditiously as possible”. Prime Minister Begin: I said so. I sent this to the Cabinet. Then there is the phrase “possibly first in Gaza”. This is put in the sentence on setting up the self-government one month after elections. I never heard such a proposal. I cannot agree. (The Prime Minister misunderstands, and corrects himself when he notes that the establishment of the selfgovernment one month after elections is part of the Camp David Agreement.) Here is the idea of starting with Gaza. I use the words Judea and Samaria. We exchanged letters8 on this. We can’t use the phrase West Bank. This is a serious matter. It is a distortion of geographical and historical facts. The West Bank refers to all of the area west of the river, not just the area annexed by King Abdullah. If we sign a letter, either in parenthesis or as a footnote to the Israeli version, we must refer to Judea and Samaria. President Carter: No problem. Prime Minister Begin: The idea of implementing the self-governing authority first in Gaza is a deviation from Camp David. If we both agree, it would be okay. What is the idea? I’ll say openly that Secretary Vance asked me if autonomy could first be established in Gaza. I replied that if we have the commitment from President Sadat that he will not then interfere in Judea and Samaria, then we will consider this possibility, with the authority of the Cabinet. We cannot agree that we will go first in Gaza leaving Judea and Samaria, and then later negotiate Judea and Samaria separately with Egypt. That would be completely paradoxical. We agreed to negotiate with Egypt alone in order to show our good faith. No one wants to be truer to the Camp David Accords. Why did we agree? We could have waited for Jordan. Autonomy was our idea, and it is one of the most beautiful ideas ever proposed by Zionism and Judaism. Egypt has no right to Gaza. Gaza is a foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the question of implementation. Maybe it would not be possible to implement the agreement in West Bank, so we might start in Gaza. Prime Minister Begin: I am sorry, I have to differ. If we deviate from Camp David, and we agree to deal with Gaza first, then that is the end of Egypt’s negotiations with Israel on autonomy in Judea and Samaria. Egypt can give us nothing on the eastern front. We can’t change our mind on this. Our foreign minister likes the idea, provided that Egypt drops Judea and Samaria. We’ll call on the Jordanians and the Palestinian Arabs to negotiate. Autonomy is our idea, but not with Egypt. I suggest that we return to the original language. Secretary Vance: You will have done so in the letter. The only question is the implementation, not the negotiation. Minister Weizman: If we finish in Gaza, and if Jordan does not come in, will Egypt act for Jordan in the West Bank? We prefer to talk to the Palestinian Arabs. President Carter: Let me preside. Secretary Vance: The modalities, and the powers and the responsibilities for both areas will have been negotiated together. President Carter: Then the question of holding elections arises. Secretary Vance: Later, the West Bank Palestinians may say okay we’ll join, but we need some adjustments for the West Bank. They would want to just add to what had already been negotiated. Foreign Minister Dayan: Let me repeat what I said to you and Prime Minister Khalil. It would take more than just one change to adjust what had been agreed for Gaza to the West Bank. Now we are talking about one unit of the autonomy. There will be representatives from Gaza, and from Judea and Samaria. There would be one council. If Gaza goes first, then you have to make a change. Gaza would have the full power to run the self-governing authority in Gaza; while in Judea and Samaria, it would not be done that way. We would have to agree that there would be two units first. The self-autonomy in Gaza alone is possible. I told Khalil and Secretary Vance that I don’t exclude it. People in Gaza are not Jordanian citizens. They have no close ties to Jordan, but Hussein may retaliate against the Gazans. We can’t be sure that they will like the idea. If we do go Gaza first, then we have to look at the second part. Some West Bank representatives go to the Parliament and are members. Khalil was surprised to learn this. They sit there as part of the Jordanian parliament. At Camp David, we agreed on Jordanian participation in the police force. I said this was no problem since all of the inhabitants in Judea and Samaria are Jordanians. King Hussein won’t send people from Trans-Jordan. He will choose locals. It doesn’t matter to us which side of the river Jordanian citizens come from. In Jerusalem

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: We said also the legitimate rights of the Palestinians. We also have rights. It is written this way. President Carter: What do you suggest? If Jordan does not participate, and the Palestinians are reluctant, how can we carry out the autonomy? Foreign Minister Dayan: I would personally distinguish three phases. We should invite all of the parties first. If they don’t come, then we could negotiate on Gaza alone. We talk about the powers and responsibilities just for Gaza. They could take a different form, and the areas would not have to be unified. President Carter: Do you agree that the basic goal is to prescribe a self-governing authority for the West Bank and Gaza both? Foreign Minister Dayan: There should be three stages. The general invitation, then if there is agreement on Gaza first, a specific negotiation for Gaza only and not the rest of the area. Then the invitation should stay open for Jordan and the inhabitants of Judea and Samaria to come in. It should be an open invitation. But the negotiations should not be done by Egypt, just by the people in the area and Jordan. So we would leave the door open. They would have to have their own negotiations on different issues. Secretary Vance: I agree on the general invitation. There should be negotiations on the powers and the modalities, and the invitation should remain open. But the negotiation of the powers and responsibilities would be largely common to both, and the modalities would be similar. Foreign Minister Dayan: Khalil said why shouldn’t the West Bank residents have both Jordanian citizenship and Palestinian citizenship. Deputy Prime Minister Yadin: Let’s forget about who wants what. Let’s look practically at the question. I was hurt when you said that you shared the views of those who think we are reluctant about the autonomy. There is a debate here in Israel. I was politically offended. We want to implement the autonomy on our terms. Now things are being turned upside down as if Sadat suggested autonomy. We should be practical. We should deal with the modalities in the whole area, and then implementation could come in Gaza first. But that might be counterproductive. If Jordan doesn’t join, why should we agree to what Sadat negotiates? Who gave Sadat power to negotiate for the West Bank? If Sadat can deliver the goods in Gaza, or Shawa, that is okay. But elsewhere Egypt can’t deliver. If we were to go Gaza first, we should forget the rest. Let them come when they are ready. President Carter: At Camp David we agreed that Jordan and Egypt would negotiate on the West Bank and Gaza combined. We also agreed that Egypt would participate on behalf of the other Arabs. It would vio-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Kingdom is the only non-Palestinian element in Jordan. I am not recommending anything. Jordan is a Palestinian state. You are trying to convince us to establish a second Palestinian state. We’ll go far, but we will never agree to a second Palestinian state. You should make that clear now. We should make clear what we plan to do. There is no way to prevent Jewish settlers from settling in Judea and Samaria. We can’t prevent this while Israel has one-half million Palestinian Arabs in its pre-1967 borders. No geographical line can divide the Jewish people from the Arab population. We have to live here together. When I use the figure of one million Jewish settlers in twenty or thirty years, I can assure that they will live there. In Jerusalem, in greater Jerusalem, there is a crucial problem to have one million Jews. They will live there and elsewhere. We were very careful to settle Jews. We fill all of the empty houses. We don’t settle them in areas of heavy population. We settle in empty areas or where there is only a small Arab population. This is our homeland. But our approach is not religious. It is only based on security. We are settling people there. This is part of our national security concept. It is a vital means for protecting our population. It is easier to proceed if things are clear. We have the problem of water. One-third of Israel’s water comes from the aquafer in Judea and Samaria. This is a matter of life and death for Israel. We have problems of internal security, of Arab terrorism. If the day comes of true peace, with no terrorism, Israel will be the first to stop our activities in the inhabited Arab areas. We only put settlements in the most vital areas. There is plenty of land for one to two million Jews. We won’t restrict the Arab population, but we won’t restrict the Jews living there. This is a matter of life. My generation has seen war. We have seen many terrible things. Remember we can only make a mistake once. We want to exist. We are striving for peace, but you can’t frighten us by war. We want peace, but we will go on for ten wars to preserve our security and independence. Minister Burg: One should be enough. Prime Minister Begin: We should adjourn now. We are having lunch downstairs together. We can then come back, or take a break. We have one other problem with the letter which has to with the counting of time from the establishment of the administrative council in Gaza. This cannot be accepted. The transitional period can only begin when the autonomy is established in Judea, Samaria and Gaza. This is an important remark for the record. President Carter: The liaision relationship must be established. Egypt must be able to use its beneficial influence to work with the Palestinians. I thought that Dayan and Khalil had resolved this. We need to bring this to a head. We’ll try to use the language of Camp David.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX starts four years later, then there is a problem. Why should we mention it at all? President Carter: We understand. Let’s try to work it out. Secretary Vance: I gave a memorandum of agreement to Dayan. It covers all the points you want covered. Prime Minister Begin: I have read it and will have to consult with my colleagues. At the end of page two, it says the United States will not supply arms for “unlawful” armed attack. There cannot be such a thing as “lawful” attack on Israel. President Carter: We’ll be the judge of that, Mr. Prime Minister. We will leave out the word “unlawful”. We are trying to be accommodating. Prime Minister Begin: On the first page, we want no reference to the possibility of a violation of the agreement by Israel. It says either party. This should not be in a bilateral agreement. You can say the same thing to Egypt if you want. But Israel cannot sign a document that says Israel might violate the agreement. It is a good document, Mr. Secretary. President Carter: Let me summarize before the recess. If Israel and Egypt want a peace treaty in the context of a comprehensive peace, it is important to conclude the treaty during this visit. There is a limit on my time. I have SALT negotiations and other matters to attend to. If we fail to reach an agreement, it will be difficult to revive the momentum. We hope to resolve all of the differences today. We are trying, representing Egypt within the limits of our ability, to resolve the wording on Article

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with the Cabinet tomorrow, you’ll get a complete reply. On the bilateral letter, I’ll take it to the Cabinet tonight. We think the pledge of economic and military assistance is perhaps too general. President Carter: Secretary Brown can talk to Weizman. Prime Minister Begin: We’ll include the questions of ambassadors and oil. You will have a Cabinet reply on all issues. After the session of the Cabinet, we will have agreement on some issues, and maybe it will be some issues on which the United States will have to [go] back to Cairo. Secretary Vance could go to Cairo if you must leave. Then you can bring the reply of Egypt. If there is agreement, we’ll tell you. We will have an agreed communique. Before signature, we will have to deal expeditiously with the question of autonomy in the Cabinet. We will have to bring it to the Knesset. This will take eight to ten days. That means next week there could be approval before we were ready to sign. Tomorrow morning we will give you a full answer between eight and nine o’clock. Then Secretary Vance can go to Cairo with our proposals. Then next week between Monday12 and Wednesday,13 we will possibly get Knesset approval. If we do not get approval, then the government will resign. President Carter: Secretary Vance knows the Egyptian position intimately. Instead of your Cabinet meeting now, I suggest that you let Secretary Vance consult with you as you evolve your language. Secretary Vance will not shuttle between Cairo and Jerusalem. Let him work with you before your Cabinet decision. Prime Minister Begin: Dayan can meet with Secretary Vance. Foreign Minister Dayan: On Article 6, that can be clarified before the Cabinet meeting. Rosenne, Zamir and I will meet with the Secretary and his group. We can find agreed language. That is not so easy on the joint letter. There are matters of substance there. In a short hour we cannot solve this. It is not just a question of words. There are matters of substance. Maybe during the Cabinet meeting we can be in touch, but not before the Cabinet meeting. Prime Minister Begin: I am very tired. We need time. I asked for an adjournment. The two foreign ministers will sit together. On Article 6, we need Cabinet agreement. We can’t convene again for these matters. I am totally tired. I have reached my limit. President Carter: Let Secretary Vance and Dayan work through the banquet. 12 March 12. 13 March 14.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Minister Weizman: Let’s discuss it in the Cabinet.14 President Carter: It’s not just a symbolic matter. I want to leave here with a solid expression of friendship between the two governments. Prime Minister Begin: This group of ministers cannot now decide this issue of a meeting with Sadat. We will take this to the Cabinet and give you a reply tomorrow. Foreign Minister Dayan: If the Cabinet approves tonight and Secretary Vance brings the approval of the Egyptians, then the Knesset will approve. We don’t underestimate the ceremony, but if it doesn’t work out for Tuesday, that should not be a problem. (The meeting ends at 5:35 p.m.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Herbert Hansell, Legal Adviser, State Department William Quandt, NSC Staff Member Jody Powell, Press Secretary to the President Hamilton Jordan, Assistant to the President Richard Viets, Deputy Chief of Mission, U.S. Embassy, Israel Menachem Begin, Prime Minister Yigael Yadin, Deputy Prime Minister Yosef Burg, Minister of Interior Simcha Ehrlich, Minister of Finance Shmuel Tamir, Minister of Justice Moshe Nissim, Minister Without Portfolio Gideon Patt, Minister of Industry, Commerce and Tourism Eliezer Shostak, Minister of Health Chaim Landau, Minister of Transport Moshe Dayan, Minister of Foreign Affairs Ezer Weizman, Minister of Defense Yitzha Modai, Minister of Energy and Infrastructure Zevulun Hammer, Minister of Education and Culture Ariel Sharon, Minister of Agriculture Aharon Abu-Hatzeira, Minister of Religious Affairs David Levi, Minister of Immigrant Absorption Israel Katz, Minister of Labor and Social Betterment Mordechai Zippori, Deputy Minister of Defense Yitzak Zamir, Attorney General Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the U.S. Dan Pattir, Press Spokesman General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Eli Rubenstein, Assistant to Director General to the Foreign Minister General Avraham Tamir, Assistant Minister of Defense for National Planning Jossie Chiehanover, Director General, Foreign Minister’s Office Dr. Eliahu Ben-Elissar, Chef de Cabinet, Prime Minister’s Office Arye Naor, Cabinet Secretary Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor Schlomo Nakhdimon, Advisor to the Prime Minister for Press Ilan Tehila, Military Secretary to the Minister of Defense Yehuda Avner, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister (The Prime Minister begins the meeting by introducing all of the members in his Cabinet). President Carter: I want to thank you for your hospitality and seriousness with which you have addressed the treaty. I deeply appreciate your having met all last night in order to accommodate my time problems. It was very gracious of you. We have very close ties to Israel. We value your strength, and your democratic form of government. They are matters of deep admiration to us, and are a great benefit to the United States. I believe the benefits are mutual. We are close to an historic achievement. This could be the first of many steps to establish even more securely peace in Israel. Israel can defend herself. But we want your security to be based on peace with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX is of great importance to us that the negotiations on the self-governing authority and on the modalities should proceed as we agreed. There must be access to the people of Gaza to help prepare the elections. We are talking of a political process. The people in Gaza should be able to freely express their views. We and the Egyptians need to be in touch with them. I have no preference on Gaza first, but the implementation of any agreement may be easier there. Raising doubts about Gaza is bad. The omission of liaison officers is bad. We need to have arrangements for the negotiating parties to work actively with the people of Gaza. I ask you to reconsider this. I hope we can instruct Foreign Minister Dayan and Secretary Vance to work out new language. I can’t send Secretary Vance to Egypt unless we have some assurances that Egypt will have access to Gaza. This is a crucial issue. Page 3 is okay and the footnote you suggest is okay. We have not gotten any reply on the technical amendment to Article 5. We understand that the Cabinet approved it. Prime Minister Begin: The amendment to Article 5 is acceptable. President Carter: You said that the Cabinet agrees to staged withdrawal. I want to know about the stages so that we can resolve the question of the exchange of ambassadors. The American proposal on oil, including a guarantee from us, should be adequate. Egypt does reject Israel’s proposal to sell 2.5 million tons of oil annually to Israel. We have worked on an “evergreen” contract approach. There would be an annual renewal, and if there were any interruption, we will guarantee your supply. I suggest that you review this. We will provide an iron-clad agreement of the kind that Israel seeks. The Cabinet’s proposals are very forthcoming. The only one from our point of view which causes problems concerns access to the inhabitants of Gaza during the negotiations and elections. I do not want my own commitments to be violated. Any access that the United States would have in Gaza should also be available for Egypt. When the early withdrawal from al-Arish was discussed, Israel said that there would be free access between al-Arish and Gaza. The Cabinet then took a contrary position. I can’t take a proposal to Egypt unless this is provided. I am not wedded to any exact words, but the spirit is crucial. Prime Minister Begin: We considered Article 6–2. The Cabinet was forthcoming. We approved the word “contravene”. We consider this a synonym of derogate. We can say that Article 6–2 stands. In Washington, we agreed on the first part of this note. The provisions of Article VI will not be construed as contradicting Camp David. The United States and Israel agreed. In Cairo, an Egyptian proposal was made that Israeli Cabinet has now rejected. It is legitimate to accept some proposals and to reject others. The first formula was agreed to by the United States and Israel. Egypt has sought to make a very serious

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the Cabinet. Secretary Vance can say that after signing the peace treaty, and after the normalization of relations, anybody is free to visit anybody, we can go see the pyramids, Egyptians can go to Jerusalem, and they can visit Gaza as we can visit Luxor. This shows our complete good will. There will be no special deal for Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza. Annex 1 provides for entry points, and there will be free entry subject to normal checks. This is agreed. President Carter: I don’t want to pass over this. This is crucial. Your response is not adequate. Only once in the negotiations has the United States taken a position that we consider important to our own integrity. We are a signatory . . . Prime Minister Begin: It is not written in Camp David. President Carter: Unless there are clear assurances that the negotiating teams can have access to the inhabitants of Gaza and the West Bank, I don’t feel that I can carry out my commitment to Camp David. Prime Minister Begin: We will sign only what we agreed to. President Carter: But I am asking you to agree. Prime Minister Begin: We won’t sign if we don’t agree. We will carry out every word of Camp David. It is not written in Camp David that there should be Egyptian liaison officers in Gaza or in Judea and Samaria. There is specific language. We will be faithful to Camp David. On the question of oil, we agree that Egypt must supply 2.5 million tons of oil at market prices. They will get the oil wells that we developed. We want access to this oil through Egypt. If Egypt doesn’t keep its agreement, then the U.S. should guarantee the oil. President Carter: To use your words, this is not in Camp David. There will be differences from Camp David as we work for a peace treaty. I have made our position clear. Israel has the freedom not to sign an agreement and you can insist upon your position. But this is so important that I think you should designate someone to work with Secretary Vance on this. I don’t want the negotiations to break down over the negotiators having access. Prime Minister Begin: I can bring this again to my Cabinet. I can’t do more. I can only speak about the decisions that were made today. If you wish to bring it up again, I will. On oil, there is no misunderstanding. I thought we had a complete agreement. I thought there would be an Israeli-Egyptian agreement with a U.S. guarantee. We don’t want to turn to the United States. Your Sinai II commitment3 will be honored. But we don’t want this matter of oil to hurt our relations. We don’t want Americans to complain about Israel. We haven’t used the 1975

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin: Did Egypt accept our proposal on a letter for oil or 2.5 million tons? Secretary Vance: It was rejected. President Carter: We also don’t approve of that approach. Prime Minister Begin: My impression was that you agreed. Secretary Vance: I agreed to raise it with them. Prime Minister Begin: Then I am right. They have rejected it. Minister Tamir: There are two aspects. I realize what you have said. We would be reintroducing the Arab boycott idea of an untouchable Israel. They won’t sell us oil directly. We have heard you, often make the point that we should not be stingy about the peace process, about the new relationship, and that we should have faith in the next steps. But this is the only tangible test that we can put to Egypt. You stressed the urgency because of the fall of Iran. Iran’s fall has hurt you, but it is a completely serious blow to our oil situation. Now we are asked to give up the oil that is under our own control. We have no oil of our own. We have a neighbor which refuses to consider us as a neighbor. In the oil market, the idea of free competitive bidding allows everyone to play tricks. It is then totally up to their discretion on whether they sell. We have to think of our security. Our whole war appartus depends on this. It is the only tangible test of the new relationship. This raises doubts of whether they really want peace. Prime Minister Begin: Let me call attention to the timetable. We don’t have agreement on oil with Egypt. Now you will have to go to prepare for your speech. At 11:45 you will leave for the Knesset. There are now thousands of children waiting on the road to see you. I suggest that we move on now. We do not have agreement on oil, and we will have to reach an agreement. The other issues I will bring to my Cabinet. President Carter: Will there be any further meetings? Prime Minister Begin: At noon, we go to the Knesset. That will last one or one and one-half hours. The speaker will greet you. Then you have a lunch with the Foreign Affairs Committee. We do not participate. During that time, we will sit with Secretary Vance. If there is agreement, we will now decide that the Cabinet will meet after the Knesset speech. Our delegations will hold talks. We will either have a full Cabinet meeting or the Defense Council meeting with Secretary Vance. We should hear Minister Burg. Minister Burg: Iran is a debacle for Israel. Another evergreen contract would hurt Israel. This is absolutely contradictory to peace. President Carter: The American assurance takes care of the problem. We also have no answer on the accelerated withdrawal. (The meeting ends at 11:20 a.m.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX counted, “gave me a draft of a joint statement to be issued by him and Carter. I read it grimly. It tried to paper over the harsh reality that after the Camp David summit, the Blair House talks, the ministerial sessions at Camp David, my rescue mission to Cairo and Jerusalem, Begin’s visit to Washington and the president’s trip to the Middle East, we had failed to bridge the last narrow gap.” “The remaining three issues,” Vance contended, “seemed so insignificant compared to the prize that could be seized with a little flexibility and imagination.” (Vance, Hard Choices, pages 248–249) On the evening of March 12, Vance met again with Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Moshe Dayan at the King David Hotel. No memorandum of conversation or official record of the meeting has been found, but Vance and Dayan recorded the substance of the exchange in their respective memoirs. (Vance, Hard Choices, pages 249–250; Dayan, Breakthrough, pages 275–276) During the meeting, lasting “several hours,” Dayan “urged me [Vance] to persuade the Egyptians that we should drop the idea of Gaza first and make no mention of Egyptian liaison officers in the West Bank and Gaza letter. He stressed that the Egyptians could propose advancing elections in Gaza (“Gaza first”) at the autonomy negotiations. He also underscored that when Israel withdrew from El Arish and normal relations began, ‘any Egyptian could travel to Gaza on an Israeli visa, just as any Israeli would be able to go to Cairo on an Egyptian visa.’ I was prepared to accept Dayan’s suggestion if we could reach an agreement on the oil supplies question.” On oil, Dayan told Vance he “understood that the Egyptians could not agree at this time to sell Israel oil on a long-term basis and at a preferred price.” “When I heard this,” Vance later recalled, “I knew that we were approaching a breakthrough.” Dayan suggested to Vance that Carter invite Begin to a breakfast meeting the following morning, March 13; Vance telephoned the President who immediately agreed to the suggestion. (Vance, Hard Choices, pages 249–250) After this, Vance and Dayan “turned to constructing the final pillars of the bridge.” Vance asked Dayan “what Israel could live with in terms of U.S. guarantees. He replied that it would be necessary for the U.S. oil guarantee to last for twenty years rather than the five we had offered. I said I felt we could move in his direction on this. Dayan said further that there must be a clause in the treaty stating that Israel had a right to buy oil directly from Egypt. He pointed out that without such a clause the Egyptian boycott would remain in effect. It would be difficult to do, but I felt we could draft language to meet his point and persuade the Egyptians to accept it. I so indicated to him, saying I would, of course, have to discuss these matters with the president but that I was hopeful.” After gaining the President’s approval for a U.S. oil guarantee to Israel for a fifteen-year period and for the revisions to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 208. Telegram From Secretary of State Vance to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX this decision by President Sadat.2 And Begin stated that he would submit the final matters to his Cabinet. We heard shortly after takeoff from Cairo that Begin had called a meeting of the Israeli Cabinet for

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX people throughout the world. That is what makes it so difficult to comprehend when you are involved in the minutiae, as well as other things relating to a situation like this. It is interesting to recall now how Jody and others handled the press treatment of this entire project. From the beginning it was represented, properly, as a mission which had no assurance of success and, to the contrary, had significant likelihood of not succeeding. It is obvious that many cynics felt that President Carter already “had it wrapped up” before he embarked upon the venture, but that is now quite obviously false. The expectations of success for this trip were correct for two reasons: 1. In fact it was a high risk venture with no assurance whatsoever of success and with every possibility of failure. 2. By keeping the expectations low, should it prove to be successful (as it has) then the accomplishment would of course, seem even greater. President Carter throughout this entire Middle East situation has demonstrated some amazing characteristics, and even though I have had almost unlimited faith in him for many years, even I did not comprehend his capacity to handle this situation in the manner he has. Among these characteristics are: 1. The ability to study and understand this tremendously complex situation involving so much history, emotions, geopolitical considerations, etc. 2. The ability to establish personal relationships with people who are attractive and people who are unattractive, but all of whom were necessary to give any hope of succeeding in these negotiations. 3. The willingness to devote the amount of time which he has devoted to this entire matter, much more than he has devoted to any other matter since he became President. (I personally believe that he really has taken this on as a “mission” not only because he is President, but because of his personal feelings and concern about this entire situation.) 4. His patience and tenacity in pursuing this basic objective of peace in the Middle East, which he has expressed over the last three or four years, and which he has demonstrated over the last two years. This obviously is in the face of tremendous opposition, frustration, and discouragement. 5. His ability to handle the numerous legal problems involved in negotiation of a treaty, injecting not only the necessary technical abilities, but also the psychological and other factors which have proved to be so necessary in order to reach some type of resolution.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Attachment Letter From Secretary of State Vance to Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil3 Washington, undated Dear Mustafa: I am writing this to follow up our discussions on March 13 at the Cairo airport concerning the Agreed Minutes to Articles VI (2) and VI (5) of the Treaty of Peace. Those Agreed Minutes are as follows: Quote: ARTICLE VI (2) The provisions of Article VI shall not be construed in contradiction to the provisions of the Framework for Peace in the Middle East Agreed at Camp David. The foregoing is not to be construed as contravening the provisions of Article VI (2) of the Treaty, which reads as follows: The Parties undertake to fulfill in good faith their obligations under this Treaty, without regard to action or inaction of any other party and independently of any instrument external to this Treaty. ARTICLE VI (5) It is agreed by the Parties that there is no assertion that this Treaty prevails over other treaties or agreements or that other treaties or agreements prevail over this Treaty. The foregoing is not to be construed as contravening the provisions of Article VI (5) of the Treaty, which reads as follows: Subject to Article 103 of the United Nations Charter, in the event of a conflict between the obligations of the Parties under the present Treaty and any of their other obligations, the obligations under this Treaty will be binding and implemented. Unquote. This will confirm that in my opinion these Agreed Minutes to Articles VI (2) and VI (5) are interpretations of those Articles. Sincerely yours, Cyrus Vance4 3 Secret. 4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX JC: I will do so. JC: Let me respond. I think the entire process is gratifying to all of us. I want to express my thanks for your hospitality, and my admiration to you as a strong leader. MB: Strength from Abraham. Thanks. I also want to ask Secretary Brown to meet with Ezer to discuss bilateral matters. JC: Secretary Brown will be glad to meet with Ezer. MB: I have now been empowered by the Cabinet. You may think now I didn’t make a mistake when I said you would leave the country with satisfaction. JC: Thanks. We will be extending to you and Sadat an invitation at the earliest convenient date and will clear the schedule with you and Sadat before making the invitation public. MB: The debate will take place next week, perhaps Monday,4 Tuesday or Wednesday. The debate will last for 10–12 hours. I hope to get a majority, and even a strong majority. You saw our democratic process. You have had the experience. JC: It was a very interesting experience. MB: In Parliament you know you have to know how to take and how to give. I must still meet coalition parties. I suppose the opposition will vote with us. I hope to get a majority. If not, government will resign, as I said yesterday to the Israeli people. JC: Israel cannot afford to lose you as Prime Minister. Good luck. MB: Best to Rosalynn . . . JC: Our love to Alisa . . . MB: Only one thing, if the Egyptians prefer the meeting to take place at American encampment at Sinai or in Washington, we will accept either proposal. JC: I will inquire through Hermann Eilts MB: Let me know through Lewis. JC: This is good news indeed. MB: God bless you. JC: Good bye. 4 March 19.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX We should begin negotiations on a conservative level of U.S. commitment, but be prepared to move to a level you now decide on. For Israel, I would strongly recommend that you decide now that we will be prepared to seek grant aid for the airbase relocation, in the amount of $1.0 billion. Since the U.S. intends to perform all the work on the contract, much of this amount would be spent in the United States and not adversely impact on balance of payments. The rest, $1.5 billion, would be FMS credits (of which half is customarily forgiven). This extra $1.5 billion could be spent, in a mix to be determined by the Israelis, among equipment, extras for the relocated airbases, and other Sinai relocation costs. For Egypt, I recommend a 50–50 credit-cash split. The cash for sales would have to be found by them, presumably from Saudi Arabia, though this is chancy given likely violent Arab League reactions to the Peace Treaty. We could also seek grants from other western countries and from Japan. If Egypt obtains such a Saudi or other grant, then their terms would be equivalent to the terms we extend Israel for FMS credits, i.e., half forgiven. Alternatively, we might extend Egypt the FMS terms (half forgiven, the rest paid over 20 years beginning 10 years later, at commercial interest terms) that we customarily provide Israel. The total package shown amounts to $4.0 billion over the three year period, although the amounts required to be appropriated would be much less. The first year costs and their financing will have to be determined based on how quickly we can get programs going. We can envisage, for instance, that an Egyptian program, frontloaded, might require $300 million in FMS financing in the first year. The airbase relocation will require as much as $500 million in the first year, in order to insure completion within the three year limit. These would require an FY 1979 supplemental to get going, while other initial costs might be accomplished by a change in the FY 1980 budget proposal. The U.S. Government will also need to consider economic aid for Egypt. Egypt’s economy is not in good shape, and such aid might be very important to Sadat’s political survival. He may well have difficulty in obtaining continued assistance from other Arab states, including Saudi Arabia, which in the past has amounted to around $500 million a year in non-military aid. Recommendation: That you authorize me to negotiate financial arrangements (covering a three year period) with Israel and Egypt up to, but not exceeding the following: a. Israel: $1.0 grant assistance for airbase construction (Israel would pay all costs above this amount), and $1.5 billion FMS (half forgiven) credit.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Tab B List Prepared in the Department of Defense4 Washington, undated ISRAEL: EQUIPMENT INDICATED AS LIKELY TO BE AVAILABLE Acceleration of 55 F–16 aircraft, but keeping the same original total of 75, with deliveries to begin in January 1980 instead of April 1981. 600 AGM–65B (MAVERICK) Precision-guided bombs

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX League, transfer of League headquarters from Cairo, and expulsion of Egypt from the Arab Mutual Defense Pact. Such sanctions were agreed to at the Baghdad summit last November.3 On the important question of economic sanctions, Saud said his government would “maintain its economic contacts with Egypt” and continue “current commitments.” Further economic commitments were ruled out. [handling restriction not declassified] A contributing factor to Saudi attitudes is skepticism about US willingness to guarantee Saudi security. Such doubts will not be easily or quickly overcome. Prince Saud did say, however, that Crown Prince Fahd wants to reschedule his visit to Washington—an indication in part of the great apprehension among Saudi leaders that their “Arab commitments” will undermine the “special relationship.” [handling restriction not declassified] We expect considerable vacillation from the Saudis as their key leaders consider their next step. Barring dramatic treaty language or unilateral Israeli gestures on linkage, however, we expect a gradual and reluctant slide by Saudi Arabia into an Arab consensus position condemning the treaty and imposing sanctions, possibly including new limits on economic aid. [handling restriction not declassified] Iraq, Syria, and Libya will do their best to quickly push reluctant Arab governments into unqualified condemnation of the treaty and President Sadat. The actual treaty language is probably immaterial and unlikely to affect the attitude of the hardliners. The moderating role played by Syria and Iraq in the recent Yemeni conflict—after Saudi efforts to defuse the crisis had failed—probably gives them added leverage with the Saudis. In the short term, the peace treaty will quicken the pace of Syrian-Iraqi reconciliation, particularly in the area of foreign policy and military cooperation. [handling restriction not declassified] We look for Palestinian groups to show their anger over a treaty by: —Attempted acts of terrorism by radical Palestinians against Egyptian, Israeli, and perhaps US targets in Europe, the Middle East, and Israel proper. —Encouragement for continued protests by Palestinians in the occupied territories, and Palestinian demonstrations in Lebanon. It is possible that Yasir Arafat and the more moderate Palestinian majority will temporize briefly while they examine the terms of the peace for Palestinian gains and assess the reaction of other Arabs. Such restraint will likely soon give way if the Arab world, as seems likely, in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX a. Is it true that the U.S. has agreed to guarantee that Israel will receive its needed oil supplies, at OPEC prices, from either Egypt or the U.S.? b. Is it true that the U.S. is handling the issue of Egypt’s defense pacts with other Arab states by obtaining a specific Israeli guarantee not to attack Syria or Jordan? [less than 1 line not declassified] Arafat sees this as an “open invitation” for the Israelis to strike at the Palestinians in Lebanon, rather than protection for Syria or Jordan.) c. Is it true that the U.S. will agree to a clause making any “selfrule” timetable contingent upon “cooperation” by the inhabitants of the occupied territories? [handling restriction not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Middle East will try to exploit the situation in the area to the detriment of the Arab peoples. We are not prepared to allow this to happen since our friendships and our interests require that the bonds of cooperation that have marked our relations in the past should continue in the future. Dr. Brzezinski, who was with me on my recent visits to Egypt and Israel, will review with you my thinking on how the agreement between those two countries can serve as the cornerstone for a broader peace settlement in the area. I firmly believe that a stable pattern of peaceful relations can develop among all of our friends in the Middle East. This would greatly enhance our ability to meet the many challenges to stability from within and without the region. Your Majesty, I know that you share my view that we must always look for opportunities to advance the cause of peace and to strengthen the bonds between our countries. This is a time for leadership and vision as we work together for a peaceful Middle East. I know that you will share your views frankly with the members of my personal delegation. I look forward to seeing you personally in May. With my best personal regards, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Egypt and Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Sincerely Yours, Mohammed Anwar El-Sadat Menachem Begin. End quote. 4. Israelis wish to add footnote following signatures reading as follows: Quote: in each paragraph in which expression West Bank appears it is being and will be understood by the Government of Israel as Judea and Samaria. Unquote. Since Egyptians have been very insistent that letter be a joint one signed by both President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin, we need to include the footnote in a manner that will meet Israeli objective without directly associating Sadat with it. We propose to prepare the letter so that the signatures will be at the bottom of a page and the footnote will be on an attached page which the Egyptians can disregard if they wish. To avoid misunderstandings, the above footnote should be reflected in the letter as you deliver it to both governments. Vance 217. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 4. Evron said he had instructions from Prime Minister to raise Sadat’s statement4 that the treaty should be signed only in Washington. Evron said the Prime Minister was surprised that Sadat seems to be changing his mind about signing in Jerusalem and Cairo; he wonders what else President Sadat will change his mind about. Prime Minister would like to stick to the original plan. Secretary and Saunders explained that it was our understanding that Sadat was not ruling out signing in Jerusalem and Cairo but that this was a matter that he and Begin would discuss in Washington. Evron said word he had from Jerusalem was that Sadat had made specific statement that there should be signing only in Washington. Secretary said we would look into this. 5. Weizman said he was “awfully sorry” about killing of the two West Bank youths at Halhul.5 With Begin in bed and his (Weizman’s) absence, Yadin had convened a conference of army and political leaders and given an instruction for a court of inquiry. Weizman said he would look into the matter personally on his return. Vance 4 Speaking with journalists in his village of Mit Abul Kom on March 16, Sadat stated that there should be a single signing ceremony in Washington for the Arabic, English, and Hebrew texts of the peace treaty, a view Khalil asked Eilts to forward to Washington.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX have demonstrated our intent to respond. We are prepared to use force if necessary to protect the vital interests of ourselves or of our friends. We are willing to work with all Arab countries who have shared security concerns, to shape a consultative security framework. This is not an attempt to split the Arab world, though we recognize that some Arab countries are better friends than others. It is in our longer term interests to increase our relations with Syria and Iraq, and we would welcome your suggestions on how that might be done. I have already spoken to King Khalid about the intellectual and spiritual revival of Islam and the importance that we attach to it. In this context, we want to find a solution to the Arab-Israel dispute. We see the Israel-Egyptian treaty as the beginning and a cornerstone of a comprehensive peace settlement. The President has made very clear his determination to use this treaty to work to protect and preserve the rights of the Palestinians. This [is] a point of personal principle. We hope that the treaty will establish the principle of Israeli withdrawal and Israeli dismantlement of settlements in occupied territories. It should also lay the basis for the United States Arab friendship since it will result in changing attitudes on both sides. The treaty opens the door of redressing justice for the Palestinians and creating new conditions for giving the Palestinians their legitimate rights. We also believe that anything that hurts or undermines the treaty helps our adversaries. The Soviets do not wish a treaty, the Arab radicals do not wish one, the anti-Arab forces in the United States oppose it, and those Israelis who want to retain all of their lands also oppose it. So we want your cooperation over the next few months when it will be particularly difficult after signing the treaty. We believe at this new historical stage you and we are ready for new wider relationships; but any economic or political sanctions against Egypt would hurt us as well [as] Egypt. We have been encouraged to hear that it is not your intention to do anything to disadvantage or hurt Egypt and that you will exert every effort to maintain normal relations with Egypt. This is a statesmanlike position. The President in Cairo pledged himself to work to solve the problem of the Palestinians. I cannot imagine any President in the future willing to do so much for the Palestinians. I would like to be able to tell him from you when we go back that there will be no tangible actions by you that would hurt Egypt or us. The President hopes that you will be able to visit Washington soon to discuss these matters and joint decisions to be taken. In the meantime, we remain committed to relations with you which we think are very deep. Crown Prince Fahd said he was pleased when he first heard of the visit. He saw a clear indication of the interest of the President of the United States. All we hope for is that the efforts of President Carter con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX relationship on security issues with Arab states. This is why the President asked him to come here. You understand that we are walking down the path of history together. Crown Prince Fahd asked is there nothing in the treaty that the Palestinians after a certain time will get self-determination? The Palestinians will ask us that. Dr. Brzezinski said the words “self-determination” have not been used. To Israel that means a separate Palestinian state. We have used the words “participate in determining their future,” because we believe that the next five years will bring conditions in which Palestinian and Israeli objectives are not incompatible. He mentioned the Peres speech in the Knesset on Palestinian rights as evidence that change does take place over time. Golda Meir said there was no such thing as a Palestinian.3 Begin said one year ago that the Israelis are Palestinians. Peres may be the next Prime Minister and he spoke of the rights of the Palestinians. President Carter and President Sadat created a framework in which we can redefine existing reality into something very different within the next five years. Mr. Christopher said that difficult questions lie ahead in determining the scope of self-government in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The concept of full autonomy is to a large degree self-government. Institutions can be created on the West Bank and Gaza Strip which would eliminate most of the objectionable aspects of outside involvement. It is important that the Palestinians find a means of becoming part of the negotiations themselves. We are prepared to welcome the Palestinians into negotiations on the basis of their acceptance of Resolution 242. Your government earlier made efforts along those lines. We hope you will do so again to insure that moderate Palestinians join the process. Crown Prince Fahd said of course they would continue the process toward the results mentioned, but they are asked questions and they need an answer when the Palestinians ask them. They hear the pronouncements of the ultimate aim but they want assurances that they have a choice of their own future. Dr. Brzezinski said the answer is that in the course of the next five years the situation can be altered in ways not specifically predictable at present. If the United States now stated flatly that there would be a Palestinian state in five years, they would not get a single Israeli prepared 3 Referring to the Zionists who arrived in Palestine in the early 20th century, Meir was quoted in the June 15, 1969, Sunday Times [London], as saying: “There were no such thing as Palestinians. When was there an independent Palestinian people with a Palestinian state? It was either southern Syria before the First World War, and then it was a Palestine including Jordan. It was not as though there was a Palestinian people in Palestine considering itself as a Palestinian people and we came and threw them out and took their country away from them. They did not exist.” (Sunday Times, June 15, 1969).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dr. Brzezinski asked if the Arab League measures would not have the effect of economic sanctions. (All said no.) He noted that we are launching ourselves on an effort to help the area. We intend to help Egypt militarily, and other damage to Egypt would hurt us. We might as well be frank about it. Prince Saud said that the measures stipulated by the Arab League are not to be taken as punitive measures against Egypt or the United States. Mr. Christopher said that he was heartened by the indication that Saudi Arabia will not take unilateral direct steps to interfere with the peace process. We are anxious to report that to President Carter. In the candor of our friendship it should be pointed out that the U.S. people and the Congress may not distinguish so clearly between acts taken unilaterally or collectively with Arab friends. If you do make efforts to persuade others, it would be desirable if this became known, even if it fails, and I hope that it does not. We have asked Congress to do some extraordinary things in our mutual interest so it is very desirable to be able to explain to Congress the acts that have been taken. Crown Prince Fahd said that the point was well taken with regard to your attempts to bring Congress around. He hoped that you would bear with me when he says that in this part of the world we know best how to make friends. Some things are better done quietly. Dr. Brzezinski said we are not asking you that, and not giving you advice on how to conduct your relations. We wonder what is behind the words used by Prince Saud. We do not want to surprise you and we do not want to be surprised by you. We understand the Foreign Minister says that collective actions will not prevent Saudi cooperation. This is really important to us. We are going to the Congress to ask money for Egypt, to undertake measures to enhance security for the region as a whole to promote moderation, and to prevent the Soviets from gaining a position. So we need to know what you will be doing. Prince Saud said the measures to be taken would consist of three categories. (The interpretation of what might be harmful to the bilateral relationship between Egypt and Saudi Arabia would depend on the nature of those relations.) These actions will stem directly from the Arab League and the Mutual Defense Pact. In the event the Egyptians sign a treaty, the automatic results or the measures to be taken will be based on the regulations and charter of the Arab League: First, suspension of membership in the Arab League; second, moving the headquarters from Cairo elsewhere; and, thirdly, to apply Arab boycott regulations to Egyptian companies or institutions dealing with Israel. This means changing the relationship not only between Egypt and Saudi Arabia but between all the members of the Arab League. They will change the responsibility of Egypt to the Arab League and vice versa. It is some-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX have used the phrase that they would “participate in determining their own future”. Crown Prince Fahd said that was an exceptionally anglo-Saxon phrase. There is nothing like that in Arabic. (Some discussion ensued about how to translate the various phrases.) Dr. Brzezinski wondered how President Carter’s speech5 in Cairo had been translated. He thought they should use that translation. That was a very careful choice of words. Crown Prince Fahd said that the status of Jerusalem had a very special significance for this country. Muslims first turned to Jerusalem to pray until God declared that they should turn to Mecca. Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had been asked this specifically in Israel, i.e., to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. There are also demands for such an action in the United States. Our position remains unchanged. This issue will be resolved only in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement. Mr. Christopher said that we stand by our position not to recognize any unilateral steps by Israel which claim that whole territory. It is recognized by us as occupied territory to be dealt with in the context of a settlement of the West Bank and Gaza. Crown Prince Fahd said that this had been a very fruitful exchange. He would like once more to reiterate their determination to be helpful in lessening the problems. We will be sending out words and emissaries to lessen the problems. We urge you to recognize human limits. We will come to you at once and say, “This is the problem that remains.” We must stay in close contact and look at the whole area. We are surrounded by more than just nuisances. Try to see the situation that we are in and never attribute ulterior motives to us. Saudi Arabia will not dig the U.S. in the ribs or harm relations with Egypt. [Omitted here is discussion of regional security issues.] 5 The text of Carter’s March 10 address to Egypt’s People’s Assembly is printed in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX they do have an ability to project their military power, and that is serious. The U.S. is prepared to respond to both threats. For the external threat, we are willing to use military power if our vital interests require it. An example of that was our sending of the carrier Constellation to the Arabian Sea. There are three basic principles which guide our approach. —First of all, we want to work with those Arab countries that are willing to work with us. We wish to have a consultative security arrangement which would be nothing like an alliance; however, there may be circumstances susceptible to bilateral or multilateral security arrangements, depending on the situation. —Secondly, we are ready to cooperate with all Arab states. It is not our intention to split the Arabs. We wish to work closer with our friends and moderates, and we are not excluding others. Iraq, for example, has been helpful in Yemen. We see the Islamic resurgence as terribly important. It marks the rebirth of Arab vitality which is the best bulwark against communism. —Thirdly, we wish to promote a process of a comprehensive peace in the Arab-Israel dispute. The Israel-Egyptian treaty will be concluded shortly. We have promoted it and we see no other choice. Trying to solve all differences at once is, in fact, to solve nothing for a long time, or ever. Rather, we believe that setting in motion a process will establish the principles of withdrawal and the dismantling of settlements. It establishes a precedent. Maybe this will not be universally applied. However, if it is exploited intelligently it can help the Palestinians. The President has made a public pledge to that effect, both in Cairo and in Israel. Once that process begins, people will have to focus on clearcut issues such as elections, registration, who votes, and other clear problems. That will have an important political effect and help to mobilize world public opinion on this issue. We have been asked why do we not state clearly or precisely what the final outcome of this process will be. First of all, we do not know the answer to the question. Secondly, to state it would, in fact, be counterproductive. If we state an outcome favorable to the Arabs, the Israelis will not join. If we state an outcome favorable to the Israelis, then no Arabs will join. And if we require major concessions of both sides, neither will join. Rather, we need to set in motion a process which is somewhat open-ended. Let the process shape attitudes. There have been major changes, both among the Arabs and the Israelis. Mr. Peres now speaks about the rights of the Palestinians. Begin once told me at Camp David that he would rather cut off his hand than to see a settlement dismantled. However, now he says that he will resign if they do not dis-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX I had the privilege of meeting President Carter, who gave me more time than any previous President. I know that he desires peace and stability and I respect that. Unfortunately, to the pain of myself and others, we have lost touch with each other. From a good beginning, we went our different ways. In the beginning we spoke of mutual problems. Then the President was the first to speak of Palestinian rights, then of going to Geneva.3 We began to prepare to go to Geneva, then came the surprise visit4 of Sadat to Israel. This is a chance for me to express the feelings of the people as a whole. The visit to Jerusalem under occupation had great religious significance. My grandfather is buried there.5 He was involved in the Arab revolt against colonial rule and he died because he would not compromise. We lost Jerusalem in 1967 under Egyptian command. We knew we would lose, but we went into that war anyway. Under Egyptian command and responsibility, the West Bank was lost. The Sadat visit was a very, very big shock. Yet we chose to take the moderate path and describe the visit as a courageous move. Sometime later, I asked Sadat, “Why did you not tell me. Why not ask what you could get for 242.” I never got a positive answer. Also in 1973, there was no consultation. Egypt has given much to unity, but it cannot be a unity of one. The losses and expenses since 1973 are losses that we suffered. The real peace process was derailed by Sadat. We were close to Geneva. We were all getting ready to go. Sadat wrote me about Camp David and reiterated his determination to demand Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Jerusalem. I wrote to President Carter also.6 I told him that if Israel was intransigent, to consider going to the Security Council. I talked to Sadat while he was at Camp David and reiterated that position. Then came the agreement, a very limited agreement. We were told that the vagueness was intentional. The role provided for Jordan under the Camp David agreements was that of a policeman, to ensure the security. Of whom—the occupied? We tried to keep as quiet as possible. But that is not a role that we could play. What we wanted to know was what was the final object. Perhaps if we knew that, we could work it out. The Arab view about Egypt is that it has been an abnegation of moral responsibility for those who took risks and suffered. Egypt is the largest of the Arab states, but they cannot first take in the Soviets then throw them out—make war, then make peace—without regard to our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the U.S. can play a role as a mediator when it is so committed to the support of the Zionists. If they have everything, why should they consider giving anything up? Always they have had the strategy of separating Egypt from the Arab world. They have always wanted to turn this problem into an East-West problem. At times like this, Jordan becomes an embarrassment. In the regional security plan, where does Israel fit? The holocaust did occur. Although this area had nothing to do with it, this city has suffered the most, receiving the victims of another kind of holocaust. Should we tell our people to cooperate with Israel? Here is the greatest threat to stability. I have known no President to take as many risks for peace; however, it is not like ’48, which was a disaster from our point of view, but like 1956. No one here is discussing the existence of Israel, but we are wondering what about the rights of others. Jordan could be an embarrassment if it relies totally on its friends. But I want to come back to the great problem. Arab unity and coordination have always been resisted by our friends. The problem has been Israel. It must be addressed before it is too late. With regard to the precedent, the facts and figures that we have regarding the West Bank and the occupied territories, we have to bring before the Security Council. We were asked to postpone it for the third time; however, we went ahead because there were serious changes taking place on the ground. We saw postponement as being worse. What is the alternative to bringing it up? Could our friends prevent this? You may be right that the treaty will cement U.S.-Arab relations, but it is contrary to all of my expectations and experience. Mr. Christopher said that he had listened intently to the eloquent and somber presentation by King Hussein. It seems that events in the last month may assist to achieve the rights of the Palestinians. This is your goal and we share it. It has given the U.S. a new sense of authority. A timetable has been agreed upon. There is a new sense of confidence in carrying out provisions leading to providing a homeland for the Palestinians. Before you act, we hope you will ask if it is in our interests and your own self-interests. Leave the door open to the possibility that we may be right. Do not take an irrevocable act or close doors. This is the thought I would like to leave with you. King Hussein responded that he would not act on personal whim. His fears are genuine, even for Sadat. Dr. Brzezinski thanked the King for the time he had given us and indicated that he would convey his views to the President. I think we understand each other. We will persist because we think it best. It would not be good for us or you if the problem were reduced to an East-West conflict. That is all the more important that we not be alone in what we are doing. There are different ways of being helpful, or un-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX treaty. We indicated that we are very concerned that any reaction by Saudi Arabia directed negatively at the treaty, such as attacks or tangible economic actions, could adversely affect our interests. We had intense discussions. In the eyes of the Saudis this initiative greatly complicates their situation. They are faced with conflicting pulls from the U.S. and the other Arabs. They feel that you (Sadat) have not consulted with them and they see a difficult period following the treaty. They see themselves bound by collective obligations of the Arab League. We pressed them with regard to the differentiation between the collective obligations and bilateral actions. We noted that we are involved in a growing relation with Egypt and it would be senseless if the Saudis diminished their relations. I believe it is fair to say that our discussions usefully conveyed to the Saudi leadership the gravity with which we would view such action. We sought an understanding from them that they discuss very precisely the technical steps they intend to take, distinguishing between symbolic steps as opposed to those that have tangible, bilateral effects. We heard the answer from Saud and from Fahd with unanimity. We find ourselves encouraged. They made a point which struck us as sensible, that you have not done enough to explain your motives and actions. They find themselves in the position of explaining your actions to others. It would be helpful if you could make a public case using the kind of argument that we made to them, stressing that the victims of any freeze in the present situation would be the Palestinians. Dr. Brzezinski then invited Mr. Christopher to comment. Mr. Christopher said that Dr. Brzezinski’s account was entirely accurate. He would say that Saudi Arabia was pulled in three directions. First, by their Arab brothers; secondly, by their friendship with the U.S.; and third, by their friendship and admiration for Egypt. They want to do everything in their power not to hurt Egypt over the next weeks and months. On a bilateral basis they are prepared to continue the aid relations and they referred to two substantial aid programs as recent signal or talisman of their good faith. They were careful to note that things may change, but they intend to be a good friend of Egypt. On the collective side it is different. They intend to send an emissary to the other Arab countries to promote moderation. They will join only in the technical outcome, i.e., the move of the Arab League headquarters from Cairo, suspension of Egyptian membership in the Arab League, and the application of the boycott to Egyptian companies dealing with Israel. They could not stop action short of that. We are in for a period of very careful waiting and watching. They will try quietly and in their own way on the collective front. We got the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat said he had received a message from Begin.7 He would show it to him. Dr. Brzezinski said it was psychologically important not to exclude Begin from visiting Cairo, or you from visiting Jerusalem. President Sadat said we will be good neighbors, and we have no objection if he comes here. However, the whole show is Carter and for that reason he had suggested signing all three of them in Washington. He then read the message from Prime Minister Begin which indicated that the Washington signing was acceptable, with two additional signings in Cairo and Jerusalem, with the order to be determined later. President Sadat then read his proposed answer which was that “All that President Carter told you, as you mentioned in your message is correct and I 8 everywhere. My statement about signing three copies in Washington was motivated only by the fact that it was entirely a Carter show. Until we meet in Washington, please accept my warmest wishes and congratulations.” Dr. Brzezinski said it was especially President Sadat and Carter, since you started the process by your trip to Jerusalem.9 Mr. Christopher said I am very reassured. I am sure the President will be also. I assume the modalities will be agreed upon in Washington. President Sadat said yes. He said you have seen my people. Dr. Brzezinski said they are your great strength. Mr. Christopher said the treaty is also extremely popular in the United States. President Sadat said yes and the whole world, except among the Arabs. Referring to the Mubarak visit to Saudi Arabia10 he said that he 7 The message, sent by Begin to Sadat through Lewis on March 16, conveyed the substance of an exchange between Begin and Carter on the sequence of the signing ceremonies for the Arabic, English, and Hebrew versions of the peace treaty. Begin agreed with Carter’s suggestion that Washington should serve as the first signing location for the peace treaty and also stated his willingness to go to Cairo to sign the Arabic version before Sadat came to Jerusalem to sign the Hebrew version. (Telegram 5309 from Tel Aviv,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tries which deal with Egypt, that would affect us. We were very clear about the limits of what we would accept: they are very narrow. There are things that you and we could do to mobilize the moderate Arabs. Urge the moderates to speak up. I have thought that Morocco, Tunisia, Oman, and others would be willing to speak up. President Sadat, referring to his critics, waved his hand and dismissed them as “all those scarecrows.” At best, they are protectorates. Dr. Brzezinski said that the President had promised to do something about Japan. My Deputy, Henry Owen, is going to Japan with instructions to stress the importance we attach to Japanese assistance to Egypt. I also talked to David Rockefeller to organize a meeting of lots of U.S. business leaders during President Sadat’s visit to the U.S. (President Sadat interjected “Marvelous.”) Private enterprise is much more important than government in our country. Ambassador Eilts said he had received an invitation for President Sadat to consider speaking at the New York Economic Club and wondered if he wished to consider it. President Sadat responded “Right.” He continued that, with regard to the Saudis, our main effort should be to persuade them not to come to the point of involving other nations, such as Japan. I will drop them a line. In the end they would have only you and us as friends. With respect to Hussein, he was visiting an aide in London and announced that he was ready to come to Camp David. I called and asked what is your program. This came during a bad period at Camp David when things were not going well. King Hussein cannot miss any show. I could not ask him there when I was fighting Begin. He always tries for show, not for substance. I told him that when we decide anything, I will let you know. We can discuss it. Later on TV I was watching Barbara Walters.11 Hussein said that he had been contacted by me and I had asked to meet him in Morocco, but he had no time and was proceeding back to Jordan. After we reached our agreement, I met Barbara Walters and I told her that I was going to choke her, since she misled everybody. She said “But the King told me that.” That man is a showy one. He thinks himself the most clever politician in this area, so this tactic. He wants me and President Carter to come and beg him to save the situation. There are three main influences on him. First, the Saudi; second, the U.S.; third, the Syrians, whom he fears. He does not heed the Palestinians, despite what he says, and he does not protect Palestinian rights. If President Carter and I give him the West Bank, he will be shouting 11 U.S. television journalist.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat said Hussein wants the West Bank for his United Kingdom. I will tell in my speech why did he not form a Palestinian state when he had it. His grandfather, Abdullah, agreed against every code of morals. Whenever we stand together, all will come together. I anticipate a Syrian change. An important fact is that no one opposes me who has strong ground to stand in their own country. If Israel had not lost the last fifteen months, things would be much better. It is my theory that the peace process starts after the signing, not like Begin who wants to get everything. We will bring the Israelis to something you cannot imagine. In Jerusalem I said that 75% of the problem is psychological. We will give all of them psychological satisfaction. Do not fear the scarecrows. Dr. Brzezinski asked if there was anything we could do to help. President Sadat said the economic and military aid is important. We need 200 tanks with crew maintenance. We need surface-to-air missiles. That will change the situation there and around the Bab al- Mandeb when we give them to Somalia. In my speech I will call on Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine and tell them that I am ready to receive them in Al-Arish, which has been liberated. Are they ready to take the cause in their own hands and fight? Egypt did and made peace. Dr. Brzezinski said that is a good idea—to build popular pressures. Prime Minister Khalil said that he agreed with Dr. Brzezinski that the Saudis would not boycott the country, but can boycott individual firms. This will not happen in the near future since it must wait for the normalization of relations and that is not imminent. He felt that we can neutralize the members of the Arab League. The most will depend on the outcome of the negotiations with Israel on the West Bank. Dr. Brzezinski said that we are with you as is world public opinion. Israel is now talking about survival and people listen to that. But when they are talking about Palestinian rights, their right to vote, water rights and such issues, it will be a different matter. Prime Minister Khalil said that if we succeed in the West Bank negotiations, I think our position will be strong. But if it drags on more than President Sadat said I think we will succeed. It is in the interest of Israel. Dr. Brzezinski said that Mr. Begin does not see it that way. He is suspicious about Gaza. It is only with some effort that those suspicions were overcome. President Sadat said what about the military, looking at General Jones. I shall choke you in the Pentagon.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX only optimists shape history. He thanked President Sadat for the time that he had given the delegation. As the meeting broke up, Chip Carter said to President Sadat that he considered him “one of the two greatest men in the world.” President Sadat put his arm around Chip and walked with him to the door. 221. Letter From Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter1 March 19, 1979 Dear Mr. President, I consider it necessary to write to you on the question of the situation in the Middle East. In the past I set forth more than once my considerations on this matter. What makes me return once again to this question is the situation emerging now in connection with the steps taken by the United States to push forward a separate agreement between Israel and Egypt. Our principled attitude to attempts to solve the Middle East problem on the road of separate deals is known to you. We have expressed this assessment of ours both through diplomatic channels and publicly, in particular in connection with the US-Israeli Egyptian meeting in Camp David last year. So far we do not know yet all the details of the agreement being prepared, and the fact that they are kept secret is symptomatic in itself. But whatever these specific details might be, the main thing is already clear. This agreement is not designed for and cannot lead to a just and thus a lasting peace in the Middle East. No matter what statements are made, what explanations are given we are deeply convinced that the prepared separate deal is advantageous only to Israel. Not only does it fail to resolve fundamental issues underlying the Arab-Israeli conflict but it does not even bring us closer to their solution. 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 4,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Strange, to say the least, is an approach when despite earlier agreements the US evades joint efforts with the USSR to ensure a comprehensive settlement in the Middle East and then we are even asked to support separate deals. And indeed, the fact is that provisions of principle regarding future course of action in the Middle East were agreed between the USSR and the US already when you, Mr. President, were in office. A Joint Soviet-US statement on this score was worked out and published on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 222. Memorandum From Reginald Bartholomew of the National Security Council Staff to President Carter1 Washington, March 19, 1979 SUBJECT Egyptian-Israeli Dispute over Subphasing of Withdrawal (U) The Egyptian and the Israeli negotiating teams in Washington have apparently reached an impasse over the question of accelerated withdrawal from the Alma oil field. The Egyptians had expected a return to last fall’s formulation of withdrawal from the oil field within four–six months. The Israelis were prepared for early withdrawal from al-Arish, but Weizman is under strict instruction not to agree to withdrawal from the Alma field until the end of the nine-month period. (S) The Israeli Cabinet voted today on the full package of proposals,2 but included in that package is the Israeli proposal of not withdrawing from the oil field until the end of the nine-month period. As a result, Weizman has no more negotiating authority to deal with this issue, and Begin has specifically ruled out any possible compromise. (S) The Egyptians have reacted badly to this development. In their view, the Israeli proposal does not constitute genuine subphasing of withdrawal and therefore Prime Minister Khalil has informed us that Egypt will not be bound to the exchange of ambassadors one month after the interim withdrawal has been completed, nor will Egypt agree to talks on the orderly transfer of oil fields and on company-tocompany arrangements to insure continued supply of oil to Israel during the period of turnover. (S) Secretary Vance will be available later this afternoon to discuss this issue with you. Minister Weizman, who is quite unhappy with his government’s position, will be leaving at 6 p.m. today. It might be worth having Secretary Vance call Weizman before his departure.3 (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX There are number of other minor issues on which agreement was almost reached. The most important of which was a memorandum on research and development. (U) 224. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Newsom)1 Washington, March 19, 1979 SUBJECT U.S.-Israel Agreement on Airbase Construction: Circular 175 Authority We request authority to negotiate and conclude an agreement with the Government of Israel relating to construction by the United States of two airbases in Israel in connection with Israel’s withdrawal from Sinai under the Egypt-Israel peace treaty. We would like to have a DOD-State-Embassy team begin negotiations in Israel on March 23, 1979. We will continue to keep the Congress informed on this matter. A Memorandum of Law is attached.2 Recommendation That you authorize the negotiation and conclusion of a U.S.-Israel Agreement on Airbase Construction along the lines of the draft text at Tab 2.3 Any subsequent changes to this draft will be subject to prior approval by NEA, T, PM, L and the Department of Defense.4

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in a more emotional state than I have yet seen him. He had obviously had a report from Kamal Hassan Ali on talks with Weizman and with Atherton and was visibly upset. He had trouble controlling his sense of outrage as he spoke. He said flatly that “we cannot go back on what has been agreed upon” and that he had earlier in the day sent the Secretary a message through Ghorbal on the subject.6 (I have obtained a copy from Boutros Ghali and will send English translation by septel.) 4. Specifically, Khalil said: — (A) GOE will under no circumstances agree to a company-tocompany oil arrangement with Israel as the Israelis are demanding.7 The treaty annex which provides that Israel may bid on the international market for Egyptian oil will not be implemented before Egypt and Israel enter into negotiations on normalization. Furthermore, Egypt will under no circumstances specifically agree to sell Alma oil to Israel.8 It will only be in terms of surplus Egyptian oil. — (B) In the meantime, Israel has USG guarantee to provide Israel with its oil requirements. If USG wishes purchase oil from Amoco for this purpose, this is USG business. — (C) Moreover, he could not accept what he called the new Israeli proposal not to withdraw from the Alma fields until seven months after signing of the treaty.9 This is totally inconsistent with letter and spirit of earlier sub-phasing agreement developed during Blair House talks10 and, Khalil insisted, with what he had been told by President Carter and the Secretary during President Carter’s visit.11 The same applies to the Al Arish withdrawal. When I pointed out our view that three months Al Arish and seven months oil fields strikes us as a reasonable compromise, Khalil hit the ceiling. He reiterated that this is not consistent with what was said here during President Carter’s talks.12 I noted that Atherton had told Kamal that he was confident that nothing specific about a two month or four month date had been said in those talks and I also knew of no such statement. Khalil responded that Atherton was only part right. He claimed to have specifically asked President Carter about the sub-phasing dates and that the President had replied he could not remember the dates, but that they would be those 6 Carter underlined this sentence. 7 Carter underlined this sentence. 8 Carter underlined this sentence. 9 Carter underlined this sentence. 10 Carter underlined, “totally inconsistent with letter and spirit of earlier sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX pected to stand up and say that he was a liar? Or that Egypt has given way to more Israeli demands? And all of this in the face of Begin’s totally unhelpful statements yesterday about Jerusalem;16 re Jerusalem, no independent Palestine state or anything else that might help Egypt in its present difficult period with the Arabs. 8. Khalil asked me to make it clear that there can be no further flexibility in the Egyptian position on sub-phasing or oil. This, he claimed, has been made clear in the letter he has sent to Secretary Vance.17 He emphasized that everything that he had said in that letter had been included with the full approval of President Sadat. Sadat, he said, is as disgusted as he about the Israeli position put forth during the Weizman/Ali talks. 9. Comment: As predicted, the new Israeli position on subphasing has aroused Egyptian hackles. They are disappointed that we do not seem willing to press the Israelis to abide by the Blair House subphasing agreement. They feel that once again they have been taken— Sadat, in response to President Carter’s urgings, accepted the compromise brought by the President only to find that we are now asking for more compromises. I do not believe that the Egyptians will allow the treaty to founder on these issues, but they are going to insist on the Blair House arrangements being honored and that the USG has guaranteed Israel oil supplies, hence no Egyptian/Israeli arrangements, even through private companies, will be permitted during the interim period. Eilts 16 Reference is presumably to Begin’s March 20 statement to the Knesset in which he said: “Dear and distinguished Dr. Khalil, please take note: United Jerusalem—the one—is Israel’s eternal capital and will never again be redivided. It will remain one for generation unto generation.” (Israel’s Foreign Relations, Selected Documents, vols. 4–5,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX In order to stay within the $1.5 billion limit, the Egyptians will probably have to choose among these items. The equipment list is pretty good; the financing arrangements are less attractive. (C) In answer to your question2 on whether there is anything the Israelis did not get, the answer is essentially “nothing” among their priority requests. They did hope for a larger grant component in the total and will probably work on Congress to get this reversed. (C) As things now stand, we are committed to sell equipment and services worth $4.5 billion to Israel and Egypt. If present terms are maintained, the U.S. Treasury will be hit for only $1.1 billion of that amount and this is all that Congress will have to authorize. This is on

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 228. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, March 21, 1979 SUBJECT Credits for Egypt (U) Harold Brown is preparing to sign a letter2 to General Ali today which promises Egypt that we will be prepared to recommend to Congress that the United States will provide military equipment and services to Egypt over the next three years of a value of at least $1.5 billion, $750 million of which is to be in the form of FMS credits comparable to those we provide to Israel, i.e. current interest rates, ten year grace, twenty additional years to repay. The remaining $750 million would have to be financed by Egypt. (S) I am concerned about the lack of comparability between our assistance to Egypt and Israel. Israel is getting $3 billion, all of which is FMS credits and $800 million of which will be entirely forgiven. Even allowing for the additional military expenses Israel faces in its relocation of facilities from the Sinai, the proposal is extremely lopsided in Israel’s FMS credits place very little burden on the American taxpayer and on the budget. (Congressional authorization of 10% of the credits as a guarantee is all that is required.) I believe we should offer credits for the full $1.5 billion of the Egyptian program. I am not concerned that this will remove incentives for continued Saudi military assistance to Egypt. Egypt will still be faced with the need to pay interest, and eventually to repay these loans. It would be easier, in my view, for Egypt to persuade Saudi Arabia to pick up these finance charges than it would to get them to fund large new military programs at this time. Similarly, it could provide the basis for persuading Saudi Arabia to increase its non-military assistance on the grounds that it would free up Egyptian funds to repay the FMS loans. (S) RECOMMENDATION: That you consider again the desirability of informing Egypt that the United States will provide FMS credits of up to $1.5 billion over three years following the signing of an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. (S) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX referred to the subphasing as discussed at Blair House. That means four or six months, depending on which set of talks is referred to. A message to Begin will probably be needed. (S) 2. Memorandum of Agreement on Oil. The Israelis have submitted a counterdraft3 which would include a price subsidy formula and an option to extend the guarantee almost indefinitely. (C) 3. Memorandum of Agreement on Assurances. Senator Church has said that anything more than what we have in our draft would virtually constitute a treaty and would require Senate approval. The Israelis are asking for significant changes. (C) 4. Unilateral Steps Letter. Begin wants to discuss this with the President. His initial reaction suggests that we will have problems.4 (C) 3 The text of the Israeli counter-draft has not been found. On March 18, the United States amended the draft text of the oil supply agreement from the originally proposed fifteen year guarantee. Under the new formulation, the agreement would become effective for a five-year period “commencing blank months following the entry into force of the treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel, and shall be extended for an additional period commencing at the end of that five-year period and ending ten years later, at which time the arrangement will terminate.” (Telegram Tosec 30001/67721 to Tel Aviv, March

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —12 improved HAWK batteries —4 TPS–59 three-dimensional radars —4 destroyers of the US Gearing class, henceforth to be referred to as quote frigates unquote —Harpoon and Phalanx weapons systems for installation on frigates, number to be determined —pressure testing of diesel submarine hulls —800 M113 armored personnel carriers —technical data package to upgrade T–54 and T–55 tanks —lorries and tractors, number to be determined. The United States is willing to consider favorably the following items of equipment, subject to further discussion and definition: —F4 Phantom aircraft —radars for detecting low-flying aircraft, of a type to be determined by the Air Defense Survey —diesel submarines of the Guppy type, following evaluation of the program for pressure testing existing Egyptian submarine hulls —auxiliary equipment (e.g., ground radars, communication equipment, forward and side looking camera, equipment for frogmen) —patrol boats The United States also maintains its offers of the following equipment: —cruiser (USS Albany) —CH–47 helicopters —additional F–5E aircraft. Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX assistance should be sought in a single FY 1979 supplemental budget request. (C) 2. Negev airbase construction: DOD and OMB will develop options for alternative sources of financing to begin construction should final Congressional action be delayed until July. (C) 3. Deliveries of military equipment to Egypt: DOD will review options for the prompt delivery of some of the items on the Egyptian list which we feel Egypt is sure to ask for. (C) 4. Further review of sales to Egypt and Israel: As specific sales contained in the lists for Israel and Egypt move forward, agency comments on timing and the U.S. view of Egyptian and Israeli priorities (e.g., submarines for Egypt) will be sought through the normal arms transfer review process. (C) 5. All approved the scope and composition of the proposed military assistance package being considered by the President. ACDA added that the proposal seemed modest when compared to what had been expected. (C)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX measures to halt or prevent the violation, ensure observance of the Treaty of Peace, enhance friendly and peaceful relations between the parties and promote peace in the region, and will take such remedial measures as it deems appropriate, which may include diplomatic, economic and military measures as described below. 3. The United States will provide support it deems appropriate for actions taken by Israel in proper6 response to violations7 of the Treaty of Peace. In particular, if a violation of the Treaty of Peace is deemed to threaten the security of Israel, including, inter alia, a blockade of Israel’s use of international waterways, a violation of provision of the Treaty of Peace concerning limitation of forces or an armed attack against Israel, the United States will be prepared to consider, on an urgent basis, such measures as the strengthening of the United States presence in the area, the providing of emergency supplies to Israel, and the exercise of maritime rights in order to put an end to the violation. 4. The United States will support the parties’ rights to navigation and overflight for access to either country through and over the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba pursuant to the Treaty of Peace. 5. The United States will oppose and, if necessary, vote against any action or resolution in the United Nations which in its judgement adversely affects the Treaty of Peace. 6. Subject to Congressional authorization and appropriation, the United States will endeavor to take into account and will endeavor to be responsive to military and economic assistance requirements of Israel. 7. The United States will continue to impose restrictions on weapons supplied by it to any country which prohibits their unauthorized transfer to any third party. The United States will not supply or authorize transfer of such weapons for use in an armed attack against Israel, and will take steps to prevent such unauthorized transfer.8 6 An unknown hand moved the word “proper” up between “for” and “actions” in this sentence to read “The United States will provide support it deems appropriate for proper actions taken by Israel.” 7 An unknown hand inserted the words “such demonstrated” between “to” and “violations” to read “to such demonstrated violations.” 8 The final version of the memorandum added two further paragraphs. Paragraph 8 reads: “Existing agreements and assurances between the United States and Israel are not terminated or altered by the conclusion of the Treaty of Peace, except for those contained

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX We oppose any attempt to tamper with the positions of the parties to the Treaty by putting emphasis on the security of Israel with apparent disregard to the manifold elements contained in the Treaty. We equally oppose the attempt to put emphasis on certain rights as navigation and overflight with total negation of the rights of the other party. The draft Memorandum also refers to the action the United States would take in the event of an armed attack on Israel. We consider this concept both inappropriate and untimely as it comes with the signing of the Peace Treaty. Furthermore, the letter3 addressed to the Prime Minister of Israel on March 26, 1979, by the President of the United States stipulates that: “In the event of an actual or threatened violation of the Treaty of Peace between Israel and Egypt, the United States will, on request of one or both of the Parties, consult with the Parties with respect thereto and will take such other action as it may deem appropriate and helpful to achieve compliance with the Treaty.” The Government of Egypt therefore reiterates that the concept and orientation of the proposed Memorandum is detrimental to the peace process. Needless to say that Egypt does not consider itself bound by that Memorandum or whatever commitments to which it was not a party or on which it was not consulted. Mostafa Khalil 3 See Document 236.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX intention of the United States to agree on such a memorandum. Moreover, we learned of it by way of information and not consultation. Am-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Vance: An attachment would be sufficient. Begin: No, it must be an integral part of the joint letter. I am willing to write a footnote in my own handwriting underneath my signature. Brzezinski: proposed in that case maybe Sadat should write in a footnote in his own handwriting disagreeing with Begin. The President: proposed that he himself write in the footnote as a compromise. Begin and Dayan accept. The President then cites some gestures that Sadat will make for Begin when Begin visits Cairo—Synagogue, scholars, Jewish community. Begin seems genuinely touched. Begin then asked the President to intercede with Brezhnev to agree to direct flights from the Soviet Union to Israel.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 237. Letter From President Carter to Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, March 26, 1979 To President Sadat: In accordance with our discussion this morning,2 the documents have been handled in the following manner: a) Only in the Hebrew text of the Treaty, the words “Gulf of Eilat” have been added in parentheses following the words “Gulf of Aqaba.” b) Following Camp David procedure as you suggested, I have added a notation on my copy and the Israeli copy of the joint letter as follows: “I am informed that the expression ‘West Bank’ is understood by the Government of Israel to mean ‘Judea and Samaria’.” No notation will be made on the Egyptian copy of the letter.3 I appreciate your helping me to resolve this final problem. Sincerely yours, Jimmy Carter 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 239. Editorial Note After more than six months of negotiations, the Treaty of Peace between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the State of Israel was signed by President Jimmy Carter, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat, and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin on the North Lawn of the White House on the afternoon of March 26, 1979. The final agreement package consisted of the treaty text itself—comprised of a preamble and nine articles—supplemented by annexes dealing with post-Treaty security arrangements, including the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from Sinai, as well as the normalization of political, economic, and cultural relations, including the exchange of ambassadors and the termination of economic boycotts. In addition, the text carried agreed minutes to Articles I, IV, V, and VI and the letter from Begin and Sadat to Carter on West Bank and Gaza negotiations (see Document 216), along with an explanatory note from Carter explicating the Israeli use of “Judea and Samaria” to denote the “West Bank.” (See Document 237) The exchange of ambassadors between Egypt and Israel was confirmed by three attached letters: one, from Sadat to Carter stating the exchange of ambassadors between Egypt and Israel would occur one month after Israel’s withdrawal to the agreed interim line; a second, from Carter to Begin, affirming this pledge; and a third, from Begin to Carter, acknowledging receipt of Carter’s letter. Finally, U.S. assurances regarding its role in ensuring compliance among the signatories to the Treaty provisions were laid out in identical letters sent by Carter to Begin and Sadat. The complete English language version of the Treaty, including all annexes, minutes, and letters, is printed in Public Papers:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 241. Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts1

The Search for a Broader Peace,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX promise absorbing the furor of the Arab world, which was, in Saudi view, [the] best that could have been expected.” Saud advised that if the United States was “going to pursue Phase II of peace process, it should take steps to open direct contacts with PLO.” Otherwise, he asserted, “it would be better to forget about [the] peace process for the moment and concentrate on bilateral relations with the Arabs while the dust settles.” (Telegram 2746 from Jidda, April 4; National Archives,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX JC: I’ll tell them to prepare for either day and you can let me know, through normal diplomatic channels, which day. (JC) You are correct in identifying Santa Catarina as special to President Sadat’s heart. He has mentioned it before to me. This is a very fine step. He also discussed this long ago with Mr. Peres. MB: On November 19th. Very symbolic. Will do our best to transfer on November 18. I also want to tell you how proud each of us will be to be with you on December 9th in Oslo, for the Nobel Peace Prize. JC: (Laughing) . . . Your remarks are both very generous and presumptuous. All the credit goes to you and President Sadat. MB: (Mentions a cable) . . . As I said, it was history-making and you did it. President Sadat and I absolutely concur. JC: Thank you. I would like to say for future reference, no matter what time of the day or night it is, do not hesitate to call me. I get up very early most mornings, and was up at 5:00 this morning. MB: Thank you. I won’t abuse it; but will, if necessary, use it. JC: I hope you all will explore every possibility of small gestures of generosity and cooperation above and beyond the treaty agreements. MB: . . . President Sadat and I discussed the release of prisoners. This will take a few weeks. We will also take out the military headquarters from Gaza City. You gave him a letter,6 but he appreciated hearing it from me. JC: I am very grateful, and want to express my congratulations and appreciation. MB: Thank you. My wife and I send our best wishes equally to Rosalynn, Amy, and to your mother. JC: My mother will never forget your embracing her first after the signing ceremony. MB: All the time she was sending kisses to me in the air! The evening in the tent was beautiful. JC: Hamilton Jordan may have expressed our feelings when he said, “Begin for President!” MB: Hamilton. Hamilton is a wonderful man. He likes to make jokes. He is a wonderful man. JC: Not all a joke. (Ending pleasantries from both Heads of State) 6 Not further identified.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX JC: The 26th of May? AS: Yes. The 26th of May. When he comes to meet with me on the 27th, we shall take planes and visit BatSheba3 and then open the corridor between Egypt and Sinai. We didn’t want to wake you up. JC: Wish you would have. As a matter of fact, I was awake at 5:00. AS: This is all a result of your efforts. JC: You always say that. Let me ask you about the opening of the borders. AS: On the visit on the 27th, we shall declare . . . JC: All the borders? Or just through El Arish? AS: All the borders. JC: Very good. AS: You know me. I want to keep the momentum going. JC: I am so pleased that you and Prime Minister Begin have worked all this out together. AS: I have a suggestion. Can you send Cy to us on the 27th? JC: I will do almost anything you want. I will have to check with Cy to see what his schedule is like. AS: We want to have your representative with us for this occasion. JC: I will send a representative. If Cy can’t come, I will send my personal representative of equal importance. AS: I didn’t tell Begin, but the land is my land. (laughter from both Heads of State) JC: It has always been your land. AS: Yes. I wanted to ask you, the news of the nuclear reactor.4 JC: It is well under control now; was of concern for a few days. The press exaggerated the danger, as they usually do. I was there on Sunday in person, and I am personally familiar with the nuclear technology. I am very well pleased. AS: We were very worried about it. I want to ask you to do something for me. I want to start a contribution for my scheme on Mount Sinai. I told Prime Minister Begin to deliver to me before Nov 19th. JC: What did Begin say? AS: He said he would do his best. As I told you in Washington, it’s 85% psychological, not 75%. JC: 95%! 3 Beersheba. 4 Reference is to the March 29 accident at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in Middletown, Pennsylvania.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 245. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, April 19, 1979 SUBJECT Nuclear Cooperation Agreements with Egypt and Israel We initialed identical nuclear cooperation agreements with Egypt and Israel in August 1976.2 It was our intent at the time to submit these agreements to Congress right away. President Ford, however, subsequently decided to withhold submission. The agreements have remained in abeyance pending the Administration’s review of our non-proliferation policy and passage of the new non-proliferation law. Over this period we have assured the Egyptians, who have continued to press us on concluding an agreement, that we intended to do so as soon as practical. Aside from the question of renegotiating our initialed agreements to reflect the requirements of the new law, the Egyptian and Israeli agreements have always been informally “linked” with a tacit understanding that they would be substantially identical and move forward in tandem. Several developments have occurred, however, which make such linkage doubtful. For its part, Egypt appears ready to comply with the added nonproliferation conditions specified in the Nuclear Non-proliferation Act of 1978, but only so long as we guarantee it equal treatment with any agreement subsequently concluded with Israel. Israel, on the other hand, has not pushed us to conclude an agreement. Moreover, under the law we would insist on safeguards being applied to all of Israel’s existing nuclear facilities (including the unsafeguarded nuclear facility at Dimona). The Israelis have resisted this in the past and will probably continue to do so. The Israelis remain interested in a nuclear cooperation agreement and they might seek to have you waive the full-scope safeguards re- 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 20, Alpha

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ment to conform to the requirements of the new law. Ambassador Eilts is concerned that the delays which have already occurred in concluding an agreement are undermining Egyptian confidence in our intentions on an issue which they view as a major bilateral concern, especially when they appear ready to agree with our non-proliferation policies and are willing to concede our requirements. Egypt and Israel already agreed in 1976 to much more stringent controls, excluding safeguards, than exist in our other agreements. In our judgment it is desirable to avoid delays on moving toward concluding an agreement with Egypt. In this context, we need your agreement that we will vigorously support an agreement with Egypt recognizing the possibility that it could become a controversial issue in Congress. No time is an ideal time for this, but the treaty signing seems likely to provide the best atmosphere in which to send this to Congress. If we do not move soon, we will not be able to complete Congressional review this session. If you agree to move forward quickly on the re-negotiations, we would submit to both Israel and Egypt, within a month, identical draft revised agreements for their consideration. We will also indicate our willingness to send a U.S. negotiating team to conclude agreements at an early mutually convenient time. Under our current perceptions, we expect that the agreement with Egypt could be ready for submission to Congress during the current session. We will, however, have some control over the timing of various steps in the progress toward concluding an agreement. We also hope that the issue will be insulated to a large extent from domestic politics since our position on both the Egyptian and Israeli agreements will be based squarely on our non-proliferation policy, the requirement of the law and the energy needs of the two countries. Recommendation: That you agree to move forward quickly with renegotiating the nuclear cooperation agreements with Egypt and Israel, including a provision for equal treatment for both countries, understanding that Egypt will expect us to support our agreement with them even if we do not have a parallel one with the Israelis.3 3 Carter approved the recommendation, adding the handwritten notation: “Don’t let Israel or a few Congressmen get into a position of controlling or vetoing our action. J.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX government. For a few days there was some doubt as to the outcome. In the end the government did survive and in doing so appeared to learn some lessons that make it less vulnerable today. The proximate cause of the January rioting was the government’s announcement of precipitous rise in prices of basic commodities. It has not repeated this mistake, but, rather, has achieved much the same goal by resorting to incremental price increases. There have been some grumblings, but there appears to be no mass discontent. 5. This is partly due to the fact that Egypt’s overall economy has been steadily improving. Since January 1977, the Egyptian GNP has gone up by approximately 8 percent per annum in real terms (the Ministry of Economy says the figure is more than 9 percent). The balance of payments picture has dramatically improved and, for the first time in its history, Egypt is current on its external debt. Income from Canal tolls, oil exports, tourism, and remittances are all rising. Some sectoral snags remain, however, particularly in the construction industry. 6. There is some question, however, on how much of this improvement in the large has trickled down to the lower income levels. Certain sectors of society obviously have benefitted from Sadat’s open door. Others, particularly lower paid government employees, have not. The frustrations of living in Cairo and other Egyptian cities increase daily. This is a function of population explosion, of urban migration, and of an infrastructure which was sorely neglected for 25 years. Cairo could

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX are in a strong position in the national student leadership. The Islamic societies, and their adult associates, oppose much of Sadat’s peace policy, especially the failure to resolve the Jerusalem issue, and have strong reservations over the course of domestic developments. They fear modernization, and oppose Sadat’s economic open door. The religious right, however, bereft as it is of real leaders does not at present constitute anything more than a latent threat. It has attracted no more than 10–15 percent of the student population, and the campus groups are fragmented geographically and ideologically. The lack of a hierarchical structure in Sunni Islam argues against the rise of large scale organized opposition from the religious right. It could develop, but it would take time. There is no charismatic leader, but the situation is ripe for one to emerge. Sadat has shown that he recognizes the potential threat and has initiated a two-track policy. He has warned that he will crack down on the Ikhwan and the Islamic societies while, at the same time, offering financial inducements to main line religious figures. More funds have been appropriated for mosque construction, wages have been raised in the religious sector, and a large number of mosques are about to be brought under government control. 12. The only significant minority group in Egypt, the Copts, has little ability to destabilize the country. At most, there are 4 million Copts in a total population of some 40 million. They are scattered around the country, with the largest concentration in rural upper Egypt. Despite their protestations to the contrary, the GOE does not seek to deliberately discriminate against Copts. Fundamentalist Islamic organizations do seek, however, to repress the Christian community. This is a problem for the government as well as for the Copts. Outbreaks of religious strife will continue but should be easily contained by the security forces, as they have in the past. Sadat has repeatedly stressed his commitment to communal peace. In doing so, he has done much to calm the Coptic leadership. 13. The Soviets continue to work against Sadat, but few assets remain with which they can work. Their consulates and cultural centers have been closed, and their activities are carefully monitored. They have considerable influence with domestic leftists, but these same leftists have little power or influence of their own. Many were discredited by their involvement in the excesses of the Nasser era. The domestic left continues to have a disproportionate amount of influence with Cairo’s intellectual elite, but has made little inroad with the Egyptian masses. While the left retains the ability to exploit incidents (as it did in January 1977), it has so far showed itself incapable of instigating instability on its own. 14. Overall, our assessment at this time is that destabilizing forces are evident on the political-economic scene and that those forces in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX no tangible evidence that Mubarak is at present planning any such thing. 17. Despite these caveats, our current assessment is that Mubarak is the most likely person to succeed in a constitutional succession. The question remains how would he perform? Many consider Mubarak to be a lightweight, intellectually unsuited to manage Egypt’s affairs. Yet the same, and more, was said of Sadat following Nasser’s death. Sadat learned quickly and confounded his critics, although not without some difficulty. 18. While no Sadat in either wisdom or experience, Mubarak has had a longer apprenticeship under Sadat than the latter enjoyed under Nasser. Sadat has delegated far more authority to Mubarak than he, Sadat, ever received from Nasser. Mubarak now has had considerable experience in local government, party, and diplomatic affairs. He has tremendous energy and appears to have grown in the job. His greatest liabilities are his tendency to adopt simplistic approaches to complex issues, and his frequent attempts to personalize abstract problems. We believe he would be better qualified to rule after some more seasoning, but suspect he could handle the job if it were thrust upon him. His external and internal policies, at least initially, would not deviate from those of Anwar Sadat so long as the twin objectives of (a) further progress on Middle East peace front and, (b) economic development makes headway with our and other friendly states’ help. In connection with the first, Mubarak is not rabid on the Palestine issue. He has several times told the Ambassador that if meaningful autonomy for the Gazans can be obtained, the West Bankers can be left to stew in their own juice, if they refuse to participate in the peace process. Eilts 248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 249. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 3, 1979 SUBJECT West Bank/Gaza Negotiations Secretary Vance has sent you the memo at Tab A2 in advance of our Friday morning meeting with Bob Strauss.3 At this point more questions are raised than answered. Specifically: —A deputy for Strauss. Bob will not be able to assume full responsibility until later in the year. Even then, he may not want to get into all the details. One possible candidate to be his deputy is Jim Leonard from our UN Mission. He knows the Middle East well and is an experienced diplomat.4 —Appropriate US role. How active should we be? When should we begin to lay out substantive positions? Cy prefers to hold back for a while, letting the Egyptians and Israelis take the lead at first. —Broadening Arab support. The positions we take on settlements, Jerusalem and a dialogue with the PLO will be important signals to the Arab world. The direction and timing of our moves will require careful consideration. —PLO. Most Arab governments are urging us to open a dialogue with the PLO. This would cause an uproar in Israel.5 An alternative 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX representative or person associated with those organizations as is necessary to assure reasonable protection of your own security and that of your staff and American citizens in Lebanon. You should pick one individual for this contact. This contact represents a continuation of the liaison with PLO/Fatah for security purposes which was authorized for Embassy Beirut in 1976 and has never been rescinded. We recognize, however, that experience has shown that you must have discretion to conduct exchange with associate or representative of PLO/Fatah who may be accessible only to the Chief of Mission. 3. In the first instance you are authorized to conduct exchanges with Basil Akl, if he is your choice, on the understanding that you will inform us immediately if you believe it essential to be in touch with others in PLO/Fatah. 4. Your contact must not rpt not stray beyond the understanding we have with the Government of Israel, as recently reaffirmed in the memorandum of agreement.2 Your contact, therefore, will at this time relate to security and security-related issues within Lebanon. Your contacts will not be construed as recognition of or negotiation with the PLO/Fatah on issues going beyond security. 5. For Ambassador Lewis: You should not rpt not raise this issue with Israelis but regard it as consistent with past policy in Lebanon which has been publicly acknowledged. If asked you should cite past practice and say you will query Washington. For your own background only at this stage, we would probably ask you to reply to such a query along following lines: A. The security of American personnel and institutions in Lebanon depends on a large degree on the self-restraint of the various Palestinian groups. (There are 56 Americans in the Embassy and several hundred Americans working at the American University, American schools, financial institutions, and businesses.) Our inability to prevent incidents by routine measures was illustrated by the April 2 grenade attack on the Embassy and the April 16 bombing of the cultural center. Another example of the danger to Americans in Beirut was the threat made in mid-April of 1979 against Ambassador Dean’s life by the same group that assassinated Ambassador Meloy in 1976.3 B. The Israelis will understand our vital security concerns and our determination to take all necessary measures to protect our personnel 2 See Document 232. 3 Francis Edward Meloy, Jr., his aide, and their driver were kidnapped and later shot to death in Beirut. Although several members of Palestinian and Lebanese groups were arrested and charged, no one was ever convicted. (James M. Markham, “U.S. Ambassador and Aide Kidnapped and Murdered in Beirut Combat Sector,” The New York

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX sending formal response but meanwhile he wanted to give oral reply. Saudi Arabia’s desire to maintain relations with Egypt has been and remains very strong. Even at this time of greatest strain, SAG has tried to keep as strong relation as possible. Unfortunately, maintenance of relations apparently does not meet the interests of President Sadat. Sadat apparently saw some remaining links in the relationship and he “chopped” them in his May Day speech.4 He has made it impossible to maintain any relations or any of the commitments that SAG had made, even in such areas as military sales. Prince Saud then said in low solemn voice that he wished to inform me officially that HMG felt that it could no longer keep its commitment to purchase F–5s for Egypt. Commitments should be of equal importance to both countries. SAG has tried to keep its commitments in the face of many obstacles, but now SAG feels it cannot keep this commitment. 5. I said that I thought SAG position was that F–5 deal was considered to be completed transaction and that it would therefore be carried through. Saud replied that indeed arrangement had been considered as “completed” and thus outside boundaries of Baghdad decisions5 but this was no longer possible. 6. I said that I was indeed sorry to hear this news. I remembered that Crown Prince Fahd had told us on several occasions that SAG wished to do all that it could to help Egypt. The way relations between the two countries have deteriorated over the past few weeks has been great tragedy. I was certain that SAG decision on F–5s would not be taken lightly in Washington but would in fact cause great distress. Prince Saud said that this was not situation that Saudi Arabia wanted but it was one brought on by President Sadat. 7. I asked if SAG distinction between Egypt and Egyptian people still remained in effect. Would SAG now take actions, for example, against Egyptian expatriates in Saudi Arabia? Saud said distinction still existed and Saudi Arabia would take no action against Egyptians in Saudi Arabia but he did not know what actions Egyptian Government might take. 8. I asked Saud how he thought Islamic Conference would turn out. I pointed out, as Secretary Vance did in his letter, that ostracism of Egypt could harm the interests of both Saudi Arabia and U.S. in area. 4 In his May 1 speech, Sadat accused Saudi Arabia of “encouraging (or paying)” Arab states to cut diplomatic relations with Egypt, “discounted previous Saudi financial aid,” and questioned whether the Saudis would honor their pledge to finance Egypt’s purchase of F–5Es. Sadat also criticized the Saudi leadership, comparing it unfavorably with that of the late King Faisal, as well as Syria. A summary of the speech is in telegram

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 252. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, May 9, 1979 SUBJECT Middle East Initiatives (U) You asked me to think of steps that might be taken to assert our commitment to the Egypt-Israel treaty and to the next stage of negotiations. It seems to me that we need to be clear concerning the target of our efforts. If we are trying to influence the Saudis, then public statements may be the wrong way to proceed. If we create an anti-Saudi mood in Congress, we may find that we have tied our own hands. If instead we are addressing a domestic audience, a different strategy is called for. (S) Possible actions: —If the Saudis are adamant in their refusal to fund the F–5Es for Egypt, we could publicly state the facts of the situation and request that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 253. Summary of Conclusions of a Mini-Special Coordination Committee Meeting1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Saudi Arabia1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 255. Summary of Conclusions of a Presidential Review Committee Meeting1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. (S) Entire text. 2. The West Bank/Gaza negotiations began in Beersheva Friday2 afternoon almost as planned with the one exception being the last-minute absence of Prime Minister Khalil. While the opening statements presented each side’s starting positions, the meeting was conducted in a conciliatory and businesslike atmosphere. The principal achievement is that the opening session is now behind us and with that hurdle surmounted, it will probably be easier for the parties to get down to work. The meeting concluded with agreement to meet next on June 6–7 in Alexandria with efforts between now and then to work out an agenda for that meeting, perhaps through a private meeting between Khalil and Burg in Egypt in the next few days. 3. The one development that marred the day’s events was Khalil’s decision not to come. This had been developing since Wednesday when Khalil told our Charge in Cairo that he would not attend the meeting if Burg were going to chair it. When I got to Egypt, I found Khalil firmly opposed to attending a meeting on the Palestinian issues in Israel chaired by the Minister of the Interior rather than Prime Minister or Foreign Minister. I believe he was concerned both about the reaction in the Arab world and about Burg’s lesser rank against the background of Begin’s refusal to meet with him in Washington last February.3 He suggested either a roundtable with no chairman or a meeting chaired by me. Despite our late-night and early-morning efforts to resolve the issue, Burg with Begin’s support ignored Dayan’s efforts and held to the position that Sadat and Begin had agreed that each meeting in this negotiation would be chaired by the host country. The Israelis, for their part, were upset over Boutros Ghali’s action in a meeting with Dayan in El Arish on Wednesday4 which seemed to the Israelis to reverse Sadat’s commitment to Begin in Cairo to open the border this weekend. When Burg insisted on chairing the meeting himself, Khalil sent General Kamal Ali to head the Egyptian delegation in his place. Ali stated simply that Khalil did not come “for procedural

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the administrative council to be set up. While recognizing the complications ahead, he wished that the elections might take place speedily. The most difficult part of his speech for the Egyptians to swallow was his statement that autonomy “does not and cannot imply sovereignty.” He went on to reject an independent Palestinian statehood. Interestingly, he changed his text from “never” to “not” in saying that Israel will not agree to the establishment of a Palestinian state but after citing Israel’s fear of such a state as a security threat, he turned back to a conciliatory tone of trying to solve these problems together. He concluded with the words from Ecclesiastes; “to everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: a time to keep silence, and a time to speak; a time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.” 8. My talk with Sadat Thursday evening,5 as you would expect, included a review of the world situation. Analyzing the current state of the Arab world, he saw as the main element the efforts of Iraq to become the main Arab power. He saw Iraq’s efforts to seize the center of the Arab stage as the main explanation of the Baghdad Conference.6 He described his strategy over the coming months as trying to draw the moderate Arabs away from Iraq, and he said he would be seeking our help in doing this. He felt that the ceremonies at El Arish this weekend would play a major role in beginning to change Arab minds about the peace process. He felt that the dramatization of his getting important territory back would force the Arab world to face up to the fact that concrete benefits can be gained in this way. He felt that this would be a major factor in his gradually beginning to win moderate Arab support. 9. Sadat also feels that he now understands better how to deal with Prime Minister Begin. I would not be surprised to see him make another grand gesture towards Israel this Sunday7 in connection with the El Arish ceremonies in his effort to stimulate a forthcoming response of some kind from Begin. 10. My talk with Begin in London8 concentrated heavily at first on a number of emigration cases from the Soviet Union which he hopes we 5 May 24. Sadat summarized many of the same points he made to Vance in a brief

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to sort out the common ground as well as to define the issues of controversy which must be bridged. Vance 257. Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the Department of State, Secretary of State Vance in Rome, and the Embassies in Israel, Egypt, and the People’s Republic of China1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Negev—with speeches by Israeli President Navon, the Mayor of Beersheva,6 Begin, and two by Sadat. The common themes of peace and normal relations flowed through all of the speeches. However, President Navon, who undoubtedly thought he was doing a good thing by giving his speech in excellent Arabic, used an Arabic word which Sadat heard as meaning “give”; (i.e. “giving the Sinai back to Egypt”). This caused Sadat to drop whatever prepared text he may have had and to extemporize quite simply but eloquently. His main points were that security does not lie in land but in a relationship of friendship and that peace can not come unless there is respect for the land of others. He almost explicitly said that sovereignty over the occupied lands belongs to the Arabs and that Israel is not giving back the land but simply restoring the appropriate exercise of Arab sovereignty in it. However, Monday’s Jerusalem Post reports that Navon had showed privately afterwards his actual text and the similarly sounding word in Arabic meant “returned”. The Post says Sadat and Navon got on well and the misunderstanding was put to rest. Later at an assembly at the university it was Sadat’s turn to offend. He commented that the Arabs had taken care of the Jews through their centuries of life in the Middle East. And Begin, in an otherwise temporate speech at the university, brought together in one compact paragraph virtually every negative statement he has ever made about the “so-called PLO.” President Tekoah, of the university, announced the university’s decision to establish a multimillion dollar fund for research in areas related to desert development, invited Egyptian scholars to participate and to join in the management of the fund. While claiming substantial achievements for Israel in this area, he graciously said that Israel has much to learn from Egypt and his remarks were an elevated point in the day’s proceedings. In short, all of the speakers were well-intentioned and for the most part managed not to sour the atmosphere but, one way or another, introduced enough sore points to keep the course from being completely smooth. 8. The day’s several meetings—from the Rest House at El Arish to the 1-hour inaugural flight aboard Sadat’s aircraft—seemed to all of us to enhance measurably the relationships between the two sides at all levels. From what we can tell, a good deal of useful business was done, although Secretary Vance will have to fill in some of the details in the following: —The Secretary and Sadat were alone for a time before Begin arrived, and the Secretary intended to suggest that Sadat talk to Begin about the problems for the peace process caused by some Israeli actions, such as new settlements, the crackdown in the West Bank, and the bombings in Lebanon. 6 Eliyahu Nawi.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX as described above, he will probably stay in Israel long enough to talk with Burg after his return from Cairo. Then he will move to Cairo and go the rounds with the important Egyptian participants and then will be ready to participate in the first substantive negotiating session. We may begin to see how the negotiations will work more clearly after the Burg-Khalil talks, but by the time the first session is completed, it should be possible to begin to see how each of the issues will be tackled and to see more clearly what approach to the issues makes most sense for us. 11. The strategy we have already set for ourselves of letting Egypt and Israel take the lead in organizing these negotiations is a valid one. Although they have been slow in pulling their acts together, they now seem to be getting together with hopes of having a sense of how to proceed by the second week in June. Newlin 258. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, June 6, 1979 SUBJECT Situation in Lebanon (C) The situation in Lebanon appears to be deteriorating.2 Specifically, there appears to be a growing risk of renewed internal conflict which could trigger external involvement. (S) The President would appreciate your analysis of the present situation and your suggestions of concrete steps we might take to minimize 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Arabs attach great significance. The statement4 which was issued a few days ago by the U.S. Department of State on the illegality of these settlements and the threat they constitute to the peace process was quite appropriate and timely. You might also deem it suitable to take this issue up with Mr. Begin in the near future. In your forthcoming talks with President Brezhnev,5 it would be helpful if you persuade him to be more cooperative with regard to extending the mandate of the United Nations Emergency Forces especially after having agreed to the same on the Syrian front. Their position in this respect is rather weak and the arguments they are presenting are unfounded. The Legal Adviser of the United Nations Secretariat has concluded in a memorandum that the failure to extend the mandate of the Forces would be contrary to the Charter itself, let alone the difficulties it creates to the peace-keeping operation. If he remains adamant on this point, it might be worth exploring to get his consent to broadening the operation area of the United Nations Truce Supervisory Organization. The mandate of this Organization does not need to be extended and hence, a mere extension of the area of operation would be easier although the force is not equipped enough to handle this responsibility. In an attempt to facilitate your task of proposing the formation of a multinational force in case your efforts to persuade the Soviet Union to cooperate fail, we are currently considering the setting up of an all- African force. It would be composed of friendly African nations that have a genuine interest in the maintenance of security and stability in this vital approach to their continent. I am seizing this opportunity also to write to you about a matter of major concern to us. Undoubtedly, you know the importance we attach to the modernization of our armed forces with a view to enabling them to discharge their awesome responsibilities. You are also aware of the central role I assigned to them in the crucial field of transfer of technology in the era of reconstruction. I have emphasized the new role the armed forces should play in adapting sophisticated technology to our needs in the areas of housing, infrastructure, food production, agroindustry and land reclamation. Hence, I reiterated before the Egyptian 4 On June 4, the Department protested in a formal statement the Israeli Cabinet’s decision to authorize the establishment by Gush Emunim of a settlement, Elon Moreh, near Nablus, describing it as “harmful to the peace process and particularly regrettable at this time.” (Jim Hoagland, “U.S. Protests Israeli Plan for Settlement on West Bank,” The

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX problems. First and foremost, it could have a negative impact on the manufacture of aircraft, the development of sophisticated anti-tank missiles and our drive to introduce a higher degree of modern technology and know-how. I believe that you do not want to see this happening. I also believe that the United States can step in and take part with us in this operation in one form or the other. To contain the negative impact of such reckless move on their part, we have turned the Organization into an Egyptian institution. Joint U.S.-Egyptian companies could be founded to boost our strategic industries and build the technological base we have committed ourselves to establish in the context of the post-war reconstruction. If this proves difficult at this stage, American companies could be encouraged to cooperate with our Organization one way or the other. I trust that you agree with me on the necessity of demonstrating to our armed forces that our partnership in the peace process is mutually beneficial and that there will be no weakening of our defense capabilities whatsoever. This is so in the light of their realization of their role in the coming few years as an element of peace and stability in the region. Such faith in the future requires reassuring all our armed services that their weapons system is going to improve rather than deteriorate as a result of our bolstered friendship with the United States. It is equally important to reassure the Egyptian people of the state of their armed forces and their ability to bear their awesome responsibilities. Needless to say that the absence of a genuine effort to remedy this situation promptly would give rise to misinterpretations and adverse reaction in the Arab World too. It will lend credence to the false allegation that the signing of Peace Treaty will signal a weakening of Egypt’s defense capability. Certain circles are fond of making comparisons between the Soviet readiness to saturate its allies with military equipment and the United States more hesitant and cautious attitude with its friends. We want to dispel these notions. Vice President Mubarak will also discuss with you a few points related to our economic cooperation. I have no doubt that you will lend our requests with regard to the “Carter Plan”7 your enthusiastic sup- 7 A term used by Sadat to describe an intermittently repeated proposal for a multinational aid and development program for Egypt. Described in an interview with journalist Joseph Kraft in November 1978 as an Egyptian equivalent of the Marshall Plan, the plan initially called for the provision of $10–15 billion in U.S. aid to Egypt over a five year

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Mubarak conveys greetings, friendship, etc. and hands message2 to the President. The President reads and summarizes. Sadat appreciates U.S. position on settlements; wants more F–4s with Mavericks. Carter refers to Mubarak’s talks with Harold Brown;3 indicates we cannot now convey new destroyers; urges Egyptian acceptance of cruiser—could be symbolically very impressive. Why does Sadat dislike the cruiser? Mubarak: The destroyers you offer have lower capability than the Soviet. Carter: They will be equipped with Harpoons. Mubarak reviews what the U.S. has offered—35 planes and two old destroyers—and compares that with what Soviets offered in the past. This is creating a bad impression in the armed forces. Carter: I understand the problem. On the navy side the cruiser and destroyers would be symbolic, bold move. Maybe you and Sadat could visit the ships. On the other points Harold Brown will give me a report.4 2 See Document 259. 3 Brown met alone with Mubarak on the morning of June 11. Brzezinski summarized the meeting for Carter in a June 11 memorandum. “Mubarak’s main point,” Brzezinski reported, “was that we need to do more for the Egyptian military in order to ensure its loyalty to Sadat. He wants Egypt to be treated like Israel in terms of our overall military relationship. In particular, he argued that our approval of specific items of military equipment should not be constrained by the financing that is available at any given time.” Mubarak asked Brown for more F–4 fighter aircraft and Chinook helicopters. He reiterated Sadat’s unwillingness to accept the U.S. offer of Gearing class destroyers. Brown suggested that the Egyptians “look again” at these destroyers as the United States had “nothing else readily available.” Brown also “agreed in principle” to develop “a long term defense plan for Egypt, including a program for the next five years.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Middle East, Subject File, Box 13, Egypt: Arms and Mili- 4 Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Robert J. Murray prepared a draft report—drawing on the June 11 conversation between Brown and Mubarak—for Brown to sign and submit to Carter. The report proposed that Brown “refine” Egypt’s defense requirements list “in the course of further U.S.-Egyptian defense consultations over the summer,” ultimately developing a five-year equipment plan for Egypt that would encourage Cairo to “limit its arms procurement ambitions,” demonstrate to the Egyptians ways to reduce the size of their armed forces, agree in principle to more aircraft and additional ships provided these fit Egypt’s available financial resources, and look at ways to use Egypt’s existing military industries in support of the program. In a handwritten note, dated June 12, on the report’s undated covering memorandum from Murray to Brown, Brown wrote “6/12 R Murray—OK to proceed along these lines; e.g. 5 year planning, consider added ships & a/c in that plan over time, help w/defense industry. HB.” (Washington National Record Center, OSD Files, FRC

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Mubarak: Sadat does not want to spoil the peace process. Carter: Egyptian silence weakens Israeli opposition to the settlements. Mubarak agrees. We will move on this issue; some comments have taken place. On other issues notes that Israel would like to have the U.S. only the status of observer in the ongoing negotiations and have so informed the Egyptians. Reiterates that Nimeiri needs urgent help as per talks with Javits. Rhodesian statement underlines Egyptian desire for Chinook helicopters. Carter concludes meeting by restating what he will do in Vienna8 and Tokyo.9

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX of enhanced U.S. military assistance to Egypt, perhaps stretched out over a somewhat longer period of time. The President would like to have the above by the time of his return from Vienna.4 (S) Zbigniew Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX military government will retain control of X percent of the public domain lands now under its control. In these areas, Israel can establish security installations and settlements. The remainder of the public lands will pass under the jurisdiction of the self-governing authority. In theory, Israel would not be required to give up the right to establish new settlements, but as a practical matter the scope for new settlement activity would be limited. —Water. A joint water authority will be established with equal Israeli and West Bank/Gaza representation. The situation prevailing at the time of the establishment of the self-governing authority could not be changed unless both parties agreed. In other words, the worst outcome if no agreement could be reached would be a continuation of the status quo for five more years. If new wells are to be dug, joint decisions would be required. (This would establish a measure of equity which does not now exist. If an Israeli settlement needs more water, it would probably be necessary for the Israelis to agree at the same time to allow an Arab village to dig a new well, which is presently not usually permitted.) —Security. The Israelis have undertaken to withdraw some troops and to redeploy those remaining into specified security locations. This implies some limitations on the Israeli military presence. The stages by which limitations will be set, however, are yet to be decided, and it might be possible to define the type of presence that might exist after three years without spelling out the intervening steps with great precision. It might be specified that the implementation of Israeli military redeployment will be discussed with the new self-government, along with the initial division of responsibility between local security forces and the Israelis. This is not an area where we and the Egyptians should try to be too precise. (S) Conclusions I do not honestly believe that the negotiations for a self-governing authority for the West Bank/Gaza are likely to produce positive results within the one-year target date. At some point, it may be necessary to revert to the earlier approach of trying to define the basic 242 tradeoff—peace, recognition and security in exchange for Israeli withdrawal—with a staged process of implementation that might include a transitional regime of some sort. Begin, of course, will reject this approach, but Peres supports it. It has the advantage of dealing frankly with the principle of withdrawal, without which I see little likelihood of an agreement. The main advantage of the Begin Plan is that it makes Peres’ idea of territorial compromise look increasingly attractive to the Arabs. I suspect we will find that “autonomy” will be a non-starter. Either we forget about the West Bank/Gaza for a while, or we will probably have to find a way of anchoring the transitional concept to 242. Unfortunately, we did not quite succeed in doing so in the Camp David accords. (S)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Begin, Burg, and Dayan urges that we get this response to him for delivery4 Saturday before the Sunday Cabinet meeting in Israel. He and the Israelis to whom he has spoken believe there is considerable advantage in closing this chapter promptly. I have cleared the proposed response below with Bob Strauss and Jim Leonard. When the Secretary is satisfied with a text, would you please send his decision directly to Tel Aviv and Cairo with an info copy to us. 3. Begin text: The position of the United States with respect to the West Bank/Gaza negotiations is based on the Framework for Peace in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and went to Jerusalem. Much progress had been made by Israel and Egypt. This was consistent with UN Resolutions 242, 338 and others, as well as the Joint Statement between the U.S. and the USSR. It was a fact that Israel was withdrawing from the Sinai. Israel was prepared to negotiate treaties with all its neighbors. Palestinian rights, under the Camp David accords, would be preserved. Security of all states was to be guaranteed.” Moreover, Carter “hoped that the Soviet Union would give its support and encourage other states to join in this process. Total Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai was part of a process as prescribed by the UN. UN supervision was important. We would expect all Security Council members to approve such UN supervision by UN emergency forces. But the U.S., in the interests of a peaceful resolution of these differences, was pledged alternative supervision if that was necessary. However, our strong preference was for a UN force.” In response, Brezhnev said he wanted to “re-emphasize” the “Soviet position of principle in its appraisal of the U.S. policy.” “The fact that the October 1977 Soviet-U.S. understanding on joint action in the Middle East was violated and supplanted by an anti-Arab policy argued nothing good for the people of that region nor for the relations between us. Brezhnev thought that it was clear to everyone now that the Egyptian-Israeli treaty had failed to tranquilize the Middle Eastern situation, but it has aggravated it. He called attention to the indignation and determination of the Arabs and noted the war which Israel, protected by Egypt, was in effect waging in Lebanon. This could at any time grow larger. It was necessary to prevent a resumption of armed conflict along the lines of the 1967 war, to prevent a major conflagration.” “Therefore, unfortunately,” Brezhnev continued, “the positions of the U.S. and the USSR were fundamentally different at this time and not through any fault of the Soviet Union. To be frank, the Soviet Union would resolutely oppose any efforts to use the UN to bolster the separate deal between Egypt and Israel, be it by using the present UN troops in the Sinai or any other manner. The position of the Soviet Union with respect to the Middle East remained the same as it was all along. The Soviet Union believed that there would be no firm peace there without the complete vacating of the Arab territory occupied in 1967 and without an opportunity for the Palestinians to set up their own state, without ensuring the security of all nations in that region, including Israel. As before, the Soviet Union considered it desirable for our two countries to interact on Middle East issues, using earlier UN resolutions as a foundation.” (Memorandum of Conversation, June 17; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 75, Trip: Box 1)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 267. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 268. Research Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX we will be able to provide under the $1.5 billion, three-year package. For my part, I recognize that Egypt has legitimate defense needs greater than those we have been able to meet within this particular package. As announced following my meeting with Vice President Mobarak, I believe that our two governments should now work closely and intensively to plan our longer-term military supply relationship beyond the three years envisaged in the equipment package associated with the signing of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. In that way, Egypt could satisfy a greater proportion of its military equipment needs over the next several years. Implicit in any longer-term relationship would be a U.S. assurance that necessary spare parts and followon support would continue to be offered. In this connection, I also want you to be assured that Maverick missiles will be included with the arms for the Phantom aircraft we will be delivering to Egypt. I have therefore directed4 Secretaries Brown and Vance to begin this planning immediately in cooperation with Egypt. To undertake a major, long-term military supply relationship will require the fullest possible support of the American public and the Congress. Congressional support for the current $1.5 billion package is an essential first step, but we will have to be careful about overemphasizing the military side of our relationship. Your warmest supporters in the public and the Congress hope that Egypt will assign highest priority to economic development rather than to military programs. They are concerned that the major portion of our peace package has been for military equipment. People in the United States understand that Egypt has important defense needs and are willing to help, but they hope that this can be accomplished in a manner which will enhance rather than compete with our shared goal of accelerated economic development in Egypt. I am prepared to work with you closely, Mr. President, as our two countries develop together the most effective response to Egyptian needs. I am sure that this can be done while taking into account the political and financial constraints within which I must function. I will be sending you a further message5 following the Tokyo Summit,6 where I will be pressing for sympathetic consideration of Egypt’s economic programs. As you are also aware, Ambassador Strauss will be bringing with him a small group of business and labor executives to work further with your colleagues in developing areas of additional economic cooperation. 4 See Document 262. 5 See Document 275.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX this session, Begin and Strauss met more formally with all members of their respective delegations in adjoining conference room for what was largely a ceremonial encounter. 3. Begin/Strauss meeting was continuation of their initial tete-atete on previous day.2 Main subjects covered were Israeli settlement activity in West Bank, increasing opposition to Israeli policies among certain segments of U.S. public opinion, impending meeting between Sadat and Begin in Alexandria on July 10, prospects for the impending round of autonomy talks at Alexandria on July 5–6, and the increasingly dangerous situation in Lebanon in the wake of the aerial dogfight between Israeli and Syrian planes on June 27.3 4. On settlements, Begin said that he knew with certainty that settlements are not a serious problem with Sadat, although he may raise it during our meeting. (In this connection, I heard from another source that Begin claims Sadat told him during their last meeting in Cairo that he understood Begin’s problems about settlements and only wished he would hurry and get things done as quickly as possible so as to get the issue out of the headlines.) Strauss restated the U.S. position on the settlements issue4 in response, stressing the damage that he believed it was doing to the peace process. 5. On the Alexandria meetings, Begin urged Strauss to do whatever is necessary to reach agreement on the agenda, stressing the need for a limited practical agenda which will permit the two parties to get down to concrete business. Strauss assured him that we had every interest in doing everything possible to get the talks moving on concrete issues, and that he would do his best. 6. Begin told Strauss that he anticipated Sadat would make another effort on the Jerusalem issue when they saw each other July 10. He anticipated that would be the major topic on Sadat’s mind, but he gave 2 A record of this meeting has not been found. Strauss arrived in Israel on July 1, following a brief stopover at the Cairo airport where he held a press conference. The Embassy conveyed a transcript of Strauss’s remarks in telegram 13322 from Cairo, July 1;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 9. Comment: It was evident throughout this conversation that Ambassador Strauss and Prime Minister Begin have established an excellent personal rapport which should stand us in very good stead in the weeks and months to come. Lewis 271. Telegram From the Department of State to Multiple Posts1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —We want to caution however that the parties have not yet gotten to the resolution of substantive issues. Many very difficult problems lie ahead and resolving them will be arduous. But this latest session shows that headway can be made. Their purpose in the working groups over the next few weeks will be to get the full range of issues on the table so decisions can be shaped on how to deal with them. 4. In Amman Ambassador Strauss met with King Hussein and in Riyadh with Crown Prince Fahd and heard their views on the negotiations. While neither had significantly new elements to add to past positions, there were very useful meetings. Ambassador Strauss advised King Hussein and Crown Prince Fahd of US confidence that the peace efforts would produce positive results for the Palestinians, of the US commitment to stick with the process over the long term, and of the encouragement that we have received from nations outside the Middle East. Both showed great interest and were pleased when Ambassador Strauss offered to return periodically to keep them informed of progress in the negotiations. Vance 272. Letter From Israeli Prime Minister Begin to President Carter1 Jerusalem, July 16, 1979 Dear Mr. President, My two days2 in Alexandria were good days. Wherever I went the people received me with great warmth. President Sadat and I had two talks in complete privacy.3 During our first meeting we discussed several practical issues as follows: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Palestinian state be formed with an undefined link with Jordan. Understanding, so he said, Israel’s security problem he thought this could be solved by demilitarization. I put it to him that demilitarization is feasible and proper in the context of the Sinai desert as we had agreed. I added: “Besides the fact that we trust you there is an objective factor. In a desert demilitarization is verifiable. In a populated area it is a hoax. One can keep a katyusha in every garage and in every home.” On the matter of autonomy, President Sadat said that we may start with the Gaza Strip. When asked whether he meant that we begin with an agreement in relation to the Gaza Strip he made it clear that the agreement should be general and include, in his formulation, the West Bank. But, he explained, the introduction of the autonomy for the inhabitants could begin with the Gaza District first. President Sadat turned to the matter of the settlements. He had mentioned the issue the previous day using the expression: “it creates difficulties” and “it is intimidating”. Now he added that he had told Dr. Burg when they met a few weeks ago: “Even if you have the right to build settlements it shouldn’t be done during the negotiations.” I recalled my letter5 to you, Mr. President, on this issue, whose contents were confirmed by the Secretary of State a number of weeks ago. About Jerusalem he said: the city will not be divided. Part of the city where the Moslem and Christian holy shrines are located will be under “Arab sovereignty with a flag”. (He did not say what flag). The “Wailing” (Western) Wall will be excluded. The city will be run by a common council. In the course of our second talk President Sadat again mentioned an idea which he had first raised with me in private during our El Arish meeting,6 namely the construction of a water pipeline from the Nile to the Negev. He then went on to ask for an early return of Santa Katherina to Egyptian sovereignty. His wish is that this occur a day before November 18, the eve of the second anniversary of his visit to Jerusalem. Perhaps I will be able to give President Sadat a response during his forthcoming visit to Haifa. In replying to President Sadat’s presentation I said that a Palestinian state would be a mortal danger to Israel. It would inevitably be a PLO state, bringing with it permanent bloodshed. Furthermore, it would be a peril to the free world turning in no time to a Soviet base, menacing thereby Egypt itself. 5 See Document 259.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX after Ramadan and that this would probably mean at the end of August. Haifa, I know, will accord the President of Egypt an enthusiastic reception. I thank you, Mr. President for your attention. Yours respectfully and sincerely, Menachem Begin9 9 Begin signed “M Begin” above this typed signature. 273. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 17, 1979 SUBJECT UN Resolution on Settlements (U) This week, the UN Security Council will vote on a resolution derived from the report of the Three-nation Commission on Settlements.2 The first draft (with State’s technical suggestions) is at Tab I.3 (U) The issue: Should we vote for a “good” resolution (close to the draft) and incur the wrath of the Israelis (and possibly sidetrack the process of questioning the settlements in Israel)? Or should we abstain, while making a strong speech on settlements, thus minimizing the political damage? (There is agreement that we stand to gain little from the Arabs 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 274. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown and Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, July 19, 1979 SUBJECT Military Assistance for Egypt You asked2 about the possibilities for enhanced military assistance for Egypt. We conclude that it is important for the United States to move beyond the immediate program of assistance agreed during the Treaty negotiations. As you know, during Mubarak’s June visit we undertook to develop3 a longer term (five year) military assistance plan with Egypt. We are now preparing for the first round of talks in Cairo on this plan,4 with the aim of completing the plan by October 1st. In the planning process we will be reviewing Egypt’s force structure and missions as well as equipment requirements. It will be our aim to encourage Egypt to make reductions in its force structure and to limit equipment requirements to those needed for replacement and modernization of obsolete or unsupportable Soviet equipment. We will severely discourage force expansion. Moreover, wherever possible, we will encourage Egypt to make the most of the Soviet equipment it has now, and will offer technical assistance for this purpose.5 We are looking at ways to help Egypt’s de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX of Egypt’s military equipment needs, but not all. Egypt should be encouraged to develop perhaps smaller but nevertheless significant supply programs with Europeans and others to complement our own activities. In carrying out this policy, we need to begin conditioning both Congress and the public to the fact that Egypt has legitimate defense requirements in addition to needs for support in its economic development program and that both of these aspects of our effort serve U.S. national interests and are closely intertwined. In our judgment, U.S.-Egyptian defense relationships are developing in productive ways, although the supply of equipment is naturally not as extensive, as inexpensive, or as fast as Egypt desires. —We will deliver before October 6 the first of the F–4 aircraft, plus other equipment and, if Egypt makes a firm decision, a Gearing Class destroyer. These first deliveries are a high priority for Sadat and we have made every effort to make them available in time for this politically important date. —We are exchanging a number of expert military teams on Egypt’s high priority items, such as air defense. —We have defined with Egypt the equipment priorities and delivery schedules for the full $1.5 billion already agreed. —We are starting work on the longer term plan decided above. While this will not initially provide commitments for financing and delivery, it will continue the military dialogue and help to cement defense relationships between our two countries. In addition we earlier promised Sadat and Kamal Ali that we would welcome the opportunity for close defense consultations. To that end we would expect to have annual meetings at the Defense Minister level and periodic staff consultations during the year. We believe we are well started on the road to enhanced defense relationships with Egypt. We will have to consult closely with Congressional leaders as we go along. Cyrus Vance Harold Brown

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX reaffirmed his government’s commitment to continuing support of your development program, but said this position can be sustained only if it is handled with great political sensitivity. We must avoid any suggestion that Japan’s decisions on aid to Egypt are in response to U.S. pressure. The Prime Minister should be given latitude to announce Japan’s commitments—which I hope will be increased—in his own way and time. —Finally, I want to thank you for your thoughtful message of congratulations on the signing of the SALT II Agreement.7 I deeply value your encouragement. —This was indeed an historic event. The SALT II Treaty is an important part of the evolving mosaic of a peaceful world order. Because of the destructive power of modern weapons, it is essential that the United States and the Soviet Union overcome the mistrust and tension which have affected our relations for too long. The Treaty limiting strategic arms signed at Vienna represents our continued commitment toward that goal. —Again, please accept my thanks for your comments on the Alexandria Summit, and my best wishes for your continued success and the welfare of you and the Egyptian people. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter His Excellency Anwar al-Sadat President of the Arab Republic of Egypt Cairo End text. Vance

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX sense of not being party to yet another useless UN gang-up on Israel— while making our own position clear. Begin had wanted us to veto. (S) Begin. The latest (unconfirmed) report is that the blood clot in a brain artery has cost him 25% of his vision in one eye, 10% in the other. Strauss and the President have sent messages.6 (U) Palestinians. The UN Security Council is about to consider a resolution on Palestinian rights.7 Through the Kuwaitis, we have been told that the PLO is prepared to endorse 242 (our condition for talking with them). This subject will be the centerpiece of a “non-PRC” at 3 p.m. on Wednesday.8 Your attending would be of great benefit.9 (S) Lebanon. From June 27 until Sunday, the Israelis had not used aircraft to strike at PLO bases in Lebanon. The Sunday strike10 was particularly bloody. State has put out a statement of disapproval. There are also growing signs of a possible major Israeli military action in Lebanon, though no hard information. Strauss suggested to Begin that he consider a moratorium. Begin said he would talk about it further when Strauss next goes to Israel. This subject—in broad context—will also be discussed on Wednesday. (S) Autonomy Talks. Since Strauss’ visit, we have been working with the Egyptians and Israelis on the setting up of the two working groups (modalities of elections, and powers and responsibilities of the Self- Governing Authority). Each will have two members (Jim Leonard will be on both for us). Some Israeli members of the full talks wanted to attend, but we and the Egyptians have wanted to put the level down a notch, to give the groups a chance to work. We hope they can get to 6 The Department transmitted Carter’s message conveying wishes for Begin’s “quick recovery” following his hospitalization in telegram 189702 to Tel Aviv, July 21.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 277. Summary of Conclusions of a Senior Level Meeting1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX reply12 to his earlier letter13 to you should be dispatched, outlining in general terms the approach to Congress and some of the other steps referred to above.14 (S) It was agreed that thought should be given to a meeting between you and President Sarkis next spring, perhaps in the context of an informal visit by him to the United States arranged by the Council on Foreign Relations.15 (C) 3. UNTSO. Secretary Vance reported that he will respond16 to Dayan’s suggestion of a tripartite meeting by inviting him and an Egyptian representative to meet with us and Waldheim (or a representative) to discuss the future of UNTSO.17 (C) 12 See Document 278.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX United Nations and the governments contributing troops to UNIFIL, as well as with Saudi Arabia and Syria. We will also be consulting with the Congress about the best course of action to take. Meanwhile, it will be important for us to persuade other quarters which contribute to the provocations and the cycles of violence to exercise restraint, and to cease terrorism. Mr. President, all of these steps will take time and hard work; but I am committed to doing what I can to hasten the day when Lebanon will no longer be threatened by strife and conflict, and when you will be able to devote your energies solely to rebuilding your country and advancing the lives of your people. I want to keep in touch with you, Mr. President, on these issues of great concern to us both. My heart will be with you as you shoulder your heavy responsibilities. With warm personal regards, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter. End text. 3. For Ambassador Dean: Since you have to carry the message personally to President Sarkis, we believe you should either try to deliver it Thursday, July 26, or telephone Sarkis as far in advance as possible of your planned meeting-dinner with him on Friday, July 27, to say that you have a response from President Carter, explain that, under the circumstances, it would be better for us if we did not have to deal with an “open letter.”5 Say to Sarkis that we very much understand and appreciate the domestic political problems he is facing, and the need to be seen as doing something about the problems Lebanon faces. In this connection, you might note that the U.S. made a strong statement condemning Israeli air raids and has taken a firm stand—publicly and privately—against the recent series of Israeli ground incursions into UNIFIL’s areas of operation. Ambassador Tueini has also registered a strong message of protest over Israeli actions in the Security Council. 4. FYI. While we do not yet have report, we understand from secure voice telephone call with Tel Aviv that there may have been a useful exchange Wednesday, between Viets and Weizman on Lebanese 5 Dean met with Sarkis on the morning of July 27 and attempted to persuade him not to send a second letter to Carter. Sarkis replied that “too much publicity had already been given to the planned letter not to send it,” but assured Dean that the text would not be made public. Dean reported: “Sarkis agreed that whatever he had to say had already been set forth in his July 4 letter. He reiterated that he was merely responding to local political pressure.” Dean concluded that this second letter would likely receive a “courteous acknowledgement” and would “close the present exchange.” (Telegram 4189 from

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX sociated air-to-air and air-to-ground missiles, the Improved-Hawk surface-to-air missile system, and TOW antitank missiles to Egypt is important to the national security of the United States. You are requested on my behalf to report this determination to the Congress, as required by law. This determination shall be published in the Federal Register. Jimmy Carter 280. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX UNTSO flap,4 a more activist U.S. role in the autonomy negotiation, and new proposed U.S. arms sales to Jordan and Saudi Arabia. Against this background, U.S. involvement in the postponement of the UNSC vote on the Palestinian rights resolution and what is seen here as the latest U.S. effort to draw the PLO into the peace process and establish a U.S.–PLO dialogue have set off a wave of emotional questioning of American constancy. The chain reaction has been given momentum by the ominous local interpretation of President Carter’s August 1 comments5 to the New York Times on the plight of the Palestinians (“Carter Equates PLO, U.S. Civil Rights Groups”, as one Israeli newspaper tendentiously headlined its report). Israelis now believe that the U.S. is moving in the direction of supporting or at least acquiescing in a Palestinian rights resolution which will supersede and, to use the Israeli phrase, “empty Resolution 242 of all meaning.” Hodding Carter’s statement6 the same day that the U.S. is willing to “build upon” Resolution 4 The Israeli newspaper Ma’ariv reported comments made by Dayan on July 30 “refuting US allegations that UNTSO substitution was discussed with the GOI. Dayan said that ‘The US had no reason to assume that Israel would agree to the idea of observers.’” On May 30, Dayan continued, “‘Begin told an authorized American representative that Israel would agree to the stationing of a multinational force in the event that the Security Council did not approve the continued presence of the existing international emergency force. But beyond this the Prime Minister did not agree to any other idea.’” (Telegram

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX change Res. 242 and 338 in ways “incompatible with their original purpose.” The Israelis would no doubt claim, in addition to their other criticisms of a Palestinians rights resolution, that a new text treating the Palestinian issue as other than a refugee problem would be incompatible with the original purpose of 242—and therefore “changed”—even though the GOI committed itself to a much broader interpretation at Camp David. 7. The GOI and U.S. commitments on the PLO. The Israelis recognize that the immediate purpose of a new Palestinian rights resolution is to clear the way for the initiation of a direct U.S.–PLO dialogue. The GOI would without doubt view PLO acceptance of a Palestinian rights resolution, even if it included within it references to Res. 242 and 338, as insufficient to meet the U.S. commitment under the 1975 memorandum of understanding.8 The Israelis would call “foul”, assert that these two Resolutions stand on their own, and reject our acceptance of this “package deal” instead of explicit and unencumbered PLO acceptance of Res. 242 and 338 and Israel’s right to exist. 8. A “maximal” resolution. Israeli reaction to failure of the U.S. to veto any Palestinian rights resolution will be strident, but U.S. acceptance (even by abstention in a SC veto) of a “maximal” resolution (one postulating Palestinian national rights) would probably elicit sharp retaliatory measures and touch off a major crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations. There is not a paragraph in either the preambular or operative parts of the present draft text in reftel which does not contain language the Israelis will find unacceptable. The worst in Israeli eyes is, of course, operative para. 1, which “affirms that the Palestinian people should be enabled to exercise its inalienable national rights of self-determination, including the right to establish an independent state in Palestine.” Even if the explicit reference to a Palestinian state were dropped, any text using such euphemisms as “right to political independence” or even “self-determination” would be totally unacceptable. Failure of the U.S. to veto such a resolution would be considered by the Israelis as an outright violation of our 1975 commitment. It would also be seen as a negation of the Camp David Accords, in that it prejudged the outcome of the autonomy and final-status negotiations, and would be cited as proof of the dishonesty of President Carter’s statement that the U.S. did not favor a Palestinian state. 9. The Cabinet, with or without Begin, would react violently and punitively. It is important to remember that there are those in the Cabinet who are seeking to transform current GOI positions in a number of areas into “red lines.” Within the range of possible Israeli responses are the following kinds of retaliatory actions: 8 See footnote 7 above.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX as a silver lining, few Israeli politicians would wish to publicize such perspicacity. Few would be persuaded that we have enhanced the chances for a comprehensive peace. Our going along with a resolution which would be seen as “amending” 242 by specifying Palestinian rights—either “national” or just “legitimate”—would create a vocal national consensus which the GOI, carried along by its most hawkish elements, would manipulate to the hilt. 13. There are steps which we should take to reduce Israeli suspicions over the period ahead as we grapple with a Palestinian rights resolution and the difficult choices involved, regardless of our final decision on U.S. policy. —It is in our interest to maintain a dialogue9 on this question with the Israelis as intensively as possible over the days ahead in order to achieve the dual purpose of allaying as much as possible Israeli fears that we are up to a double game, and pre-empting charges that we are violating our commitments. —Should we begin negotiations on the text of a Palestinian rights resolution, we should provide drafts to the Israelis on a timely basis and brief them in as much detail as practicable on the signals we are receiving and on the American position as it emerges. —Such steps, however, will in no way avert the inevitable storm of vituperation, possibly backed by provocative actions destructive of the peace process, which adoption by the Security Council of such a resolution would bring on. Viets 9 On August 8, Carter held a luncheon meeting with Evron. The meeting, Brzezinski wrote in a August 7 memorandum to Carter, was designed to “clear the air” between the United States and Israel. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 282. Telegram From the Embassy in the People’s Republic of China to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 283. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State and the White House1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX year later there would come a new SC resolution which you would not veto, contrary to your 1975 commitment. I appeal to President Carter for reconsideration. Unquote. 10. Throughout conversation about resolution I remained firm and unyielding, pursuant to your instructions. 11. Met later in day with Dayan, Weizman, and Evron and went over same ground,7 stressing need for us to regain some credibility for Camp David negotiating process if it is to have chance of success. Their negative response was identical to Begin’s. Dayan warned me that Begin would be reporting fully to the Cabinet on Sunday,8 and that by Sunday there would be at least 10 contradictory versions of my presentation appearing in distorted forms in the press. He advised me to make my position clear directly to the press before leaving for Cairo. With Lewis’ agreement, I did so in brief departure statement at Dayan’s home.9 Lewis 7 No other record of this meeting has been found. 8 August 19. 9 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, Carter drew a heavy vertical line with an arrow pointing to it. 284. Action Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State (Bowdler) and the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Constable) to Secretary of State Vance Washington, August 18, 1979 [Source: Department of State, INR/IL Historical Files, Box 11, Cairo (Folder III). Secret; Sensitive. 2 pages not declassified]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX will succeed.” With an almost mystical confidence, he said that at Camp David “we jumped over obstacles to new horizons.” If the Palestinians were to join the autonomy talks at this stage, Sadat said, we would reach no agreement, just as we would have reached no agreement at Camp David if Hussein had been there. It is important first to complete the autonomy negotiations with Israel; then if the Palestinians refuse what we have achieved for them, this will be their responsibility. Their entry now would “doom the peace process,” he stated. 5. Recalling his report to us following his last talks with Begin in Alexandria, Sadat expressed confidence that by the end of this year there would be agreement on full autonomy and a solution to the Jerusalem problem. This agreement could then be carried out in Gaza and Jerusalem, leaving the West Bank aside for the time being because of its particular sensitivity to the Israelis and because this would provide an opportunity for Israel and Hussein to come to an understanding with respect to the West Bank. Sadat stated confidently that, when the present phase of negotiations with Israel is completed by the end of this year, Hussein would join the negotiating process and, by working with Israel, could arrange a plebescite whereby the Palestinians would agree to join Jordan rather than insist upon an independent state. 6. To make certain that I had understood precisely Sadat’s position, I put certain questions to him towards the end of our meeting: —I first asked how concerned Sadat would be if we vetoed an Arab resolution in the Security Council, thereby undermining our credibility with the other Arabs and reinforcing the Baghdad front. Sadat repeated that this would not harm Egypt or the autonomy talks but would harm the United States with Saudi Arabia. —I next asked what Sadat’s views were on a milder resolution which would not call for a Palestinian state, which would basically draw on language we have used in the past, and which would be supported by the U.S. I told Sadat that in my talks in Israel it was clear that even such a resolution would be opposed by the Israelis. Sadat repeated that when Israel is frightened, this will harm the peace process. —I then asked his reaction to a U.S. resolution which would be opposed by the Arab world but would, on the basis of my talks with Israel, still be opposed by them. Sadat repeated that anything which frightened the Israelis would be bad for the peace process. 7. When I described the Israeli position (characterizing it as unreasonable and asking for his advice) that any new resolution was unnecessary since the peace process is being implemented and progressing well on the basis of Resolution 242 and 338 plus the Camp David Framework, and that any new resolution would unbalance the Camp

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX very plainly that Sadat and Khalil were both very concerned over impact on peace process of anything in New York that would upset Israelis. This official (Ahmed Maher), who had just been briefed by Khalil, noted that some in the Ministry disagreed with their leaders but the leaders feel strongly on this. 13. Sadat’s final statement to me was to return and prevent Jimmy Carter from weakening or destroying his great accomplishment at Camp David. Atherton 286. Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the White House and Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX However, he was convinced that the basic elements of agreement on autonomy had been hammered out at Camp David and that it should be possible to reach agreement on how to implement those elements, so long as the whole agreement is treated as an entity and no effort is made to separate it into various “chapters”. Begin went on to say that he agreed with Sadat that their relationship had greatly improved, beginning with their meeting in Washington the night before the Treaty was signed (March 25). He then reviewed at some length the ups and downs in their personal rapport. He seemed both pleased and somewhat bemused by the fact that Sadat and he were now able to disagree sharply about the issues without it affecting their friendship. 8. After some further discussion of Sadat’s personality and their increased ability to communicate with one another, Begin again said that since we had now heard both from him and Sadat strong objections to our proposed course of action, the whole idea of a US sponsored resolution should be dropped. He counted on Secretary Vance’s statements to Ambassador Evron and to Senator Stone that the Kuwaiti resolution would be vetoed if put forward. He said that we should continue to work energetically in the working groups and plenary on the various autonomy issues and put aside all UN action. He then asked me what I would recommend to you when I returned. 9. I told him I would report faithfully his views and Sadat’s to you in detail, along with the suggestions from both of them that we abandon our resolution option. However, I could not say that I would recommend a change in our position on the resolution. I left Begin in no doubt that that position still stands and that I could only assure him that I knew you would give careful thought to his views and to Sadat’s. Begin then reverted to the subject of his relationship with Sadat, describing in some detail their discussion in El Arish, and more recently in Alexandria, about Jerusalem. He took considerable satisfaction in the fact that in Alexandria he had been able to explain in detail the Israeli view of the Jerusalem problem without exacerbating their personal relationship, and that indeed it was after Begin’s explanation that Sadat had insisted that Begin and he use first names with one another (I have now heard this account from both Sadat and Begin. Sadat sounds as if he believes an arrangement on Jerusalem is nearly within reach; Begin on the other hand talks about their positions as being far apart but takes pleasure in fact that they can be frankly discussed without rancor.) 10. Begin also raised with me the subject of oil supply, describing the original commitment Sadat had given him in Washington which was covered in your letter.6 He said that the Israelis were now anxious 6 See Document 236.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 287. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, August 20, 1979 SUBJECT Middle East Trip: the Way Forward (U) As you will have seen from Bob Strauss’ reporting cables to the President,2 the trip produced even more negative reactions to our UN Resolution plan than we expected in calculating the price to be paid. The Israeli reaction went about as far as thought; but all of us were unprepared for the vehemence with which Sadat flatly opposed the idea of a U.S.-introduced resolution—or indeed any resolution at this time. Strauss had an Ambassador with him at all times who later prepared the cables for his signature. (S) Sadat’s reasoning was as follows: —any resolution which scares the Israelis is a mistake—and the U.S. resolution would do so; —there is a good chance for progress in the autonomy talks, and in the Egyptian-Israeli relationship which needs to underpin anything else, provided they are left alone and the process is not disrupted by our (unnecessary) actions; and —even if a resolution were accepted by the PLO, this would not be desirable, since it would lead to the entry of disruptive elements into the talks themselves before they are well-established; in fact, Sadat said, this (acceptance of the resolution) might be the worst outcome of To be sure, Israel and Egypt have different interests from us in this process (and in major respects from each other). But to be opposed publicly and forcefully by both Camp David parties increases the dangers of the Resolution course (while, ironically, making it somewhat easier to get off this course—if that were desired—since this is in fact, if not in perception, no longer just an “Israel vs. U.S.” issue). (S) Conversations with our local Ambassadors (Atherton, Lewis, West, and Veliotis) also helped to cast doubt on 1) the likelihood of PLO 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egypt—emphasizing the latter, in order to move this as much as possible away from a “U.S.-Israel” matter). He could outline whatever option we have selected, and stress our concern with the peace process as the best way of achieving Palestinian legitimate rights. (S) We would need to be doing our diplomacy quickly (with seeking a postponement being the “least cost” way out). This includes: —communication with the Kuwaitis (and Beirut); —approach to the British (on postponement); —instructions for damage limitation to West and Veliotis (who have basic background and have asked for Wednesday appointments, pending whatever decision is reached in Washington); —communications to Israel and Egypt, Congressional contacts I am appending a broader options paper6 put together by Hal Saunders on the plane (and which he will revise for tomorrow). Option 3 is the one presented here. (C) P.S. Strauss and Ben Epstein arranged with Teddy Kollek for an invitation to Andy Young to visit Jerusalem, “to see how people can live together.” It will be sent privately in the near future. (C) 6 Attached but not printed. A revised version is also attached but not printed. 288. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX visit that realization of the national rights of the Palestinians does not place Israel’s security or interests in jeopardy. 8. PriMin Begin said that, as the negotiations develop, we would sort out points of agreement and disagreement about the jurisdiction of the self governing authority and would see what can be done to give the negotiations the push they need. 9. These two points were subjects of disagreement, but the disagreement was not as sharp or tense as in the past. 10. On bilateral issues, PriMin Begin raised two points: the supply of oil, and the stationing of forces in the Sinai. With respect to oil, Israel had two demands: (1) a written Egyptian commitment to supply Israel 2 million tons annually; and (2) to sell this amount at the OPEC base price—about 24 dollars a barrel. There was some disagreement between Egyptian and Israeli officials (Oil Minister Hilal and Energy Minister Modai) on these points. Israel also seeks this supply from the Alma field on the ground that it is now producing 1.9 million tons annually at the rate of 38000 barrels per day. Our officials think that this rate of production is detrimental to the Alma field and is causing a high level of attrition, and that production from Alma should be reduced to one million tons annually. 11. President Sadat agreed to provide an aide memoire to Israel to the effect that Egypt will supply Israel with two million tons annually without specifying the area of production from which it would come. With respect to price, President Sadat insisted that Egypt cannot give Israel a privileged position which would then have to apply to other buyers of Egyptian oil. Egypt cannot discriminate between customers. President Sadat indicated to PriMin Begin that if Egypt followed this practice, it would incur a loss of over 600 million dollars annually. PriMin Begin accepted the view of President Carter that the price should be left to the market. In other words, the prices charged will be the going prices at the time each contract is concluded. 12. With respect to the forces in the Sinai, this subject was discussed between President Sadat and PriMin Begin, and in parallel between Minister Weizman and Minister Kamal Hassan Ali. Weizman, who was opposed to UNTSO, met with President Sadat. Since Israel is opposed to UNTSO and is pressing for joint Egyptian-Israeli patrols, President Sadat indicated there was a need for U.S. participation. President Sadat instructed General Ali to take the position that we should follow the procedures provided for in the Peace Treaty, namely the establishment of a multi-national force, and should meanwhile resort to a temporary arrangement as follows: —The U.S. would supervise Zone A, either through increasing the frequency of its aerial surveillance or through the use of representatives of the American Military Attache Office in Cairo.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and has at least modified Egyptian opposition to joint Egyptian-Israeli supervision in some areas of the Sinai. At the same time, he has insisted on the principle earlier outlined in forceful terms by Mubarak that there should be some U.S. participation with the Egyptians and the Israelis and that there will be no Israelis, at least in western Sinai (Zone A), where the major Egyptian armed forces will be located. When this issue is discussed in Washington September 18–19,4 we will apparently again be faced with an Egyptian-Israeli position contrary to our own preferred course of action. End comment. 19. I assume the foregoing oral message is the only read out we will get from the Egyptian side until Bob Strauss meets with Sadat.5 Atherton 4 See Document 295. 5 See Document 290. 289. Letter From Egyptian President Sadat to President Carter1 Cairo, September 9, 1979 Dear President Carter, In keeping with our tradition of consultation on all matters of common interest, I have asked Vice President Mubarak to see you2 and discuss with you a few issues that would interest you. I have no doubt that this practice would cement our relations which are already a model to be envied by many nations. The commitments we share are so vital, not only to the promotion of stronger ties between our two countries and people, but also for the maintenance of world peace and security. As you well know, the Middle East is still witnessing much turmoil because of the events which are taking place at the instigation of outsiders. The situation in Morocco is a case in point. Thousands of foreign soldiers are being amassed near the border between Algeria and Morocco and used in combat. The purpose is not only to topple the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX see because the other side is seizing every opportunity to be on the offensive all the time. On the other hand, enhancing our defense capabilities and raising the standard of our armed forces is an important element domestically as well. These forces are called upon to perform many functions for improving the quality of life in Egypt. To fulfill this mission, these forces must acquire the latest technology in many fields. We need your help in this respect. Your assistants have been cooperative and sensitive to our needs. They see the situation and read the consequences the same way we do. Their Egyptian colleagues are cooperating with them fully. Exhaustive studies have been made and I believe that we are approaching the final decision on the issue. I have asked Vice President Mubarak to render you any assistance as you make the decision. He is accompanied by competent officers representing the three branches of our armed forces and they are instructed to cooperate fully with your officials. I have no doubt whatsoever that you make the decision that would reassure us and all your friends, not only in the Middle East, but also in Africa. I need not emphasize to you the necessity for making a long term arrangement for maintaining our military capability. Other aspects of the bilateral cooperation are proceeding smoothly too. In the economic field, a marked improvement has taken place. Matters are settled expeditiously and promptly. Necessary adjustments are being made at the request of both parties. We have requested an increase of half a million tons in the amount of wheat and wheat flour we get under PL480. Vice President Mubarak will discuss this matter with Secretary Vance and I am certain that you would be most responsive to this request. You are aware of the considerations which prompt us to request this increase. It is so vital, under the present circumstances, to fulfill our needs in this regard. Machinery and other commodities are equally important to give our economy the shot in the arm it needs. As you know, we have been able to keep our economy in good shape in the face of all odds and despite tough challenges. We are determined to persevere. The Sudan requires your attention too. Subversive intervention, conducted by the Soviets and executed by the Libyan unenlightened regime, is confronting the Sudanese leadership with a tremendous challenge. The country is unable to cope with inflation and the scarcity of many vital commodities. Naturally, this constitutes an element of pressure on President Numeiri and his colleagues. Arab countries which traditionally assisted that country are now withholding their aid to force the regime to follow their line of policy. Under such circumstances, you would certainly give the Sudan a high priority among the recipients of your aid. Having said that, I would like to share with you some thoughts on the peace efforts we have started together since we met in Washington

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX We discussed briefly the bilateral outstanding issues and there was no problem which we could not solve. As I informed you in my oral message,7 we reached agreement that Egypt will sell Israel 2 million tons of crude oil annually at the market price. I indicated to him that we can not possibly give Israel any preferential treatment in this respect as we can not discriminate between oil buyers. With respect to the forces that would supervise the implementation of the Peace Treaty on the ground, we agreed tentatively on the general outline of a formula that could be employed until the United States forms the multinational force provided for in the Treaty. I made it quite clear to him that an American participation in this transitional arrangement would be very helpful. Of course, we do not mean to [initiate?] a physical American involvement that would cause you the slightest trouble. It is a symbolic presence through a limited number of officers, possibly in civilian cloth. At any rate, the subject will be discussed in length between Secretary Vance, General Ali and Dayan within a few days.8 I have no doubt that they will be able to reach agreement. Prime Minister Begin offered to put forward the date of Israeli withdrawal from the Saint Katherine area which contains Mount Moses. Their forces will withdraw from that area before November 19 so as to enable us to hold the planned celebration of the second Anniversary of my trip to Jerusalem.9 I agreed to allow the flow of tourist into this area without delay as a gesture of good will. I was quite touched by the response of the people of Haifa to my visit. It was overwhelming. This is a real guarantee for the coronation of our efforts. The Arab Israelis were also forthcoming and enthusiastic. They constitute a considerable proportion of the population in the City and its vicinity. They understand fully the nature of the situation and the peace process. I believe that they can be a positive force for peace. With this in mind, I have agreed to provide them with some cultural services they badly need since they were cut off from the Arab World for over three decades. It might interest you to know that they are very appreciative of your spirit and the role you are playing as the leader of a nation they greatly admire. With best wishes and regards.10 Mohammed Anwer El-Sadat 7 See Document 288. 8 See Document 295.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX for Begin and his admiration for Begin’s political courage, interspersed with admonitions that we should not harass Begin in present circumstances. He said that even on issues where they disagreed, Begin was amiable but seemed fatigued. They had not agreed on a specific time for a next meeting, Sadat said, but he had invited Begin to stop in Egypt on his way back from the U.S. in November and Begin had accepted the invitation. Sadat spoke in glowing terms about his reception in Haifa by both Jews and Arabs, describing Haifa as a model for coexistence in the region.5 4. In discussing the future, Sadat made several points which he described as important and asked that we note carefully. Saying that he and Begin had not reached any agreement on the basic issues of full autonomy and Jerusalem, Sadat said, “until now I have built bridges with Begin; now is the time for the United States to take over.” At another point, he asked us to note carefully his comment on Israeli television that “instead of conflict, we now have differences of opinion.” Sadat said he and Begin agreed that Camp David and the peace treaty are the cornerstones for comprehensive peace and should be “consolidated every day.” He said he had told Begin, “let us agree that, no matter what, we will stick to Camp David and the Peace Treaty; we cannot go back.” 5. Toward the end of the meeting, stressing that we should note this carefully, Sadat said: “I ask you to resume your full partnership role. You should start convincing Begin, but you should not press him.” Sadat said that as our friend and partner, he advised us to try to help Begin. We should ease Israeli suspicions. It is necessary, Sadat said, to give directives to the delegations in the autonomy talks so that they can make progress by the end of the year. Begin had said, though “not in an aggressive way”, that he was not yet ready for this and in any case the negotiations have until next May to achieve results. Sadat said that he and Begin alone cannot agree on such directives, but this could be accomplished if the United States would help Begin. The United States, he said, must put forward its plans; the time had come for the United

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Israelis. (These two subjects will be covered more fully in separate reports.) 9. Finally, Sadat confirmed Begin’s agreement to withdraw from Santa Katerina by November 16. He said he did not expect you to be present for the ceremony on November 19 this year but would want you to attend the celebrations there in November, 1980. He invited me to this year’s ceremony, and I accepted.8 Atherton 8 The following day, September 10, Strauss met with Khalil. Strauss reported that during the meeting the Egyptian Prime Minister “filled in many of the blanks in my meeting with President Sadat.” In what Strauss called “one of the most valuable talks I have had since embarking on the Middle East negotiations,” Khalil suggested that the United States conduct policy on “parallel tracks: within and outside the autonomy talks.” Moreover, after outlining Egypt’s goals in the peace process, Khalil noted that to achieve these, “we must first stop all Israeli military action in Lebanon and all PLO terrorism

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX bombings inside Israel. The bomb which exploded Wednesday in the Jerusalem market only helped underscore his point. But once again he was not prepared to move first. He argued strongly that the PLO would use any period of quiet to rest, regroup, and re-equip. 6. My two meetings with Burg5 and a meeting with the Israeli team for the autonomy negotiations6 produced two positive developments: first, Burg himself said he would propose that the plenary session in Alexandria September 26/27 approve his scheme to establish a number of sub-groups under the two existing working groups to deal with specific issues in the negotiations on the modalities of elections and on powers and responsibilities of the self-governing authority. I elaborated on his idea by suggesting that using more experts on various subjects could deepen the discussion of particular issues, and he responded positively. Both of us said publicly after the meeting with the Ministerial team that we hope that this could be done and that it would enable us to move the negotiations into “second gear”. Second, Burg said that he would go to the Alexandria plenary with a timetable for the plenary sessions for the rest of the year. This will impose certain interim deadlines on the working groups. 7. One intervention by Arik Sharon during this meeting with the Ministerial team provided interesting insight into his thinking. If we did not, he said, Israel would face a situation at the end of the negotiations in which it would be pressed to make concessions because by that time only one or two issues might stand between the negotiations and an agreement. Recognizing that Sharon’s intent was patently unconstructive, Burg turned him aside. 8. The combination of technical discussions to shape the issues for political-level consideration by the end of the year and work schedule for that same period is consistent with Khalil’s timetable of moving toward the difficult issues only at the beginning of next year. So out of these discussions here and in Cairo we have managed to shape the talks as we predicted in June, putting ourselves in position by the end of the year to show that the issues crucial to the Palestinians will be dealt with seriously in the negotiations. It also enables us to define and discuss these contentious and emotional issues in a non-political setting where progress can be made. 5 No other records of Strauss’s meetings with Burg have been found. 6 No other record of Strauss’s September 12 meeting with the Israeli Ministerial team for the autonomy talks has been found. Remarks made by Strauss and Burg to the press following this meeting were reported in telegram 2928 from Jerusalem, September

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 292. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX fort to rein in the PLO. Secretary again stressed that Israel’s actions in Lebanon have done it great damage and urged that Weizman give thought to what Israel could contribute to making the truce stick, since that is so much in its best interest. Weizman said he would do so. Israelis had for some time wanted to talk to Lebanese Foreign Minister Boutros but Boutros had refused. Weizman returned to the point that the problem is that the Government of Lebanon doesn’t control Lebanon, again argued that it is Israeli actions that have brought current calm and remarked that Egyptians have not said anything to Israel about its actions in Lebanon. Secretary observed that Israelis are using American—not Egyptian—weapons in Lebanon. 8. Weizman said he would do his best to hold back but if things blow up again Israel would probably have to be more severe and might have to go into Lebanon again for an even longer time than before. Secretary pointed out that that would be even more damaging to Israel and urged again that Weizman think about ways to make the cease-fire lasting. Ambassador Strauss urged that Israel take advantage of the opportunity to get the edge on the PLO by announcing a moratorium on violence. Secretary seconded this suggestion. Vance 293. Memorandum of Conversation1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX is the food of the people. If Egypt could buy it elsewhere it would do so, but it can’t. On maize, he asks for 100,000 tons more; 20,000 tons more of edible oils; frozen chickens, 5,000 tons more; and animal fats, 40,000 tons more. They have asked for rice since their population is increasing, and they must send some to Sudan, which is in a crisis. He had a message from Numeiry’s aides asking for wheat and sugar; Egypt has to send it from time to time when it is needed. So, he is asking for 60,000 tons of rice. Also about 250,000 tons of iron. If it were a gift—as with the Japanese—this would be even better! These are nearly the whole requirements, and are very vital for the Egyptian people. He has talked with Vance and Strauss and Brzezinski. He told Vance that he would not leave here without a solution! Where can they buy it? So he insisted! (Note: all this with humor.) President Sadat two days ago had told him to tell of the urgency of increases, that they have no money to buy these commodities elsewhere. The President asked what the level of wheat shipments to Egypt had been over the past five years. Secretary Vance said that Egypt is getting about one-third of the world-wide total. It is very large. Shipments to other countries are in dollars; Egypt gets its in terms of quantity. Therefore Egypt gains the benefit that it does not have to worry about fluctuating prices. The President asked how much was shipped three–four years ago. Ambassador Ghorbal said it was one million tons. Last year it was 1.5 million. Now they badly need to have 2 million tons. Vice President Mubarak said that this was the point: Egypt has a difficult situation on wheat. It has no relations with the Arabs; if it did, then it could buy elsewhere. But it can’t find it. The President asked whether other Egyptian aid programs could be reduced to provide more here. What about their CIP program? Secretary Vance said that he would take a look at it, but there are difficulties there. Therefore we hadn’t gone forward. Vice President Mubarak said that he had talked with Khalil: this is difficult. Egypt needs all the items, and their sources are limited. This is a problem for this year. The President said that he understood. The total is difficult, with the budget, the Congress, and our other aid programs. Vice President Mubarak said that they can’t find the money anywhere. The President said that he understood. Vice President Mubarak said he would stay until he gets it! Ambassador Strauss said that if his wife stays, as well, that is ok.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX flict with Egypt). But Libya has more planes and tanks. He said to Harold Brown on the Phantoms: 35 is not a fair number. That means no replacements, and there will be nothing else until 1983. But what about spare parts? Therefore they ask for more Phantoms: it is easier to get

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX On military issues, he had not heard a report yet on the Vice President’s meeting with Harold Brown. He knows that it has always been the Egyptian attitude that the Gearing class destroyers might not be adequate. In Alexandria, he had proposed that the Egyptians take a cruiser, but they had said no. If they decide they want small, more modern ships, and no Gearings, then he will honor what Harold Brown recommends. There are increasing difficulties with the reduction of our F–4s. There is a feeling that the F–4 level is now minimal for us to have adequate reserves. He will wait for Harold Brown’s assessment before responding. On peace, President Sadat has been heroic. The Vice President should tell him that the President appreciates his good wishes. We will continue to work with Sadat in harmony. It is important that Egypt and the U.S. be close in the talks. We need to know Egypt’s negotiating attitude, so we can honor the desires of Sadat. Sometimes it is difficult for him to be more forceful—as in protecting Palestinian rights, promoting the autonomy talks, preventing settlements—than is Sadat. It is hard when we take a strong position, and Sadat is more accommodating. We need to keep in touch, and keep our attitudes in a common approach. If Sadat is too sensitive about upsetting Begin, and expects him (the President) to be the only tough negotiator, then that is difficult for him (the President). Secretary Vance said that he had talked with Ezer Weizman about Lebanon,8 who said that Sadat had not taken a strong position. Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat did talk about this to the Israelis. The President said that speaking about it, and being forceful, are different. On several occasions—concerning settlements, Lebanon, and the talks—he has tried to be forceful, but Israel says that the U.S. is being tougher than Egypt. He knows the need for good Sadat-Begin relations, but we also need to carry out Camp David. Begin is stubborn and courageous. He will say no if he means no; he will say yes if he means yes. On several occasions, we have been more forceful in carrying out the Camp David Accords than has Egypt. Israel takes advantage of the weaker country. Therefore, there is a need for us and Egypt to work more closely together. Vice President Mubarak said that Sadat does not want the U.S. to be in an awkward position. The President said that he does do it. We need to know beforehand if Sadat wants us both to be soft. It is no good for Sadat to be soft, and expect him (the President) to be hard. We need to deal with difficult 8 See Document 292.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Several such technical committees might be formed at the outset, corresponding to the general areas represented by the spheres of activity on which there is presently agreement: 1) Economic affairs (for example, finance, trade, agriculture, industry and labor). 2) Social affairs (for example, education, culture, religion, social welfare, housing, transportation and health). 3) Local affairs and public order (for example, municipal administration, administration of justice, and local police). A fourth technical committee might be formed to discuss the structure, composition and seat of the elected body, in light of the agreement to negotiate those subjects. This committee could also discuss those functions specified as responsibilities of the elected body in the appropriate portions of section A of the Camp David Framework (for example, representation on the continuing committee). Either party should be free to raise any subject in the working group or its committees. Additional spheres can be discussed and additional committees can be formed if necessary, it being understood that each party must agree to any decisions taken. The work program of the technical committees might include, but need not be limited to, the following: —Identification and accumulation of the data required to discuss each sphere of activity with objectivity and in detail. —Description of the major tasks that will have to be undertaken by the elected body in each sphere. —Description of the major problems with which the elected body will be faced in carrying out those tasks. —Examination of the existing laws and regulations pertaining to each sphere of activity, and identification of those which will remain relevant to accomplishing the tasks and solving the problems in each sphere during the transition period. —Identification of those tasks and problems which will require additional measures during the transitional period. Each technical committee could report the results of its work to the working group in accordance with a schedule decided by the plenary. The working group could then forward each report to the plenary, together with whatever comments it might choose to transmit. The working group could also review the powers and responsibilities held in all spheres by the military government and its civilian administration under the present arrangements and report to the plenary a comprehensive listing of these powers, responsibilities and spheres. This would be undertaken without prejudice to the views of either

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. The talks with Egypt and Israel2 on peacekeeping arrangements in Sinai ended this afternoon with an agreement, subject to approval3 of the respective governments and in the case of the US, the approval of Congress, on the following points: —With respect to Zones A and B, we would agree to assume the supervision and observation function during the interim period to ensure compliance with the treaty terms. Both sides accepted our position that we could only consider undertaking this role if it could be performed with a contingent of civilian personnel which did not exceed the presently authorized size for SFM. —We also agreed to increase the frequency of Olive Harvest flights to an average of one per week.4 —With respect to the buffer zone, both sides have agreed to work out arrangements jointly between themselves without U.S. involvement. 3. We had several exchanges with Kurt Waldheim during the day to try to work out a letter from him which would enable the Israelis to accept UNTSO as the supervising mechanism for Zone B. Unfortu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 296. Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee Meeting1

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in future years. (The Egyptian program is now handled on a “full funding” basis in which credits are set aside from the start to cover the entire cost of a program.) By shifting to the cash flow basis, some of Egypt’s credits under the $1.5 billion “Peace Package” would be freed to cover start-up costs on additional programs. —That an additional $350 million in credits be added to the FY 81 budget. This additional increment, plus cash flow funding, would smooth out the two-year gap until additional funds became available in FY 82. If this course of action were adopted, we would have to explain to Congress that the withdrawal of Arab support from Egypt required us to request additional funds before the end of the three-year period previously anticipated for the “Peace Package.” It would also provide leverage for Israel to request an increase in its own funding level. (S) All agencies except OMB agreed that this level of funding was consistent with Egypt’s needs. OMB representatives stated that they would want to take a much closer look at the concept of cash flow funding. OMB indicated that they would submit their comments on this and the budgetary implications of this very large proposal to the President separately since they had not had time to study it sufficiently. (S) OMB questioned the need to seek a decision on this issue now, rather than during the regular budget review process in December. Secretary Brown noted that we had promised General Ali to resume talks in early November. At that time we would have to be able to provide some indication of the size of the program we were prepared to offer. It was also noted that the proposed sums—although very large—required an appropriation of only ten percent of the total amount as a credit guarantee. (S) The PRC reviewed the list of items which Egypt has requested. All agreed that we could not support its request to purchase F–15 aircraft at this time. However, all agencies, including ACDA, supported the OSD/JCS proposal that we indicate our willingness in principle to sell

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 3. Secretary met with King Hussein Sept. 24 for hour and a half. With King were Court Chief Abdul Hamid, Minister Hassan Ibrahim and Ambassador Salah. Secretary was accompanied by Under Secretary Newsom, Assistant Secretary Saunders, Ambassador Veliotes and Country Director Cluverius. Secretary welcomed King and said it had been too long since their last conversation. King expressed his pleasure at renewing their friendship. Secretary then expressed his interest in idea of Jordan-West Bank/Gaza confederation which Anwar Khatib had publicly espoused recently in Amman. King simply said such ideas have been around for a time and moved on to put them in context which he described as willingness of PLO to take a fresh look at Palestinian-Jordanian relations. King said he has been working to bring the Palestinians and PLO to a course with which all, including US and eventually Israel, could live. He said he wanted to bring Arafat to political maturity and he felt Arafat was ready now to discuss future Palestinian-Jordanian relations and wanted to know King’s views. Hussein said he had told Arafat that, on the contrary, it was up to Palestinian/PLO to tell him how they felt future relations should be shaped. Hussein continued that PLO does want dialogue “across the board” and he of course is ready to hear them out. Sharaf interjected that Anwar Khatib’s statements about a united Arab kingdom apparently were inspired by his Majesty’s meetings with Arafat. 4. Secretary then described Romanian envoy’s report to him of Arafat’s view which included PLO acceptance told Arafat that, on the contrary, it was up to Palestinian/PLO to tell him how they felt future relations should be shaped. Hussein continued that PLO does want dialogue “across the board” and he of course is ready to hear them out. Sharaf interjected that Anwar Khatib’s statements about a united Arab Kingdom apparently were inspired by his majesty’s meetings with Arafat.2 4. Secretary then described Romanian envoy’s report to him3 of Arafat’s view which included PLO acceptance of Israel within pre-1967 borders and, specifically, Arafat’s conclusion that ultimate solution is confederation. Hussein said Arafat had told him that Ceaucescu had made some suggestions and added that Ceaucescu had access in useful places and could make a contribution. Hussein said Arafat was concerned about motives behind apparent and seemly increasing USG desire to deal with PLO. Is USG doing it to involve PLO in a genuine way or as device to discredit PLO? PLO is worried that USG may be seeking contacts in order to keep PLO quiet. Nonetheless, King Hussein said, 2 The repetition of the first phrase of this and the next paragraph suggests that this paragraph is likely a transmission error. 3 No record of this discussion has been found.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 7. Hussein turned discussion back to peace issues and said goal is to work out with PLO and key Arabs an agreed Arab position on major issues which would, in effect, provide PLO an Arab cushion for steps toward peace which it must take at some point. This would include agreement on what is needed to change SC Resolution 242 to be acceptable on Palestinian rights. Arabs must be agreed before a position can be brought to the world. Sharaf said an Arab consensus is needed to support PLO on such difficult issues as mutual Israel-PLO recognition and language of any new SC resolution. PLO is considering all of this and Hussein said that Arabs need such agreed positions whatever outcome of USG efforts and that USG might need this Arab consensus if its efforts do end in stalemate which is likely in his opinion due to Israel intransigent attitudes and harmful actions. 8. Secretary asked if King had any timetable on these inter-Arab consultations. Hussein said process, which Sharaf interjected are not yet really formal consultations, should be completed in two–three months. Sharaf said that first question other Arabs ask is what would U.S. view on these ideas be. Secretary said that of course depends on how they come out. What we are now working on is arrangements for transition period, which we all agree is needed, and what King is discussing with other Arabs is a vision of what should happen at the end of that period. They are not inconsistent. Saunders interjected that what is needed as we proceed along parallel tracks is mutual acceptance that what the other is doing is sincere and well-intentioned. We need a meeting of the minds and way to reach it is through mutual respect for the other’s concerns. Hussein said there is no doubt of President Carter’s sincerity and commitment but that peace process had gone astray and is headed for stalemate. Saunders said that of course we do not believe this is the case but, even if it is at some future point, there can be ingredients in a stalemate which can be used to move ahead. 9. Under Secretary Newsom wondered if King was confident that inter-Arab discussion would be completed before the issue of a new resolution comes up in the UN. Hussein said that ideally it should be and Sharaf added that Kuwait, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Syria have heard his Majesty’s ideas. PLO is seeking King’s advice and guidance and has a great interest in a new SC resolution which would put Palestinian issues in truer perspective. PLO needs something major in this regard to justify acceptance of 242 and Israel. PLO also needs Arab support for such a move and this support is his Majesty’s goal. Secretary said that Romanian reports of Arafat’s position, about which he wanted Hussein to be fully informed, was that what Arafat needed is resolution acceptable to U.S. and Israel which would recognize Israel’s right to existence within secure and recognized borders and the Palestinians’ rights to self-determination would not be further defined in the resolution but it

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 13. Secretary said he wanted to mention the tank sale, which we hoped to move forward soon to Congress. He said he wanted King to understand that it would cause us no problem if King chose British or American tanks; whatever his decision, it is fine with us. Hussein said that, frankly, there are problems with U.S. offer: lead time is very long and tanks would not be equipped with sights which others (read Israelis) already have. In any case, deal with U.K. probably will be completed in a week or ten days. Saunders asked how many British tanks might be purchased. Hussein said one division at least. Veliotes noted that this might mean a U.S. purchase of about one hundred M–60s. King agreed. Veliotes added that an early decision of chieftains will help us with the Hill since the rather vague number we have been using has given some congressmen the impression that we do not know what we really want to do. Hussein, Sharaf and Veliotes agreed that it would be useful if all this was settled by time of October joint military commission meeting. 14. Newsom asked for King’s views of Jordanian-Saudi cooperation in Yemen and of situation there. Hussein said there had been no real change in Yemen since situation there rather static. He had discussed it with Prince Sultan in Geneva enroute to New York. King said contingency planning is needed and that SAG and GOJ should look ahead to potential dangers and plan together how to meet them. Hussein said he shared Saudi doubts about Salih and felt his regime disorganized particularly in comparison with much better organized government in Aden. Veliotes said that King’s officials had responded positively to Doug Bennet’s discussions in Amman re need to strengthen North Yemen’s institutions and that Jordan could play a helpful role. Hussein and Newsom agreed that much would depend on Saudi view of Salah which is not good at the moment. Hussein turned to broader aspects of regional security and said that Syria is not yet ready to participate and Iraqis feeling squeezed between events in Iran and Israeli threat. They are increasingly anti-communist, however, and this is to the good. Noting he realized he sounded like the late King Faisal, Hussein said Arabs felt themselves at present under pressure from Communists and Zionists. 15. Secretary wondered what King planned to say to the General Assembly.4 Hussein said he felt it would be positive and, hopefully, 4 King Hussein addressed the United Nations General Assembly on September 25. During his speech, he accused Israel of refusing to treat Arabs as human beings “but as a human barrier which it must seek to demolish.” The King also rejected calls for autonomy for the Palestinians as described in the Camp David Accords, insisting that the Palestinians must be given their own state. He noted: “Autonomy for the people but not the land” was a principle the Palestinians would not accept. (Bernard D. Nossiter, “Gromyko, at U.N., Calls Concern Over Soviet Units in Cuba Artificial,” The New York Times,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 298. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, September 27, 1979 SUBJECT Military Assistance Program for Egypt (U) As you know, the PRC met last week to consider how to respond to the Egyptian request for a five-year program of military cooperation and assistance. As indicated in the summary notes at Tab B,2 Cy Vance, Harold Brown and I agree that a major program is required. Jim McIntyre has submitted his comments separately at Tab A, rightly pointing out the budgetary implications of a very substantial, long-term security relationship with Egypt. (S) Egypt’s very large military establishment is facing massive obsolescence in the near future. There is no inexpensive quick fix for this situation. There is also no realistic probability that other sources of military support will soon appear. The questions which Jim raises in his memorandum underline the difficulties which we all recognize are associated with a program of sufficient size to respond to Egypt’s needs. A high-level Defense delegation visited Egypt in mid-August for frank and detailed discussions of the military supply problems Egypt faces.3 Our own subsequent analysis of the $8 billion Egyptian request concluded that a program in the neighborhood of $4.35 billion is required to meet Sadat’s basic military and political needs over the next five We do not underestimate the difficulties of presenting a program of this magnitude on the Hill, and we recognize that it would be used as leverage to increase Israel’s current aid levels. However, it is our reading of the mood on the Hill that the Egyptian predicament is understood and viewed with considerable sympathy. That viewpoint is substantiated by the findings of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Staff, which recently conducted a fact-finding visit to Egypt. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 77, PRC

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX peace process. Thus politically there is need for some urgency, whatever we decide. (S) RECOMMENDATION: That a joint State/Defense decision paper be prepared for your review by October 8, examining the implications of a long-term military assistance program for Egypt along the lines proposed by the PRC, and alternatives.5 (S) 5 Carter initialed his approval of the recommendation and added a handwritten note: “Be cautious about excessive U.S. commitments. Budget constraints will be very se- 299. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, October 1, 1979 SUBJECT A Course of Action on Lebanon THE DECISION This memorandum lays out for approval a concrete plan of action designed to transform the present ceasefire in South Lebanon into a longer lasting truce (a detailed scenario is attached). In the process we would seek to accomplish these specific additional objectives: —enable the Lebanese Government to take several further steps to enhance its authority, particularly in the south, as part of the continuing implementation of Resolution 425; —return internal Lebanese refugees to their homes and undertake an international program of rebuilding in limited areas of the south; —strengthen UNIFIL’s role and capability in partial preparation for the later day when it may be asked under Resolution 425 to help the Lebanese Government secure the Israeli-Lebanese border; —lessen the likelihood of an Israeli-Syrian confrontation in the air; —produce a token demonstration of Syrian willingness to begin withdrawing its forces while the Lebanese take increased responsibility for security in central and northern Lebanon; 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the parties (although we would share more details with Waldheim and one or two of his closest associates, because of their central role). To go into details, for example with the Israelis, could lead to an insistence that the details of the last stage of the plan be agreed upon before the first step is taken. Our strategy would involve tailoring our initial presentation to the role which we foresee each party playing in the process and to anticipate—and thus to avoid—some of the difficulties which particular parties will have with certain aspects of the plan. As we proceed, we would retain the flexibility to refine or change some of the later steps we envisage. THE ISSUES Because there are so many actors, we have had to consider a number of issues that will arise in the implementation of this plan: 1. Management. We have reviewed various possibilities for the management of this program and have concluded that the U.S. will have to provide the motor to keep this effort going but will need to work in an almost co-manager relationship with the UN Secretary General. Ambassador Dean can well handle the U.S. role in Beirut. An important element in the UN’s ability to play its role will be its ability to field a personality who can be a focal point for the negotiations among the parties in Lebanon. Both of us, of course, will work closely with the Lebanese President and Prime Minister. It may prove useful at some point for Waldheim to send a special representative to the area for this purpose. We, the Lebanese, and the Arabs generally have supported Waldheim naming the just-retired UK Ambassador in New York, Ivor Richard, to this position. Neither the Soviets (because Richard is from a NATO country) nor the Israelis have been keen on the idea. If the Richard appointment does not materialize, we may be able to make use of an excellent Pakistani, Ambassador Akhund, who is now about to arrive in Beirut to coordinate UN development and reconstruction programs in Lebanon. 2. Parties Involved. Within Lebanon and in support of this plan we will need to marshal the support of the following parties: —Secretary General Waldheim and the UN Secretariat generally. (We will resume consultations with them after you have agreed to this general approach.) —Israel. (In both Washington and Tel Aviv, we would fill them in at an early stage on the broad outlines of our proposal, urge their cooperation, and promise to keep them informed of progress.) —The Lebanese Government. (The U.S. and UN would jointly put forward a proposed course of action.) —The PLO. (We would seek their cooperation through third parties primarily, but the UN would carry the major burden.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 4. U.S. Contact with the PLO. Initially, we will probably be able to steer clear of any contact with the PLO apart from our normal security contacts in Beirut, which are publicly known. (The UN, the Lebanese Government, and members of the consultative groups in Beirut and Lebanon would have direct contacts right away with the PLO.) At some point, however, it may be necessary for us, if the potential gains are high enough, to decide to have contact with the PLO in the Lebanese context for the purpose of achieving an end of terrorist attacks on Israel, not only those launched from Lebanon but also those coming from within the occupied territories. The latter would be a particularly hard objective to achieve, but we believe we must try. The Israelis would, of course, react sharply to any contact and charge that we had violated our Sinai II commitment.3 Any contact would have to be justified on the following grounds: (a) It is an extension of our publicly announced security contacts. The objective is to enhance the security of the American mission and the people of southern Lebanon. (b) The “Sinai II Commitment” was made in a Memorandum of Agreement entitled “The Geneva Peace Conference” and relates entirely to the peace process. Contacts in Lebanon on Lebanese problems were not addressed, nor were they intended. Israel has never objected to our contacts on security in Lebanon. (c) The Israeli argument that contact constitutes recognition is not tenable; governments, including Israel’s, often have contacts which they acknowledge do not constitute recognition (e.g., Israel with Jordan). The issue would not be contact but the purpose of the contact. In the Lebanese context, contact would not constitute recognition of the PLO in the peace process and would not in any sense involve negotiation on issues related to the peace process. Nevertheless, we would have to expect strong Israeli objection. Our defense would lie in whatever success we achieved in ending violence. 5. Dealing with Israel. We will clearly have to keep the Israelis fully involved in an effort to encourage an evolution in their thinking. However, as noted above, we will also probably have to delay until later discussions with Israel on specific elements of the plan. Initially, we would set forth general targets for a moratorium on attacks on Israel, and our overall purpose of carrying out Resolution 425 (which Israel has accepted). At the moment, Weizman—perhaps without Cabinet backing—has modified Israel’s preemptive strike strategy by saying that Israel would not hit the Palestinians if the Palestinians did not hit Israel. It seems unlikely that we will get more from the Israelis in the near future until we are able to describe the readiness of other parties to make certain commitments. At some point, however, we will have to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 300. Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States (Evron) to President Carter1 Washington, October 8, 1979 My dear Mr. President: I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the following message: “Dear Mr. President, I am taking the liberty of writing to you on an issue that is of great importance to Israel. On March 26, 1979, the day of the signing of the Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel, you were kind enough to forward to me the following letter and enclosure: ‘Dear Mr. Prime Minister: On the basis of my discussions today with President Sadat and you, I attach a summary of my understanding of the results of those discussions. Sincerely’ ‘1. Israel will withdraw from Southern Sinai and restore to Egypt the exercise of its sovereignty over that area, and over all the adjacent oil fields in the Gulf of Suez, two months before completion of full Israeli withdrawal to the interim Al-Arish-Ras Muhammad line. 2. Egypt will take the necessary steps to insure that oil from those oil fields will be made available for purchase by Israel on an on-going basis, at the world market price current at the time of transfer, from the time of Israeli relinquishment of the fields. 3. The Government of Israel will make all arrangements for the transportation of oil in question.’ During our successful meeting in Haifa,2 President Sadat and I discussed, inter alia, the issue of oil supply and we reached full agreement on the question of quantity, namely two million tons per-anum. With respect to the matter of ‘world market price’ mentioned in your letter I proposed to President Sadat that we agree on the average price, neither the lowest nor the highest. President Sadat, however, preferred to leave this concrete question to the discussions between our respective Ministers. Our colleagues, Minister Hilal of Egypt and Minister Modai of Israel met again last week but without reaching agreement. The Egyptian Minister of petroleum maintained the principle that Egypt will decide 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Hamilton Jordan, Chief of Staff Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs David Aaron, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Robert Hunter, Staff Member National Security Council (David Aaron and Hamilton Jordan joined the meeting while it was in progress; Zbigniew Brzezinski left before it was over.) Ambassador Strauss noted that little progress is likely to be made in the autonomy talks by May. And either Begin and Sadat will be embracing one another by then, or there will be a total breakdown in their relationship. He is totally convinced that there is no chance of Egypt’s and Israel’s moving on the West Bank. Sadat does not even know what is going on; Khalil doesn’t want it; and Begin won’t move. Dr. Brzezinski said that this means the situation is a mess. Secretary Vance said that there is a lot to what was being said. On Lebanon, he said it was never our intention to get out in front, and to beat the drums on a Lebanon initiative. The effort goes back to a Khalil- Strauss conversation,2 when Khalil said that peace in Lebanon would buy added time for the peace process. Lebanon appears ready to do something, and is better able to do so. But how far can it go? He can’t say. Saudi Arabia would like greater stability, and would be of some help. Syria is interested in something happening, if it would increase stability and not be humiliating to it, so that it would be easier for it to wrestle with its internal problems. With Israel, how can it take care of its northern border situation and at the same time cut down on terrorism? With the PLO, indications are that it is becoming more sophisticated. It might see that more stability would advance its cause. The UN and UNIFIL want stability. Therefore, there may be the ingredients for something to move toward stability. For us, everytime Lebanon flares up, we have domestic problems as Israel over-reacts. The problem we must deal with is about dealing with the PLO. The President clearly can’t have this happen now. But the Lebanese and others might try to get the PLO to make some advance on terrorism to satisfy the Israelis. Will it work? He doesn’t know. Much of it is for Israel to decide. In advancing U.S. work, we would not be out front, but would work with others, and push others to advance the interest in getting more stability. Ambassador Strauss said that, looking at the State Department plan3 in a vacuum, there would be no problem. But we really need something else, otherwise we will be blamed for failure. He doesn’t like the paper—though it is crafted well—because it looks duplicitous: it starts us on the course inevitably towards the PLO, without saying so. Second, if we say that we are not dealing with the PLO, the President

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Strauss agreed, but added that that doesn’t just mean terrorism mounted from Lebanon. Ambassador Habib said that Eppy sees Israel’s loss of image each time Lebanon blows up. He (Evron) worries about a rising tide of opinion, that could even lead to anti-Semitism. Therefore Eppy is not as negative. Ambassador Strauss said that Eppy thinks Ambassador Habib has great credibility. Ambassador Habib asked what would happen if Lebanon takes the lead—and Begin gets what he wants, which is the PLO (issue?) off his back? Ambassador Strauss said that he wants Begin to bless our effort, and give us some room to maneuver. That means we must clearly be seen as

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Strauss said he could say he is getting their thoughts. The problem is not to see the others. If he goes to Israel, he has to say why he is doing so. Dr. Brzezinski said that if the approach is quieter, why would Israel be interested. It will see the U.S. inching towards the PLO, whatever we do. One they stop; second they will stick it to us here. Secretary Vance said this might be right. But Israel sees damage from past Lebanon actions, and will again if the cease-fire breaks down. Dr. Brzezinski said that there is a trade-off. It is after Cambodia, it is an ugly situation, and politically and morally something should be done. There would be an impact in the Arab world if we did nothing. Ambassador Strauss agreed. Secretary Vance raised the question of how to do something, and stick to it, on the PLO. It is up to Lebanon, Syria, and the UN to affect the PLO. Dr. Brzezinski suggested the UN. David Aaron said he had thought the PLO was interested in getting legitimacy. Secretary Vance said that if we can’t do that, how do we do something. Maybe we can go part way on a truce plan; then in time go on. David Aaron asked why the situation is calmer now. Is it because we have this initiative going? Israel is worried that something might happen. Then should we just let it simmer, and keep the effort moving to keep the situation quiet? Ambassador Habib said that this is a good point. Therefore we should move on a gradual, phased basis. Secretary Vance said that we need movement on a phased basis— e.g., how can we get movement on Tyre? How can we get the LAF into Tyre? Therefore we need some understanding on how to do it. Pieces like that can be moved. Maybe we can do that without being inconsistent and without dealing with the PLO. Dr. Brzezinski asked how great the U.S. role should be. Secretary Vance said that we should first move to talk with the Israelis—and not see it slide past them. Ambassador Strauss said we have to go to Begin first, and get him as a co-conspirator. Secretary Vance said that second we should go to Lebanon and say that it must do more. Therefore, we should ask them what they will do. We should go to Syria and ask them what they will do—e.g., pulling some forces out of Beirut and the airport. Robert Hunter asked what the incentives would be for the PLO to cooperate.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX David Aaron asked what this will do for them. They see that we are putting them on the spot over Lebanon. If they say no, they see problems. If they say yes, this is the slippery slope to the PLO. We need a plan, if they say no, not to leave this problem at their doorstep. We can’t let this effort come to grief in Jerusalem. We need a plan for Begin that will not crowd the Israelis. Ambassador Strauss said that if we go to the Israelis, we must have in our options one that we know they can accept—e.g., to do what they are now doing. We need an option they will accept. Secretary Vance said we could lay out why they should be involved. He is not sure; this could put them on the spot. Ambassador Strauss asked what he meant. Secretary Vance said he meant on the autonomy talks. Ambassador Strauss said that we did this before. It was bad. We need a little forthrightness, with an option the Israelis can say yes to, even if we don’t like it. Secretary Vance said he has the idea of dealing with this in small pieces—e.g., Tyre. Can we devise steps? Ambassador Habib said that if the cease-fire is maintained, it could be done. If not, the PLO will not let Tyre be neutralized. Secretary Vance suggested acceptance of the cease-fire as ok, even if fragile. Then on to the next piece. How can it be put together? Ambassador Habib said that once Lebanon is there (Tyre) it would be hard to change. The PLO will have to agree to lots before we get to that point. Secretary Vance said that it is at least a piece. Ambassador Strauss said we should go back to premises. It is given that, for the PLO, there is nothing in it for them that we will give. With regard to Israel, there is damn little in it for the PLO to warrant their getting in, to crunch on a deal. Therefore there is nothing in the plan for the Israelis. Therefore how do we get them in? First, we could give them something; but we can’t. Second, there is world opinion—this is the only thing. It is something positive, with low costs, and is a positive step towards peace in the world. This needs a bit of escalation of publicity. The only thing we have is that this is something positive for Israel, with low risks, and assurances of what we will not do. Then it reaches the launch pad, with political security and support here. Dr. Brzezinski asked how this would be done. Ambassador Strauss said we should say to Begin: you won’t do anything on the autonomy talks or on settlements—for good reasons, etc. But Israel must take a positive step for world opinion. Therefore, here Israel can be on the side of the angels. The problem is in being crowded into dealing with the PLO. We would publicly say we would not do

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Strauss said that there could be a quick fact-finding trip, including Israel. Ambassador Habib said that this is an idea for himself; he will not draw as much fire. Ambassador Strauss suggested that Ambassador Habib go to Israel. Ambassador Habib agreed. If he goes to Syria, he must go to Israel anyway. Ambassador Strauss said it would be ok for Ambassador Habib to go to Begin. This would be better than himself. Would it be possible for him to go to three or four countries, and end up in Israel? If it looks like success, then he (Ambassador Strauss) could join him, and bring Eppy. Ambassador Habib noted that Eppy is sympathetic. Secretary Vance said that if this is fact-finding, what do we have in mind? What would Ambassador Habib look for? Ambassador Habib said it would be to see whether the Lebanese have guts. Will Syria back them? The UN in New York will do so. Secretary Vance asked if he would go to Syria to ask them to pull out of Lebanon. Ambassador Habib said that Syria can’t do that. Secretary Vance said that if he (Ambassador Habib) could talk with Syria on reducing its presence. That would be a real selling point in Israel. Ambassador Strauss agreed. Secretary Vance said that this is the one thing Israel wants to see. Then we have a chance of Israel’s encouraging this effort. Ambassador Strauss said that we have to structure it. For Begin, we can expect nothing from the PLO. But maybe we can get something from Syria. We could say that this is a non-risk gamble: for Israel and us this is no risk. Ambassador Habib said that therefore this changes nothing on the Israeli-Lebanese border. Ambassador Strauss said that Syria would be first. Therefore this is the plus for the Israelis. Secretary Vance said that he raised with the Syrians the question of withdrawing from downtown Beirut and the airport. They said that this depends on the Lebanese. If they say they will do it, and can provide security, the Syrians will talk. Ambassador Habib said that the Syrians don’t believe this. They are devious in dealing with Lebanon. Secretary Vance said that at least we can talk about it. Ambassador Strauss asked about the way to structure it.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 302. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, October 18, 1979 SUBJECT Letter from Begin on Oil Negotiations with Egypt (C) At last Friday’s breakfast,2 you decided that we should not get involved in mediating on oil prices between Israel and Egypt, in response to Begin’s request (Tab B).3 (S) Subsequently, Dayan has come to us with a renewed plea for a positive response.4 Bob Strauss has suggested—and Cy and I concur— that we try a middle course that is still designed to keep us at a distance, without making your response a flat turndown. This would be to suggest a list of internationally-respected experts in the field, from which Begin and Sadat could choose one or more to help. Begin would have the responsibility for selling Sadat on the idea. (S) This approach would put the ball back in Begin’s court; though we should be under no illusions about the stakes involved, and the possibility that Begin will come back to us again in an effort to get us to assume responsibility. (S) At Tab A is a message to Begin. The key element (paragraph 3) was drafted by Bob Strauss.5 The rest is a State draft. The speechwriters have cleared. (The cable will include talking points on our skepticism that this sort of mediation can work.) (C) RECOMMENDATION: That you approve the message to Prime Minister Begin at Tab 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Office, Presidential Advisory

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX mutual understanding and accommodation that characterizes their new relationship, a satisfactory agreement can be reached. Sincerely, Jimmy Carter11 11 In place of his signature, Carter wrote: “OK. JC.” The Department of State trans-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 304. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, October 29, 1979 SUBJECT London Meetings (U) The meetings2 with the Israelis and Egyptians went better than expected. For the Egyptians, the talks took place against the background of Sadat’s expressing optimism in contrast with press reports of Strauss’ testimony—i.e. the effect Strauss was trying to achieve. Khalil continues to be impressive, and his seriousness about the process is now complete. (C) From the Israeli side, the hidden factor was Burg’s neardesperation to come home with something, in order to counter Dayan’s charges that he couldn’t run the negotiations. He publicly announced that he was coming with new ideas; and when Strauss demonstrated that they were worth nothing (e.g. that Burg would go to visit West Bank leaders—who surely wouldn’t receive him!), he flailed around for alternatives, which Khalil and Strauss obligingly provided. (S) The agreement on supervision of the elections is the most significant—i.e. that the military will not take part, that Palestinians can (with approval of the Working Group), that there can be outsiders (unspecified), and that the world press can be there. This also covers the whole “process,” not just election day. (C) The agreement to continue the Israeli presentation on the current powers and responsibilities of the military government is less opti- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presiden-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Arabia.2 This situation is very damaging to me politically and also creates a major obstacle in the achievement of a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We should be acting in concert, but instead we are divided. I realize that some sharp differences will remain between you regarding what should be done immediately to make progress, but there is no doubt that we share common goals and purposes. My hope and prayer is that, either directly though your own emissaries or through me, you will explore every possible way to minimize the adverse consequences of those differences and to restore the mutual respect, consultation and understanding which should exist among the three of us.3 You have my personal best wishes and my standing offer to help in any way possible to resolve this most serious matter.4 Your friend, Jimmy Carter P.S. Give my love to Jehan and your family. 2 On October 18, the Embassy in Cairo reported, “There seems to be no longer any effort by either Egypt or Saudi Arabia to carry out the moratorium on press criticism that Ambassador Eilts worked out last spring.” (See footnote 5, Document 253) “Fueled by press charges and countercharges, the animosity between Sadat and Fahd seems to have reached a new level of intensity. Unless the lid can be put on the public rhetoric, the situation could get out of hand, with serious implications for our Middle East policy.” (Tele-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Begin had an almost pro forma meeting with Habib,5 stressing the need to a halt to attacks on Israel; the Israelis apparently accepted that the Habib effort is not a back-door approach to the PLO; they are skeptical but open-minded; Weizman will suspend the preemptive strategy for now, but will keep options open if attacks resume; and Israel will get Haddad out of the UNIFIL area if the PLO and Leftists leave it; —France is trying to get a statement out of the PLO prior to the Arab summit, on Lebanese territorial integrity, the temporary nature of the PLO presence, extension of Lebanese authority, support for the cease-fire, and praise of the UNIFIL role. The sweetener (provided the statement came before the Arab summit) would be an Arafat visit to Phil is thus “reasonably optimistic” about the chances for moving forward. Formal written statements and all-party conferences are out. A modus vivendi might be possible, and he sees a “surprising degree of Arab confidence that Arafat would cooperate.” Given what is happening, there is no need for us to take a more prominent role. (S/S) Where Next? Habib sees the near-term as important in seeing what the Lebanese can and will do to follow up—in thinking things through, developing details of an initiative, and securing Palestinian approval of next steps. The Arab summit could be crucial. (S/S) Phil has asked for approval of a number of steps (pages 7–8). These are essentially non-controversial, except: —should we talk to the Saudis, Kuwaitis, Moroccans, and Sudanese about supporting some effort through ambassadors, or send Habib out (the former minimizes risks of being seen as trying to interfere in the Arab summit; the latter has more chance of getting somewhere); and —should we tell the Israelis about French thinking (yes: to keep from being accused of holding back; no: that we might be asked to turn-off an Arafat visit). (S/S) 5 Habib met with Begin on October 28 to discuss “cooling” the situation in South Lebanon and moving the ceasefire toward a permanent peace. Assessing their meeting, Lewis stated that the Israelis were “basically satisfied with current status quo in South Lebanon. At same time, they recognize that situation there does not provide best foundation for securing Israel’s northern front. Overall impression left is that Israel has no quarrel with long-term objectives of: perpetuating the ceasefire; eventual departure of unauthorized forces from area of a strengthened UNIFIL, and effort to enhance authority of GOL. As for practical next steps in Lebanon, Israelis are deeply skeptical, but apparently willing to let others give it a try so long as certain fundamental factors are kept in forefront of effort.” (Telegram 23165 from Tel Aviv, October 29; National Archives, RG

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The State-Defense memorandum provides the technical information you need to make the crucial decisions required, so I would like to address myself to the larger picture. With these decisions, we have the opportunity, and in my view the obligation, to cement a relationship of vital importance to the United States. President Sadat has nowhere else to turn for military assistance. He is in this position by virtue of turning away from the Soviets and moving closer to the United States and Israel—steps of unprecedented benefit to our interests in the Middle East. Our failure to support Sadat militarily at this critical juncture could have disastrous effect on our overall peace effort. (S) It is important to stress that we have taken responsible steps to keep the assistance package at a reasonable level. We received a larger and more expensive list from Sadat,3 but we pared that list by projecting smaller, yet more sophisticated, Egyptian armed forces. Further, we are working with the Egyptians to build up their indigenous arms production base, and, if the moderate Arabs move closer to the peace process, we hope to encourage their resuming contributions to Egypt’s defense. (S) I strongly agree that we need to provide more assistance and preferred financing terms in FY 81, and that this funding should be in addition to the already strapped FY 81 security assistance budget. We do not want an arms delivery gap to occur during the next two critical years, nor do we want to affect adversely vital interests elsewhere as we move to protect the interests at stake here. (S) Finally, I think that sufficient facts are presented here for you to make a decision at this time, rather than to wait until after the budget cycle runs its course next month. Sadat is expecting a reply shortly, and delaying the decision until December could affect the Strauss/Linowitz visit on November 17.4 (S) RECOMMENDATION: That you approve each of the five recommendations in the State- Defense memorandum at Tab A.5 (U)

1000 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the only source of substantial credit assistance. In view of present political circumstances and Egypt’s economic situation, the US is likely to remain in this position for a while to come. Our decisions on the scope of a longer term arms supply relationship thus have significant political content. This is true not only of the size of the program, but also its pace. The deliveries in the current “three-year” program are front-loaded. Therefore, if we simply phase in a five-year program after “the three-year program,” we will have a severe interim “delivery gap” of 2–3 years which will put a serious strain on our overall relationship. The PRC recommended a multi-year security assistance program

1002 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX limited production assistance to Egypt, it will have minimal impact in satisfying Egyptian requirements for the foreseeable future. The budgetary impact differential among these annual funding levels is not great, assuming no “forgiveness” (grant aid) is involved. For FMS credits extended by the Federal Financing Bank, the annual appropriation must cover only the guarantee fees, which equal 10% of the loans. Thus, the budget appropriation would range from $50 million to $100 million a year. OMB already assumes, in its budget projections for FY 1982, credit funding at the $500 million a year level. (The possibility of FY 1981 funding is discussed below). We are sensitive to the “proportionality” of the annual funding level to that of Israel. As it approaches Israel’s $1 billion, Israel will undoubtedly feel the case for additional security assistance it has submitted is even more justified. They have asked for an additional $800 million a year, but we do not believe the accelerated pace of military equipment deliveries which this would imply is necessary, and we have not encouraged them to think they will get it or even a portion of it. An increase for Israel, assuming that it contained the usual 50% forgiveness, would add greatly to the budget impact; e.g., an additional $800 million a year for Israel would require an additional budget appropriation of $440 million. If this initiative with Egypt did result in our also increasing assistance for Israel, we would want to strongly resist extending any forgiveness in that increase. We do not recommend forgiveness for Egypt. Egypt’s external financing deficit appears just about balanced by the external assistance they receive. Egypt should be able to manage the interest and subsequently the principal repayments if we offer the same terms provided for under Peace Treaty package—10 year grace period and 20-year repayment of principal thereafter. By the same token, however, we do not recommend that Egypt directly fund a major portion of approved purchases from their own resources. It would merely divert resources from priority economic development. In our judgment, these recommendations would not lead to a requirement for an increase in currently projected U.S. economic aid levels to Egypt. FY 1981 Funding The original $1.5 billion treaty package was supposed to cover a three-year period, but it is already committed and it satisfied only a small portion of Egypt’s priority needs. If we do not begin the new assistance program until FY 1982, we would face a politically difficult two-year gap before we can even announce a new sale to Egypt, and a three or four-year gap between completion of major deliveries from the $1.5 billion program and the start of new deliveries. In the meantime, Egypt’s Soviet equipment will be seriously deteriorating, with attendant decline in Egyptian military morale.

1004 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX term FMS financing program at substantial levels were established. Because of this risk we do not recommend cash flow financing across the board; rather we propose this method of financial implementation only on a selected basis to begin important programs in FY 80 and 81 and only drawing on committed but not yet spent funds from the original $1.5 billion program. We believe that limiting the use of cash flow financing in this manner meets previous objections and limits our financial exposure to an acceptable level. Cash flow financing (up to $320

1006 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 308. Memorandum From the Special Adviser to the Secretary of State for Middle East Affairs (Sanders) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, November 9, 1979 SUBJECT General Assembly Resolutions on Israeli Settlements In casting our votes, I feel that we should be mindful of the strong possibility that the Israeli 1978 reaction to our vote may not be an accurate barometer of their 1979 response. It is important to remember that the domestic political situation in Israel today is extremely delicate—unlike a year ago—and that the fact that Israel raised few objections last year to these resolutions does not mean that they will not become the subject of heated debate this year. In voting for these resolutions, there are several things that we do not want to accomplish. We do not want to put the Israeli Government in a position where it will be forced to increase settlement activity. We do not wish to jeopardize the orderly conduct of the autonomy negotiations. We do not want to make it more difficult for Cabinet moderates and the Labor Party to oppose settlements. And we do not want to further erode Israeli trust of the U.S. at a moment when Israel is particularly uneasy about our commitment in general terms and on specifics like aid and US–PLO ties. Accordingly, I recommend that if we maintain our 1978 position, we first explain to the Israelis in New York and in Jerusalem that we are merely reaffirming prior US positions and not going beyond them. Moreover, I believe that we should take a low-key approach to these resolutions both here and in New York. We should avoid citing domestic Israeli developments (such as the Elon Moreh decision)2 which might hinder debate within Israel. Finally, we should not support any resolution at the General Assembly or the Security Council which substantively alters our current position. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

1008 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX only the Saudis.6 We should consider slightly more involvement, perhaps with talking points to selected Arab participants. This can be judged on the basis of the Foreign Ministers meeting. —Rejectionists: They will no doubt try to put together some rhetoric, if not some concrete action. They will set the tone of the meeting. Saudi Arabia, lacking a consensus among the moderates, is inclined to be passive. The pressure to move to consensus, however, is on the hardline side, not the moderate side (as was true at Baghdad I and II). We should make this point to Saudi Arabia and other moderates, in order to try shifting rhetoric, and also to give Lebanon a better chance of being a focus of attention instead. —Israel: A key factor in the Summit will be the impending deportation of Mayor Shaka.7 There is a consensus in Israel on this point, and not much give. But if it happens, the likelihood of stronger rhetoric out of the Summit, and coalescence around hardline positions, will increase considerably. The peace process will be damaged on the West Bank. Newsom is talking to Nehushtan; we should consider going to the Vance/ Strauss level immediately.8 Revelation of their settlement plan before the Summit will also have a serious effect.9 —Oil: Even with Iran, it is unlikely that any new steps will take place on oil at the Summit, although 1) Ghaddafi is almost certain to raise it; and 2) there is a good chance that there will be a declaration on 6 West met with Saud on November 11 to discuss the issue of Lebanon at the Summit. West summarized the Lebanese Government’s desire for a strengthened ceasefire in which “no armed elements” in Lebanon “would attack anyone else,” cooperation of all parties with UNIFIL, and the introduction of Lebanese Army units and civil authorities in southern Lebanon. Moreover, West emphasized the U.S. effort to give “strong support” to Lebanon. (Telegram 7789 from Jidda, November 12; National Archives, RG

1010 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with the Yemen operation and support for Morocco). The problem of military presence would remain, however, and there will be greater awareness of internal vulnerability. (S) 310. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations-Designate (Linowitz)1 Washington, November 14, 1979 SUBJECT Middle East Negotiations (U) You take over2 at a time of deep skepticism about the possibilities for success of the talks: —the Begin government is on the edge of paralysis and, even if it survives, is unlikely to become much stronger; at the same time, the election/government-forming process in Israel is measured in months, not weeks; —the Shaka affair3—if he is indeed expelled—threatens a collapse of any local government on the West Bank, deep disillusionment, and serious problems for the Egyptians at the Talks; and —although the President is committed to the process, election developments here are leading to skepticism, heightened by the shift of command in our delegation; 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

1012 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX nothing); and c) the passage of time in weakening the rejectionist There is a school of thought which holds that Egypt will “turn” on the Israelis as soon as the Interim Line is reached (January 25). Khalil specifically dismissed this thought at the London meeting;4 and Egypt has publicly pledged that the exchange of Ambassadors will take place on February 25, whatever is happening in the Autonomy Talks. (S) Thus the Egyptian preference is for the real issues to be met at the political level beginning next month or early January at the latest. However, they have argued that we should take the lead in pushing Israel, against the background of the “favorable climate” Sadat has engendered. In his meeting with Mubarak,5 President Carter firmly rejected this division of responsibility, and also stressed that we cannot be out in front of Egypt on issues like settlements. (S) Sadat’s future role is a key mystery. He has shown himself capable of dramatic action (and turning on Israel is one such possibility); he has floated ideas like a new international conference in El Arish (though no one has taken him seriously—rightly, so far); and he constantly talks about the deal he will cut with Begin. Sadat keeps focussing on Jerusalem as the lead for such a deal (Begin, meanwhile, congratulates himself on his forebearance when Sadat raises the subject). And Sadat has floated the idea of diverting Nile waters to the Sinai and Negev—at first in exchange for a deal on Jerusalem, until Begin reacted harshly to this connection. (CIA tells us that this idea would be very expensive, ignores Egypt’s own water needs, and would be politically costly). (S) From our standpoint, the Sadat-Begin relationship is central— which is one reason someone of your political stature on our side is vital to moving the process on with these two key leaders. Ultimately, agreement has to come “top down,” rather than “bottom up.” The Israeli delegation is deliberately weak politically—a factor contributing to Dayan’s resignation.6 On the Egyptian side, Sadat will ultimately call the shots; but Khalil is now firmly on board, and increasingly demonstrates his capabilities and importance in the process. (S) We are doing what we can to protect Sadat’s domestic position. To be sure, there is not much concern for the Palestinians on the part of the Egyptian people; but there is popular concern to see that “peace pays.” 4 See Document 304. 5 See Document 293. 6 Dayan resigned as Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs on October 21. An Embassy analysis of Dayan’s rationale for resigning, including his limited role in the autonomy negotiations, the state of Begin’s coalition government, and philosophical differences between himself and the coalition’s membership, was forwarded to the Department of State

1014 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX blessing. Not only is there the time needed to put a new government in place; but also “autonomy” is Begin’s concept (though he didn’t go very far with it). Labor has favored territorial readjustment, the Allon Plan,8 etc., and it will not be easy for Labor to shift gears. Because of Begin’s personal commitment to Camp David, having a strong Begin government would probably be best from the standpoint of the talks— but this may now be a pipedream. (An alternative school of thought holds that Begin’s leadership on peace is played out anyway, and that only an alternative political constellation can now move forward). (S) The choice for Israel is fairly stark: between having five more years of effective “control” over the West Bank/Gaza—with the legitimacy of Camp David (as far as it goes)—or a breakdown of a framework for dealing with the Palestinian issue, further isolation in the world (where Israel is probably at its low point) and even more terrorism. The nature of this choice is added reason for trying to get a Self-Governing Authority more or less on time: thus preserving some “framework,” instead of seeing diplomatic anarchy again. (S) One angle is worth exploring—though not much weight can be put on it: that this is probably Begin’s last chance to make peace for his nation, and to assure his place in Judaism’s history. (S) We should also not rule out the possibility that Dayan will re-involve himself in the peace process (provided his health9 holds out). He played a key role in Camp David, etc., and is never without The Begin government may collapse in the near future10 (the smart money gives him only a few more weeks; yet the sizeable Labor lead in the polls will concentrate Likud and NRP minds, and creates a strong incentive for soldiering on). If the government does collapse, implementation of the Egypt-Israel treaty will most likely proceed on schedule. But it is unrealistic to expect the Autonomy Talks to make any progress (though the form and actual meetings will most likely proceed). The timetable will almost certainly slip, though we must not rule out Israeli political ingenuity (e.g. a government of national unity that could take some decisions). (S) The aid relationship with Israel will be important. It gets $1.7 billion now (in effect, “straightlining” for the past three years, discounting the special $3 billion peace package). This means real erosion from in-

1016 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX did play with the idea of a complementary initiative. We could encourage an initiative along the lines of a federal or confederal relationship between the West Bank and Jordan, which Hussein has advanced in the past. The Begin government would not accept it (it has residual claims to sovereignty over the West Bank); but it is consistent with the Labor approach. The important thing is to seek progress in the Talks that will increase the incentives for Hussein to be involved in the West Bank in some way during the next few years, to avoid being frozen out by an autonomy regime in which he has no part. At the moment, this is a long-shot. (S) In the next few months, Saudi Arabia will also be important, both in showing confidence in the possibility of some success in the talks— by keeping oil production up; and in trying to play a moderating role in Arab politics (beginning with the Arab Summit on November 20). In general, the Saudis have been reluctant to use oil in politics; with the exchange of Ambassadors—or outright failure of the Talks—it might not be able to sustain that position. (At the same time, economically Saudi Arabia probably wants to sustain at least an 8.5 million barrel a day output, and it will see its oil production decisions in the context of its total relationship with us). We should keep up our discussions with the Saudis on the peace process, while continuing efforts on Saudi military problems, Gulf security, etc. (S) At some point, Bob had intended to go to Syria. The object was to keep Assad informed, and also to indicate the ways in which completion of Camp David could lead in the direction of a comprehensive peace. The Syrians would not receive him in the context of Camp David; it is unlikely that they would soon receive you, either, though it is something to keep in mind (the Saudis could be helpful in arranging The Talks12 State will be briefing you on the detailed issues. Suffice it to point out here the tough problems, which include: —the status of East Jerusalem (for purposes of voting), where some sort of dual voting might be possible; —the voting status of returnees from 1967 (as provided for in Camp David); —the “legislative” vs. “administrative” character of the Self- Governing Authority; 12 Hunter sent a follow-up memorandum on the state of the autonomy talks with a list of strategy suggestions to Linowitz on November 26. (Carter Library, National Secu-

1018 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Collateral peace issues. These include oil (now hopefully resolved, though the terms of the agreement have been reported to us by the two sides in different terms), Sinai observer arrangements, etc. (S) 311. Briefing Memorandum From the Senior Adviser to the Secretary of State (Habib) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, November 17, 1979 SUBJECT Lebanon—Discussion with Dobrynin As instructed,2 I called on Dobrynin today to inform him of our views on the situation in Southern Lebanon and our support for the Lebanese initiative in that regard. I outlined for him the nature of the Lebanese initiative and its purpose, emphasizing that we believed it was worth supporting for humanitarian as well as political reasons. I noted the existence of a fragile ceasefire which we sought to make permanent, the relationship to Security Council Resolution 425,3 and the dangers of confrontation and escalation if the situation in Southern Lebanon was to heat up again. I then gave him a brief account of my recent visit4 to the region and ended up by referring to the forthcoming discussion of this problem at the Arab Summit meeting in Tunis. Dobrynin had obviously been informed of Soviet conversations on the subject with the Syrians and with the PLO. He said that the Syrians 1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the

1020 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 312. Memorandum From the Ambassador to Egypt (Eilts) to President Carter1 Washington, November 21, 1979 This supplements my series of reports from the field (attached). INTRODUCTION At your request, I visited Cairo, Jidda and again Cairo during the period November 13–November 20. While in Cairo, I met twice with President Sadat and also with Vice President Mubarak, Prime Minister Khalil and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Boutros Ghali. In Jidda, I met first with Islamic Conference Secretary-General Chatti and, subsequently, had a four-hour conversation with Prince Fahd. In both capitals, I briefed the ambassadors on my mission and the results of my talks. Both Sadat and Fahd asked that I pass on to you their warm regards and best wishes. You had asked that I take up with Sadat and Fahd (a) the Iranian hostage situation, (b) the need for a thaw in Egyptian/Saudi relations in the interest of progress on the Middle East peace process, and (c) any other matters that they might wish to raise. With Chatti, you asked that I take up the Iranian hostage problem. This report is divided into three sections: (a) Iranian hostage problem, (b) Egyptian/Saudi relations, and (c) other matters. [Omitted here are the portions of Eilts’s report relating to the Iranian hostage situation.] EGYPTIAN/SAUDI RELATIONS First Talk With Sadat (November 14) During my first meeting, I told Sadat that you had asked me to visit Cairo and Jidda in order to transmit to the Saudis Sadat’s letter to Fahd.2 You had been very appreciative of Sadat’s quick and positive response. I planned to leave for Jidda the following day in order to meet 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

1022 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX over.” The current West Bank/Gaza negotiations aim at obtaining “full autonomy” for the Palestinians and a satisfactory resolution of the Jerusalem problem. The revised letter was in fact prepared by Osama Al-Baz and given to me late that night. The original English translation prepared by Al- Baz is attached to this report. The Arabic version was in a sealed envelope and I could not therefore check it, but I have no reason to question that it corresponds to the English translation. Talk With Fahd (November 17/18) The greater part of my four-hour meeting with Fahd focused on Egyptian/Saudi relations. Fahd remains leery of any direct or indirect contact with the Egyptians, is deeply suspicious of Sadat, thinks Sadat has deliberately betrayed the Arab cause at Camp David and that nothing will come out of the West Bank/Gaza autonomy talks. He is also convinced that, despite Egyptian promises, they will leak any messages between the two countries. I first told him that you are concerned that a continuation of the Saudi/Egyptian contretemps makes it more difficult for you politically to move ahead in a meaningful fashion in the Middle East peace effort. It is unhelpful to have the two Arab countries with which we have the closest relations be so publicly at odds with each other. I recalled your messages to Fahd and Sadat and said Sadat had sent you a letter in reply, enclosing a letter to Fahd and asking that you arrange to deliver the letter. You had asked me to undertake this mission. I then gave him the letter and suggested it would be useful if he read it so that we could use it as a starting point for our discussion. He did so, sometimes nodding in slight approval, but otherwise making no substantive comment. He then gave me an hour and a half litany of his complaints against Sadat very much along the lines of what he had said to me in Rome last May,3 but updating it to include more recent Sadat attacks. The thrust of his complaints was that Sadat had lied to him, that Sadat’s earlier protestations of wanting to go to Geneva4 had been a sham as evidenced by the sudden Jerusalem trip, that Sadat was not authorized by anyone to speak for the Palestinians and that, judging from what he could tell from Israeli settlement policies, nothing meaningful would come from the current negotiations. He went to great lengths to defend

1024 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX used. This would permit charges and rumors to be checked out before they escalate to a point where they result in public attacks. I mentioned, as an example, the article in the Egyptian opposition newspaper, Al- Sha’ab, that the Saudis are financing the Kennedy campaign, an article which had prompted Fahd to issue a public denial. This kind of thing could be checked out before it becomes a public issue. Fahd agreed in principle, but made it very clear that he does not trust the Egyptians. They will at some point leak news of any such direct dialogue, however secret it may be. After we had gone round and round on this for a time and he would not budge, I suggested that perhaps this kind of checking out of malicious gossip could be done through our embassies. He seemed agreeable. Again, however, he spoke of a “period of tranquility” of several months after which the matter of an indirect dialogue could again be considered. (I am convinced that he will do nothing on reestablishing a dialogue with Egypt, direct or indirect, until after the exchange of Egyptian/Israeli ambassadors in later February and after the inevitable ensuring flap has abated. He is scared and considers himself vulnerable in the eyes of the other Arabs.) Fahd said he will reply to your letter after he gets back from Tunis and, with a little pressing, he also agreed to reply to Sadat’s letter. I urged him to make his replies as constructive as possible and not to give a long recital of past complaints. He gave me no commitments, but said he would consider carefully what I had asked him to do. We shall see. Second Talk with Sadat (November 18) I briefed Sadat in Ismailia about the results of my talks with Fahd. I frankly put the best face possible on them, but made it clear that Fahd is not yet ready to resume any kind of dialogue. I also made it clear that Fahd believes the Egyptians will leak any such dialogue. Sadat took it very philosophically. He said that he had not expected anything more to come from the talk with Fahd, but was glad that Fahd had agreed to the need to reestablish a moratorium on public attacks. He assured me that he will honor it. He also agreed that our embassies be used to try to prevent any misunderstandings from escalating to a point where they become public attacks. (Sadat will have to be carefully watched on this, since he tends to get carried away when he is making a speech.) Fahd, Sadat said, is afraid. He feels himself vulnerable before the other Arabs. Fahd will do nothing, Sadat opined, until after the exchange of ambassadors and the resultant flurry. Even then, Sadat thought, Fahd will be very leery. This should not trouble us, Sadat

1026 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and cooperative.) Sadat said he is doing so in an effort to see if he can improve relations with the Soviets. He recalled there has always been a Soviet ambassador in Cairo. This action on his part, he wished you to know, will in no way change the Middle East peace process in which you and he are engaged. CONCLUSIONS (a) Sadat remains strong, self-confident and optimistic. In contrast, his Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs are less so. Boutros Ghali is speaking of the need for a “mini-crisis” around the end of January because the autonomy negotiations will not have gotten very far. This would be useful, in his view, as a smoke screen for the exchange of ambassadors. Although Sadat does not seem worried about the ambassadorial exchange, Khalil and Boutros Ghali are very worried about it, especially in the absence of progress on autonomy. Sadat did say the Egyptian ambassador will not go to Jerusalem, only to Tel Aviv. (b) Fahd wants to be helpful, but is not anxious to be counted in at this stage of the game. I do not think he should be pressed too hard, though he should be continued to be reminded of the facts of the Middle East peace effort and who prevented going to Geneva. After yesterday’s Mecca incident,7 he will be even more cautious about sticking his neck out. (c) Our embassies in Cairo and Jidda should monitor closely so that the moratorium on public attacks (including press) is honored. (d) A follow-up should take place in a few months.8 7 On November 20, hundreds of Islamic militants seized the Grand Mosque at Mecca during the annual hajj pilgrimage. The attack was led by a former member of the Saudi National Guard who called for a revolt against the Saudi monarchy, accusing it of betraying Islamic principles by becoming close to Western countries. (Philip Taubman, “Mecca Mosque Seized by Gunmen believed to be Militants from Iran,” The New York

1028 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with the autonomy talks as a fact, and could peruse them, demanding: Israeli control over East Jerusalem and over security in the territories; inclusion of some West Bank areas (uninhabited by Arabs) in direct Israeli control; authority over water and capacity to deal with terrorism; and seeking some arrangement with Jordan. (S) 314. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

1030 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ever, PLO acceptance of this point looks more like public relations one-upsmanship and is being seen by Israelis as a way for the PLO to heighten international criticism of future Israeli retaliation against such terrorist attacks. 4. All in all, then, it seems from here to be a good idea for Phil to proceed to the Middle East after Pakistan. If this is the decision, I definitely feel he should come—at the end of whatever itinerary is chosen—to Israel. But we should be most careful in my opinion not to characterize this swing as an attempt to build upon the Arab summit, but rather as an opportunity for Phil to be briefed by those who participated at Tunis and get the reactions of those affected by the outcome as it pertains to the Lebanon problem. Lewis 315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

1032 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX October 6.9 We will do our best to meet your critical needs and look to a continuing relationship which will enable us to do more in the future. —In that connection, we welcome the signing last month of the memorandum of understanding10 covering future cooperation that we may be able to undertake with your domestic defense industry. This is a complex field and we need to work carefully together to ensure that our efforts are fully successful. But it is also an area which offers the possibility of sustained benefits not only to your military but with possible application to the civilian side as well. —On the economic front, we are pleased that you perceive an improvement in the area of economic cooperation, a subject which, as you know, was a major focus of conversation in Washington with Vice President Mobarak. Here too, while we may be unable to respond as comprehensively and swiftly as you might desire, Egypt’s needs are a matter of prime concern to us. —In the wake of Vice President Mobarak’s visit, we have reconsidered what we could do to help you finance Egypt’s wheat imports. Our desire to be helpful is, as you know, limited by the absolute necessity to restrain the large U.S. budget deficit and the compelling needs of many developing countries. Nevertheless, we have proposed to the Congress that we raise our provision of wheat to Egypt under the PL–480 concessional credit program in the current U.S. fiscal year from the originally

1034 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations on December 4, 1979, Ambassador Sol Linowitz paid his first “get-acquainted” visit to Egypt and Israel in his new capacity December 8–13. Linowitz provided an overall summary of his trip in an un-numbered telegram to multiple posts, December 13. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

1036 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 317. Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to President Carter1 Washington, December 10, 1979 SUBJECT US Access to Facilities in Egypt (U) (TS) By your note on the report of the 30 November meeting between Ambassador Atherton and Egyptian Vice President Mubarak,2 and separately in a telephone conversation with me, you asked for a report on how the US could, and whether we should, help develop naval and air base facilities for Egypt on the Red Sea, usable by the US in future emergencies. This memorandum contains a preliminary analysis. (TS) Recent events reinforce my conviction that an expanded US military presence in the Middle East/Persian Gulf/Indian Ocean region is a strategic necessity. In the long term, the appropriate level of such presence will require access to a small number of selected air base and port facilities in the area. I will shortly submit my proposals on these broader measures to enhance our flexibility for rapid deployment and sustained operations in the area. (TS) In the shorter term, as you know, we are in the process of obtaining a very modest foothold in Egypt by virtue of the limited access to Wadi Kena Air Base extended by the Egyptian Government. We have proceeded quietly to insert a base warm-up team and necessary equipment to support operations by two E–3A AWACS aircraft. We will soon withdraw the personnel but leave behind under Egyptian Air Force caretaker status, the modest support infrastructure items now in place at this Egyptian field. Thus, we will be able to introduce E–3As into Wadi Kena with supporting personnel with little notice and be able to conduct operations shortly after arrival. (TS) During our consultations with Vice President Mubarak regarding Wadi Kena, he repeated President Sadat’s earlier suggestion of the desirability of having the US upgrade the Red Sea port/airfield complex at Ras Banas (Berenice). Preliminary information (see attachments)3 indicates that this complex is very austere and would require a substantial effort to develop a permanent base. Both the port and airfield lack a potable water source and a reliable fuel supply system. The

1038 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 318. Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States (Evron) to President Carter1 Washington, December 12, 1979 My dear Mr. President: I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the following message: “Dear Mr. President, I thank you for your letter of December 6, delivered to me by Ambassador Sol Linowitz.2 Your generous words of appreciation are very dear to me. In the course of his visit, Ambassador Linowitz had the opportunity to meet with my colleagues3 and received detailed information on the various aspects of the negotiations relating to the autonomy for the Arab inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District. These negotiations continue apace and we are all hopeful that we shall succeed in overcoming the difficulties and reaching agreement. On January 7, 1980, I am scheduled to travel to Aswan at the invitation of President Sadat for a direct personal exchange of views between us. Meanwhile, here in Jerusalem, Ambassador Linowitz and I held a lengthy private talk which we both concluded was immensely useful and enjoyable. Permit me now, Mr. President, to turn to you with an urgent personal request. As you are aware, Israel has, over the years, been confronted with objective difficulties in the economic domain emanating mainly from 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2,

1040 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 319. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, December 13, 1979 SUBJECT My Lunch with Ambassador Evron The Ambassador told me that Begin is extremely concerned about the proposed U.S. military aid package for Egypt,2 on which he was briefed by Sol. I explained to Evron that we have no intention of scaling it down because we have legitimate long-term interests in Egypt that we need to protect, and that these interests are also to Israel’s advantage. More specifically, I said: 1. That Israel’s qualitative edge over Egypt will be preserved in the years ahead in part because of what the U.S. is doing for Israel and in part because of what the Israelis are doing for themselves. And we are confident of this; 2. That the U.S. has to make certain that there is a wider constituency in Egypt favoring U.S.-Egyptian ties, and it is especially important that the military be part of that constituency. The Egyptian military capabilities have become degraded and the Egyptians cannot help but notice that the Soviets are providing very advanced equipment to Syria and Algeria. It would be damaging to all concerned if the only basis for Egyptian-U.S. ties and for further progress of the Camp David peace accords were Sadat himself; 3. That we are encouraging the Egyptians to redirect the focus of their defense efforts away from Israel and toward regional stability— including the Sudan and perhaps eventually some contingencies in Saudi Arabia. This is clearly also in Israel’s interest. Evron is going home for Christmas and he would like to be able to convey the above as an authoritative expression of U.S. thinking. He says he has spoken about this to the Vice President and he hinted that he would like to see you personally in order to get a message to that effect. I made no promise, but an alternative would be for me to phone him and restate the three points above as representing an oral comment 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 72, Middle East: Box 5. Top Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig. J.” 2 In the right-hand margin next to this phrase, Carter wrote: “What pkg. have I approved?”

1042 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX recognition of the integrity and security of Israel and agreement to establish normal diplomatic relations, and (c) state its readiness to accept “a Palestinian entity on the West Bank and Gaza provided it and any negotiators on its behalf first agree to accept the existence, security, and integrity of Israel within its 1967 boundaries and to undertake a permanent non-aggression agreement with all of the existing states adjoining it.” In connection with the last point, there is a statement that the United States would prefer that such an entity be confederated with Jordan or Egypt for a period of at least five years, but the U.S. would abide by any reasonable solution acceptable to the states adjacent to such an entity. It is significant in the Bandar approach that there is no mention of Jerusalem, although that may be subsumed in the commitment to the 1967 borders. Analysis [1 line not declassified] —On the one hand, the idea of close Saudi-U.S. collaboration in some sort of Middle East Marshall Plan has been in Saudi minds for several years, and we have heard it on other occasions. Also, the fact that the Saudis are asking for U.S. support for a Palestinian entity associated with Jordan and Israel’s returns to lines approximating those of 1967 is not surprising. —On the other hand, the idea that the Saudis would shift to open support of the U.S.-Egyptian-Israeli approach to an Arab-Israeli settlement and acceptance of Israel would be a major and important shift in Saudi policy. Doubts are raised because none of Fahd’s recent communications to you, including one just a few days ago, indicates that the Saudis are ready for such a shift. It is true that the Mecca Mosque takeover4 is a new factor in their thinking, and only that would seem to explain such a sharp change in their position, if any, since Hermann Eilts visited Saudi Arabia just a month ago. [1 paragraph (4½ lines) not declassified] Nevertheless, the approach is important enough to be investigated. Hermann Eilts’ visit to Saudi Arabia in early January would provide an opportunity to probe [less than 1 line not declassified] (Hermann will leave for Cairo the evening of December 27 to receive an honorary degree at Cairo University and could be in Saudi Arabia at the end of the first week in January.) Before giving Hermann instructions to do more than probe [less than 1 line not declassified] however, you will want to consider seriously whether you really want to deal with such a Saudi proposal of these dimensions in the next few months. —Saudi support for the peace process and recognition of Israel would be a major endorsement of the success at Camp David and,

1044 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the internal situation. The posture we strike as we come out of the hostage crisis will have an important and long-lasting impact on the Saudis, and on their willingness to look to us for the long term. Thus Hermann’s mission could usefully get to the Bandar approach by indirection, by emphasizing the overall context of our policy towards the region. Indeed, if his presentation (and our policy) is credible in terms of overall Saudi interests—centering on security, the Saudi connection with us, and the overall future of the region—then any move on the Arab-Israeli problem would assume its rightful place, and we will be better able to relate what Fahd may have in mind to what Bandar told us. We recommend therefore, that the Eilts mission to begin with focus on our overall strategic thinking for the region. He would use this to probe Fahd’s thinking about Arab-Israeli questions, without himself raising the particular points (and contentious issues) in the Bandar approach. If Bandar speaks for Fahd [less than 1 line not declassified], then Fahd can speak for himself. Elements of this approach might include: —Our views on the strategic importance of the region, including the Soviet dimension, Gulf security, nature of regional friendships, the flow of oil, the cooperative international framework on energy and economic issues. Hermann would indicate that the Arab-Israeli dimension (as well as concerns for Egypt and countries as far removed as Turkey, Sudan, and even Morocco) is a vital factor in this overall picture. —Our attitudes about the importance of some U.S. involvement and the role of power (in its largest sense). The Middle East (as a whole) will be central to our global strategy; our efforts are directed to integrating our policy into an overall strategic conception with our friends. —We will want to work closely with Saudi Arabia—in ways that make sense to it. We recognize the dangers of stop-and-go policies and approaches, or of trying to impose forms and methods that do not accord with Saudi Arabia’s own conception of regional problems. We must pursue our interests and relationships; but we want to take into account the interests of our friends. —There are a number of areas in which we would like to continue an active dialogue: some directly U.S. military (recent Murray mission; fleet deployments, Rapid Deployment force); some indirect support (FMS, role of particular countries in military supply support for regional nations—e.g. Sudan, Yemen, Morocco); a political framework for thinking about the region; possibilities (if any) for regional security cooperation (where of course Saudi Arabia’s views will be the most significant); economic cooperation (both within the region and in terms of the Gulf States’ involvement/responsibility for the international economic system).6 6 For documentation related to U.S.-Saudi bilateral military relations, the Carter administration’s efforts to construct a Persian Gulf security framework, and other bilateral and multilateral political and military issues in U.S. relations with Saudi Arabia and the countries of the Arabian Peninsula, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula.

1046 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX funds appropriated or otherwise available to carry out chapters 2 and 5 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, and the Arms Export Control Act, for Jordan in the fiscal year 1980 will serve the process of peace in the Middle East. You are requested to report this determination to the Congress on my behalf, as required by law. This determination shall be published in the Federal Register. Jimmy Carter Attachment Statement of Reasons for Determination2 Washington, undated Statement of Reasons for Determination Under the International

1048 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX event of unprecedented importance for our interests in that vital area. Temporarily at least, the decision has left him with nowhere else to turn for much-needed security assistance. While we should strive to minimize the cost of that assistance, I believe that costs we do incur are justified because they will contribute to the eventual realization of a major U.S. foreign policy objective. (S) Sadat’s greatest need at this critical point in the peace process is for major assistance in rebuilding his obsolescent armed forces. Even with some of the items we have provided, his forces still are relying primarily on deteriorating Soviet equipment. In my view, a central threat to Sadat’s stability is from military leaders who are becoming more and more dismayed with Egypt’s second-class readiness state. These military men convinced Sadat to request over four times the amount of assistance we are discussing here, but we told the Egyptians that this amount was clearly excessive and that force reductions, coupled with equipment modernization, would be a better and less-costly alter- These facts lead me to support fully the near-term items recom-

1050 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Cy therefore proposes—and I agree—that we test the Bandar proposition with an intermediate approach, centering in the first instance on a visit Hermann Eilts is paying privately to the area (he leaves for Egypt this week; but will not arrive in Saudi Arabia until January 8). This approach would be to put the Arab-Israeli conflict in the broader context of U.S. strategy and involvement for the Middle East, thus showing that we are prepared to discuss (and to respond to) key Saudi concerns about security of the region. This would a) go to the heart of Saudi preoccupations—where the Bandar approach is only one means to an end; and b) enable Eilts to smoke Fahd out [less than 1 line not declassified] of the Bandar approach, without committing us to steps which, at the very least, would provoke a political crisis with Israel and cause problems for the autonomy talks. (S/S) The draft instructions we have prepared for Eilts (appended to Cy’s memo)4 would also give coherence to a number of efforts we are considering (or you have decided) for a long-range Middle East strategy. His visit would thus be a first effort to bring Saudi Arabia along—a key step in our effort to seize the initiative in Middle East policy as soon as we come out of the Iranian crisis. (S/S) By our current thinking, if Fahd does reinforce Bandar’s presentation to Eilts, we would then consider how far we could usefully proceed at a time when the Camp David framework is still controlling. In any event, we would have intensified the dialogue with Saudi Arabia on the whole range of issues, and begun to restore our credibility. (S/S) Cy, Sol, and I will meet Wednesday5 afternoon to discuss the Bandar approach and to refine Eilts’ instructions, pursuant to the guidance you give us. (S/S) RECOMMENDATION: that you approve the guidance for a mission by Eilts to Saudi Arabia (page 6 of Cy’s memo)6 4 Attached but not printed. The draft instructions for Eilts stated the objective of his Mission was “to continue a direct dialogue with the Saudi leadership—a dialogue we would like to broaden and deepen in the coming months.” To the list of attached talking points for Eilts’s meeting with Fahd, which focused on the Middle East strategic situation and the administration’s desire to see the development of a “credible regime” for Palestinian autonomy, including agreement on Jerusalem, Carter added, in a handwritten note, an instruction to “ask Fahd specifically & persistently for his best proposal (step by step) for a comprehensive Mid E peace.” 5 December 26. 6 Carter initialed his approval of the recommendation, adding the handwritten notation: “See addendum. J.” See footnote 4 above.

1052 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to persuade any representative Palestinians to join the negotiating process, it seems to me our objective should be to produce sufficient evidence that things are moving in the negotiations to defuse Arab and third world reaction to normalization. In other words, we should try to have enough to show after eight months of negotiations not only to demonstrate that we take seriously the May target date but to give pause to the Saudis and other moderate Arabs, including moderate Palestinians, about launching new efforts to further isolate and punish Egypt. 4. Proceeding from these premises, my conclusion is that we need to take a hard look at ways in which we can help make something happen at the Sadat/Begin summit. Therefore, while I subscribe to much of Sam Lewis’ analysis (Tel Aviv 26726),5 I do not agree that we can wait until after the summit to decide whether and how we can begin to inject some substance into our full partner role. 5. Trying to influence what comes out of the summit can admittedly be a tricky exercise. We cannot get out in front of Sadat or appear to be pressing him to move more rapidly than he is prepared to do. This would be dangerous vis-a-vis the Israelis, and could also arouse Egyptian expectations that we are prepared to deliver more than may be possible through our own efforts with the Israelis. 6. At the same time, Vice President Mubarak and Prime Minister Khalil have independently suggested that President Carter communicate with President Sadat about the need to seek concrete progress at the summit. This suggestion results from their concern, based on the experience of the last two Sadat/Begin summits, that Sadat will again be reluctant in the intimate atmosphere of the summit to introduce a note of controversy and will, in fact, end up making further gestures to Begin on bilateral issues (e.g., accelerating the pace of normalization beyond what is called for in the peace treaty) without getting anything in return. An additional consideration is that, even if Sadat decides to press Begin harder this time than he has before, he will do so in such a

1054 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX could be decisive, and that the U.S. should be ready when the time comes. The objective, Sadat said on both occasions, was for he and Begin to reach agreement on giving directives to their negotiators. Against this background, we could ask Sadat if his comments after the last two summits still represent his views and how he plans to proceed in the January summit since, if he is looking to us to play a role, we need to know what his strategy is and what he expects from us. As part of such an oral representation, we should be prepared to note specific issues in the negotiations where we believe attention at the summit could usefully be focused with some hope of reaching agreement on appropriate directives to the Egyptian and Israeli negotiating teams. 8. I have given considerable thought to what those specific issues should be, and have also discussed this question with Jim Leonard and with my senior political section staff who have participated from the beginning in the autonomy talks. I agree with Jim Leonard (Cairo 26211)9 that it would be desirable to encourage specific agreement at the summit in three areas: something in the autonomy negotiations, something on Jerusalem, and something for the Palestinians. I also agree that the best issue to focus on arising out of the autonomy negotiations would be the size of the elected self-governing authority. (Incidentally, Boutros Ghali singled this out as one of the three issues on which he believes there should be an effort to reach early agreement; the other two were amnesty for Palestinian prisoners and giving an international flavor to the commission that would supervise West Bank/ Gaza elections). I also agree with Jim that, so far as something for the Palestinians is concerned, the idea of a return of deportees is better than seeking Israeli agreement to amnesty prisoners who have been tried and convicted for security crimes. 9. With respect to Jerusalem, I have reservations about Jim’s fallback idea of suggesting discussions between Israel and representatives of the Christian and Muslim faiths about the holy places. My own view is that this would be perceived as accepting the long-standing Israeli position that the only questions related to Jerusalem that are open to discussion are those pertaining to the status of the holy places. My own preference would be to go for agreement on the right of Arab residents of East Jerusalem to vote in and stand for the elections to the selfgoverning authority. (Boutros Ghali is concerned that this would be seen as accepting the Israeli position that autonomy applies to people but not to land. I consider this a legalistic argument outweighed by the political symbolism of giving the vote to East Jerusalem Arabs.)

1056 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said he had noticed. Minister Weizman said he called it the Muddle East. The President said that you have the situation well in hand. We appreciate how you control the situation. Minister Weizman said that Lebanon is quiet. The President said that this is good news. Minister Weizman said he would try to keep it that way. The President asked about the Iranian troops in Lebanon.3 Minister Weizman said that they are still in Damascus. Neither the PLO, Syria, or Lebanon want them in Lebanon. They are doing their best to keep the troops from moving there. He personally is not particularly worried about them. The President asked how Israel is getting on with Egypt in the peace discussions. Minister Weizman said that they could and should do better. He is not active in them, and thinks that this is a good tactic. Eventually he will probably get into them.4 The next Sadat and Begin Summit is very important. The President mentioned the 7th of January. Minister Weizman said it would be in Aswan. He will go to Egypt afterwards, at the end of January, to see Minister Ali and Sadat. Sadat is a great fellow, courageous and clever. Last month he had a half hour alone with Sadat, and two hours with other Egyptian leaders. Sadat said to try something on Gaza first, and to see if a solution is possible on Jerusalem. There is nothing new about that. He (Weizman) hopes at Aswan they will find a way to carry on. Afterwards he will see what he should do. What has been done, despite pitfalls, and less than the President would have liked to see done, he thinks is so strong that nothing can change the course, even though there are ups and downs. Between the two militaries, there are no problems. The interim line will be reached at the end of January. It is working out nicely. There will be no UN, and no US troops. It is a neat and clean withdrawal to the interim line. 3 Following a conversation with Syrian Presidential Advisor Daoudi on December

1058 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX because of peace with Egypt. He will be a little happier with that border. He hopes and prays there will be no war. The economic measures are tough. Pilots have taken a 20% cut in salary. The President said that this is important symbolism. Minister Weizman said exactly. With the military budget, he will try to get a voluntary 5% reduction in salaries in the armed forces. 100% inflation is terrible. He prays that within the next five years he will be able to cut their aid request by $500 million. The President (laughing) asked what role the Minister would be in at that time. Minister Weizman (laughing) said he hopes he will be defense minister. He asked to come here as Defense Minister and as a member of the Cabinet, to ask whether a way can be found on aid. He knows U.S. problems and the President’s desire for a balanced budget. Israel wants him to succeed. The President said there is no way he can get a balanced budget, though he would like to. Minister Weizman said that, without going into facts and figures, there is U.S. inflation and reduction in the value of the dollar. M–60 A–3

1060 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the Peace Package, he will try to make some modifications. He will talk with Harold about it this weekend.10 By Monday, we will tell Eppy. It would be a mistake to expect much. We have an extremely tight budget. This is not Israel’s fault. The Soviet threat has gone up, and we have had to increase the defense budget (partly in relation to the SALT debate). We will put a higher profile on our commitment to the Persian Gulf region, which will help Israel some, as well. Therefore he has had to cut down funds for social programs below what they would have been—for the aged, the poor, for education, though they will be adequate. Foreign aid has suffered severely. But he is determined not to cut aid to Israel or Egypt. Jordan, Syria, Greece, Turkey—including some good friends—will be cut back in dollar amounts. In addition, the dollar is decreasing in value. This will not happen to Israel. He will try—and he believes he will succeed—in getting a little more than a symbolic amount. This will increase the value of the Peace Package. He cannot be more definite now, and doesn’t know the amount. He will meet with McIntyre on it. He understands Israel’s problems, and wishes we could be more generous. Minister Weizman asked if there is anything he can do. Some people in Israel said that he should shut up on the peace process! The President said he doesn’t know what will happen with combined developments in Iran and Afghanistan. Maybe there is a silver lining in the clouds. He has a sense that many of the so-called moderates are deeply concerned about the consequences for them. If the Soviet Union moved into Pakistan; if the Iranians tried to unsettle the ruling family in Saudi Arabia; if there is Iranian-Iraqi violence, over the three islands11 or otherwise—then the importance to them of having a strong and stable Israel and Egypt would greatly increase. We see the strategic importance of a friendly and strong combination of Egypt and Israel. This can be a stable rock, about which the waves of the region swirl. The last time he talked with Giscard, he began to see for the first time the value to France of a strong and friendly Israel. He (Giscard) was always the most critical of Israel, because of historical ties to Lebanon and other factors. He (the President) does not condemn Giscard for this. But France has begun to change its attitude toward Israel. The most serious aggravation in the entire world is the settlements. He understands the Israelis need to do something, but for us in dealing with the French, the Japanese, and the Moslem world, they are no help. They 10 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Brown in the Oval

1062 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Minister Weizman asked about Bob Strauss’ being in the re-election fight. The President said that he is good at it, and this was what he wanted to do. Minister Weizman said that maybe he should give Bob Strauss some ideas, since he ran the Likud election campaign two years ago. The President said that this was one of the great surprises in the world. Perhaps Begin will give the Minister a vacation so that he can come here to help Bob and him (the President). Minister Weizman said anytime. He has bet some cases of whiskey on the President, and did so when the polls were down. He would correct something the President said—“if” he wins. He would say “when” the President wins. The President said that he is pretty confident. Minister Weizman said that he appreciates that he cannot expect a substantial increase in aid. It is important to Israeli morale that the President took time to see him. The President said he will let Eppy know no later than Monday. Minister Weizman said he will be on Face the Nation Sunday.12 The President said he would watch it. He said that we are making good progress, in part because of what they are doing together. (The meeting ended at 12:51 p.m.) 12 December 30.

1064 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX order to attract the Palestinians we have to produce a detailed program for life on the West Bank with all the relationships between Israel and the SGA spelled out. I question that assumption and, in any event, question whether we could possibly accomplish such an ambitious program by May, or even soon thereafter. 7. It seems to me that we should be striving to establish a number of guarantees and some limitations for both sides and set up an equitable framework wherein the inhabitants of the West Bank can order their own lives and establish their own interrelationships with Israel and Jordan. My thinking is that we should strive to accomplish the minimum agreement that has a better than even chance of drawing in the Palestinians. 8. With this objective in mind, I wonder how much fact gathering and expertise we need and, more important, how much time we must spend on this process. It seems to me that we already know the Israelis are prepared to transfer full authority in a number of spheres subject to the restraints that will be necessary to protect the security of Israel and the economies of both Israel and the West Bank/Gaza under conditions of open borders. I do not see that it is necessarily our business to detail those restraints—instead, should we not put our energies into devising an equitable framework whereby both the Israelis and the Palestinians can, in the transition phase, work out their interrelationships confident that their interests will be protected? 9. All of this leads me to think that our energies over the next month should be devoted to attaining a statement at the next plenary along the following lines: the three delegations have agreed that full authority over internal policy formulation and implementation shall be transferred from the military government to the transitional authority in at least, but not limited to, the following spheres: education, transportation, etc. (to include as many spheres as possible). The delegations recognize that within these spheres certain economic and security questions may arise which affect the mutual interests of the transitional authority, the Government of Israel and other governments of the area. The three delegations have therefore instructed the working group on powers and responsibilities to develop equitable mechanisms for resolving such questions which will protect the rights and interests of all the people in the area. 10. I would welcome your comments. Obviously this message is not all inclusive and I look forward to your suggestions as to how we might build on it for the future. Vance

1066 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “needed to help the U.S. prove that it is the ‘first superpower’ and to restore the balance” in the Middle East, a statement, Atherton assessed, that reflected “Sadat’s continued preoccupation with the strategic situation in the area, the Soviet threat and the need for U.S. to establish a position of strength.” In connection with this, Sadat also observed that this “new strategic situation and Egypt’s role should be reflected in an entirely new approach to Egyptian arms requests” in Washington. Atherton transmitted a summary of his meeting to Washington in telegram

1068 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 329. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance and Secretary of Defense Brown1 Washington, January 12, 1980 SUBJECT Longer-Term Security Assistance to Egypt (C) The President has approved in principle the sale to Egypt of F–16 aircraft and M–60 tanks, and this decision should be communicated to Vice President Mubarak during his upcoming visit. In addition, the Egyptians should be informed that we would also authorize sale of the intermediate export fighter (F–X), if developed. (S) Zbigniew Brzezinski 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

1070 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX lution and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan5 there has been a growing realization of the need to cooperate more closely among the moderate Arab nations and also Israel. There is now an opportunity to make real progress. The U.S. needs a closer relationship with Egypt even than in the past few months. Ambassador Linowitz is the best negotiator in our nation. He is a strong, capable, intelligent man. He will be able to take positions which are unpopular in our country if he is convinced they are in the interest of peace. Once normalization has occurred, it would be useful for Egypt to present its case against settlements and for Palestinians to participate more strongly. We will do the same. In the President’s view, the majority of the people in Israel support that, including many of the people in leadership positions. We are grateful for Egyptian friendship, especially the help which has been offered in the Iranian situation. The air support given to our planes strengthens our determination to persevere. We also appreciate your encouraging other Moslem nations to condemn the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Even if the leaders of those nations do not profess friendship, they listen carefully to Egypt as the dominant economic, political and military power. We appreciate Vice President Mubarak’s coming here to try to persuade the North and South Koreans to settle their conflict. We are always ready for a three-country meeting if the North is willing to accept the political leaders of the South. It is necessary for each of us to keep the other fully informed on this. Vice President Mubarak said that he had met with Secretary Vance yesterday and with Secretary Brown today. He had informed Secretary Vance fully about the recent negotiations6 with Prime Minister Begin— perhaps in greater detail than Ambassador Atherton had reported. He said that he had a hand-written report7 on the talks written by President Sadat following the meeting and wondered if the President would like to read it. The President took the document and read it while the conversation among the others continued. Secretary Vance said we had gone back to the Sudanese after the message from the Egyptians.8 Vice President Mubarak interjected that the Sudanese had now pulled out their Ambassador to the UN on the grounds that he had vio-

1072 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX rather than wheat. He noted that in the South where he grew up, people ate almost as much corn as wheat. Vice President Mubarak said he had discussed the negotiations yesterday. When full autonomy is reached, it will be a good solution to the whole problem. Egypt and the U.S. must work together. He said he had recently gone to Tunisia for a meeting with an Islamic group. He had also traveled to Malaysia and to Oman. In Oman he had met with people coming secretly from Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and the UAE. There was only one question: what did you do in Jerusalem? This is the vital question. Prince Fahd and the King know only Jerusalem. The President was right when he said some months ago that none of the Arab leaders really wants an independent Palestinian state. They are terrified of the Palestinians. They are afraid the Soviets will go there. Arafat has sent a private message. Every time he is going to make a public statement which is critical, he sends a message and says he must say this for Assad or for Qadhafi, and he asks for understanding. Egypt always gets the same message. He is trying to get some money from them, but still he is a leader who, when he finds the train is starting to leave, he will get aboard. For that reason, he has left his representative in Cairo. They have been trying to get him to take his representative out, but he leaves him there. Qadhafi has kicked out the PLO representative in Libya. In Oman, Vice President Mubarak met with the Chief of Cabinet of Shaikh Zayid of the UAE who had come from Pakistan to Oman to meet him. He said please convey to President Sadat our appreciation for all the steps he has taken, but ask his understanding that we cannot say it publicly. This is also what we hear from the Saudis. Not from the King. He knows nothing of politics, only Jerusalem. They need a way to save face. The object is not to kick the Israelis out of Jerusalem. The President wondered if Vice President Mubarak had recently read the Jerusalem language in the Camp David accords? Was that language satisfactory to Sadat? Vice President Mubarak said yes it is. Egypt wants something finished. Sadat told Begin nearly the same language as the Camp David language. Both he and President Sadat had said the same thing to Weizman: let us live all in peace. Jerusalem is a religious thing. We need only a small Council (Consulate?) with a flag. Weizman said Begin would not be able to accept the flag. But it is only something symbolic, he would see in time. The President recalled that he had once spent two days with Begin talking about flags.10 10 Not further identified.

1074 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Vice President Mubarak said the Egyptians were all praying for the President’s success in the coming elections. They say to each other what would happen if President Carter were not there. The President said to tell President Sadat that we understand his economic and military needs. In the President’s judgment this was not the time to propose the F–15. He realized how much the Egyptians wanted it. He will direct Secretary Brown to expedite delivery of the F–4s and F–16s and will consult with Congress immediately about the delivery of additional grain under PL–480. Vice President Mubarak said that the F–15 would give satisfaction to the Egyptian armed forces. If it can be given to Israel and Saudi Arabia, why not to them? It is being raised so strongly by the Egyptian military. The President said he understood. 331. Editorial Note Speaking to a conference of Jewish-American reporters in Jerusalem on January 18, 1980, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin stated that the Egyptian delegation to the Palestinian autonomy negotiations had attempted to “distort the Camp David accords” with its proposals for Palestinian self-rule. The Prime Minister called for a new tripartite summit to address the issue. “If President Carter will ask for a three-day summit to discuss matters of autonomy, Israel will go along with it,” Begin stated. (“Begin Raps Egypt, Suggests U.S. Convene New

1076 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX from the Israelis asking us to bring pressure on Egypt to expedite the agreement. (S) [Omitted here is discussion of topics unrelated to the Arab-Israeli dispute.] 333. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State and the White House1

1078 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 334. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

1080 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX bankrupt, corrupt and incapable of action. Fahd lacks the ability to run the country effectively but he said the younger group such as Saud might be able to. Hussein said he had tried to warn the Saudis that they face trouble. He was obviously very disturbed by the situation in Saudi Arabia and by Soviet actions in the area, both of which he saw affecting his own position. 8. I asked about the PLO’s refusal to accept Resolution 242 and Israel’s right to exist. Hussein said he thought the PLO could eventually be brought around on both these issues but it will take time. The PLO will have to prove itself worthy of the Palestinian people. Perhaps, he said, the PLO could recognize Israel and Israel the PLO at the same time. Hussein said there must be self-determination for the West Bank and Gaza, to assure a stable result, but significantly he made no mention whatsoever of an independent Palestinian state. 9. Throughout our conversation Hussein was relaxed, gracious and lively. He told me that he hoped we could keep in close touch and that I would be welcome in Amman at any time. He was obviously very pleased with the meeting and your invitation which I think he sees as imparting a sense that the US values him and wants to build back toward a close relationship. Clearly he is concerned about his own position in the Arab world and will be careful in his public pronouncements. But he obviously feels that he has now renewed his line of communication to us after an uncomfortable period of estrangement. My guess is that if we can make real progress in the autonomy negotiations he will find some way to participate even if peripherally. Linowitz

1082 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX

1084 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX [Omitted here is discussion of regional issues unrelated to the Arab-Israeli dispute.] [Prince Saud:] One area on which there is no consensus with the United States is the problem of Israel. That problem has made the both of us unable to make the kind of response to the Soviets that we would like. We have tried not to make this a fundamental contradiction in cooperation with the United States but it does come into effect with regards to the Soviets. Of course we want U.S. help. We see no U.S. threat to our independence. We have no fear of the United States which would act as a constraint on our actions. Our past strategy was based on alliance between Saudi Arabia and Egypt that worked for a decade. The Soviets lost ground in this area for the first time. They lost their positions in Egypt, Iraq, and Syria, which was capable of continuing to maintain its independence. However, the split between Egypt and Saudi Arabia has broken that without providing us with any alternative strategy to replace it. We have not been able to persuade Egypt and they have not been able to persuade us. We hope that the U.S. will be contributing to remove the reasons for this split. The Middle East problem is central at all levels. These thoughts reflect the situation as it is here. It is something that we live with. It is never far away from us. It is the way we face challenges to our independence and our way of life. Now we must devolve a way to meet these challenges. Dr. Brzezinski said this raised the truly fundamental questions and very difficult questions that you and we face. In the talk with Prince Fahd yesterday we were very much in agreement about the nature and the scope of the threat. It is very real and there is very little time left. With regard to U.S. strategy the President’s State of the Union message2 represented a point of departure. It was a very important statement and in many respects it was a historical affirmation of the new realities we face. After World War II we established a permanent presence in Western Europe and linked our security with theirs. This was followed by treaties in the Far East. We now appreciate that events in this region also affect these other regions and the United States, so at present we have three strategic zones: Western Europe, the Far East, and the Middle East. The conditions in these three areas are very different. It would be a mistake to try to deal with this region as if we were re-

1086 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with Iran once the hostage issue is behind us. The natural reaction in the United States after the hostages are released would be to punish Iran for mistreating the hostages. Prince Saud wondered what we meant by mistreatment. Dr. Brzezinski noted that they had been isolated and bound. The US public will feel fiercely when they are finally released. Mr. Christopher noted that the real issue was mental scarring from their treatment. He noted that Schmidt had remarked on the effects of only three days of being a hostage in Somalia;5 whereas, these people have been held for over ninety days. Dr. Brzezinski said in any event we will resist the inclination to punish Iran for this. Iran and Pakistan together provide the forward line and depth against Soviet incursion so we are going to pursue a six part strategy: on the Arab-Israel question; relations between Saudi Arabia and Egypt; to build up our own military strength; to cooperate with Saudi Arabia on Yemen; to reinforce Pakistan; and to leave the door open for cooperation with Iran. This is different from our strategy in Europe but if we pursue it we think there is a good chance of stabilizing the area. We would also like to open a dialogue with other Arab states. Dr. Brzezinski had spent several days in Algeria recently and now we have a relationship with them that we didn’t have before. We would like the same thing with Libya and also with Iraq if that does not threaten Saudi interests. Prince Saud said that on the Israeli problem the United States asks us to look at it dispassionately; we also ask you to look dispassionately from Camp David. How will we meet the real threats. The real hope in dealing with this issue is not to govern our actions with respect to the psychology of the Israelis. This will not make them willing to accept compromises and it will alienate the Arab side which is also needed in this process. The Saudis need national backing just the same as the United States does. It is incomprehensible here why the United States is not providing Pakistan with military support of the same level and nature that it does to Israel. With regard to Egypt and the speed of the progress on the Palestinian core issue we have long had relations with Egypt and we know the swings of activity, which are not new. They have existed since Nasser’s6 time. Prince Fahd has said that if we are frustrated it is because Sadat is not succeeding, not because we want him to fail. Sadat has taken the lead in this process. He took the lead on 242 and all the rest of the Arab nations followed. He went to Camp 5 Reference is to the October 1977 hijacking of a Lufthansa airliner by members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.

1088 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prince Saud said yes, you do affect public opinion in Israel. On settlements the biggest change in Israeli public opinion came when the President said that settlements were illegal and stopped some deliveries of some economic and military equipment. In the same way you could influence the Palestinian question. If the Israelis feel that regardless of their policy they could count on unhindered aid from the United States, they will not change their policy. Who will argue with Begin if he succeeds. Dr. Brzezinski said that he was uncomfortable in dealing with this since Ambassador Linowitz had been here only recently and he was better informed about the nature of the overall process. The question of course is how to choose the right moment and what issue to press. Both sides are forming their own view of home rule. At some point a positive intervention may move the situation forward. We do not intend to maintain a status quo. We know it is not tolerable. It is not even just. Prince Saud said that the status quo would be a stumbling block. Mr. Christopher recalled that Prince Fahd had said that Arafat was here and that it would be a service to his reputation if he was able to help with the hostage situation. He recalled that a year ago we had a close call in getting the PLO to accept Resolution 242. We came within an eyelash of getting that acceptance. Now that has slipped away. Is there a way to return to that? Prince Saud said this is a representation problem. Keeping the PLO away from the negotiations does not result in security. Rather it is an unnecessary complication which the Israelis wanted to add to the talks. The Saudis had tried to get recognition of the 242 by the Palestinians at the time of Geneva,7 when there was a general Arab position to negotiate. They hoped to get the Palestinians into that negotiating team. Since that time many things have changed; the PLO is interested in US recognition and would be of benefit to the negotiations. How that would happen, I don’t know. Ambassador Linowitz asked the same question. If the US in some way takes the position of solving the Palestinian question on the basis of self-determination, it could make them take the plunge. This issue is very important to them since it is one of the key negotiating cards which they would bring to the negotiating table. Mr. Christopher noted that acceptance of Resolution 242 was not frivolous or pure formality since it involved the acceptance of the future viability of Israel. This would be a major contribution. Prince Saud said yes, for US public opinion; but for the Palestinians resolution 242 involves the recognition of Israel without dealing with

1090 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Dr. Brzezinski said he had a number of scars on his back because of the position he had taken on this issue in the past. [Omitted here is discussion of regional issues unrelated to the Arab-Israeli dispute.] 337. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, February 7, 1980 SUBJECT Expedited Deliveries of Equipment to Egypt (S) Attached is the memo you requested from Harold Brown (Tab A)2 following Vice President Mubarak’s visit.3 It seeks to set forth possible options to speed up delivery of arms requested by the Egyptians within definite limits on funds and financing arrangements. Once you approve these limits, we would propose to present the relevant options to the Egyptians and have them make the necessary trade-offs. OMB and State comments are at Tabs B and C respectively.4 The package is sufficiently complex that it might be helpful to explain how the options were put together and the key issues that emerge for your decision. The principal considerations are: —Timing: to be responsive, we want some options that will begin deliveries in 1980. —Composition: the options should include both advanced aircraft which are important for overall political effect and tanks which are essential to strengthen Sadat’s position with the Army—the main Egyptian military force. —Production constraints: unless the Egyptians acquire more than 40 M–60 tanks, that production line will close forever and we have 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 11, Egypt: 1980. Secret. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Zbig. J.” The memorandum was found attached to a February 9 memorandum from Brzezinski to Vance, Brown, and McIntyre summarizing Carter’s decision. 2 See Document 335. 3 See Document 293. 4 The referenced tabs were not found attached.

1092 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The problem with Option 1 (from Table I) is that there would be no aircraft delivery for almost two years. Option 3 (Table I) would solve that, but the tank buy (40) is too small to keep open the production line for M–60s. For this reason, Defense suggests increasing the level of cash flow financing. 2. An increase in cash flow financing permits us to offer Options 2 and 4 from Table I. Option 2 First Delivery Date

1094 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX present is Option 4 on Table I which involves a relatively modest in-

1096 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX would very likely take an independent line,2 including a UN resolution on Palestinian rights. Mr. Saunders sketched two basic courses of action: pursuing the talks vigorously in hopes that success will isolate the PLO; or having some lines out to the Palestinians—and implicitly to the PLO—as a way of supporting the process politically beyond the target date and encouraging the West Bankers and Gazans to participate at the right moment. The Vice President and Ambassador Linowitz stressed the political factors of any involvement with the PLO, particularly the importance of not upsetting the Israelis in a way that would distract them from the Autonomy negotiations. It was agreed: that there should be no second Camp David,3 without complete assurances of success; that Ambassador Linowitz should continue to try gaining as much agreement as possible by the May target date—although a full agreement is most unlikely by then; that there should be repeated emphasis on conveying an impression of progress4 to the Arab world; that Ambassador Linowitz (and others) should step up their visible contacts with non-PLO Palestinians; and that there should be continued efforts with other Arabs to gain Palestinian openmindedness5 towards the Camp David process. We should consider what else will be needed if agreement is not reached by May. On settlements, it was agreed that State will put out a strong public statement today,6 confirming our position and indicating that the Is- 2 In a February 6 memorandum, Hunter wrote to Aaron that European countries “have been getting more and more nervous about the prospects for the autonomy talks, and are thinking about defensive actions they themselves might take to lessen the damage to themselves if the talks fail.” Hunter continued: “The British have been fooling around with the idea of a new UN resolution on Palestinian rights—which even the Arabists in State agree would be disruptive politically at this time. In general—with a German lead—there is also more pressure for a European-Gulf ‘dialogue’ in order to get a greater share of the oil pie (presumably with more ‘flexible’ attitudes on the Palestinian question). And all of these folks are fooling around with the PLO—with the French close to having Arafat for a visit.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,

1098 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX for deal-cutting, or at the high end by putting into the crucible his past achievements in Middle East peacemaking. Unless attention is distracted elsewhere, I expect the U.S. media to make quite a thing of the end-game, and the President’s involvement or lack thereof. (The Egypt-Israel treaty did go beyond the deadline; but the parallel is inexact—that one the Arab world did not want completed; this one it does, or at least will use the occasion of a missed deadline to make a real fuss). (S) Thus while the “time buying” approach is fine for now—particularly your suggestion about the appearance of progress—I believe the time is fast approaching for serious consideration of what might be required to give a real “college try” at getting a basic agreement buttoned up by the end of May. Some basic questions for consideration on a close-hold basis: —what should be the minimum prior agreement to justify Presidential involvement at some point, and what form could this involvement take? How should the risks and possible benefits be weighed? —how should we calibrate our approach with the Egyptians as the end game approaches? —is there a fallback that can include a Jordanian dimension? —what U.S. carrots should we consider? E.G. security guarantee; no-Palestinian-State guarantee; aid sweetener; U.S. regional-securityrelationship-with-Israel sweetener. —how should we work with the Jewish community here on shaping approaches to Israel? (S) In short, how do we shift from the negotiating process to the political process—and maintain good control? (S)

1100 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX systems, detailed discussions might best await the arrival of the McGiffert team. With warm regards, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter 342. Telegram From the Embassy in Saudi Arabia to the Department of State1

1102 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 10. In order to buy time, short though it be, we are indicating to Fahd that we are reviewing in detail all of the recent attacks both by Sadat and the Egyptian press on SAG and the royal family. For that reason, we need texts of article referred to in reftel as well as such other attacks of recent vintage (the Saudis monitor all and we are asking them likewise for the information which they have). 11. In the meantime, continuation of Sadat’s attacks and resulting retaliation would be harmful to all concerned. It would push Saudis closer to those Arabs who want to punish Sadat and his supporters. Saudi Arabia would also find it increasingly difficult to caution even the slightest restraint in anti-Sadat moves and would be more vulnerable to pressure from other Arabs to exert influence on Sudan and Somalia to put greater distance between them and Sadat. It would also make it far more difficult to count on Saudi assistance when it will be needed to help reintegrate Egypt into the Arab world. 12. Sadat is doing himself tremendous damage and we think that intervention by the President through a personal plea to Sadat to stop further attacks on Saudi Arabia and the Saudi leadership may be the only way to avoid a regional crisis also affecting U.S.-Saudi relations. West 343. Memorandum of Conversation1

1104 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX having delivered the decisions and almost immediately focused in on President Carter’s decision to offer Egypt F–15 aircraft. He stated that the F–15 impact was definitely political in that the decision to offer to Egypt would have great impact throughout the entire region. He stated that “for the first time, we are in balance with Israel.” On the F–15, “The time will come when we will ask for it. Now you have offered us many variants (options) so now we must decide.”4 [Omitted here is discussion of the U.S. Rapid Deployment Force, area and regional military concerns, and McGiffert’s recent trip to China.] 4 McGiffert repeated Carter’s decisions to Mubarak in a Febrary 23 meeting between them, stating “the President’s decisions were final for this budget cycle and that he [McGiffert] was not in Egypt to bargain.” Mubarak “told Mr. McGiffert that the United States must set the numbers of F–15s that will be made available. Mr. McGiffert pointed out that within the financial constraints of the President’s decisions, the choice was Egypt’s, but that Egypt should understand that these prices were only estimates. The Vice President then exchanged views with Mr. McGiffert on the psychological and political impact of the F–15 issue. He stated that Egypt cannot be left to appear militarily weak in front of ‘all these people, ’ i.e. Libya, Saudi Arabia and Israel” and appealed for “more equipment and faster deliveries.” (Memorandum of Conversation, February 23; Wash-

1106 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX point in going to the Israelis to make this a quid pro quo matter: it would have little impact on them). (C) My judgment is that we should: —try for a postponement of the vote until Monday; —failing that, abstain tomorrow, with a very strong statement on settlements and explaining our opposition to the commission provision; and —go to the Israelis and explain that position, stressing hard the importance that the Cabinet reject the Hebron settlements on Sunday. (C) I recommend that you raise this with Vance at the VBB,9 today. (U) 9 No memorandum of conversation for the VBB meeting has been found. However, a February 28 memorandum from Brzezinski to Aaron and Denend, listing the decisions taken at the meeting, stated that the participants decided the United States would abstain in the U.N. vote on settlements. (Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject

1108 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX safi, McHenry also informed the Israeli Deputy Permanent Representative to the United Nations of his intention to vote for the resolution.

1110 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 346. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State and the White House1

1112 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ting Congress (e.g. Sam Nunn) to consider security assistance (especially for the new Gulf strategy) against the extra 2% in the budget for DoD. This might be the way to “square the circle,” by matching potential cuts in security assistance against actual reductions in increases in the military budget—thus giving us the best mix of increased security without seeming to weaken in our resolve to strengthen defense and U.S. security. Since this could be couched in terms of not cutting funds for Egypt, and especially for Israel, it could get strong reasonance on the Hill provided careful consultations are carried out. I talked to Nimetz about it, who likes the idea. If you do, you might inject it into the discussions with the President. (C) —Oil. Energy Minister Modai has asked to come here next week to see Vance and Duncan, to 1) activate the U.S. oil supply commitment and 2) ask for money to build underground oil storage facilities, as promised by Kissinger but never followed up. The consensus is that this is a poor time for the activation of the agreement (the need is simply not there; and diverting U.S. oil would play very badly here). This could become a major issue with the Israelis if not played right. I have alerted Ed Fried, and Hinton is holding a meeting this afternoon. The object is to turn off the visit, without letting the Israelis claim that we are not standing behind the oil agreement. Strauss is speaking to Eppy about it. I will come back to you for clearance of any cable coming out of today’s meeting.2 (S) —SFM. State has promised a draft cable3 to Lewis this afternoon for our clearance (I will run it by you). I have asked Saunders to throw the ball back into the Israeli/Egyptian court—i.e. we are prepared to in- 2 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Brzezinski wrote: “separate memo.” A separate memorandum on Israeli oil was prepared by Hunter and sent to Brzezinski on March 7. Hunter informed Brzezinski that Modai told the Embassy in Tel Aviv that he was coming next week and “could not be talked out of it.” “This,” he observed, “could have serious consequences—especially in the ‘honoring of commitments’ vein. We would honor it, though our terms and conditions would appear to be onerous to the Israelis, and would themselves result in a squabble.” Hunter reported, following Hinton’s meeting (talking points from which are attached to the memorandum), “our consensus is that quiet but firm efforts should be made at least to delay this visit for a significant period of time.” In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote: “Vance will talk to Evron. ZB.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brze-

1114 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 348. Article in the National Intelligence Daily1 Washington, March 17, 1980 SPECIAL ANALYSIS SYRIA: Assad’s Prospects President Assad has committed his minority Alawite government to a risky course with his reported decision to use the military more freely to crush civil unrest in Syrian cities. This may intimidate his domestic opponents in the short run, but unless Assad is able to reestablish order quickly, it will also further erode his domestic support and could eventually bring about his ouster. By committing the military, Assad is playing his last major card to keep his regime in power. Army discipline may well collapse in the face of widespread riots. This could lead to a bloody war between Sunni Muslim and Alawite units. The Alawites, however, may choose to topple Assad before such turmoil develops in order to keep their position secure. [handling restriction not declassified] The latest round of antigovernment activity began late last month in Hamah, a conservative Sunni stronghold and a center of Muslim Brotherhood dissidence. Demonstrations soon spread to Aleppo, Syria’s second largest city, and to several other important towns in northern Syria. Damascus remains relatively quiet despite terrorist bombings of some government stores and calls by the extremists for sympathy strikes. [handling restriction not declassified] In Aleppo, the Army’s elite Special Forces failed to force shopkeepers to reopen in the face of intimidation by armed extremists. Violent street rioting resulted. The commandos reportedly suffered substantial casualties, prompting Assad to order armor and infantry into the city. [handling restriction not declassified] [less than 1 line not declassified] religious leaders and government officials in Aleppo arranged a cease-fire last weekend to give the Assad regime time to consider the dissidents’ demands for greater political freedom and release of prisoners. The religious leaders gave the government until today to meet their demands, but threatened to renew their calls for antiregime activity at noon prayer meetings if the government did not respond. Assad clearly has no intention of meeting the religious leaders’ demands. [handling restriction not declassified] 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of Support Services, Directorate of In-

1116 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Outlook Although Assad appears in no immediate danger of being ousted, his dilemma is growing. He cannot allow civil disturbances to go unchecked, but repression risks increased popular resentment of his regime. He may be able to intimidate the general population and deter demonstrations for a time, but Sunni extremist attacks on Alawite government and military officials—violence that predates the recent demonstrations—almost certainly will continue. [handling restriction not declassified] Assad apparently has decided to launch a major campaign to give the appearance of mass public support for the government’s effort to neutralize its domestic opponents. The regime probably hopes that displays of public backing would counter what probably is a growing perception in the cities that mass demonstrations are exclusively the province of the extremists. [handling restriction not declassified] As part of its campaign, the government probably will step up its efforts to “prove” that the extremists are being manipulated by outsiders such as the Egyptians, Israelis, or the US—a theme Assad has already used in a series of speeches this week. Assad is not likely to follow through with his threat to arm peasants and trade unionists to “liquidate reactionary gangs,” although additional militia units may be established. [handling restriction not declassified] The most dangerous near-term threat to Assad comes from his fellow Alawites, who are in the best position to mount a coup and want to preserve their dominance even at the expense of the present leadership. Some Alawite officers are said to be criticizing Assad’s failure to allow Sunnis a greater role in decisionmaking and his inability to come to grips with the deteriorating domestic situation; further missteps could quickly cause opposition to jell in the military. The appearance of serious disciplinary problems in Army units assigned to quell civil disturbances could persuade these officers to make their move. [handling restriction not declassified] Assad may be able to hold onto power for some time, but the chances are increasing that the Alawite elite will conclude that he and his unpopular brother Rifaat must go. The Alawites have no obvious alternative to Assad, although men such as military intelligence head Ali Duba and Special Forces commander Ali Haydar are likely to play a key role in any succession struggle. The Defense Companies and the Special Forces are considered the most loyal troops in Syria, but their support could crumble if the President and his brother were confronted by an Alawite consensus favoring a change of leadership. [handling restriction not declassified]

1118 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Four Premises First: I am writing from the premise that Sol with the President’s full support will be pursuing his negotiations with every effort to conclude them as early as possible. A lot of good work is being done on possible solutions to the issues. I am leaving the issues and the tactics of the negotiations aside for a moment, although decisions on strategy could affect how Sol begins to talk with Sadat next week.2 Second: The main issue to be kept before us is how hard we can press to conclude the negotiations in May or June and how much attention we should give to the option of suspending negotiations. Whether or not we might choose that option, we have to address the issue soon because the Egyptians are already locking us into a May 25 final deadline and closing off options for keeping the negotiations alive beyond June or beyond 1980. Sadat may well be planning another dramatic initiative. If we are going to suspend negotiations this summer, we need to do so on the right issue. Third: An immediate operational issue in the management of the larger peace process is how to deal with a number of issues outside the negotiations themselves. They will affect our ability to conclude them and to win Palestinian and Arab acceptance for them or to keep the door open for further peace initiatives if we cannot. I am thinking particularly of probable moves by the Arabs or the Europeans to bring the Palestinian rights issue back to the UN Security Council next month or after May 25. If we are going to shape those efforts we will need to make our views known soon. Fourth: How we manage the peace process this spring will affect the cooperation we can expect on building our security framework in Southwestern Asia as well as Saudi cooperation in keeping oil production up and prices down. My own view is that we should press the negotiations as long as substantive work is being done to define the issues and solutions to them. An active negotiating process is better than a void if it is serious. How big a milestone May 25 is will depend on how much we make of it—whether we and Sadat choose to make it a cut-off point or whether we continue and try to convince others that serious work is still going on. However, there is a very real alternative of suspending negotiations over the right issues. 2 Linowitz was scheduled to leave for the Middle East on March 21 for six days of talks with the Israelis and Egyptians.

1120 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX viet arms were not the answer and Soviet economic aid showed little understanding of the development process. In 1973 Sadat went to war not to win a military victory but to get the United States involved diplomatically. American diplomatic power is not—as the Arabs see it—our ability to force Israel to make concessions but rather our ability to bring about a viable solution for all parties. It will serve Israel’s interests far better to have a strong U.S. as the predominant extra-regional influence than to have Soviet-supported radical movements with no moderate counter. 3. The Palestinian issue is a security issue for the Saudis and Gulf Arabs. The Saudis and Gulf Arabs are increasingly blunt in telling us that their ability to stand with us on security issues in Southwestern Asia will depend on our ability to deal honorably with the Palestinian issue. The same point will be increasingly heard about oil production and prices. The Arab point is not simple blackmail for an ideological political purpose. Some parts of the Palestinian movement have roots in radical political philosophies and movements dedicated to the overthrow of traditional regimes. The Palestinians in the traditional societies of the Peninsula and Gulf are one of their principal security problems. The regimes there feel unable to identify with us on security issues when we do not appear to their sources of political support to be dealing with one of their main security issues. 4. A significant part of persuading those Arabs will be persuading them that we take the Palestinians seriously. That brings us to one of the toughest propositions of all—the question of how to deal with the PLO. I am not one of those who argues that a direct dialogue with the PLO would by itself resolve our problems. My long-term strategy towards the PLO would be to try to win their support for the autonomy in the transitional period and then to use that period to bring forward moderate leadership in the West Bank and Gaza so that the moderates in the Palestinian movement would ultimately have the capacity to isolate the radical elements. The PLO will probably split in that process, and that could be all to the good. But there has to be a subtly designed strategy for giving the PLO a sense—one way or another—that we regard them as part of the picture. Recognizing the Israeli side of this problem and the fact that a serious dialogue with the PLO is not on in 1980, I believe there are ways of doing just enough this year without the big splash of open meetings with Arafat’s lieutenants. But doing something on this front will be almost essential at some point when we have decided on our strategy. 5. We do not have to give the Arabs everything they want. Although the Arabs will continue to insist publicly on an independent Palestinian

1122 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX clusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. Because serious work was in progress when that deadline came, it was possible to keep going and conclude the negotiations three months later. It seems to me that the issue is not whether we can conclude the negotiations by May 25 but whether we can say with conviction that serious work is still going on with a prospect of achieving a reasonable agreement. But we need an early understanding with Sadat and Khalil on our longer term strategy so that we may maintain flexibility about the target date. We can probably assume that Sadat is pressing the May 25 deadline and hinting at suspending the negotiation in order to get us more fully engaged. The choice we will need to discuss with him is whether he will play ball with us in conducting the negotiations our way or whether we should agree on suspension until 1981 with promise of a big push then. Proceeding with the negotiation will require more cooperation from Sadat and Khalil than we have at the moment. Khalil has never understood why we have to negotiate in detail, yet not to do so is to prevent our making a serious effort to get to the tough issues in ways that would enable the Israelis to deal with them. Sadat seems to be on the brink of calling the negotiations at an end without letting us get to the end. So the immediate need is an agreement with both Sadat and Khalil that wins their cooperation on negotiating strategy without making them look as if they have made unacceptable concessions on Palestinian interests. To have that exchange with Sadat, we must decide on our own long-term strategy. On the Israeli side, as I suggested above, the approach has to be on the basis of fulfilling the Camp David commitments. We can show understanding of Begin’s political (including economic) problems and concentrate on asking him to tell us how he can conclude the talks on a fair basis. In this context, we need to know how we would suspend the talks if that happens because the greatest pressure on Begin will not be anything we say but rather his assessment of the situation he will face in the light of how the issues will be positioned if and when the talks are suspended. As we move toward decisions on how to deal with Begin and Sadat looking toward May 25, a central issue will be how to state our objectives so as to avoid politically unsustainable confrontations and to describe an achievable outcome. We will also want to give careful attention to sharpening the issues in such a way as to allow them to be the main sources of continuing pressure if negotiations are suspended. The Situation Ahead: Managing Other Initiatives In addition to the imperative exchanges with Begin and Sadat through a variety of channels, we will have to deal in the next three months with the following initiatives from other quarters:

1124 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX key Arabs lest the negative post Camp David reaction be repeated. Oil prices and our security framework in Southwest Asia are at stake. —Fahd has already sent such a message to the President.6 —As early as last August when the Palestinian rights resolution was in the Security Council, intelligence reports indicated that Arafat recognized that the U.S. might well not be able to make serious moves until early 1981. —Sadat, in presenting May 25 as a “deadline” and in wanting exchanges with us on strategy toward the autonomy talks, might well be on the verge of proposing some such strategy. —If we are to move in this direction, we would want to talk along these lines with King Hussein when he comes in the second half of April 4. Throughout this period we will probably see continuing Israeli moves to expand their settlements in the West Bank. This possibility highlights the need to consider further how we might take a stand for restraint of some kind on new settlements. The ideal way to achieve this would be a sensible resolution of the land issue in the autonomy negotiations. But if these negotiations were to be suspended, there would be at least an argument for either positioning the talks so they will break down over the settlements issue or, as one means to that end, seeking a well-defined moratorium on specified actions during the period when the negotiations are suspended. The Israelis would not agree, but the issue would be clearly put. The Decisions We Face 1. The basic decision that needs to be made is whether to press for an autonomy agreement this year. —One possible strategy is to press the autonomy talks as far as they can go with the intent to bring substantive issues to a head whenever they are ready. This might require our putting forward our own draft agreement at some point in some form, knowing this would produce another serious crisis in U.S.-Israeli relations. This would also re- 6 Brzezinski sent the Saudi aide me´moire containing the oral message from Fahd to Carter under a March 3 covering memorandum. The message conveyed Fahd’s deep concern that “with the end of May and the possible collapse of autonomy talks, the environment will be created for serious regional developments. In particular, the mood of any new Arab summit is likely to be immensely more difficult than the last two. The economic rationale for significantly lowering oil production is already being pressed with great vigour and persuasiveness. HRH’s lack of visible political ‘support’ by Washington on the Arab-Israeli issue compounds his constraints in these areas as well as in others related to cooperation in the face of Soviet encroachment.” Brzezinski reported the oral comments accompanying the message “indicate that the Saudis are fearful that they will no longer be able to support us,” to which Carter wrote: “a) That will be a decision for HRH to make b) We are doing the best we can. J.” (Carter Library, National Security Af-

1126 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Whatever we do along the above lines with the Palestinians or with Begin and Sadat, we must tell the key Saudis as well as Hussein in depth what we are doing.8 4. As soon as we know where we are going this spring, we must tell the Europeans soon in order to fend off initiatives that might cut across our efforts. Our friends and allies will be highly skeptical that we can succeed in our negotiations, but they will probably stand back as long as a serious effort seems to be taking place. If we were to engage the British with the Palestinians, this would keep them constructively engaged. 5. If we are not going to go beyond the point where serious discussion is stalled and if we are prepared to let serious negotiations go into neutral for the remainder of 1980 and then to resume them in earnest in 1981, we would want to decide that as early as possible so we could position ourselves to use the prospect of movement in 1981 to fend off such initiatives as the Europeans may mount or as the Arabs may bring to the Security Council on the Palestinian rights resolution. We would also want to bring about a suspension in the most constructive way possible with the intent of resuming negotiations early in 1981. 8 Vance underlined this sentence. 351. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

1128 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Nevertheless, we see no signs of any meaningful progress in the negotiations. The twenty sixth of May is approaching in a matter of a few weeks. If the negotiations fail to produce the necessary progress to keep the process alive, the consequences will be very grave indeed. Many people will question the wisdom of continuing the talks.4 On the other hand, the violation of the fixed date, be it a target date or a deadline, might give the impression that the talks have become open-ended since no other date is fixed. All this will expose us to charges and suspicions of procrastinating or lacking the sense of urgency which is required under the circumstances. The door will be wide open before any other efforts to seek a solution to the problem. It would be quite difficult for us to oppose such efforts or prevent any move within the United Nations for the purpose of establishing new terms of reference.5 On the other hand, this will give credence to the allegations that the peace accords we signed constitute a separate peace arrangement. We reject this categorically. As I told you in our first meeting6 in Camp David, I would never accept a separate or partial agreement. I need not emphasize this any further. —Likewise, the success of our endeavor necessitates that you refrain from taking any action or making any statement that might poison the atmosphere or exacerbate the situation. Certain actions taken by your government lately have not been sensitive to the delicate stage of the negotiations. Statements made by Israeli officials lately have not been helpful, to say the least. This is not likely to generate the kind of response we would like to see on the part of the Palestinian people in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, whose cooperation is vital to the success of our mission. —In the coming few days, our representatives will be meeting to pursue their discussion.7 These talks will provide an indication of the manner in which the negotiations are developing. It is essential that they address themselves seriously to the major issues of substance with full awareness of the consequences of success and failure. It is also essential to set up a commitee that would be entrusted with the task of discussing the issue of security8 for it is obvious that such issue is adversely interferring with many aspects of the negotiations. Hence, a real attempt to define it and clarify it would be a good step in the right direction. If the committee on security starts its function promptly and 4 Carter underlined this and the previous sentence. 5 Carter underlined this sentence.

1130 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said (to the Ambassador) that Cy Vance had done well at the hearing.3 The problem concerns how we could have voted for it. Ambassador Linowitz said that that is the key point. The President said that Cy has been very stubborn on this. He had Zbig call him this morning, and wrote a note. In a political campaign, you can’t go for a week before you know that you shouldn’t answer all questions. You can get pinned down by hypothetical questions. He is glad to see Ambassador Linowitz, and to go over where we are. He knows that the Ambassador was a bit reluctant on the Sadat and Begin visits. But he needs to indicate the resolve of the Administration and its interest in the Middle East talks. There is an impression—reflected also in the Ambassador’s talks—that we are not supporting the talks enough. He wants to let the world know that the talks are not dead. Austria, Portugal, Greece, and to an extent Germany are reacting as though the talks are dying away, and they want to fill a vacuum. He had urgent messages from Sadat, including through Khalil and to Mrs. Carter,4 that Sadat wants to see him (the President) urgently. He talked with Cy and asked him to sleep on it, that he (the President) had to let Sadat come. Then he also had to see Begin. When he (the Ambassador) is in the Middle East, he should keep in the back of his mind what the major obstacles are. On Israel, he wants to be blunt with the Ambassador: he wants to come up with a position we can take, and get accepted by himself, Sadat and the majority of Israelis and its political leaders—probably with the exception of Begin, but preferably with him. He needs to bring the talks to a head, probably in June. He can’t let this thing continue through the Convention5 and the election period. He is prepared to resolve the issues. If this can’t be done, then our position will be clear to American Jews, to the community here, to Sadat and others. He feels there will be a repetition of past negotiations in leading to a showdown with Begin, who wanted to do nothing, and was willing to let the process breakdown. Yet Begin is constrained, first by his sense of his historical and Biblical place in Israel’s history—this is 3 On March 20, Vance appeared before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to explain the March 1 U.S. vote on Israeli settlements. (See Document 345) In his testimony, Vance acknowledged that the U.S. vote in favor of the resolution had been made in error and accepted responsibility for the “failure of communications” which led to it. At the same time, The New York Times reported, Vance “made it clear in two hours of frequently argumentative testimony that the United States continued to regard Israeli establishment of settlements in occupied Arab territory as illegal and an obstacle to peace.” (Terence Smith, “Vance Rebuffs Call for Full Disavowal of U.N.’s Israel Move,” The New York

1132 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the peacemaker for Israel, and to insure its security for the future. Inside this there might be a way to find a way to movement, but it will be excruciatingly tough. His sense—shared by Sam Lewis—is that Begin will give nothing to the Ambassador on this trip; anything he might give he will give to the President here. Therefore it will be useful for him (the Ambassador) to sound out Begin. But he is also having meetings with Peres, Dayan, Weizman and others. The President said that this is good, and that the Ambassador should also use Hedley Donovan for this purpose. Ambassador Linowitz said that it would be useful to have Hedley along. He can take soundings; he will be helpful. He (the Ambassador) hopes he can come back from this trip with a better sense of where there is room for give with Begin. Is he beyond moving? His (the Ambassador’s) guess is that Begin will want to do something—for example, the establishment of a security committee. Why? Because he (the Ambassador) had been tough with Sharon here.6 Sharon liked it— and had called to say so—and that they should meet alone in Israel. There must be some masochism there. He had told Sharon that the President was personally concerned about the security issue. Sharon said that they should discuss this. The Ambassador had said that Sharon should tell Begin, and Sharon said he would. We should let Egypt know we are pressing on this. The President asked what Egypt wants. Ambassador Linowitz said that it has an understandable position. Israel says that everything touches on security—health, welfare (the President added “schools”). Therefore, with the lists of coordinated powers, they had agreed at the Hague7 that security was not in the first list of 18 transferred powers, and he had thought they (the Israelis?) were off the security kick on the first list. Khalil said he had tried to move them, and couldn’t do it. He said that we should try to get the Israelis to define their security needs and tell them, and they will try to work around it. This concerns Khalil. We may be able to get something. He (the Ambassador) had told Begin that adding to the ring of settlements around Jerusalem was an affront to the President. This shook Begin; he does not want to be in the President’s bad graces. The President said that Begin had kicked him when he was down on this one. He was causing him the greatest hurt when he was vulnerable. But he (the President) survived! 6 A summary of Linowitz’s March 13 conversation with Sharon was transmitted in

1134 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Linowitz agreed. Last time, Sadat had told him that settlements were not important. He said they could concentrate on Gaza and could forget the West Bank for years. This couldn’t happen. There is a troublesome dichotomy that is hard to get hold of. Khalil is on a kick—how can we get him off it? He has switched his philosophies— the Ambassador hopes this does not mean Sadat, as well. Before, Khalil said that they could transfer some powers into the first list. Now his position is that under Camp David, all powers must be transferred, and then have the Israelis negotiate some back. This Israel will never do. Camp David says that the powers should be defined. At the Hague, the most important conversation—which he was told he could not tell Khalil or Sadat—was with Burg, and was surprising. Otherwise it was a sterile session. One idea dealt with absentee ballots for East Jerusalem residents. He (the Ambassador) does not see Burg being independent enough to talk about something like this without Begin’s interest in the idea. The President said that Burg might be prepared to break with his boss. Ambassador Linowitz said that Burg had said frankly that he (Burg) is dismayed by Begin’s position. Shamir in Burg’s view was worse. Burg said that he could not meet with Linowitz alone. But he (the Ambassador) believed that if he can persuade Shamir, then he could sell an idea. He is a man of integrity and speaks frankly. The President said that the Ambassador would have to waste a lot of time teaching Shamir the issues. Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to tell the President how things appear. He does not have great expectations for this trip. The President said that if issues can be clearly defined, this would be good. Begin knows what happened at Camp David, and now he will be ganged up on—not just with Sadat, but with some of his own associates. Barak was good. He would take Begin off privately and get him to change his mind in a way that was not embarrassing. Dayan was close to this, though not as good. He is not sure that Shamir, Burg or Weizman could do this. Barak is like a bookkeeper, or a personal CPA, or a lawyer friend—that is, not a peer. Begin didn’t care if Barak knew he had changed his mind, but he cared about the others. Sometimes he (the President) would work out a position with Barak, who would go off with Begin. Three hours later Barak would emerge and say what Begin had suggested! There is a need for some way for Begin to change his mind, without losing face. Begin might say that he had to let the Knesset decide. The President said he was extremely eager to get into this. It might be unpleasant; and this is not the time (?). He thinks there will be no cutoff of the process, for example for this to be taken to the UN. Yet

1136 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President started off by telling me of his recent meeting2 with Moshe Dayan in which Dayan had come forward with the suggestion that it might make sense for Israel to put on the table its intention with respect to future settlements and then to indicate what the correlative anticipated right might be for the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. Dayan told the President that he thought Israel wanted about 15 or 20 more settlements; that he anticipated that all of the settlements would in due course have about 3,000 people additional; and that the Palestinians could be told that they could bring in about 50,000 Palestinians under the autonomy arrangement. The President thought this was a sensible idea, and I said that it was along the lines of Sharon’s suggestion about a limited number of settlements, but that obviously Dayan had gone beyond that to limit also the number of people at each settlement. I then gave the President about a 10-minute report on my meetings

1138 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX viously some disagreement, and the President agreed that upon reflection and after the emotions had subsided there was probably misunderstanding between them as to just how long the freeze was to run. He said he would make clear to Begin that he understood the basis for the misunderstanding. I told him that I thought this would be helpful. We then talked about how to move the relationship along and the fact that Sadat will be concerned with large issues while Begin will be cautious about details. I then went through a number of other areas which Sadat had discussed with me. With respect to military aid and the F–15’s, I told him of Egypt’s concern that the price to Israel was so much cheaper than that to Egypt and also that Sadat wanted 4 destroyers on a lend-lease basis. I also told the President that Sadat had told me the Shah was very bitter about the United States and felt he had been betrayed; that 14 months ago Sadat had suggested that he remove his planes from Iran and bring them to Egypt and the Shah had said that even if he wanted to do so they would not come unless the United States directed them to. Sadat said he was trying to temper the Shah’s feeling. Sadat also asked me to convey to the President that he thought that there was now civil war in Syria and that Assad would be out by the end of the year. He thought that Iraq was working against Assad and cautioned the United States to be careful about Iraq. With reference to Saudia Arabia, I told him that Sadat had said that the United States can control it whenever it wants to and that the Royal Family exists wholly because of the help of the United States. He said that Saudi Arabia could get Hussein to join the negotiations by a phone call, since Hussein and his family are on the Saudi payroll. Sadat did think, however, that this might be the time to improve Saudi-Egypt relations, and that the United States could undertake to do it. The President then said that he was not surprised at the suggestion about Hussein; [2 lines not declassified] He also indicated that the Shah was a trouble-maker and was misstating facts to Sadat. Quite clearly the President is eager to get back into the negotiations and said as much. He said that he had enjoyed the Camp David negotiations immensely despite their difficulties because except for his submarine duty it was the only time perhaps ever that he had devoted himself for an extended period to a single subject—entirely apart, as he put it, from the Congressmen on his neck, etc. He seemed to be immensely interested in every aspect of the negotiations and the attitude of the people involved. He is obviously not only knowledgeable but keeping current on every tactic. The President then spoke again about Moshe Dayan’s suggestion which he said was the best idea he had heard for weeks about the situa-

1140 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Ashraf Ghorbal, Egyptian Ambassador to the United States Mr. Osama el-Baz, First Under Secretary and Director of the Office of the Vice President The President began by suggesting that this afternoon2 they talk about the procedural approach to be followed until the end of May. He believes it useful to get a sense of the key differences there are between Egypt and Israel. He would like to do what they did at Camp David and during his Middle East trip: to reach agreement with President Sadat, with flexibility, and then deal with Begin on that basis. Not everything can be agreed by May 26. We should proceed, as Ambassador Linowitz and Prime Minister Khalil had worked out, to hold continuing negotiations, preferably here. President Sadat can designate whom he wants—Burg would be here for the Israelis—because he understands that Prime Minister Khalil might not be able to be here all the time. That would give us only a month to iron out as many difficulties as possible. Ambassador Linowitz had suggested working out “heads of agreement,” and Khalil and Burg had agreed. This would be agreement on principles, and on specifics. Some of the details could be left until later. (President Sadat said fine.) It would not be possible to get Israeli and Egyptian agreement on all points by then, and since the Palestinians are not in the talks, and on some issues they are needed for agreement, this could be done with their elected representatives or with the mayors. We can negotiate for a month, and then the heads of agreement can incorporate what is agreed by May 26. Second, there should be definition of the specific responsibilities and authority of the SGA. We do not know how large it would be. Egypt prefers having it fairly sizable; Begin wants about a dozen members. One possibility would be to have the mayors on an interim SGA. For the Palestinians, this would give them a voice—either personally or chosen. We have not discussed this possibility with Begin, and do not know his view. The SGA should have the right to issue proclamations, and to modify existing statutes, but not change the terms of the heads of agreement. It would have no right to change agreements reached between him, President Sadat, and Prime Minister Begin. The Continuing Committee would include representatives of the SGA, Egypt, the U.S. (if 2 On the morning of April 8, Carter met privately with Sadat in the Rose Garden

1142 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (At that point, copies were passed—see attachment—and the

1144 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said we are willing. President Sadat said that the Israelis should not want the Soviet Union to be happy, in saying that the U.S. was excluded! Ambassador Linowitz asked if he understood correctly: if we continue as a full partner on the Continuing Committee, and under the Camp David Accords, is this agreeable to Egypt? President Sadat said full partner. . . . There had been two turning points. With the first Disengagement Agreement,4 after the October war, there were hot feelings and emotions. It was a deadlock. The first Disengagement Agreement was a U.S. paper submitted after the deadlock. Also at Camp David, without President Carter and the U.S., Begin would not have signed. We will face this in the future. The fact is that the U.S. is a full partner. The President said he wants to know what President Sadat envisions if we go for Gaza-first. How can we negotiate on one part of the territories only? He can’t see it. Does President Sadat see implementing Gaza first? President Sadat said he had talked candidly with Begin about this at Aswan. Begin was silent. He (President Sadat) had said, let us agree about Gaza and the West Bank first; but he (President Sadat) would have nothing to do with the West Bank, let us start with Gaza first. He said to Begin: “Do you hear?” And Begin replied: “I hear with three ears,” which meant he felt it in his heart, as well. He (Begin) had asked the same question—do you mean agreeing on Gaza only? Does this mean postponing the West Bank? He (President Sadat) had said no. He (Begin) said in Cairo, that we could start with Gaza after agreeing on the West Bank and Gaza together. He (Begin) declared himself. He (President Sadat) proposed to help him (Begin) with problems of the West Bank. Also, why should they keep Hussein as an outsider? The President commented that Hussein is throwing rocks. President Sadat said that when he first proposed this idea to Begin, Begin refused immediately. Then after six months, all the Israelis—including Begin—said that this was a happy solution. There is no threat to Israel from Gaza. On the West Bank, even Israeli editors said that they had misunderstood him (President Sadat). Now they see this as a most happy solution—all the factions in Israel do. At Aswan, he had tried to ease matters for Begin, who heard with three ears, to go to the Cabinet. There was no answer. We need to get his (Begin’s) answer. 4 For documentation on the First Egyptian-Israeli Disengagement Agreement,

1146 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said there is no water rights problem in Gaza. What may happen is that we will set up the SGA in Gaza, and the Camp David Accords say the Israelis withdraw. Therefore Begin does not want to go forward in Gaza, so that he will not have to go forward with the process on the military side. Did this come up in Cabinet, or get discussed? Ambassador Linowitz said no. Secretary Vance said that there was some discussion at the end of the Egypt-Israel treaty negotiations. It went to the Cabinet, which voted no, so it was not put in the (joint) letter. The President said the first he had heard the idea was on the phone after Camp David with President Sadat.5 President Sadat said that he heard from Weizman—who is agreeable. Also the Israeli editors saw it as a happy solution. The President said that we should pursue it as an alternative option. It sounds good, to avoid a breakdown. It may be acceptable to Israeli public opinion. President Sadat agreed. The President said that he hears that some Israeli military commanders have turned over some responsibilities, with no publicity. General Ali said that some Cairo officials were there too, dealing with pupils, students, and passports. Minister Butros Ghali said that this was not implemented. President Sadat said the Gazans are against it. General Ali said it was in his last report. Minister Butros Ghali (disputing that report) said that the Gazans were still delaying. President Sadat said they were resisting it. The President said that some Israeli military commanders, without publicity, were turning over some powers: e.g. some police functions and schools. Secretary Vance said Moshe (Dayan) had told us. Ambassador Linowitz said that Mayor Shawaa confirmed this, and also discussed Gaza first. President Sadat asked what the answer was. Ambassador Linowitz said at first there was no interest. Then Shawaa indicated that this might be possible if we had not finished the West Bank. He said that this would have to mean there were not much time lapsing, however. 5 See Document 132.

1148 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said that if we can agree on 40 representatives for the West Bank, a date for elections, and voting for residents of East Jerusalem, would the PLO encourage Palestinians to participate in the election? Mr. el-Baz said that de facto, yes. The President asked whether the word would get out. Mr. el-Baz said yes. Hikmat el-Mazri saw Arafat, and got this point. President Sadat said that Hikmat el-Mazri had at one time been speaker of the Jordanian parliament. The President said that there is a problem with Begin in East Jerusalem on voting. Ambassador Linowitz told him (Begin) that they had the right to vote in Jordanian elections. Begin was surprised, and checked to see whether it was accurate. It is illogical for them to be able to vote in Jordan and not in the West Bank. This is a difficult issue. Ambassador Linowitz said they had only touched on settlements. Begin agonizes about this—even two months of a moratorium is a lot, and he (Begin) rejected his (the Ambassador’s) appeal. The President asked whether there was more to discuss on Begin. President Sadat said no. The President joked that Osama (el-Baz) has really mellowed! Mr. el-Baz joked that he (the President) should wait until the drafting! Minister Butros Ghali joked that it is age! The President joked that he (el-Baz) always agreed with him in general but not in the drafting! He continued that Camp David was a miracle. He talked with Mrs. Carter at noon—and said look at what has been done; it is a miracle. He asked whether President Sadat is running water under the Suez Canal for the Sinai. President Sadat said it would be done this month, but only opened in October. The President asked if this tunnel is for traffic. President Sadat said yes, and room for a pipeline. He had a feasibility plan to send water from the Nile done by Bechtel. The water will be for Ma’adi in the Eastern Desert, and for Suez. The tunnel is near Suez. A man from Bechtel visited him recently, and is doing a feasibility study, for free. The President asked whether they needed water on the Cairo side. President Sadat said yes, that they have lots of land in Sinai—and need water for agriculture and drinking, and for use inside. The President asked whether there were any difficulties in turning over Sinai on time. Did they get good cooperation?

1150 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat said that before Camp David, he felt they would reach nothing. There was a heavy campaign by each side against the other. He had an inner confidence that was tactical, not strategic. Now Begin gives nothing, because of what he has lived for the last 40 years: the West Bank. A mutual friend of theirs heard that Begin wants the West Bank. This raises difficulties. In history, Begin wants to go down as the man who made peace with Egypt, which has been important since Moses. Until Begin visits here, and the President hears him, then he (President Sadat) can’t give his idea about the whole thing. He knows that Begin doesn’t want to act in the West Bank as he did in Sinai, for ideological reasons. He (President Sadat) sent Begin a letter,7 saying that if Begin stayed in the middle of the road, then the person after him would take the whole credit: for both the comprehensive peace and the treaty with Egypt. He (President Sadat) will not make up his mind until Begin meets here with the President. The President said that the hardest for Begin of all was dismantling the settlements in the Sinai. He (the President) does not believe Begin will give East Jerusalem to the Arabs, so it will need to stay unified. Except for Jerusalem, Sinai was the worst problem; it was torture for Begin on the settlements. Dr. Brzezinski said that at Camp David he had referred to the settlements as colonial. Begin had asked him to go for a private walk, and had upbraided him for using that word. Begin said that his right eye would fall out, and his right arm would fall off, before he would agree to give up the Sinai settlements. But 10 days later he did. President Sadat said Begin told him the Sinai settlements would go with him (Begin) to the grave. The President said that Begin had had a good reception at those settlements. Assistant Secretary Saunders said that the problem of the West Bank settlements was worse. President Sadat said that if he could solve the Jerusalem problem, he insists. . . . There should be public opinion here and in the whole world; why should Israel put the U.S. in such a position with 800 million Moslems? He tells Israelis, how many of you are there, 16 million? Why not take U.S. interests into account in the Muslim world? When Begin agrees on Jerusalem, then he (President Sadat) will give water. 7 Although Sadat had sent a letter to Begin regarding the state of negotiations on

1152 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 355. Memorandum of Conversation1

1154 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX them. But I am bewildered by Fahd. He is encouraging Iraq and the Palestinian dreams. The severing of relations with Egypt—I shall never forget it because I don’t want the Egyptian people hurt. I don’t ask for economic or diplomatic relations, but everything can be solved when relations between Egypt and Saudi Arabia are normal. Moreover, somebody has to be able to sit down and argue with Begin. President Carter: The most important thing is for Hussein and the West Bank mayors to join the negotiations. Saudi Arabia could help there. Also there must be a rapprochement between Saudi Arabia and Egypt. It will take some courage for Saudi Arabia to withdraw from its close relationship with Iraq and the rejectionists. Prince Bandar: The relationship with Iraq and Syria is not as close as it seems. We will support a peace process with all our weight. President Carter: Your non-participation plays into the hands of those who oppose progress. Prince Bandar: One final request: Please, no more speeches or press attacks on us. (Speaks briefly in Arabic.) President Sadat: You have my word. A moratorium. As of now, no more. President Carter: (to Prince Bandar) And that means both ways. Prince Bandar: Yes. (The meeting ended with warm greetings exchanged between President Sadat and Prince Bandar and personal best wishes to Princes Fahd and Sultan.)

1156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX word “tackled” should be changed to something else. On point three,6 there is a problem: there is a difference between listing powers and responsibilities to be transferred, and providing for transfer of authority. He thought we could skirt this by simply outlining the powers transferred. On point four,7 Israel objects to “legislative” authority. Begin says that the SGA can do what has to be done. He said to Begin that you can call what it does a regulation, a rule, a law, or whatever: but the SGA needs authority. Begin did not deny this point; but he is troubled by the idea of legislative authority that could lead to a Palestinian state. Begin wants to avoid that. Mr. el-Baz said that Egypt had avoided the word in this point of the draft, but not the concept. They need something like this point for afterwards. Secretary Vance asked Mr. el-Baz to clarify the word “afterwards.” Mr. el-Baz said that this would be during the negotiations, but it formed a concept in a manner to give the SGA legislative authority. If a different term is used, that is all right; but the concept must be clear. Egypt will not abandon the concept. We can decide to take the Israeli argument into consideration, and defer the question of “legislative authority” now, but then talk about certain forms. Ambassador Linowitz said that [he] was troubled by the question of “afterwards.” When would this be? Mr. el-Baz said after the 27th of April. Secretary Vance asked whether Mr. el-Baz were saying that on the 27th, in the intensive negotiations, the question should be faced regarding words about laws, legislation, etc. Mr. el-Baz said: yes. Ambassador Linowitz said that we are kidding ourselves if we think that we could get that from the Israelis. Mr. el-Baz said that they will try. Ambassador Linowitz said that he had tried to find words (in the U.S. draft8 yesterday) that would not create problems for Begin. This is a prickly subject, and will provoke a strong reaction. Without a categorical change in Begin, it will get a violent reaction on “law” or “legis- 6 The text of point three in the Egyptian paper reads: “The Heads of Agreement document will provide for the transfer of authority to the SGA. Accordingly, a list will be drawn of the areas which fall under the jurisdiction of the SGA.” 7 The text of point four in the Egyptian paper reads: “The SGA will have all powers which are necessary for the discharge of its responsibilities. “The SGA will not have the power to alter the terms of the Heads of Agreement. Nor will it have the power of conducting diplomatic or consular affairs or establishing armed forces during the transitional period.”

1158 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX to get around that point by listing the powers of the SGA. We are back to “transfer of authority.” We need not get into that issue, if the Heads of Agreement just list powers. It will not advance the discussion to go back to “transfer of authority.” On paragraph four, again: Israel will react to “legislative authority” and “laws,” if described as such under powers and responsibilities, as leading to authority for an independent Palestinian state. Therefore we framed our language to get around this problem. The Egyptian redraft is all right, but we must recognize that it does not remove the problem. It is all right now. On the rest of the paragraph. . . . The President asked: paragraph 4? Ambassador Linowitz said: the second part. We are trying to reflect the Israeli position. They are trying to keep defense and foreign affairs for themselves. There is no question that Israel will agree to the SGA’s having diplomatic or consular relations or armed forces. Maybe this formulation (in the Egyptian draft) is all right, but Israel will assert that defense is with them. What does “defense” mean: it is just of Israel or of the West Bank, too? Israel insists on the latter. Second, on foreign affairs and relations with other countries, these would not be exercised by the SGA. Israel demands the right to handle communications and other types of international relations matters. We have no quarrel with the Egyptian language, but there is a problem of ambiguity. Paragraph five10 is fine, but why did the Egyptians change our language? The Egyptian language is all right. On the language on “coordinating,” the powers will not be unilateral if they are coordinated. Implicit in the Egyptian language is a practical change that will not be acceptable. Israel will say that both have to agree. The next paragraph11 focuses on what would happen if there is no agreement. Therefore, we said that existing arrangements would apply. Why has this been changed? The Egyptian draft does not deal with an important aspect of the problem. Also, this paragraph deals with coordination; not dispute settlement or whether the Continuing Committee has some agreed full powers. Most troubling, from our point of view, is that there is no alternative provided if there is no unanimity. There is a need for a way to go if there is no resolution of disagreements. We thought our proposal was good. Khalil understood it; Burg and Shamir accepted it tentatively, as pro- 10 The text of point five of the Egyptian paper reads: “The document will stipulate that the SGA will exercise its powers in such a way as to promote good neighborly relations between the West Bank and Gaza and all their neighbors, including Israel. To this end, coordinating arrangements will be made.” 11 The text of point six of the Egyptian paper reads: “It is agreed that certain areas that require coordination between the SGA and Israel will be referred to the Continuing Committee provided for in the Camp David Accords and consisting of Egypt, Israel, the United States, SGA, and Jordan. The Continuing Committee will operate on the basis of unanimity.”

1160 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX brackets? I will try to do the best I can with the Israelis to get agreement on it). He does not want differences here, between President Sadat and himself, and to try guessing what the Israelis will accept. Let’s do this, and he will then be in touch with President Sadat (after seeing Begin) and seek a common approach. Mr. el-Baz said that we will not need brackets. The President said he agreed. With Osama redrafting, though, you never know! When he (the President) was in the Georgia legislature, he had been a slow learner, and found out that in a conference committee, it is better to be the secretary than the chairman. In a meeting of 20 people, he would rather be the secretary. Whoever does the first draft has the advantage. We will try to get agreement and, if not, there can be brackets. President Sadat and he will decide. Did Ambassador Linowitz have anything else? Ambassador Linowitz mentioned East Jerusalem. The President said that there are two basic proposals and it may be necessary to discuss them. First, some form of absentee ballotting; or second, delaying a decision by letting the Gaza and West Bank mayors, who are elected, select or appoint the SGA. He strongly prefers the first alternative. If we remove direct elections, this would modify a part of the Camp David Accords, and that might open the door for both sides to modify other parts. He expects that Begin will refuse (to move) on East Jerusalem. This is an untenable position. We will stand firmly and publicly on this. It is an important issue, and it needs to be addressed. Would Ambassador Linowitz like to comment? Ambassador Linowitz replied: no. The President said he feels that if Begin is intrasigent on voting rights for the residents of East Jerusalem, he (the President) will push hard and publicly. Instead of letting the SGA breakdown, we could establish it from the mayors. His opinion is that Israel would prefer not to have the SGA set up, since that means the automatic requirement to withdraw the Israeli military government and the civilian administration. A profound change is required, with no delay, to withdraw armed forces, and to assign the rest to specified security locations. Among ourselves, we should be more flexible on what the SGA is, in order to get it set up. When it is established, even without some things, this will be a major development, leading to a step by step increase in the authority and stature of the SGA. (Dr. Brzezinski entered at 11:05). Would Ambassador Linowitz like to comment? Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to add a footnote. There are two things this skeleton agreement would let happen, in signalling to the Palestinians—as the Egyptians say is their view: first, the military

1162 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX rely only on the U.S. and on Egypt. Others, like the Arab states, are unreliable. The President said he would make the same speech to Begin, and underline the principles from Camp David. He needs to repeat his toast almost verbatim, for the benefit of U.S. supporters of Israel, and others. Second, Camp David could be carried out quickly, if the West Bank mayors, others, and Hussein would join the discussions. Absent some action by Begin and the Israelis, what can we do to get Hussein and the Palestinians to join? Should someone contact the Saudis, Arafat, or Hussein? They are playing into the hands of the enemies of Camp David. The whole world would rally to an Israeli withdrawal, and Palestinian rights would have a good chance to succeed if the Palestinians and Jordan were in. He understands why they are not. But where is the key to get them in? Mr. el-Baz said that the Jordanian and Palestinian positions are different. Jordan and Hussein have their eyes on the West Bank, and would like to move to negotiations with Israel on the lines of the Allon plan.17 There could be some Israeli-Jordanian talks, perhaps nongovernmental, or with Peres or others. The President said that this is required to be done by Camp David in the second step, which could take place after a few months, and must begin no later than three years. If the Saudis were convinced that Jordan should be in, could the Saudis induce it to do so? President Sadat said 100%. If only to guarantee their economic assistance, Jordan would immediately come in. The President asked whether Saudi Arabia could convince Arafat and the West Bank Palestinians. President Sadat said no, the Saudis are intimidated by them. But they (the Saudis) could bring in Hussein. The President asked how we could bring in the Palestinians. President Sadat said that if Hussein joins, then for sure there would be repercussions on the PLO position. They may say that Hussein has joined the Zionist plot, but in their hearts they would try to do their best. They know Hussein; they would not want him to take all the land himself. The President asked whether Hussein, on balance, was more afraid of Syria and Iraq, or interested in pleasing the Saudis. President Sadat said both. If Saudi Arabia backs him, he will come in, whatever the threats are from Syria and Iraq—and we should see what is happening in Syria. Saudi Arabia for sure can bring him in.

1164 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX fact is that that would be a multilateral approach, not just with two or three countries. They think others should be involved, including the West Europeans, and self-determination should be included. These developments the Palestinians believe should be done now. Such alternatives seem more promising to them. Ambassador Linowitz asked how. Would they try to seize the West Bank and Gaza? Mr. el-Baz said that if there were negotiations under a different umbrella . . . Israel is there, but there could be another 242, and add a resolution on self-determination. They could try to get the Soviet Union and the socialists in. The Palestinians believe objective factors would lead to a different outcome. Ambassador Linowitz asked whether Mr. el-Baz believed it in that approach. Mr. el-Baz said he believed it was wrong, or Egypt would be pursuing it. They honestly tell the Palestinians their view. The Palestinians feel there are other options. Second, if the Israeli government doesn’t give anything—and the Palestinians hear this from former Cabinet members and Kreisky and others, they believe there is a disincentive to join Camp David. They wait until Israel changes; they wait for another government. Secretary Vance asked if the “they” was the predominate Palestinian element, or just some of them. Mr. el-Baz said that this is hard to measure. But it is the prevailing view among many PLO members and on the West Bank and Gaza. They see the best alternative as waiting, and maybe to get a better deal. The President said that the Palestinians would get a pretty good deal in Camp David. Mr. el-Baz said he believes therefore that we should try to strengthen it. This would be the key work to attract the Palestinians. Assistant Secretary Saunders said we don’t know what the Israeli Labor Party would say about a better deal or a territorial deal. Therefore the issue is confused in Palestinian minds. Dr. Brzezinski said that when the Palestinians see the map, it will not be a better deal. Assistant Secretary Saunders agreed: since it is not concrete, the Palestinians don’t see this. Ambassador Linowitz said that this approach was a disservice. Mr. el-Baz agreed. Ambassador Linowitz asked Mr. el-Baz to say more. Mr. el-Baz said that if we could get a good agreement, this would reassure the Palestinians about their fears of the Israelis. The Pales-

1166 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (The meeting continued with conversation within the two delega-

1168 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX world’s exportable oil. U.S. positions are well known, vis-a`-vis the Soviet Union. We are taking strong steps to induce Soviet withdrawal. We do not see them getting out soon, if ever. Its forces are not going down, but up. Several units have been increased during the past week. The Soviets are killing thousands of Afghans a month, destroying entire villages, and directly and brutally violating the rights of the brave people of Afghanistan. The Soviet Union underestimates the Afghans’ bravery and commitment to fight. It underestimates the revulsion in the world at the invasion; and it underestimates the condemnation of the Arab world. We have a specific interest in the peace process—in addition to our friends Sadat and Prime Minister Begin. We have a direct interest in its success. Sadat is for it. He (the President) will add his own voice: we should carry out the Camp David Accords meticulously, at the earliest possible time. He is concerned about the Europeans—the Austrians, French, Germans, and to an extent the British—over their tendency to turn away from their historic support of Israel, and to accept increasing relations with the PLO and the militant groups. But to avoid this trend, we must carry out the Camp David Accords: including refugees, the Palestinian problem in all its aspects, and also the security of Israel. The Camp David Accords are complex, and difficult issues remain. Prime Minister Begin said that some minor issues have been solved. The major ones are left for intense negotiations. The American public is deeply committed to the peace process. If there is a failure to succeed, the American people will condemn all of us who are involved: him (the President), and also Israeli and Egyptian leaders, for sure, if we do not carry out all of the Camp David Accords. We have a serious problem with the hostage crisis, and this is his (the President’s) constant preoccupation. He gets advice, varying between taking strong action and exercising patience. He accepts the need for patience. He has called on the Allies to exert more pressure on Iran. After stronger economic efforts later, then we will need to decide on military moves. This option is open under international law. He will take it if he needs to. We have a mutual interest in the security and peace of Israel; and also in the peace and security of Egypt. This is a three-way partnership: all are valuable. Sadat has shown both determination and patience. There is a difference of interpretation concerning the Camp David Accords. If there had been no flexibility in the language, then we would not have got agreement at Camp David. The Accords went far in specifics. We need to honor both the letter and the spirit of the Camp David Accords, and recognize the need for accommodation in resolving differences. What we get will be the measure of our success. There is some concern here that Sadat and Egypt are isolated in the

1170 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX people held hostage. The American people cannot acquiesce in their people’s being killed. Therefore, the President has been patient for 160 days and more. The world has been astonished by this patience. Even Sadat—at Aswan—said that the U.S. had lost 50,000 lives in Vietnam. Prime Minister Begin had had to tell Sadat that in the U.S. life is sacred. He (Prime Minister Begin) did not think that direct action would help: though Khomeini’s army is weak, and would be crushed, the hostages would be dead. This patience honors America and the President. Israelis have the same pain, and the choices are difficult. Prime Minister Begin knows that it is a sacrifice for the President to see him (Prime Minister Begin). Therefore he is grateful for the President’s taking time to see Sadat and now the Israelis. Second, there are the Soviets in Afghanistan. This is one of the most serious events since World War II. Some people compare this invasion with Czechoslovakia in 1968. There was a tragedy at the end of its “spring,” when the Czechoslovak people had begun to breathe. Warsaw Pact forces crushed them, and then there came the Brezhnev Doctrine.3 Yugoslavia and Romania and others denied it. But anyway, Afghanistan is not in the Soviet orbit. It could go through Baluchistan to the Indian Ocean in a few days, and change the balance of forces in the world. There is no force to stop them. Therefore this is one of the greatest events, and it is difficult to handle. Declarations by the President, Secretary Vance, Dr. Brzezinski—they still found time to talk to us (Prime Minister Begin and Sadat). Therefore he is grateful. And therefore he will do his best to bring about practical results, and has come here with concrete proposals to discuss. Israel agrees on intensified talks. He suggests holding them in the Middle East for 40 days. This is not a deadline, it is not a target date, as was suggested at Camp David and Israel did not accept. It had said we need to be careful, and therefore accepted, on his amendment, that the two countries pledged with good faith to go for the goal of finishing in one year. Then elections can be held for the Self-Governing Authority as expeditiously as

1172 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tion—ten or twelve—like Egypt. Let’s do it a simple way: with the teams there, and only 45 minutes to be on the spot. The President said that he had no objection. But Sadat favors having the first week in the United States. We can ask Sadat (about Prime Minister Begin’s suggestion), or Prime Minister Begin can do so through the Israeli Embassy in Cairo. We can find this out today. Prime Minister Begin agreed. The President asked Secretary Vance to ask Sadat if Prime Minister Begin’s proposal is all right. Secretary Vance agreed. The President said that there are some key issues, which Prime Minister Begin had described to him. They are controversial in some instances. Prime Minister Begin is talking from an Israeli paper. Israel is inclined to see the Self-Governing Authority as an administrative council—and no more—as a cabinet, with one person for each function to be performed. Sadat sees a much broader approach, with several hundred members: 200, he (the President) thinks. His response to both leaders is that the delineation of authority and responsibilities is more important than how they are identified. Ambassador Linowitz has language, so the group will not have allocated to it legislative authority. The idea of legislative, executive, and judicial would make (the SGA) like a nation. We agree with Israel that there should be no nation, or in effect an independent government. It will be difficult how to ascribe to the group some powers and responsibilities. Egypt wants it to have more members. The number is arbitrary. We suggest 40, elected in a free process. Obviously there are difficulties: e.g. settlements on the West Bank and Gaza and the Israelis living there. The U.S. understanding, under the Camp David Accords, is that when the Self- Governing Authority is formed, then the Israeli military government will withdraw and the Self-Governing Authority will have broad responsibilities. Israeli security is a special subject; the Camp David Accords guarantee Israel’s security. A difference of opinion was inevitable in defining that security relationship. We have interpreted this, in the past, as covered in the “designated security locations,” with strong police forces under the aegis of the Self-Governing Authority. Prime Minister Begin goes to subversion and violence, which can again lead to terrorist acts. This is a broader scope than Egypt has in mind. There is a dispute on who, how, and in what circumstances Israelis can live in the West Bank and Gaza. The right to settle; the official nature of the settlements; and Israeli government financial support—all these will be well discussed in the future. The U.S. positions are well known. He is trying to get this right. Would Prime Minister Begin like to comment?

1174 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Camp David. Camp David provided for no legislative council and no judiciary. The President will bear him out. Secretary Vance will bear out that there is to be “a” withdrawal of forces. The President accepted it. “A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified security locations.” We weighed all the words at Camp David. If it (the SGA) had legislative, executive, and judicial functions, that is a sovereign state. Israel doesn’t want that. Therefore, it must not be that in fact or in name. On numbers, Egypt wants 80–100. Ambassador Linowitz says 40, and Ambassador Lewis, too. These are arbitrary numbers. It is cas-

1176 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin said he had never heard this from Egypt. Minister Burg said that Ambassador Linowitz is partly right. They had talked about 1) transferred powers; 2) shared (like water) or coordinated powers; and 3) residual powers (like internal and external security) for Israel. Israel agreed on this. But Khalil got cold feet, and said that he can’t agree on residual powers for Israel. His need is to see them all transferred. Israel says that what is security is Israel’s. The President said that he is not sure about the definition of internal security, but the rest is all right. Minister Burg said that three categories . . . The President said that with Ambassador Linowitz, Minister Burg had used the term “reserved.” Minister Burg agreed. Ambassador Linowitz said that we are not very far apart. We proposed that there be a list of transferred powers; and some for Israel, like security and foreign affairs (if anybody has the latter). This we agree on. And there should be a Continuing Committee to deal with a middle group—like water, internal security, maybe land. Why is there a problem? He thinks there is a misconception, from talks with Minister Burg, about the Continuing Committee. The idea is that there should be an agreed list of powers to go to the Self-Governing Authority. The Self-Governing Authority would then be chosen by the residents of the West Bank and Gaza. It would be understood that some powers—e.g. Israel’s security—would go to Israel. The Continuing Committee would be set up—and Egypt says that the U.S. should be in—and it would take issues like water, economic arrangements, and maybe land. It would reach decisions on a unanimous basis, and if there were no agreement, then existing arrangements would continue. Prime Minister Begin said he would come to the concept of the Continuing Committee—in the seven points9 (the U.S. had shared with Israel)—later. The issue of greatest important is security. First, the Self-Governing Authority is an administrative council—not within the spirit but within the letter of Camp David. They had weighed every word for 13 days and nights. Second, the number of members (of the SGA) should be equal to the number of functions. The U.S. and Egypt should think this over. Israel stands by it. It is in accord with the Camp David Accords. On the seven points, he wants to quote one: “It is agreed that Israel will have sole authority to exercise the power of external defense and foreign affairs.” This says “defense” instead of “security”—why? It is narrower. “Defense” refers to attack; and then Israel will defend itself. “Security” is another problem. There are Israel’s

1178 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX lead to a threat to peace, then Israel could say that it has to be on every block in Jerico and Nablus. Thus he is concerned. Prime Minister Begin said that with all respects, he did not refer to the Army with any of this—as it is written. The President will know how many there will be in Judea and Samaria and the Gaza District. He will give numbers and numbers on a map.11 The rest will be redeployed to specified security locations. (The President said: yes). He will give the President a map. Secretary Vance knows that they changed “agreed” to “specified.” This is a matter of Israelis’ lives. Therefore, it is not written down, but Israel will show it on the map. When the Self-Governing Authority is inaugurated—or even earlier—Israel will take some forces out. A number will stay, and be redeployed to specified security locations as on the map. This is a question of the Army. The question of incursions is wider. It is a daily problem. And there will not always be the Army there to deal with it. Secretary Vance said that in the call to the Camp David Accords, it says: “A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces will take place and there will be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified security locations. The agreement will also include arrangements for assuring internal and external security and public order.” Therefore, this is to be worked out between Israel, Egypt and Jordan—if it is in; it is not specified how it is to be worked out. Prime Minister Begin said that is a separate sentence—but he accepts Secretary Vance’s reading. Therefore, Israel will make proposals (on external and internal security and public order), and agreement will come. But not on the specified security locations. The President and Secretary Vance agreed. Prime Minister Begin said that arrangements on the rest will be agreed. Now on the Continuing Committee: it is in Camp David. He saw the U.S. words—in the seven points. In the Camp David Accords, the Continuing Committee is only given one task—“to decide by agreement on the modalities of admission of persons displaced from the West Bank and Gaza in 1967 . . .” The President asked Prime Minister Begin to read the rest. Prime Minister Begin said: yes. “. . . together with necessary measures to prevent disruption and disorder.” Judea and Samaria are not in it. The President asked if that is all. Please read it. Prime Minister Begin read: “Other matters of common concern may also be dealt with by this committee.” 11 Not found.

1180 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Linowitz suggested something like our Status of Forces agreements. Minister Burg said he had not heard of this idea. Prime Minister Begin said that Minister Burg speaks Rococo style. Ambassador Linowitz said that Status of Forces agreements apply to our military people abroad, and mean that they are subject to our laws. Minister Burg said that Israel’s settlers are citizens, not soldiers. Ambassador Linowitz said that he knows that Israel wants the law to apply to citizens, not property. Prime Minister Begin said they will think it over. The Vice President had said,12 and the President had said on European TV,13 that Israelis have the right to live on the West Bank, though they differ on the question of settlements. On an individual basis, they can’t send their people to Jericho, though they have the right to live there (as Arabs live in Israel). When Sadat came to Haifa,14 Sadat said that he saw Jews and Arabs living together. If a man goes to Jericho and buys a house, he will be killed by the PLO. Therefore, historically, Israelis have lived in groups, with a fence. But at Misgav’am the Palestinians broke through. This was a technical failure. Therefore, the settlements should be under Israeli jurisdiction. The President asked if this meant that, wherever an Israeli lives, Israel has jurisdiction. Prime Minister Begin said that this is true in Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza district, not everywhere. Minister Burg asked whether the President meant individuals or settlements. The President said both. Prime Minister Begin said that this does not apply in the U.S.—a person can become a citizen here after 5 years. The President said he meant this. 12 Mondale was reported to have made comments during a March 23 speech in New York that the United States recognized the rights of Jews to settle anywhere, including the West Bank. When asked about these reported statements the following day during the Department’s daily press briefing, Hodding Carter III stated that he believed that Mondale had “in fact” made “a more general statement based upon some fairly universal statements about what should be the rights of human beings.” (Telegram 77927 to multiple posts, March 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

1182 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin said that that word (“authority”) is not in the Camp David Accords. The President said that if Israelis and settlements—which have gone up rapidly under Prime Minister Begin’s government—are under the jurisdiction of Israel, the percentage of land—10 to 20—is under Israeli jurisdiction, therefore this is a subversion of the Camp David Accords. This is a matter of how much land and water. Any settlement, under Israel’s jurisdiction, is a subversion. Minister Burg said that 20 per cent is too high. The President asked if 15 per cent is better. Minister Burg said it is much lower, primo, and secondo . . . The President said he understands (what Minister Burg is saying). Prime Minister Begin said that the President reads the Bible in Spanish! Minister Burg said that secondly, Jews and Israelis in the West Bank and Gaza are about 2 per cent of the Arab population. Therefore, this is not as important as the President’s understanding. The President said: yes. Minister Burg said that there is a difference between individuals and settlements, because all governments since 1967 . . . and he has been in almost all of them . . . Prime Minister Begin said: 31 years in the government! Minister Burg said . . . all say that these are in Israel’s jurisdiction, not any other. Therefore, there are two points: first, the percentage of inhabitants, and second, individuals vs. settlements. The President said he understands. Will they apply Israeli jurisdiction to all Jewish settlements and citizens? Minister Burg said that if a citizen goes to Ramallah, there is no Israeli jurisdiction there. Ambassador Lewis said that there are no individuals on the West Bank; only settlers. Prime Minister Begin said that autonomy is for the Arab inhabitants. Israelis do not need it: they are citizens of Israel. The President said that he is concerned. Israelis have the right to live anywhere—Arabs, too. If Israel says that, wherever Israelis live, Israel has jurisdiction, therefore this will subvert (the agreement) on Israel’s withdrawal. Therefore if there is Israeli authority wherever they live, all of the West Bank is involved. Prime Minister Begin said that he had told the President why they can’t settle individuals: for security, there must be groups. They will be in a limited number of places, and not be subject to the Self-Governing Authority’s jurisdiction over them.

1184 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 358. Memorandum of Conversation1

1186 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX maybe other issues can be in the Continuing Committee. It could in a few months determine water rights. It will give flexibility for progress during the next 40 days, to determine the division of powers. Minister Burg said that Prime Minister Begin had not seen this paper. Prime Minister Begin said that he will study it. Minister Burg asked if the understanding is that the question here has to be talked over with the Egyptians. The President said that he guesses it will be all right. He has not seen the language. Minister Burg asked if they could talk more about it. The President agreed. Minister Burg said “primo” and then “excuse me.” Prime Minister Begin said Minister Burg should skip that and just say “second.” Minister Burg said that residual categories are not mentioned (in the paper)! Where are they? There are three categories: those to be transferred—in principle; those to be shared and coordinated—here it says shared; and residual—where are they? He asked to be allowed to get this out of his system. What about the residual categories? He personally likes not to postpone deciding on economic cooperation. It is a legal question, and should be discussed now—not delayed. This is a small country, and we should do this before (the agreement). The idea of a veto is no good. Eighteenth-century Polish governments fell because of the veto, under Prime Minister Bishinsky (?).5 Prime Minister Begin said that one man disagreed, and the whole parliament went home. Professor Brzezinski remembers! Dr. Brzezinski said that is why the Prime Minister and he are both here! (laughter) Minister Burg said that there were three partitions of Poland. Therefore, what if there is too much of a veto? The President asked: a what? Minister Burg said: a veto. It needs to be clarified. In between, what happens if the military goes out before the civilians are ready. It should be there on the same date, if a vacuum is to be avoided. If the veto is added, there will be a stronger problem. 5 Reference is to Wladyslaw Sicinski, a seventeenth century Polish-Lithuanian noble popularly credited with introducing to the Polish legislature the use of the liberum veto, a parliamentary device in which a single veto could block legislation already passed.

1188 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin said that second, the average reader will think we have agreed to abolish the Continuing Committee. The President asked why. Prime Minister Begin said that since Camp David originally says that it will deal with the 1967 displaced persons. President Carter said he believes that the last sentence includes that. This is not a departure from Camp David. Prime Minister Begin asked if it were clear. The President said yes. Prime Minister Begin said that at Camp David, Israel said they would accept a reasonable number of persons. The President said 100,000! Prime Minister Begin said several tens of thousands. On zeros, he never exaggerates. (laughter) The President said: Okay, several tens of thousands. Prime Minister Begin said that he will think it over. There are absorption problems; but he will think it over. It is a human problem. He would like to do it (expand the Continuing Committee?), but not make it look as though we are abolishing the Continuing Committee’s main task of dealing with the displaced people of 1967. On the Continuing Committee, there are two possibilities: to be very specific or put it in general terms. He prefers the latter, since it is not in existence yet. Otherwise, it would be putting the cart before the horse: “economic”; “detailed negotiations”; “water.” It would be better to agree on: “matters of common concern and cooperation”—that’s enough—“are referred to the Continuing Committee.” Maybe we can put further details in abeyance for a while. A partial detailing, with others left out, would leave the impression that our work is not finished. “Matters of common concern” is good. “Coordination will be required, etc.” First of all, we have to reside on basic principles, not on this paper. The United States would be in the Continuing Committee (according to the U.S. paper): is this a change of Camp David? The President said no. Prime Minister Begin said: really? The President said: well, go ahead and talk. Prime Minister Begin said that he does not see it in the Camp David agreement. If it is agreed, then all right. The question is, why is the U.S. needed in this Continuing Committee? The U.S. is not in all committees, is it? Minister Kubersky said that in the negotiations, the U.S. is in all committees. It is a full partner. Prime Minister Begin asked: in all committees?

1190 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Begin said that they can do without it (i.e. a formal reference), and agree on it . . . in general terms, we need guidelines. Ambassador Linowitz said that we want to deal with difficult problems. We are at a critical time, and near agreement. But the big issues have not been dealt with effectively. We can agree that there will be no agreement. The point now is that we have a formula with which Egypt can agree. The U.S. urges Israel to think seriously on what we can try to do with the Continuing Committee. If we can’t agree on principles or details, they can go to the Continuing Committee. Israel’s rights would be preserved in the interim; Israel should have no concern for it. Egypt proposed that the United States be in the Continuing Committee. This provides an added dimension to its discussions. It would be useful to Israel and to Egypt that the U.S. would be closely involved. The U.S. is not pressing; but Egypt wants the U.S. in badly. If Israel does not want that, it should tell Egypt. The President said that this is the role the U.S. would play. Where issues are not resolved, the Continuing Committee could function for a while, and maybe resolve issues with experience. Exclusion of the U.S. is what Egypt is trying to avoid. If Israel feels that on unresolved issues—economic relations, water—if Israel and Egypt and the Palestinians want to do this without the U.S., then Israel should decide. Egypt wants to get us past May 26th, before there is an impression of failure. The Continuing Committee, with the U.S., goes ahead and works as the Self-Governing Authority is set up. Minister Burg said that the U.S. is a full partner. This Continuing Committee is set up after the elections and the setting up of the Self- Governing Authority. This is not the answer for May 27th. Ambassador Linowitz said that Egypt proposed that the U.S. be a member of the Continuing Committee. The President said that this is so that the Continuing Committee can go on working on issues that are not resolved. Minister Burg said that the Continuing Committee is for after the inauguration and the elections. Is something further needed for after May 26th? The President said he thinks so. Prime Minister Begin said: maybe yes or no. The President said that if all issues are resolved, then the Self- Governing Authority can deal with water, etc. Security for Israel, therefore, is not concerned here, except for definitions. All he wants is that there be no failure on the 26th. The negotiating group can continue under Camp David. Minister Kubersky said that it (the Continuing Committee) cannot be established on May 27th.

1192 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX this document. He has two questions. First, if we use these as illustrations—“for example”—will this be all right? Prime Minister Begin said he would think it over, and doesn’t reject the idea on the spot. Ambassador Linowitz said that, speaking as one lawyer to another, he is making progress. Second, if Israel would feel better, regarding the U.S. role, instead a Continuing Committee would be set up with the U.S. named to it. Prime Minister Begin said no, this is not from the Camp David Accords: “During the transitional period, representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and the self-governing authority will constitute a continuing committee . . .” Very good; so it is written. There is the inauguration, then the Self-Governing Authority starts. Then there is the Continuing Committee. The President said that Camp David doesn’t say that. It says in the transitional period: “. . . will constitute a continuing committee . . .” It doesn’t say wait five days—that is in the entire period: as soon as the Self-Governing Authority is set up. Prime Minister Begin said that it says: “during.” The President said that it does not say: “will be established.” Prime Minister Begin said: during the transitional period—after the Self-Governing Authority is inaugurated. The President said that he reads English! It doesn’t need to be set up. Prime Minister Begin said: not the very day the Self-Governing Authority, the very day it is inaugurated. It says “During the transitional The President said that in Hebrew he doesn’t know, but in English . . . If it says “will be constituted,” yes. But it says “will constitute.” Minister Burg said: but not before. The President and Secretary Vance agreed. Minister Burg quoted: “The United States shall be invited to participate in the talks on matters related to the modalities of the implementation of the agreements and working out the timetable for the carrying out of the obligations of the parties.” Prime Minister Begin said that they would think it over. The President asked Ambassador Linowitz when he would see a list of authorities. Prime Minister Begin asked whether Minister Kubersky could speak. The President said: please.

1194 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the Egyptian model was submitted. Ambassador Linowitz was there at the Accadia (Hotel), where Israel stated the categories and prepared a listing. Israel worked and Egypt rejected it. There was no agreement on details, but on one point—with U.S. help—in technical planning. This is a meaningful agreement. This understanding could be the umbrella for many subjects. Israel said shared; Egypt said coordinated. They need to agree on two levels: planning and implementation. They have not agreed yet, even on the agreed list. The Israeli approach consists of three categories . . . there is understanding on many functions, a remarkable number. Ambassador Linowitz remembers. It was done ad referendum. Prime Minister Begin said: thank you. The President asked Ambassador Linowitz to explain the difference between the Israeli and Egyptian positions. Ambassador Linowitz said that Egypt did not like the Israeli presentation. It told the Self-Governing Authority how to run itself. There was a number of asterisks on the transferred powers, which Egypt said took away too much. This was the heart of the Egyptian intemperate rejection. The Egyptian proposal rests on an assumption: there should be three areas—legislative, executive, and judicial. This went beyond Camp David. Israel—showing admirable restraint—did not reject the Egyptian model, but merely said that it was “totally unacceptable!” Minister Burg asked to speak one sentence. Israel said that the areas to be transferred were quite a lot: more than for municipalities. The President agreed. Minister Burg said it was the majority of powers. Minister Kubersky said that when Israel made its presentation, they said that it did not have to be taken per se. They took into account the care needed when negotiating. Therefore, there are many asterisks. Ambassador Leonard said 45. Professor Lapidot said: 48! Minister Kubersky said that the asterisks are not part of the Bible. Many are for negotiations, and were put in automatically. The President said they had done so! In addition to “security,” they had not defined what else they would retain. Ambassador Linowitz said that there are three additional areas: international commerce, security, foreign affairs, and settlements. (A pause in the conversation followed). Prime Minister Begin said that his impression is that the U.S. would like Israel’s answer to tell the Egyptians. They (the Israeli delegation) would like the U.S. reply to their paper. Or they could remain in Wash-

1196 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Kippur—because of those three days. He (Prime Minister Begin) has said this to Sadat and to the President, too. He will not wait. He will answer now. Sadat said that his was not a proposal, it was just something to think about. Ambassador Linowitz said to think about a flag (over Jerusalem Holy places). To Sadat he (Prime Minister Begin) had said: does this mean sovereignty? And Sadat had said: yes and no. He had said to Sadat: Arab sovereignty and an undivided Jerusalem is a contradiction in terms. Never do Jordanian citizens cast votes in Jordan. The President asked if this were right. Don’t they? Professor Lapidot said there hadn’t been any elections in 13 years. Prime Minister Begin said that there is a difference on Jerusalem. Israel put its law on Jerusalem in toto—but not on Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza district. Israel is sovereign in toto. Therefore, it can’t be said that they vote for the Jordanian government. Elections were postponed. The President asked: does that therefore mean no elections? Prime Minister Begin answered: yes, there would be elections; but the President had asked about Jerusalem. In Jerusalem there are Judean citizens. Some opted for Israeli citizenship. They have 80–90,000 Jews in Israel who are not citizens, and they do not vote for the Knesset. To have a vote in Jerusalem for the Arab residents: this is out of the question. It is absolutely impossible. It means repartition. The President asked about absentee voting. Prime Minister Begin said that Ambassador Linowitz had brought that idea up. But what change does that make? Israel says that if the inhabitants in Jerusalem vote for the Administrative Council, then this is repartition, since there would be two jurisdictions, since the Arabs would be under the Administrative Council and the Jews would be under Israel. So he had said at Camp David. He never misled anyone. The President said he knows. Prime Minister Begin said that he and Sadat had written separate letters about it. There should be no illusions; there can be no repartition and no vote. The city cannot be divided. The President said he sees how firmly Prime Minister Begin feels about it. If an American lives in either West or East Jerusalem, he can vote in the United States. This does not encroach on sovereignty. His judgment is that the entire prospect of elections on the West Bank would be destroyed. There can be no elections if we take away the franchise from these people who happen to live there. Minister Burg said he would respond not in sentiment, although Jerusalem is in the Bible more than 660 times, and is in the Koran not once. He will speak as a statesman. The logic is this: a U.S. citizen in Jerusalem can vote for the President of the United States, because he wants to be ruled by the President here. A citizen in Jerusalem can vote

1198 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tion for dividing Jerusalem, we should be able to draft something to take care of that. But Prime Minister Begin seems to feel viscerally that the right to vote leads to a divided Jerusalem. Prime Minister Begin said: yes. Ambassador Linowitz said he was sorry: he would like to assure Prime Minister Begin. Prime Minister Begin said that it is not a matter of assurances. What could Israel want? What does it need? This is not religion or sentiment. It is a fact. Jerusalem is sacred to the three monotheistic religions. Israel does not interfere with the religions. The Copts and the Abyssinians ask Israel for help. Egypt can now get in and help if it wants—though it has problems with its own Copts. Minister Burg said that the Egyptians would like Israel’s Copts! Prime Minister Begin asked what the Christians have to complain about? The President said that this is not at issue. Prime Minister Begin asked why the Muslims should complain. El Aqsa is there—despite the fact that it is on the Temple Mount, where there are two mosques. Jerusalem is sacred to Jews, Christians, and Moslems. But that is history: in our time, what is Jerusalem? It is the heart of the Israeli nation for 3000 years. The Moslems conquered it. King Abdullah10 did so, again. He desecrated the Mount of Olives cemetery. He destroyed the Hadassah Hospital and the Hebrew University. Israel rebuilt one city. Should it suggest that Copts in Cairo vote for other governments? It is incomprehensible. It is one city. Teddy Kollek could be reelected for 3 elections more. It will still become a divided city if Israel permits voting for the Administrative Council. Minister Burg said he would add a footnote. The President had mentioned absentee voting. They live in Jerusalem. It is their capital— though the U.S. does not recognize it. Does the U.S. want to give Israel a mortgage? It is too difficult. Ambassador Linowitz said that no one here wants to divide Jerusalem. He would try an idea. Suppose that there were elections in the West Bank and Gaza, and the elected officials then selected from Jerusalem 8 or 10 people to serve with them as members. Prime Minister Begin said that he doesn’t think this would be possible. It is difficult. He speaks about the heart of the Israeli nation. Why play around? It has been the central issue of their lives for 3 millenia. The Eastern part is the real Jerusalem—West Jerusalem is an addition. He is now told that they should vote in the Judea and Samaria Admin-

1200 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 359. Memorandum of Conversation1

1202 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX end of the 40 days, to have a brief session here to confirm what has been done. This is an option the Egyptians would like to have. Prime Minister Begin said that this could be considered at the proper time. With regard to the draft on the Continuing Committee, in accordance with the Camp David Accords, in the transitional period the Continuing Committee could deal with other matters of common concern, with the U.S. invited to take part, and decisions to be taken on the basis of unanimity. First, he did not like to change Camp David, and this could be written into a protocol, that this is not a precedent. Second, we don’t need all the words of Ambassador Linowitz (from yesterday’s U.S. proposal),5 if they say “in accordance with the Camp David Accords.” We should also put in the word “also,” to show that we are leaving in the original text (on the uses of the Continuing Committee). It will “also” deal with other matters. He has accepted the U.S. idea on citing some examples (of the work the Continuing Committee might do). It should also cite the development of sources of water, for the benefit of all. In accordance with paragraph five (of the Camp David Accords Associated Principles), the United States would be invited to join. He had a problem with the word “operate” (in the U.S. draft). Rather we should say that “decisions will be taken.” The President asked the Prime Minister to reread his draft.6 Prime Minister Begin said that it was his handwriting. Nobody else could read it; and even he could only read it with difficulty! (laughter) The President said he wanted to hear whether Prime Minister Begin could read it the same way a second time! (laughter) (The Prime Minister reread his draft.) The President said he preferred actually listing the three nations to be involved, as stated in Camp David that they “will constitute” the Continuing Committee. Prime Minister Begin asked if the President wanted to list all the names. The President said that if we were going to change the words of Camp David, then he would like to add the word “immediately,” since the Accords just say the Continuing Committee should function soon. Prime Minister Begin asked if the words “as soon as possible” would be all right. The President said that Camp David did not contemplate any delay.

1204 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX will be assigned to an advisory group, and this committee will make recommendations to the plenary and the heads of state. Prime Minister Begin suggested that we go by stages—he is not prejudging the issues. The President may tell Sadat that we discussed this subject. He (Prime Minister Begin) wishes the President would accept his proposal: Issues of security will be discussed after Israel puts together its maps for the Egyptians. Then the main negotiating terms can take up the issues, as the Camp David Accords provide, with military experts taking part. Then what the plenary decides, he will accept. Today he can’t accept the words “security committee.” The President said that this causes a problem. Sadat did not make this a proviso in regard to having continuous discussions, but Prime Minister Begin should not underestimate Sadat’s concerns on this issue. Prime Minister Begin should be flexible—which is natural for him (the Prime Minister) and help him (the President). If the plenary just states that the advisors will discuss these issues, then there will be ten days to get the maps, and then report back—this will delay the entire process for 10 days, which is bad. Prime Minister Begin said that the President had said he (Prime Minister Begin) is flexible: he is used to hearing different compliments! The negotiating teams will consider this approach. Ambassador Linowitz said that Israel had said publicly that a security committee could be set up. Prime Minister Begin asked who said it. Ambassador Linowitz said Minister Burg. Minister Burg said yes, provided he was quoted exactly! Prime Minister Begin said he could always say that they had made a mistake in saying that. It had happened before, on Khalil’s part, as well. It happened at Camp David and elsewhere. Minister Burg shouldn’t be put on the spot! Minister Burg said he liked to be quoted. Ambassador Linowitz said: “primo.” Minister Burg said he had said that at some stage there would need to be talk about security issues. He had not excluded that there could be a security committee at some point. Secretary Vance said that Minister Burg had said . . . The President said that he hoped the Israelis would think it over. This is crucial to Sadat; and he has said so to his own people, in the Assembly, and to the Palestinians. Sadat and he (the President) see this as part of the Camp David process. What it is called is of secondary importance. If we continue the plenary without discussing security, there will be serious and unnecessary problems. We need cooperation to avoid problems.

1206 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX derstanding. The negotiating teams on security . . . all depends on the principles he presented yesterday. They expect an answer today or tomorrow. They could have said (at Camp David) that they would just appoint the Administrative Council. But people would say that this is a masquerade, and an indirect aid to Israel. So Israel proposed free elections—though they may be difficult to do. Sadat is mistaken in saying that he could impose autonomy on Gaza. Sadat can’t do it; no one can. Can we drag people to the polls? In Belgium, there is a fine for not voting. But it doesn’t help; people just pay the fine, of about 50 francs. So you can’t drag people to the polls. Israel stands by the elections. It is objectively difficult if the Palestinian Arabs will not take part. First, the Mayors could appoint the Council—but this can’t be done. It would be like having PLO-types. Israel would prefer known PLO people if it came to that. That is, if the mayors would agree anyway, which is doubtful. So what if we postpone the elections—as with the mayors— and they appoint the members? The same difficulty would arise. If there are free elections, the President says, PLO sympathizers could be elected anyway. Israel would say, so?—this happened through free elections. It would ask the elected individuals not to be with the PLO, but what can Israel do once there have been free elections? Therefore, there should be no proposal to say that anyone acquiesces in non-elections. His proposal is, let us work to get done in 40 days. Then after 30 days or so, we can assemble, and the President can empower Secretary Vance to come together with them, and to reason together. Now there is no other proposal that seems reasonable. We should stand by the democratic process of free elections. (At this point, Robert Hunter left the room for about two minutes). Minister Burg said that surely, before May 26, talking about not having elections would be psychologically bad. The President said that this was a wise statement. Minister Burg said that since it came from a sage, it was appropriate. (laughter) He would add that if we leave the idea of free elections, it would be a grave deviation from Camp David. We do not wish that now, at least until May 26. The President raised the other option—Gaza-first. Minister Burg has assessed it well: to say today that we would abandon free elections would be bad. But the Camp David Accords would not come into being if the elections are not carried out. When we reach the final stages of the negotiations, it all becomes a failure if there is no means to get the Self-Governing Authority in place, then it will fail, and other provisions will be lost. Maybe we need to keep our option open to have a brief transitional period—maybe a committee—in Gaza or of mayors— to negotiate on a limited number of issues . . . We don’t need to cross that bridge now. We will work now, and with Israel and Egypt, on free

1208 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Secretary Vance said that he would describe the negotiations. We want a tripartite agreement: let’s work on it. The President said he recalled that Israel had suggestions on Articles 4 and 6. Secretary Vance said he had discussed them at breakfast, but can’t remember the details now. The President called on Ambassador Evron. Ambassador Evron said that the problem is that Egypt now takes exception to the whole paragraph. Professor Lapidot called on Mr. Rubinstein. The President said he had not been in this issue. Mr. Rubinstein said that Egypt did not see Israel’s declaration, that if there is no agreement reached (on the follow-on force), then Israel will not withdraw in 1982. There is more than a hint of that in the document, in section (sic!—paragraph) six to that effect. Egypt says that it is not acceptable, any hint that Israel might not withdraw. The Israelis think that the Egyptians know the Israeli position. Prime Minister Begin said that, therefore, let’s have a trilateral and a bilateral . . . The President said he sees. Secretary Vance said we have . . . Prime Minister Begin said: . . . and an exchange of letters. They should become an integral part of the treaty. The President asked: who? Secretary Vance said that this didn’t need to be crossed to the year before withdrawal. The President said that he could see that Sadat would be reluctant to sign a document saying that Israel might not withdraw. We need to reserve the prospects on that. It is not in the (agreement?). He sees a problem. Prime Minister Begin said that Israel would not require that of Sadat: the United States gave the commitment. The President agreed. Prime Minister Begin said that this was central to it (the treaty?). Mr. Rubinstein said that Egypt would object to a U.S.-Israeli agreement saying this. The President said he knows. Mr. Rubinstein said that this is a crucial thing, which Israel cannot accept. The President said that it was not necessary to get agreement with Sadat, but we could see, and try to remove it (the problem?).

1210 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX “Administrative Council” appeared once, then it applied every time. This was agreed. In the year and a half since Camp David, attempts have been made to change the document, without the words “Administrative Council.” He has to return to the document. He showed Dayan, in a paper at the peace treaty signing, seven deviations from it (on not including the words “Administrative Council”). We are now at a stage, in the last year, where we see proposals to change the content and meaning. Israel wants it clear: if “Administrative Council” is not there, then Egypt will say it is an assembly. He wants to make clear that Egypt can’t say this, since it is an administrative council. He does not want a closet state, or a corridor leading to an independent Palestinian state. This is crucial. It is another idea, a proposal. He wants to remind the President that in the joint letter, Egypt and Israel repeated the words “Administrative Council.” Egypt did not want it, but we repeated it. In communiques (of the autonomy talks) it is always there. Therefore “Administrative Council” means something. It is a most essential point. The basic issue is, what is the self-governing authority? Everybody has interpreted it—so what is it? The President said that he does not favor substituting the words “Administrative Council” for “Self-Governing Authority.” This is fruitless semantics. It is better to look at the powers and responsibilities it will have, not at the name. We put in “Administrative Council” once, reluctantly. We cannot accept giving up “Self-Governing Authority” in all references, and use “Administrative Council” in its place. Prime Minister Begin said that he does not want to give up “Self- Governing Authority.” He repeats this. The President said he understands. Minister Burg said that “Administrative Council” means something. The President said he knows. Prime Minister Begin said that these words give an accent: that it is more administrative than political. Therefore, it gives more or less, but the words stand per se. What they are asking for all the time, and Ambassador Linowitz once agreed—then the Egyptians got cold feet—either bring (?) the Israeli model or talk about the three categories. But Egypt backed out. Therefore, there should either be an accent on “Administrative Council,” or use of the three categories. These are two possibilities, and. . . . The President said he would prefer to accept the latter. Minister Burg said that Egypt had not agreed. The President said that there are good prospects for success. Problems of semantics are there all the time: Judea and Sumeria vs. the West Bank; Palestinians vs. Palestinian Arabs—there is always a problem of definition. He understands that Prime Minister Begin and

1212 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX fragmentation of functions. Israel will try to consolidate them. Why get into that problem? Minister Burg said that we should talk more about it. The President said: later. Prime Minister Burg [Begin] said that if there is no agreement, then Israel will stand by these points. It can not be otherwise: non possumus. The President said that Prime Minister Begin should not destroy his reputation for flexibility, which he and Prime Minister Begin worked to protect! Prime Minister Begin said: “Here I stand; I can do no other.” Minister Burg said: Martin Luther,17 1521. Prime Minister Begin said: “you know? How did you know?” Minister Burg said: “I was there.” (laughter) Prime Minister Begin said that he shouldn’t quote Luther, who once said that all the Synagogues should be burned. He (Luther) did not like the Jews. The President suggested that he and Prime Minister Begin have a short talk. Would the others please wait, and there would be a group photo for historic reasons. Anyone not wanting to be in the photo could leave! (The President and Prime Minister Begin went into the Oval Office for a private meeting, where they were later joined by Secretary Vance. At 11:50, they emerged for the group photo and to discuss the press statement).18 17 German priest and theologian of the sixteenth century, Luther is best known as the initiator of the Protestant Reformation in 1517. Luther is reputed to have uttered the phrase which Begin quoted in the preceding sentence in his appearance before the Diet of Worms in 1521. 18 The text of the two leaders’ April 16 remarks to the press is printed in Public

1214 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX directed at Israel,” followed by abstention; 2) “leave the resolution as it is,” then veto it; and 3) produce a new U.S. resolution “which focuses on the main problems in South Lebanon and directs attention toward possible ways of dealing with them.” Of these, Vance chose the third option. A copy of the new draft U.S. resolution, the Lebanese draft, and the action memorandum are in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Handling Restrictions Memos, 1979–1983, Lot

1216 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Committee. Ambassador Linowitz said that water was the most amenable for solution, with security next. He expects that there will be little or no movement on land and East Jerusalem voting rights (Secretary Vance thought the latter issue was dead). It might be possible to get something on private lands, since the Israelis have not so far made a point of this issue. He would try out a new formula on East Jerusalem, permitting Jordanian citizens, in general, to vote. He also hoped to skirt the issue of legislative authority. The object should be to get enough agreement to keep Sadat interested in continuing the process, and to deflect any European efforts. Ambassador Linowitz said that he doesn’t expect very much on this 10-day trip,3 since both parties are still testing one another. Begin, for example, was chided in Israel for giving away too much here in Washington, and therefore is not ready to make concessions. The Ambassador is worried that the Israelis might not make a security presentation on the first day. If so, the Egyptians might go home. But if this issue can be resolved early, other issues could be easier. Mr. Saunders pointed out that this would be particularly so with regard to land, because of the security implications tied up with land issues. Dr. Brzezinski asked what we should do if the parties prove too unyielding to get agreement before May 26. Secretary Vance said that then we would have to consider how to cut back our expectations, in order to get something to claim a partial victory. Ambassador Linowitz said that he might have at some point to go to Begin and indicate the risks of a breakdown unless Israel is forthcoming. Mr. Saunders said that a “pause” might be possible after May 26, if there are a few tough issues to be settled—as happened with the 1975 disengagement negotiations. Secretary Vance said that conditions are different: the press has made a lot of May 26, and the Europeans are waiting in the wings: that might not directly affect the situation in the area, but it would affect our interests. It is one thing to pass the date in a state of serious negotiations; it is another to have a pause. We should also not jump ahead too soon. Ambassador Linowitz said that in his first meeting with Begin, he would try to disabuse the Prime Minister of the notion that the “four points” tabled here in Washington are conditions for forward movement. He said that he would proceed on this trip by talking through issues for a couple of days, and then be prepared to table papers on in-

1218 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Linowitz said that thinking about the general idea would be useful, and that co-production of the aircraft engines would be positive.4 4 On May 10, the Department of State informed the Embassy in Tel Aviv that Carter had approved in principle Israeli co-production of jet engines intended for Israel’s Lavi

1220 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 363. Memorandum of Conversation1

1222 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX in talking about alternative ways to proceed—e.g. the Allon Plan;6 this is no help with the Palestinians. Begin is upset. We should try to help with Begin, but handle him differently from Israel, itself (in terms of the way we present the issues), so that the country will not see us as anti- Israel. The President said that that is crucial. What about the ultimate question? Should we try to bring all this to a head next month, or be a participant in a willingness to find ways so that the talks can just go on? Ambassador Linowitz said no (to the latter point), we should do this: Once we have made our position clear on Begin’s four points, we should first insist on an Israeli security presentation early in the talks, so that the advisory groups can be set up. Weizman is going back to Israel7 early so that he can join the talks and meet with General Ali. Maybe we can make some headway on this. Second, there is water. There is a need to get some agreement on principles, so that it can then be put into the Continuing Committee. The President asked when Weizman would be getting into the talks. Mr. Hunter said that Weizman was leaving from here early, on Tuesday8 night. The President asked when he was seeing Weizman.

1224 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX head. Begin sees that he will either move or fall (?). He (the President) doesn’t want to make Begin fall, but if Begin sees that he can only keep Weizman and Dayan (?) by moving, this is a strong incentive. He (the President) would like to get as much of an agreement as possible—a reasonable agreement, even if no one loves it. If he goes to Sadat, then Sadat will accept it. He wants to put forward what Sadat will accept— and not attempt to assuage Khalil. Ambassador Linowitz said that he had talked with Sadat, and told him the substance of his recommendations. He had told Sadat how he planned to handle water . . . The President said that Sadat didn’t care about details. Ambassador Linowitz said that he had told Sadat that there could be agreement on principles, with the Continuing Committee taking account of the rest, such as the technical matters. Until there was agreement, then things like the rate of water sharing would continue. Sadat said that was all right; and he (the Ambassador) thinks this will be all right with the Israelis. The President said good. Ambassador Linowitz said that he had talked about other issues with Sadat—such as security. Butros and Osama and others find this approach wrong. On public lands, they will try a formulation, even though neither Egypt or Israel will like it: it is that, after autonomy is set up, there can be no settlements by either side without agreement by the Continuing Committee. Therefore, there would be a freeze. The President asked on which lands. Ambassador Linowitz said on public lands. Private lands anyone could have. The President said that Begin would not buy this. Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to try it out with the President. If the idea were to leak, we would be pleased. The President said that it would please him. It is, however, more generous than our position, since it doesn’t call for dismantling. Ambassador Linowitz said that it would give Israel a veto over Palestinians settlements, and Egypt wouldn’t like that. It would be good if it leaked. The President said good. Dr. Brzezinski asked what would happen if Begin rejects it. Ambassador Linowitz said that he would take the issues one at a time—e.g. water, security, and legislative authority. He can’t see Begin rejecting all the ideas. Begin would reject land and East Jerusalem voting rights. If there is enough progress on other issues, then we can look at what to do with the Continuing Committee with regard to

1226 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX of “legislative authority,” he would try to skirt the issue, and not use the words, but try to ensure that the SGA has the powers that it needs. There are no other specific issues. The rest of the problems are like the one on what to do with water. If we can use . . . that is the beauty of the Continuing Committee, if we use it to make unnecessary agreement now on all details. The President agreed. Ambassador Linowitz said that Begin should like this—since it means that everything doesn’t have to be decided now. The President said that even if Begin wants it, he won’t agree on it. He likes to run down a string of tedious points, to see what they can be traded for. Finally he gets to the point of making major concessions. Ambassador Linowitz asked if he could introduce a sensitive point: when—and he would like to keep this open—he should break off and come home early, if he hits a roadblock. This would show that we are serious. The President said that when Ambassador Linowitz asks him, he will say yes. In fact, Ambassador Linowitz will be more reluctant than he will be to have the Ambassador come home. Ambassador Linowitz said he just wants authority to do it. The President said he guesses that Egypt would pull out first. Ambassador Linowitz said that if Israel is not forthcoming on security, then Egypt might pull out then. He will tell this to Begin. The President said that maybe he should send a message to Sadat, and even do so early, so it will arrive by the time that the Ambassador gets there. He will ask that Sadat permit a few days for security to be discussed. Or he would ask that Sadat not pull his people out over security—this is better. Ambassador Linowitz said that this is good; it will keep the talks going. The President said he would tell Sadat that we have plans for making progress on schedule, not just for discussions. Before Sadat decides to withdraw, even under difficult circumstances, Sadat should consult with him (the President) first. Ambassador Linowitz said that this is a great idea. The President said that, where possible, the Ambassador should (in his approach) quote Camp David directly. Even if it is a matter of three words, this would be better. Ambassador Linowitz said he knows. Begin is almost Biblical about it! The President said almost.

1228 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX IFIL forces in southern Lebanon would not be shelled nor attacked in any other form. Subsequently, I received reports that the request had been fulfilled. I can again repeat my promise, Mr. President, that Israel will do its best and utmost and will exercise restoration of peaceful conditions in southern Lebanon. May I, Mr. President, use this opportunity to express to you and to the American people our deep condolences at the tragic loss of life during the rescue mission in Iran.3 May God console the bereaved families in their grief. The mishap which occurred can happen in any operation. However, the mission itself was noble in its concept and in its purpose—to save the hostages. We all deeply regret that this mission did not succeed but that should under no circumstances change anybody’s attitude towards the goal itself and the courageous decision which you took to try and bring home diplomats who are being held in captivity in violation of sacrosanct international laws and customs. The people of Israel stand by you and the American nation at this difficult hour. It is our fervent hope that the freeing of the hostages will yet be accomplished.4 With best regards. Yours respectfully and sincerely. Menachem Begin. End text. Christopher 3 Reference is to the failed April 24 attempt to rescue the Tehran Embassy personnel held hostage by Iranian revolutionaries since November 1979. 4 In a brief response on May 2, Carter thanked Begin for his “considerate message” about the hostages in Iran and expressed his appreciation for Begin’s “prompt action in instructing your military commanders to try influencing Major Haddad.” “It is my hope,” Carter added, “that UNIFIL will be able to turn its attention increasingly to the critical problem of infiltration, which directly affects Israel’s security.” (Telegram WH80487 to Tel Aviv, May 2; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Israel: Prime Minister

1230 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Representative to the United Nations Donald F. McHenry argued that given the search for a “comprehensive peace” in which the United States had taken an active role, “we should not be distracted by approaches that offer no prospect for making practical progress.” Further, the United States “should not adopt an approach that does not endorse UN Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, the agreed basis for all peace efforts in the Middle East—an approach which, indeed, seeks to change Resolution 242. We should not allow the United Nations to be used in this way. The clash of opposites and the sharpening of contradictions has no place here, in this body dedicated to the maintenance of peace and the resolution of disputes through peaceful means.” For the full text of McHenry’s statement, see telegram 1714 from the U.S. Mission to the United Nations, May 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800216–0283) 366. Summary of Conversation1

1232 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski submitted this draft, which made no reference to the killings in Hebron, to President Jimmy Carter for action under a May 8 covering memorandum. In the covering memorandum, Brzezinski informed the President that the Department of State would like to instruct Representative to the United Nations Donald F. McHenry to tell the Tunisian representative that the United States would be forced to veto a resolution which did not make reference to the Hebron incident; at the same time, the Department of State wished to instruct McHenry to “use his discretion” about “floating” a U.S. draft resolution for which the United States could give a “yes” vote. Carter did not take action on this memorandum. In a separate May 8 memorandum, sent for action to Carter, Brzezinski informed the President that the Security Council had “softened” the resolution, deleting references to Security Council Resolution 465 (1980) and to the “deploring of Israeli action.” Brzezinski recommended to Carter that he instruct McHenry to abstain on the resolution while issuing a “strong statement;” Carter initialed his approval of this recommendation, adding a handwritten note: “Check with me on final text. J.” Under a third memorandum, dated May 8, Brzezinski forwarded to Carter the draft text of the statement to be delivered by McHenry. After making textual changes, Carter initialed his approval of the statement, adding the handwritten note: “Tell McHenry to use the text as I’ve approved it. J.” All of these documents are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 79,

1234 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the postponement would be a relatively brief one, probably not more than a week or so. One of the key factors in his decision to postpone is the forthcoming major address he will be making on Wednesday, May 14,5 in which he will announce some significant Cabinet and policy changes. The Israelis were at first puzzled but then philosophical about Sadat’s proposal to postpone the discussions, and they are anticipating that the postponement will not be an extended one. They can be expected to assert publicly that they had been perfectly willing to proceed with the negotiations and that Sadat’s action makes it less likely than ever that there can be an agreement by May 26. For his part, Sadat now is clearly miffed at Begin’s failure to move forward in the negotiations and tends to discount the possibility of making any real progress with Begin in the months ahead. 2. During the nine days we spent at Herzliya trying to find agreement,6 we accomplished little substantively on the major issues. For several days the Security issue was the major hang-up. Prime Minister Khalil and the Egyptian Delegation refused to discuss any other issues unless and until the Israelis agreed to move forward with discussions of Security by an appropriate group. Begin had asserted at the outset of this round of negotiations that Israel would not discuss Security on any continuing basis unless it were first agreed that Israel would have responsibility for both external and internal security. Predictably, the Egyptians refused to agree, there was almost a breakdown in the talks, and ultimately the Israelis dropped the condition and agreed to a discussion. The Egyptians then put forward their own security proposals which were dismaying to the Israelis and, in important respects, out of line with our own thinking. At that point the negotiations almost broke down for the second time. After some fast footwork and semantics, we were able to get things back on track again. (Reflecting the tone of the discussions and the hypersensitivity of the parties is the fact that I was able to get Egypt and Israel to agree on a formulation for security discussion by proposing that this be done by a “negotiating team” rather than by a “negotiating committee” or “negotiating group”.) The heart of the matter is that the two sides are actually not so far apart in implementation of Security measures as they are in the jargon and rhetoric. Accordingly, I did my best to try to get Ali and Weizman in center 5 During his May 8 meeting with Linowitz, Sadat described his forthcoming speech as a “‘turning point’ in his government’s efforts to institutionalize democracy and structure the government for taking decisive action in rebuilding the country.” (Ibid.) 6 See footnote 2 above. Presumably, Linowitz intended to refer to the length of his entire trip, rather than the duration of talks.

1236 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 7. In a one-to-one discussion8 with Begin I tried out with him the Gaza First idea after I had already done so with Khalil and the other members of the Egyptian Delegation. Interestingly enough, Begin said that the only Gaza First proposal he knew about was one which would call for an overall agreement with respect to the West Bank and Gaza and implementation first in Gaza. I then asked him point blank whether he would approve an agreement which dealt only with a plan for Gaza for early implementation while further discussions continued with respect to the West Bank. He did not answer me directly but merely said that if such a position were presented “we will think about it”. The Egyptians, however, did not respond favorably when I put the same question, and Khalil said that Sadat had never intended that there be a Gaza First option which would not include agreement on an overall plan to be implemented first in Gaza. When I met with Sadat in Ismailia, the conversation was such that it simply was not possible to bring up the Gaza First option with him, therefore, I did not do so. 8. Begin’s political position is stronger than it was a couple of months ago. The recent Hebron killings9 and his visit to Washington apparently helped him in the polls since he now emerges as a tough fighter on behalf of Israel’s security. When I met with Shimon Peres10 he told me that there was no more than a fifty-fifty chance that there might be an election this year and asserted that he thinks Begin is stronger than he was earlier this year. Begin obviously feels this because he told me several times that he thought that his position on security had a national consensus behind it and the full support of the people. When I asked Peres and Rabin11 about their own estimate, they said that the nation would, indeed, be deeply concerned about its security but they thought that this did not necessarily mean support for Begin’s position. Both are confident Labor would handily win any election now. 9. As to Sadat, he is about to unveil a new governmental plan which he thinks will make a dramatic difference in the governing of 8 On April 30, Linowitz met with Begin for over two hours, during which, Linowitz noted, Begin was “totally unyielding” and “the toughest I have yet seen him.” After touching upon Vance’s recent resignation and replacement with Muskie, the two men discussed the “four points” Begin had proposed in Washington. (See footnote 5, Document 357) Linowitz pointed out that the Israeli positions “were bound to create serious problems and might prevent any progress in the negotiations.” Linowitz “asked him bluntly whether he really wanted an agreement on autonomy. He responded emotionally and vociferously that there was nothing in the world he wanted more than an agreement and he would do everything he could to achieve one except prejudice Israel’s security

1238 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 369. Summary of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Egyptian President Sadat1 Washington, May 13, 1980 The President called President Sadat at 0605 EST this morning and asked about Sadat’s speech to Parliament. The Egyptian president indicated he had just finished speaking and that “everything will be okay.” Sadat confirmed the President’s statement that Ali2 would now be doing most of the negotiating. When asked about resumption of the talks, Sadat said he would tell Parliament tomorrow3 that because of the President’s “interference” they will resume next week. (C) The President informed Sadat that his daughter-in-law was doing fine and Sadat expressed his and his son’s great appreciation for what the President is doing in that regard. The conversation terminated at 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,

1240 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —Secretary Muskie’s talks in Europe;5 —Sol Linowitz’ talks in Europe;6 —a speech on autonomy7 (where Muskie is preferable); —low-keying the importance of May 26 in our public presenta- In addition, we need some form of presentation for the moderate Arab states,8 and especially Saudi Arabia. Perhaps Sol should go to Riyadh—or a message could be sent to the Crown Prince. (S) I also believe that both Linowitz—and the speech—should get at the security question, by reassuring the bulk of Israelis and reducing the capacity of Begin to wrap himself in the flag on issue after issue because of their “security” implications. (S) I remain convinced that we need to intensify the talks in some way. Holding a Blair House or Rhodes-type9 set of talks may be impractical at this point. But I do believe that Sol should spend longer at a time in 5 Muskie traveled to Brussels for a meeting of the NATO Defense Planning Com-

1242 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX through an intensified effort on the West Bank and in Gaza to explain how we see autonomy coming out, in terms of powers and responsibilities, etc. (S) We also should think through our UN tactics. I believe there is merit in taking the position, in advance, that we believe in Camp David, and thus will just abstain on resolutions that would upset the process, unless they get at the basis for peacemaking (242) and require a veto. It could save us a lot of squabbling every other week. (C) Finally, we will need to get on with the talks10 with the Israelis on the oil supply agreement (Sam Lewis says that the President told him that this was okay); that is different, of course, from agreeing to a formula that would permit triggering now. But we don’t want to get accused (however unfairly) of reneging on an agreement because we were unprepared to talk. (S) 10 See Document 378. 371. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

1244 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. Under Secretary Osama El-Baz called me to the Foreign Ministry Friday at 1630 local to hand me the text of the following letter from President Sadat to President Carter. El-Baz said this was intended to supplement the oral message conveyed last night in reftel. 3. Begin text:

1246 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX With best wishes and regards. Sincerely, Mohammed Anwar El Sadat End text. 4. As I did with Boutros Ghali last night, I told El-Baz that, according to our information, their interpretation of the Knesset action on the Jerusalem bill was erroneous; it had been introduced by an opposition member of the Knesset and the government had moved to bury it in committee. El-Baz refused to buy this explanation, saying that the government could have taken the position that submission of this bill was untimely and opposed its introduction at this time. Instead, the government had permitted the bill to be introduced and referred to committee. 5. I then asked El-Baz what the GOE considered should happen before negotiations resume. He said their position was as stated in last night’s oral message—namely, that there should be assurances that the Jerusalem bill will not be voted into law while negotiations are going on. In addition, Israel should stop provocative announcements of plans for new settlements such as that in the recent Dobbles’ report; it was one thing for Israel to state its position in negotiations that it had a right to settlements but quite another thing to announce specific plans to establish new settlements. 6. Noting that President Sadat’s letter called for coordination and a common strategy between us, I reiterated the point I had made last night to Boutros Ghali that the GOE announcement which caught us by surprise was hardly an example of coordination and consultation and could not help but make a bad impression in the United States, after President Sadat’s statement to President Carter and in his People’s Assembly address that Egypt was prepared to resume negotiations. This would inevitably be seen as a reversal of the Egyptian position. I thought it useful to make this point again since Mansour Hassan, Minister of State in the presidency, with responsibility for information and cultural affairs, was in El-Baz’s office during our conversation. Hassan was apparently there to discuss a press briefing which El-Baz was going to give immediately after our meeting to further clarify the Egyptian position on the autonomy talks. I believe the Egyptians are genuinely worried about the effect on President Sadat’s credibility which their announcement has created and are seeking to minimize the damage, particularly with the American press. 7. Department may wish to repeat this message to Tel Aviv.4 Atherton 4 The Department transmitted the text of the telegram to Tel Aviv in telegram

1248 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Middle East” which outlined a viable formula for that transitional arrangement. —Under these circumstances, it would not be advisable for any party to undermine the process through the imposition of any preconditions or the taking of any actions that threaten the essence of the negotiations or purport to confront the other party with a new fait accompli which might jeopardize the rights or positions of the parties. Thus we were pleased when the head of the Israeli delegation, Dr. Josef Burg, in response to a letter from Dr. Moustafa Khalil, stated on May 5 that you subscribe to the notion that no preconditions should be set for the negotiations and that the autonomy talks should be guided by the principles and provisions of the Camp David Framework. —In this spirit, we did not give much weight to certain statements issued by Israeli officials on matters which are related to the negotiations. We took this as a way of taking a negotiating position in public for obvious political reasons. However, a regrettable development took place in the past few days when certain negative moves were initiated that would result in poisoning the atmosphere of the negotiations and make it very unlikely to reach agreement. I am referring specifically to the move which is being considered by the Knesset to turn the annexation of East Jerusalem into basic law.5 You are quite aware of our position on Jerusalem. While we are not calling for a division of the city or the introduction of any barriers between its different sectors, we insist on achieving that without resort to territorial annexation or violating the rights and interests of 800 million Muslims. It is true that we are familiar with your view on this issue and we are not asking you to forfeit your right to state your views in the course of the negotiations. But it is a different matter to take certain actions through your political institutions for the purpose of co-opting the outcome of the talks. These actions seem to be designed to render these issues, however crucial, not negotiable or useless to discuss. Instead of stemming these attempts on the basis that they adversely interfere with the peace process and create a situation which is hard to keep under control, it appears that the Israeli Government is encouraging or even endorsing such moves. —Another case in point is your position on settlement issue. As that matter was being brought up for discussion in the negotiating chambers, an Israeli official revealed your plans to intensify settlement activities and establish new settlements in the coming five years, i.e., for the duration of the transitional period. I trust that you agree with me that such plans are incompatible with the spirit of negotiations. It is an attempt to predetermine the outcome of the talks through taking ad- 5 See Document 371.

1250 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. (S) Entire text. 2. Please deliver2 following message from President Carter to King Hussein: Begin text: Your Majesty: I believe that an exchange of views between us on all issues of interest to both the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and the United States would strengthen the relations between our two countries. I therefore would like to invite you and Queen Noor to pay an official visit to Washington, D.C. in the second half of June. Ambassador Veliotes will explore with you a mutually convenient date for your visit. Rosalynn joins me in expressing to you and Queen Noor the hope that you will be able to come at that time and we are looking forward to seeing you both. Best regards, Sincerely, Jimmy Carter End text. [Omitted here are instructions for Veliotes regarding proposed dates for the visit and visit protocol.] 2 Veliotes delivered Carter’s message to Hussein on May 21. Hussein accepted the

1252 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX hardly surprising that it has not been possible to conclude them in 12 months. We have had targets before that have been exceeded, but it is the ultimate success of the outcome and not meeting the target date that is important. —What is important today is that serious negotiations are underway, and that we believe they are getting somewhere. The experience at Herzlia of engaging both Ministers and working groups simultaneously permitted the parties to begin grappling with some of the central issues for the first time. —Ambassador Linowitz had to handle a tough confrontation over the security issue at Herzlia. But at the same time much valuable work was accomplished. We have now put forward our suggestions on most of the issues and these are being considered carefully by the two sides. There is a much closer common concept of what kind of document we should aim for as the outcome of negotiations than there was even a month ago. We are moving steadily toward getting both sides to accept a single text as the basis for negotiations. —It is our intention to pursue these negotiations as vigorously as possible until an agreement is reached. We will play our role as “full partner” and will both put forward our own suggestions as we consider appropriate and intervene to break deadlocks to move the process forward. We are not interested in achieving an incomplete or inadequate agreement within some arbitrary time limit. We are determined to get a meaningful agreement on autonomy and will extend the negotiations if necessary to achieve it. —There is already agreement on a significant list of functions to be transferred fully to the Palestinian self-governing authority. The two sides are now grappling with the remaining core issues: arrangements for control over land; the principles to govern an equitable allocation of water; designing arrangements that will fully assure Israel’s security while giving the Palestinian authority an appropriate role in security functions; arrangements in the economic sphere; voting rights for the East Jerusalem Arabs. These will be tough issues to resolve but we believe it can be done with patience and determination. —The President remains convinced that Resolution 242 and the Camp David Framework offer the only practical way of building toward a comprehensive peace. He is determined to see this process through to success. —The President has asked Secretary Muskie and Ambassador Linowitz to outline to key European leaders the progress made to date in these talks and to stress the complexities of the issues which can only be ultimately resolved by tenacious attention to the negotiating process itself in the months ahead. We will make clear to the Europeans that we

1254 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX President Sadat had made the second announcement about a further postponement or suspension of the autonomy negotiations.3 Both announcements came to all of us as a complete surprise. You will recall that at the end of the last round of talks4 in Herzliya on May 7 the three delegations affirmed that the intensified negotiations, as agreed upon in the wake of your conversations with President Sadat and myself, would continue in Cairo on May 12. A day later, without prior consultation, President Sadat decided to postpone the date of the continuing talks to which we had all agreed. In his speech to the Egyptian Parliament on May 14,5 President Sadat declared that in response to your personal request he had decided to renew the negotiations. However, on the following day, he again surprisingly announced yet a further postponement. On Sunday afternoon, May 18, I received from our Ambassador in Cairo President Sadat’s personal message6 to me in which he listed three main complaints: The private Member’s Bill in the Knesset pertaining to Jerusalem as the Capital of Israel which elicited the almost universal consensus of the House,7 a statement made by our Minister of Agriculture8 in one of the negotiating sessions concerning the settlements in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District, and the latest measures in Judea and Samaria. I assume, Mr. President, that the Egyptians provided you with the contents of that message so I will not go into its details. In my reply to President Sadat, dispatched today, I conveyed to him the following. I wrote that the aforementioned Jerusalem Bill does not differ whatsoever in its contents from the letter I communicated to you on September 17, 1978, at Camp David. I, likewise, drew his attention to the Resolution on Jerusalem adopted on April 1, 1980 by the Egyptian Parliament which completely contradicts our innermost beliefs. Israel did not, however, because of that Resolution, interrupt the negotiations. On the matter relating to Minister Sharon, he legitimately made a statement in the course of the talks regarding our settlements. The Egyptian delegation voiced objections as did our delegation over General Ali’s statement on security issues which we found to be totally unacceptable.

1256 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. Following is a summary report on Mobarak’s discussions here on autonomy negotiations.2 Mobarak met alone with the President3 for 20 minutes May 23; had lunch with the Secretary (this was mostly a social occasion with no business of importance transpiring); and then met with Ambassador Linowitz later the same day for more than an hour. 3. In meeting with the President, Mobarak in essence sought the President’s views as to whether a quick resumption of the negotiations was desirable or, alternatively, whether it would be better to have a more extended pause. The President later directed that Mobarak be asked to convey back to Sadat a brief message that (a) he would prefer that the talks be started again as soon as possible and (b) we would try to get an appropriate statement on Jerusalem. 4. On the way to the airport upon departure, Mobarak indicated some personal disappointment with the message, pointing out that Sadat’s suspension of the talks had been favorably received in the Arab world, and this was important to Egypt. 5. In conversations with Ambassador Linowitz,4 Mobarak and former Prime Minister Khalil,5 whose visit overlapped with the Vice President’s, made it clear that they do not expect the negotiations to register much progress before the U.S. elections in November. Both stressed Egyptian willingness to continue the talks provided we can get assurances from the Israelis that the Cohen Bill6 on Jerusalem will not be voted into law. Khalil agreed that either a letter from Burg to Linowitz or Burg’s confirmation of Linowitz’s understanding of the situation would permit Egypt to resume the talks.7 Mobarak said he be- 2 In addition to the discussions on the status of the autonomy negotiations noted here, Mubarak met with Brown on May 23 on the supply of parts and munitions to the Egyptian military, the progress of the F–4 fighter program for the Egyptian Air Force, and the planned temporary deployment of U.S. F–4 fighter aircraft to Cairo West airbase in support of that program. The memorandum of conversation of this meeting is in the

1258 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX we are working from that; and (2) the price charged for any oil supplied to Israel must be full replacement cost; it cannot contain any hidden subsidy. My Recommendation: We stay with the basic position contained in the May 1 memorandum (attached) with one change: increasing the requirement for short-term, indirect purchases from two-thirds to three-quarters. Our negotiators would have to seek additional instructions before changing this position. The position has the following main provisions: When there is no physical shortage of oil available to Israel, the Agreement could be activated, subject to the concurrence of each of the governments at the time, if Israel: (1) is paying for all its imported oil an average price higher than the average cost of the most expensive 10% of crude oil imported into the United States ($38.61 per barrel in March) and; (2) has to buy at least three-quarters of its oil through short-term, indirect purchases. As to the matter of the price of oil that we would provide if the Agreement were activated: (1) if the U.S. provides foreign oil to Israel, we would charge our acquisition cost plus any handling charges; and (2) if the U.S. provides domestic oil to Israel, the price charged would be acquisition cost or the replacement cost whichever is higher. Replacement cost means the actual cost to U.S. refiners of replacing oil sold to Israel; if this cannot be precisely determined, replacement cost will be considered to be equivalent to the average cost to U.S. refiners of the most expensive 10% of crude oil imported into the United States. This is a sound, tough negotiating position. We may have to authorize adjustments in the future, but I recommend that we not do so in advance. I recommend, and Charles Duncan concurs, that we send a team to Israel in June, to proceed on the basis described above.4 4 Carter initialed his approval of the recommendation. Also attached but not printed is an update on Israel’s oil supply situation.

1260 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and the few remaining West Bank mayors, including Freij, are considering similar action. The quality of life has plummeted in the territories and many, including Sam Lewis, expect a cycle of violence and repression which could turn the clock back ten years. This ultimately could lead to repugnance in Israel and even greater pressure for new elections. Begin is no closer to solving his ministerial problem. He and Sharon engaged in a vitriolic exchange at Sunday’s5 Cabinet meeting which will make it all but impossible for Sharon to support Shamir’s appointment as Defense Minister and equally impossible for Begin to withdraw it. If Sharon votes against the government he is required by Knesset procedures to resign and Begin is apparently backgrounding the press that this would be no great loss. Sharon’s defection would not bring down the government but would make Begin’s majority and survivability very tenuous. Begin, in an almost irrational Knesset speech,6 compared the German government to the Nazis and the French to the Vichy. He reiterated Israeli policy on Jerusalem and used the line that the government does not intend to “intervene” in the Knesset handling of the Cohen Bill.7 While the intent may have been to be helpful, the message was couched in a way which will be interpreted by the Egyptians and other Arabs as anything but helpful. Burg talked to Sam and said he was anxious to come to Washington to see you and is ready to travel on 36-hour notice. Burg once again tried out Begin’s formula of the Government not “intervening” in the matter of the Cohen Bill but asked Sam for any other suggestions. Burg would like to get a formula worked out before coming to Washington. Sam is skeptical that any formula Begin could agree to would satisfy the Egyptians and suggests we not spend much political capital in pursuing this track. He also points out that the government is beginning to press its own version of a basic law on Jerusalem which could come out of committee or at least be considered in committee in a matter of weeks or no more than months. Thus, even if we get a reassurance on the Cohen Bill we must be careful not to mislead the Egyptians and set the stage for a future walk-out which causes even more damage. Sam suggested getting Burg and Ali together (Ali is currently indisposed due to a recurrence of his rheumatic arthritis), back-to-back Burg and Ali visits or a shuttle by you in the area. However, Sam is 5 June 1. 6 Excerpts of Begin’s June 2 address to the Knesset are in Israel’s Foreign Policy, His-

1262 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 380. Memorandum From the President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz) to President Carter1 Washington, June 6, 1980 SUBJECT Status of Egypt-Israel Autonomy Negotiations I thought you might want to have this very brief report on where things stand now with reference to the effort to get the autonomy talks started again and how we have been going about it. Ever since the visit of Mubarak,2 I have been working with the Israelis and the Egyptians endeavoring to evolve a satisfactory formula which might cover the concern expressed by the Egyptians with reference to the Jerusalem Bill3 in the Knesset. I tried out several alternate approaches with the Israelis after first checking with Roy Atherton to get some assurance that the Egyptians would be agreeable to them. As you know, the Israelis feel that they have not misbehaved in any way in connection with the Jerusalem Bill, and are unwilling to offer any assurances as to what the Government might or might not do if the Bill were to issue from the committee to which it has been referred. The most the Government of Israel is willing to say is that it will not “interfere” with the legislative process of the Knesset in connection with this Bill. This obviously will not satisfy the Egyptians, as I have forcefully indicated to the Israelis. The central fact is that Jerusalem is such a politically sensitive and explosive issue and, therefore, Begin and his colleagues are unwilling to say anything about what they might or might not do if a Jerusalem Bill were to appear on the floor of the Knesset. As you will remember, all but very few members of the Knesset voted to refer Geula Cohen’s Jerusalem Bill to committee when it was offered by her. This morning I thought we had resolved the issue fairly well.4 The plan was for me to write a letter to General Ali indicating that the Is- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country

1264 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with me in order to discuss how to get the negotiations moving again and to make plans for the next negotiating sessions. It will not be possible to get word from Egypt until sometime Sunday8 as to whether this course of procedure is agreeable, and we shall then have to make sure that Israel is fully in accord. Conceivably all this might be worked out in time for Ed Muskie to say something about it in the course of his speech Monday noon. 8 June 8. 381. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in Israel and Egypt1

1266 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX London and Bonn, and Minister of State Boutros Ghali appears to be making same argument in Rome. The state of play as we understand it is that various options will be examined at meeting of political directors June 4, who will prepare final recommendations to their leaders in time for summit June 12–13. 3. In our judgment the Europeans have already made up their minds that they will have to issue some kind of statement and it will therefore probably not be possible to talk them into holding off entirely on an initiative. We believe instead our efforts should be directed toward channeling any statement by the Europeans in directions that are as constructive as possible and that will be less damaging to our own Middle East strategy. We can best do this, we believe, by defining our own concerns and requirements as precisely as possible. 4. As the EC governments formulate their final positions over the next few days, you should seek appropriate opportunities to get our views across as outlined below at the level you deem will be most effective. In your remarks you should stress three principal points: (1) We will view any statement they make or any action by the contribution it makes to a negotiated settlement; (2) anything that appears to offer the Arabs the false hope of an easy alternative would conflict with our purposes since it would take the heat off the Arabs to engage eventually in the autonomy negotiations; (3) we wish to be consulted about any initiative the Europeans propose to launch well in advance. 5. Begin talking points: —The achievement of peace in the Middle East is, as we all agree, of vital importance to the West. In our view that cannot be achieved by actions which are designed primarily to satisfy one side. It can only be achieved by negotiations, as difficult as these can be, of the kind which flow out of the Camp David Framework. As the Secretary has already stressed, the President has determined that we will pursue these negotiations in the absence of any other alternatives which have a chance of achieving peace. —We are now attempting to cope with Sadat’s suspension of the talks2 over the proposed Jerusalem legislation.3 Amb. Linowitz is at work attempting to get the talks back on the tracks because we believe both sides basically want to see the process through. In the meantime the Israeli Cabinet crisis4 and the increased violence in the West Bank have complicated matters. But we continue to hold the view that the

1268 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —We are therefore open-minded but we attach utmost importance to the criteria which we have mentioned, and we want the Europeans to be aware of them. We would ask the Europeans to explain how they believe their specific ideas would contribute in real terms to advancing the negotiations. —We hope that in continuing its dialogue with the Arabs, the European Community would not suggest concessions without a clear commitment on the Arabs’ part to a peaceful resolution of the Middle East problem and recognition of Israel’s right to exist. The recent Fatah conference in Damascus resulted in assertion of maximalist Palestinian demands for the liquidation of Israel and we would expect that this position would be strenuously opposed by our European allies. —Finally, whatever ideas the Europeans finally come up with, we hope to be consulted well in advance. 6. In making these points, you should also make it clear that we are fully aware of the connection between the Arab-Israeli conflict and the problems we face more broadly in the Middle East and Southwest Asia. We recognize the contribution that demonstrated progress toward a comprehensive Arab-Israel settlement can make toward strengthening our strategy across the whole region. Muskie 383. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State and the White House1

1270 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 4. I recommend that Department repeat this message to Tel Aviv.7 Atherton 7 The Department sent the text of this telegram to Tel Aviv in telegram 154173, June

1272 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX danians) are always committed to it; it is dear to us; and we will try to contribute to it—to see it realized in any way we can. He remembers discussing with the President approaches to a comprehensive settlement—pre-Geneva, joint delegations, Palestinian involvement, etc. But events took a different course! Unfortunately, there was a lack of communication between him and the President; and both were “surprised” by events. There were gaps of time, understanding, cooperation— which he had always valued. He is very grateful to see the President, to talk, and to hear the President’s opinions on all matters. He will speak honestly and frankly on all of them. The area is one of danger. Conditions have changed since they met in Tehran—Iran, Afghanistan, and the changing attitudes of people in the area. He once thought that Jordan was on the front line, with dangers to Arab identity and the future. Others now face this as well. There is a history of struggle, going back hundreds, even thousands of years. Their future is in jeopardy. He will see what they can do in the area, to bring the countries closer together to face the challenge. The President looks clearly into the future, about our joint action to meet the threat, to our joint cause, and to our common future. He (King Hussein) is also concerned about the Europeans. It is true that Jordan is small—in its people and location. For many years past, they have struggled and made achievements. This is not a matter of survival, but of wanting something better than survival for his people. They want something: the future, defense, in the identity of people. There are limits there, too. It is a great problem they all face; they are at the receiving end of threats, developments, and events. They need to be with friends, dealing with contingencies, and need to play the role they can, defending their future. In the area of the Arab world, it is interesting to discuss that—the different attitudes, the problems they face. It is obvious that the Palestinian problem needs to be moved toward a solution. In particular, there needs to be a major role for the U.S., without which nothing will happen. What seems to be a step forward (note: Camp David) may be so in reality. But what is next? What about the real problems—Palestine, the difficult problems that need help and attention to be overcome. In all fields, our future cooperation is needed, in many fields. What can we do? Thank you very much for the opportunity to deal with you (the President). He (King Hussein) is ready to discuss with friends the President’s interests. The President expressed his admiration for King Hussein, and for what he has done and tried to do in gaining a comprehensive peace. Also there is the history of His Majesty’s family—including his father5

1274 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX of the states welcome this. We have a large naval presence in the Indian Ocean, to stabilize it; then we will reduce the force. Under difficult circumstances, we departed from His Majesty’s ideas on resolving the Israeli-Arab conflict, by taking advantage of the opportunity to resolve the Sinai problem. We laid the groundwork for the Palestinian people to participate in determining their own future. This is not perfect. But we have made progress. As for the future, it is difficult to predict. There are major problems—there is no responsible person to negotiate for the Palestinians living in the West Bank and Gaza. We hoped at Camp David that this would happen, but it has not materialized. This has crippled the prospects for complete success. The issue was to induce Israel to withdraw from the Sinai, and to withdraw from the West Bank—keeping some outposts—as a way of helping to resolve the problems and to permit the Palestinian people to participate in determining their own future. Some people would be able to return to the West Bank. It is not easy to negotiate under Prime Minister Begin; but there has been progress. He (the President) is determined to continue. This is not incompatible with His Majesty’s ultimate goals for the West Bank. It is an interim solution. After the Self-Governing Authority is set up, then discussions will take place on the permanent status of the West Bank and Gaza. We support Resolution 242. There should be a withdrawal by Israel from the occupied territories and guarantees for Israel’s security. He would like His Majesty’s advice on how to go about finding a way to get the Palestinian people to be represented. There is an obstacle: Israel will not talk with the PLO as long as it says it wants to destroy Israel and will not accept 242 and Israel’s right to exist. If the PLO will do this, however, we will talk with it. Maybe there is something possible in the interim—perhaps some mayors: this would get us over a difficult time. If Israel and Egypt go on with the talks, and make progress, then we will continue, and resist efforts to subvert the process. We welcome efforts that would add to the peace process, and would not oppose the Europeans on that basis, or a Jordanian initiative, to build on the process. However, we would resist any modification that would cancel 242 or threaten Israel, or that tried to undo the Egyptian-Israeli achievement. He sees and appreciates His Majesty’s efforts to reach the same goals: the right of self-determination; a withdrawal of Israeli West Bank forces; and the control of terrorism (where His Majesty has done an admirable job). He sees changes taking place in Iraq—he sees it to be more responsible and moderate than before. Syria is going the other way; and it is more allied with the Soviet Union than any other state in the area. He would like to hear how His Majesty would approach the future—this would be helpful to him (the President). Maybe they have a different view of Sadat. He sees that it took an act of courage to resolve the con-

1276 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX get Egypt’s support for it. He accepted Resolution 338. Jordan could not bargain over Palestinian rights. Was Israel willing to return the lands, either directly or under international auspices—with selfdetermination? If there is self-determination, he is sure the Palestinians will choose what we can live with. Most Palestinians are in Jordan. Most Palestinians carry Jordanian passports. The radicals do well only when hope appears closed. After many years—they only want to know the end of the process. The President was honest to say that he couldn’t say what that is. Jordan had to rely on his (the President’s) good will. But after so many promises and assurances, they couldn’t go into the unknown without knowing where the process was going. He does not want to divide Jerusalem. They say that there should be Arab sovereignty—sovereignty for the Christians and the Moslems in the Arab part of it. Let Jerusalem be a real city of peace. There should be self-determination for the rest (i.e. West Bank and Gaza). There should be an end to settlements. Jordan has prepared a slide show on the settlements, which he would be happy to show the President. This shows that all has changed; there are new obstacles. Maybe even stopping settlements now would not be enough. Water resources, the ecology—all have been changed. In Israel’s opinion, Jerusalem is Israeli; the West Bank is Israeli. There are rights for some, but they are under Israeli occupation. He has had a vivid impression that Israel wants the West Bank to be forgotten. Israel had the impression that it could remove Egypt from the scene. And this has happened. With the support and help they get, he doubts that they will change. But the Palestinians must be involved. Without Palestinian participation, there cannot be a real solution. If there is agreement otherwise, it will sow seeds of distrust, and then the radicals will get the opportunity to destroy the agreement. He is willing to do all he can for a real process, with an end in view—on the future of the Palestinians, and of Jordan, and of the region. He is in touch with the PLO—that is a title: leaders change. Recently he has tried a little opening—he is not totally encircled. After Egypt moved (i.e. 1977), they faced a state where the area seemed to be disintegrating between left and right. An idea was floated and a meeting was held (i.e. in Baghdad); but friends (note: the United States) did not see what this meant. For the first time, all the rest of the Arab world spoke of 242 as the basis of a solution—including some extremists and the PLO. This held the Arabs together, and avoided disintegration which would have helped the enemies of the Arabs. This situation has changed recently. Syria is closer to the Soviet Union, and there are pressures in that country. Syria’s attitude tends to be negative on any solution—and this is more so, now. But they are part of a

1278 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (i.e. in Lebanon), but it is not a clear-cut issue. There are three groups of Christians; Sunni and Shia Moslems; the Syrians; the Palestinians. The nightmare continues, with suffering and danger. He does not know the result. But Lebanon is a time bomb. This does not serve Lebanese or others’ interests. In Jordan, they are making progress. They are affected by oil price increases. Maybe the oil producers see their benefits going up; and the industrial nations suffer less than Jordan does. The majority of countries try to make progress and to catch up—they are suffering most from this instability (i.e. in oil markets). This is another area of danger. There is a danger of eruption of more radical regimes’ taking over in the world as such. Jordan is in touch with its European friends. It senses their concern for the future. What will happen next? He believes that we are not [now?] at a critical juncture, where misunderstandings are the order of the day, and lack of communication. Are we (i.e. Jordan and the U.S.) partners in seeking a better future? Will we share the making of the future? How can we ensure that we work together? The Europeans are reluctant to move. Jordan does not want something that is an alternative to what has happened (i.e. Egypt-Israel peace treaty) or to block it. But what can we do about Jerusalem, the West Bank, Palestinian rights, and how can we relate to other parties? The Europeans are anxious to avoid a U.S. veto. This leads to the idea of differences in the Alliance at a difficult time. We can wait to see what happens. He hopes to go home knowing the President’s ideas. But when that ends in disappointment, then he fears that hope will be lost, and only the extremists will benefit. In Jordan, they have problems. Jordan is close to the United States. Jordan is grateful for U.S. economic help—which has diminished—and he is not asking now. But the United States knows where Jordan stands. He wants to know: how did things go wrong (i.e. between Jordan and the U.S.)? How did it reach this point? Beyond that—if we are still partners—how can we reach common objectives? The President said that this was extremely helpful. First, there is our friendship. The U.S. commitment to Jordan’s security and prosperity is solid and unchanging. He was disappointed by the lack of Jordanian support for Camp David. He has a great deal of investment in it, and saw it as the only viable way to get goals that both he and His Majesty share. It has one defect, which can be corrected: the need to have a firm, recognizable voice of the Palestinians, making their demands on water, total withdrawal, land, a share in security, an end to settlement, and resolution of Jerusalem. No one does this now—with world attention and approval—negotiating with Israel, the U.S., and Egypt to get His Majesty’s goals. Therefore it is very difficult for us when others say that

1280 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Majesty should see our determination. There is terrorism on both sides; and we deplore both. In summary, to underline His Majesty’s commitment, is there some way to pursue the process of Camp David, without Jordan or the PLO in? This brings him to the conclusion that if Palestinian representatives were in for the next few months, and we see nothing happen, then we will explore something different—though always within 242. Perhaps it was a mistake to go so far with Camp David without Jordan. We understand that Sadat after Camp David was to go to Morocco to see you (His Majesty). Later, we got your list of questions11 and responded12 to them. If we made a mistake, it was not deliberate. He (the President) believes that without some other process, this (i.e. Camp David) is the best. It is not perfect, but it is the best alternative. One last thing, concerning the PLO: when he has met with Assad, His Majesty, and the Saudis—including Fahd—and Sadat, he has always asked that they induce Arafat to endorse 242 and Israel’s right to exist. Following that—or concurrently—we would deal with the PLO to look for a solution. This has not proved possible through private encouragement—Arafat talks about this as his bargaining chip— and is an element of the problem we have not been able to solve. Our commitment to Israel’s security is complete. Israel does not ask for U.S. forces; we provide its security needs. Maybe there is an incompatibility in our hopes to resolve the problem. Does His Majesty see what is possible to do? King Hussein said that they can see when they are at home, with the PLO, what can be done. The President said that he expects that getting Palestinians into the talks would be hard. But negotiations and communications are important. He had been surprised how far Israel had moved on the Egyptian front, and on its commitment to principles on withdrawal, etc. He cannot predict success, but he has seen movement before. King Hussein said that it is precisely 242. Perhaps we can look at it later. That was adopted after the 1967 war and only talked about countries. The Palestinians objected: 242 did not talk about their rights. The President said that 242 just mentioned refugees. King Hussein said that it was the missing ingredient. The President said that with the Saudis, we drafted a statement the PLO could issue, putting forward its reservations on full Palestinian rights. He presumes that Arafat saw it, but it didn’t work. 11 See Document 64.

1282 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX could be brought in as mutually agreed. People from the West Bank and Gaza could come in as part of the Jordanian and Egyptian delegations. This still has promise. If Jordan is not in the talks—and he wished they would be—there should be another way. The Prime Minister said that they had dealt with the Israelis for a long time. The President said that he had read about it in the newspapers (laughter)! King Hussein said that that had been a violation of the only agreement between Jordan and Israel (laughter)! The Prime Minister said that Israeli actions are to absorb the West Bank—on the ground. Without a commitment that the result of the process is self-determination, Jordan couldn’t join the talks. Jordan would be used as an umbrella while Israel absorbed the West Bank through settlements—in the Arab view. This was the dilemma after Camp David. This was the fear they tried to convey before Camp David, that Jordan would look like the obstruction, whereas Jordan is trying to provide the basis for a viable settlement. King Hussein said that there is a basis for future misunderstanding. There are two schools of thought in the Arab world. Some say that there should be concentration on the remaining problems. Others like to undermine Camp David and return to the past. This camp is more aligned with the extremists. Security should be for all; Jordan wants assurances for itself, too. All right, they will think about it (i.e. what the President had said on Palestinian involvement). The President said he hopes His Majesty will think about it. He sees differences between the Jordanian position and ours; they are important. The Prime Minister said that they were not fundamental. The President agreed. The most difficult issue is Jerusalem. As Begin says, its ultimate status should be resolved in negotiations. Second, there is the end of Israeli occupation and military government, which Dayan and Weizman support. The definition of full autonomy needs to be hammered out. How much Israel should get out is to be negotiated. The Labor Party is for partition. Begin says that the Palestinians should be left to manage their own affairs. He (the President) is for full autonomy. Begin is for full autonomy. Some difference! (laughter)! We need to find a means for the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, with PLO support, to get in the talks—as long as we make progress. They can make strong demands, and Egypt will support them. If the process still breaks down, then all of us will look for alternatives. We will do our best now. He fears that otherwise the situation will get worse. There will be deterioration.

1284 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Nicholas Veliotes, U.S. Ambassador to Jordan Ambassador Sol Linowitz, Personal Representative of the President for Middle East Peace Negotiations Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Robert Hunter, National Security Council Staff Member (notetaker) His Majesty Hussein I, King of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan His Excellency Sharif Abdul Hamid Sharaf, Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan His Excellency Ahmad Lawzi, Chief of Royal Court Lt. General (Ret.) Amer Khammash, Minister of Court Lt. General Sharif Zaid Bin Shaker, Commander in Chief of the Jordan Armed Forces His Excellency Fawaz Sharaf, Ambassador of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to the United States Secretary Muskie began by asking His Majesty if he had enjoyed his visit to the Air and Space Museum. King Hussein said yes; it had been his first visit. The President said that His Majesty had had a good guide. Senator Glenn2 had taken King Hussein and Queen Noor to the Space Museum after last night’s dinner. King Hussein said that it was extremely interesting. Dr. Brzezinski said that the capsule was interesting. The President said that now we are working on the space shuttle. It will carry a large payload, and is very flexible. Space on it will be leased to private corporations and governments. It will help with repairs to machinery in space and satellites. King Hussein said that it meant a new era. The President agreed. It is complicated to build one that can go out and back repeatedly. There is the problem of heat damage. He would be glad for His Majesty to go up in it sometime. We would try it out well, first (laughter)! The Prime Minister said that next they should go to a naval museum; he had a preference for it. The President said that this morning’s meeting could be brief, here, and then they could talk in the Oval Office while the others continued their talk here. He apologized for keeping His Majesty so long yesterday—he only realized how long when he read about it in the newspaper! It was so fruitful, and he had been enjoying it so much. So he apologized for keeping His Majesty. He presumed His Majesty would be discussing with Harold Brown on defense matters, which are impor- 2 Senator John Glenn (D-Ohio) was one of the Mercury Seven astronauts. He was the first U.S. citizen to orbit the Earth on February 20, 1962.

1286 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX high. How to accommodate to these problems and to share responsibility with OPEC—which is making the profits—will be discussed jointly. Then he will be going to Yugoslavia, Spain, and Portugal. After his visit, the world will see the communique—we don’t have any secret agreements—to analyze it, and to see whether we answer Jordan’s questions. We have discussed the Middle East. His Majesty has seen the European resolution. We do not see it as incompatible with the Camp David process. There was a resolute attack by the Israeli Cabinet and the PLO on the European resolution. Therefore, it must be fair and well balanced (laughter)! He doesn’t know what can be done on the Maqarin Dam.5 Habib had been to see His Majesty and others. Would His Majesty like to comment? We do not want to interfere. We are trying to eliminate some obstacles that exist. He has studied the problem, including water rights for the West Bank and Syrian cooperation. We have gone as far as we can, without some agreement between Jordan, Syria, and Israel on what to do. Does the project have a life? King Hussein said very much so. They have agreed to address themselves to the question of the West Bank, and prepare an answer for Phil (Habib) soon.6 He hopes the U.S. will continue. Would we please clarify the rules and the guidelines on shares so that they can tackle the problem of getting Syrian cooperation. The President asked about the possibility of direct Jordanian dealings with the Israelis. King Hussein said that they do this in the Israel-Jordan Mixed Armistic Commission (IJMAC), concerning the waters of the Yarmuk River and the Jordan Valley. There are direct and indirect contacts. The Prime Minister said that they had had a meeting yesterday. Ambassador Veliotes said that they had solved a technical problem, and they met under the auspices of IJMAC. The President said good. Ambassador Veliotes said that these were technical issues. The Prime Minister said that there is now no problem. He assumes that issues with Israel can be managed. Habib raised issues on which there was agreement. There was only one, raised by Israel, on water for the West Bank. Jordan is not ready to go into details. This must await a

1288 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President said good. Ambassador Veliotes said he hoped it would not show up in the Israeli press! King Hussein said that this project could be done in the context of peace. Secretary Muskie asked whether there were any problems with the authorization bill for the Maqarin Dam; Congress asks about it each year. Ambassador Veliotes said that this is a problem. The President said he knew. Ambassador Veliotes said that there is $50 million this year and previous appropriations. If agreement is not reached in this fiscal year, then we will have to tell the Congress we can’t swing it. Hal Saunders and he will discuss this with the Prime Minister. The last issue with Israel is that Israel is asking a specific figure, concerning water Jordan would take from the Yarmuk to the West Bank. This is hung up. The President said that if U.S. funds are available, we will need something for Congress to keep them. The Prime Minister said that several issues have been resolved: the Yarmuk triangle, the weir, and others. Only one remains, which Israel raised recently: water for the West Bank. The major political issue is can Israel speak for the West Bank? We can find a formula. King Hussein said that there are other issues with Syria. The President said he knew. These are his items. Perhaps they could talk privately about self-determination. He wants to understand. He has listened carefully, but does not see how His Majesty sees this in a broader context. Perhaps they should talk privately? King Hussein said: as you wish. The President suggested that they stay here. King Hussein said that they had talked about all subjects that had been raised; they should try to work them out together. Jordan’s feeling now: as far as what else happens, they accept developments and progress in some areas to establish a comprehensive peace (i.e. the Egypt-Israel peace treaty). Now is the point to think again about what to do. In the Arab world, there is a division. Some—either in their thinking or from external suggestions—want to undermine all that has been done recently. Jordan’s feeling is that what has happened has happened, and they would like to see how to go forward. Their object is a comprehensive peace settlement and security, to transfer the area to greater stability and hope. Some points were raised yesterday on the Palestinians: can anyone speak for them? This is a dilemma. The natural answer is the PLO. Then

1290 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX schools, police, etc.—they found reticence. The mayor was fearful of being seen as betraying the Palestinian cause. Maybe this (i.e. consultations) is a fruitless effort. He understands the difficulties of having a formal group. Perhaps 5 or 6 mayors would be willing, collectively, if they know they had the tacit approval of the PLO and of Jordan. They could speak for the residents, and demand that the Israeli Military Government be removed. They could demand responsibility to run their lives, to have elections, and for the Self- Governing Authority to have full responsibility. So far, we are playing into Israel’s hands, by not being able to carry out the Camp David Accords. If Begin wants to slow down the process, he can blame it on the Palestinians, and say that he wants to do something, but can’t get the Palestinians to take responsibility. This (i.e. the consultations) would be a public relations achievement, at least in the U.S., if the West Bank and Gaza mayors were trying to take their own rights under the Camp David process. Now it is felt here, in the press, that the Palestinians are not willing to negotiate, but rather are terrorists. He is eager for progress. It is hard for us to meet with West Bank mayors. They are reluctant to talk with us. (Speaking to the Palestinians?): How can we help Jordan take over the West Bank, and get the Israeli Military Government out? One mayor is coming here. King Hussein said Khalaf. The Prime Minister said he has a relative here. The President said that his (Mayor Khalaf’s) brother is here. We will treat him,7 and hope it will succeed. We will try to break the stalemate (i.e. in the talks). King Hussein said that there are many members of the PLO and other Palestinians who would be ready, if it worked out, to speak directly to the United States. The issue is how can they join the Egyptian delegation—there is no Jordanian delegation. The President said that they do not need to be in a delegation. King Hussein said it might be easy to discuss with them. The President said that the problem is that if they are designated as representatives of the PLO, it will not work. If they come as individuals, we will not try to analyze whom they represent. Some mayors may be PLO members: we don’t know. If they say they will negotiate, but represent the PLO, it would be impossible for us. We can’t talk with the PLO. The Prime Minister said that there is a practical difficulty for West Bankers to come in a context that would prejudge the result—i.e. the

1292 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX they get their views across. If not, the Palestinians will suffer most: they will be held responsible for failure. The Israelis say they want to go forward, but the Palestinians do not—Israel does not hear their demands. King Hussein said that there is a dilemma: Camp David dealt with two areas, Egypt-Israel in one and the Palestinians in the other. The Egypt-Israel treaty many see as progress and as a solution to part of the problem. The President underlined that it was a part. King Hussein said that the Palestinian side, unfortunately, was done in the absence of the Palestinians and Jordan. Egypt was unable to address this adequately, because it did not know what was involved. The President said yes, this is what he is saying. King Hussein said that Jordan passed maps to Egypt to help it avoid mistakes. Is there a way to say that what happened between Egypt and Israel exists, and take a fresh start on the rest? Camp David is telling people to fit into a formula which does not meet their needs. It brings into question the end results Jordan is asking about. The Palestinians do not know what rights they will secure at the end of the day—the future. The President said that nothing in Camp David contradicts what His Majesty wants in the future. King Hussein and the Prime Minister said that they understood. The Prime Minister said that asserting the demands of the Palestinians is difficult for them to do under occupation. The President said that we know what they want, and want to get there. But there is no mechanism to get there, if they will not participate. For Jordan and the Palestinians, if you are not in the talks until the goal is clear, and is 100% of what you want—then there will be no progress. Sadat knew what he wanted; he (Sadat) said so to Begin: withdrawal. Begin didn’t want that, and wanted to keep the settlements. But world and Israeli opinion was with Sadat. Begin yielded, and said that the Knesset should decide. He (the President) believes that Begin is difficult. He has spent as much time with Begin as with his (the President’s) wife—since each hour with Begin is magnified a hundred fold (laughter)! We should remember that there will be other Israeli leaders after Begin—and he (the President) will be President. Also, the people of Israel want peace. Its public opinion indicates that, if settlements were an obstacle to peace, the overwhelming majority are opposed to them. Now there is no way for moderate leaders or public opinion in Israel to believe that Palestinian leaders demand rights: e.g. an independent state, a confederation, or Israel’s getting out. Demanding these is all right. But no one is designated to work with Dayan, Yadin, us or

1294 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX record. We need to broaden the basis for the Palestinians to assemble and talk—only in the context of eventual self-determination. The President said that Jordan and the PLO see self-determination differently. The difficulty (between them) is that Jordan does not espouse publicly an independent Palestinian state—and he believes Jordan doesn’t want it. Assad said two years ago that this was the worst thing that could happen, but doesn’t say so publicly, because of Rabat.9 Therefore self-determination is a phrase in Israeli minds meaning an independent Palestinian state. In Jordanian minds, it means federation with Jordan. His (the President’s) preference is Jordan’s—confederation of the West Bank with Jordan. He had told the Israelis this. He has no group of West Bank leaders to present their case to the American people and himself, demanding the right of free assembly, to express their views and demand the right to vote, to choose a congress, and to take over administering their own affairs. No one is recognized to make these demands. He is asking the Jordanians to help it evolve. The Prime Minister said that without Begin, Israel might let the Palestinians assemble. How can it be done? His Majesty is ready to talk to them (the Palestinians). But if they are not allowed to assemble in peace, with an elected body, how can it be done? Ambassador Linowitz said that this issue has not come up in that form in the autonomy talks. The President said (to Ambassador Linowitz) to forget Camp David (i.e. as the context). How can we get the limits removed? Ambassador Linowitz said that let the Palestinians announce that they will be involved, with a mechanism to get their views, and ask for an assembly. We can support them in that. The Prime Minister said that the U.S. says the Palestinians should participate in Camp David: this is a non-starter. The President said he does not believe they have to do it that way; we can get around it. The Prime Minister said that if that is just a future course of action, then all right—but it will be necessary to get Begin to allow it. They (Jordan) will ask. Ambassador Linowitz said that Jordan should tell Israel it is doing this, and is taking responsibility for a peaceful assembly. 9 The Arab League Summit Conference, held at Rabat, Morocco, in October 1974, was attended by leaders from 20 Arab countries. On October 28, the conference voted unanimously for the creation of an independent Palestinian state anywhere “on Palestinian land that is liberated” from Israeli control. Additionally, the conference recognized the PLO as the “sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.” (Henry Tanner, “Arab Leaders Issue Call for a Palestinian State; Arafat Given Main Role,” The New York

1296 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The Prime Minister asked what changes there had been in Begin and Shamir. Dr. Brzezinski recounted his discussion with Begin at Camp David, when Begin had told him that his (Begin’s) arm would fall off and his eye would fall out before he would give up the Sinai settlements. But 10 days later, Begin agreed that a number of them should be dismantled. He (Begin) accepted autonomy for the West Bank; now we are trying to make that a reality. In five years more, it will be possible to translate an intolerable reality towards accommodation. But to start a new process would mean going back three years. The Prime Minister said that the problem is that this view assumes the process of Camp David occurs in a vacuum. Begin sabotages it. They need something explicit on the end result—i.e. selfdetermination. With the vacuum, one party is in control, and tries to sabotage. There is a need for a mechanism guaranteeing fulfillment in the right directions—either self-determination at the end, or allowing an assembly in the West Bank and Gaza, with a platform shaped by two guidelines: self-determination and security for Israel. The President said they had discussed this subject enough. He would summarize: first, some Israeli positions are not acceptable to Jordan. These can be negotiated, though some would not change—e.g. Jerusalem. Palestinian mayors can say that self-determination is their position, and they will not change, but are willing to negotiate to achieve that goal. This doesn’t have to be under Camp David; they can say what they need. Only 1% of the American people know that the Palestinians cannot assemble and talk. But if there were a group of representatives of the Palestinians who could say they insist on an alternative—self-determination—we want them there as soon as possible. First is the need for them to peaceably assemble. If Jordan says, all right, it does not accept the Camp David Accords, but will help create a peaceful assembly, this kind of rhetoric would help us make progress. Without it, Israel is firm on the West Bank; Egypt tries, poorly, to speak for the Palestinians; and we try to get Israel out of the West Bank, etc.— without any way to deal with the Palestinians. Secretary Muskie said the first phase of Camp David—the Egypt- Israel treaty—the Jordanians say is a fact and will continue. The second phase—Palestinian rights negotiations—are stalled because there is an absent party. We can make it a fresh start by following the President’s idea. How else can we get to talk? Jordan says to give up on the talks for another approach. Negotiations are needed. Two parties are already talking; but the third is not there. Which is more likely to work: an ongoing process or a new one which is not conceived? This is the choice. It is difficult to do the talks bilaterally with Egypt, so the talks are stalled; the Palestinians are not there or represented there. That can be a fresh

1298 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX trying to regroup in the area. They will talk, but retain their identity; will others say that Jordan goes too far? He will talk to the PLO, maybe in New York before he leaves. The Europeans are worried; he hopes they will be involved. The Soviet Union is not important; it only needs to know where we are going. Jordan can prevail on the reasonable elements among the Palestinians. He will not promise that he can deliver, with things as vague as they are. With Egypt and Israel in Camp David, everything was clear. On the Palestinian side, it was not clear. Therefore Jordan posed its questions. He wants the U.S. to understand totally where Jordan stands. Our objectives are one and the same. But how can we move? He wants to move as fast as possible. The President said that what he would like for His Majesty to say— after consulting with the PLO, the Palestinian people, and the other Arabs—is to acknowledge that the U.S. will not abandon Camp David. His Majesty can deplore this if it [he] wants—he hopes he (His Majesty) will not condemn it; and His Majesty can say that the ultimate goal of Camp David is too limited. But second, please say that the Palestinians must have a voice in our affairs: a free assembly, the vote, the right to take over administration of the occupied territories, a congress to speak for the Palestinians, and that the ultimate goal—which is different from others’—will be pursued and not abandoned. This would be a step forward. He hopes that the code words could be avoided. King Hussein said that there is one difficulty: Israel wants sovereignty over the West Bank, Gaza, and Jerusalem. The President said no, they prefer West Bank sovereignty, but this is for negotiating. Some Palestinians are for an independent Palestinian state; and some are for a confederation with Jordan. No one has to relinquish demands for a final solution. He wants His Majesty to say that the Palestinians must have a voice, a free assembly, the vote, the right to choose a body to represent them, and to state their ultimate goals and say they will work for them. He (the President) hopes that His Majesty will not condemn the Camp David process, but say that he (His Majesty) will not speak in favor of it or join it, but the Palestinians in the area must have a way to express themselves. This would add a new dimension, although it might not succeed. Palestinian leaders do not need to acknowledge acceptance of Camp David; but Egypt, Israel and he, himself will not abandon Camp David. We can work in harmony. If His Majesty says this, that would be good. Please consult with us; and have the Jordanian foreign minister and prime minister come back and talk with Muskie, Linowitz, and with him. Perhaps Jordan will say that it didn’t work, or that the PLO said to say that, but please report and we will see how we can proceed. He wants to explore how to break the deadlock. (The meeting ended at 12:09 p.m.)

1300 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX it does not support the Camp David process, and have included a draft paragraph (Tab C) that might be inserted to correct that deficiency. (S) I want to underline one other point: the vote we cast on this resolution will have some impact on the autonomy talks, and especially on the Burg-Ali-Linowitz meetings on Wednesday5 and Thursday. As Chris notes, a veto would cause problems for Ali; but an abstention would have problems for Burg—and could (if followed by unilateral Israeli acts) also spill over onto Egyptian attitudes. Equally important, we have been predicating many of our recent acts—bridging beyond May 26; softening the European statement; and taking a firm line on UN resolutions—on our commitment to Camp David. That position wears progressively thin as the talks do not restart, and as there is a widespread assumption that we will not make any serious effort to get a significant agreement before our elections. Thus the position Linowitz takes with Burg and Ali this week—and the position you take with them on Wednesday6—will largely set the tone for months to come: whether we will take an aggressive or relatively relaxed stance towards the pace and intensity of the negotiations. (S) To help clarify the issues involved, we will convene a Senior Level Meeting7 on Monday afternoon, to present a strategy for the Burg-Ali meetings to you for your approval. (S) RECOMMENDATION That you meet with the Vice President, Muskie, and me on Monday morning to decide on our UN vote:8 5 July 2. 6 See Document 387.

1302 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Minister Burg said that his color looked better. The President said that Genscher has cut his weight back. Deputy Secretary Christopher said that Genscher’s colleagues had urged him not to go to Japan (for the Ohira funeral).4 The President joked that maybe he should have said “see you in Japan!” His (the President’s) hope is that without further delay we can restart the autonomy negotiations. He asked Minister Ali to relate this to President Sadat. They should start without preconditions, with a firm commitment of both parties to negotiate under the Camp David Accords. It is his belief that any act by either side to disturb the talks would be. . . . (Secretary Muskie entered at this point). Secretary Muskie said that Minister Burg has the world’s best collection of stories. Minister Burg said that it is one of his minor prides! The President continued that his hope is that there will be no preconditions in restarting the negotiations. What concerns there are about future interruptions in the talks would be lessened by the fact of the talks itself. If Israel and Egypt are in talks, they would be less likely to take particular acts, and there would be more confidence. His hope is that the talks will restart with no further delay. If in the next few weeks, or perhaps in September, there are developments that cause one side or the other to withdraw, that problem can be faced then. He believes we can make progress. The history has been surprisingly good through the peace treaty. Both nations have concerns, but the talks can be successful. He has asked Minister Ali to convey this to President Sadat. Ambassador Linowitz said that they had had a very fruitful three hours today, mostly clearing the air. The talks5 had been frank. Minister Ali had raised three issues: Jerusalem and the Knesset committee action; settlements; and confidence building measures on the West Bank, which are a cause of agitation. Minister Burg’s concerns had included articles in the Egyptian press making unwelcome statements about Begin, plus Sadat’s suspending the talks without conferring. The talks this morning were very helpful and beneficial. Afterwards, he thought that we could get the talks resumed. Minister Ali needs to consult with Cairo; Minister Burg is ready to start. After Minister Ali conveys his views to Cairo, he (Ambassador Linowitz) hopes that we can meet tomorrow morning and indicate that the talks will resume. Minister Burg said he was prepared to say this. Minister Ali said he was not.

1304 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President asked whether Yadin had been able to see Egyptian antiquities. Minister Ali said yes. The President said that Yadin had asked him (the President) to arrange it. Minister Burg said that Yadin had been to Memphis, and shown a strong interest in it. The President said that he had asked Yadin if he (the President) could help arrange such a trip to Egypt. Yadin had said he would like to go. He (the President) had said that this would be the first thing he would raise with Sadat—that Yadin should go to Egypt and see its antiquities. Sadat said he would invite Yadin personally. Minister Burg said that he was in Egypt 40 years ago, travelling from Geneva to Palestine via Lisbon and Africa. The trip took four and a half months. The President said that people forget what has been done in the past two years. He does not want us to move backwards with disagreement or failure. If we continue to work we can succeed. Minister Burg said that too much has been invested to permit failure. The President agreed. Secretary Muskie asked whether the Egyptians had removed all the artifacts before Aswan was flooded. Minister Ali said yes. Secretary Muskie asked if this was all of them. Minister Ali said that it was all. They had teams that went throughout the valley to see whether there were other artifacts. They succeeded in digging out the ancient buildings. The President said that it was a mammoth job in raising the sites above the water. Minister Ali said that the biggest was Abu Simbel; it was more than 20,000 tons of stone. The President said that autonomy should be easy in comparison (laughter). Secretary Muskie said maybe we should build a new pyramid. The President said he was very glad that the discussions have got so far. Minister Ali would talk to Sadat tomorrow. Does he have to wait? What time is it in Cairo? Minister Ali said that sometimes Sadat goes out and comes in late. The President asked whether Sadat goes to bed late. Minister Ali could tell Sadat that he (the President) considered this important enough to call him (Sadat) tonight.

1306 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. Summary: Following for the record and your information is report of meetings which lead to July 2 decision to resume autonomy talks. 3. Ambassador Linowitz met alone with Burg evening of July 1 and breakfasted alone with Ali July 2. Burg was bristly about Egyptian inconstancy and said Israeli Government and public increasingly doubtful of Egyptian intentions. He was particularly upset about media report he said he had heard to effect that Egyptian Parliament had passed resolution stating that Jerusalem was to be capital of future Palestinian state. However, he said he and his team ready to do business of course, without preconditions, and could work here on Sunday2 if necessary. Ali reviewed for Linowitz the expected litany of Egyptian concerns—Jerusalem, settlements, conditions on West Bank—but did not reveal in breakfast meeting that he was not authorized to agree to resumption. 4. Wednesday3 morning trilateral meeting (for about three hours) consumed for most part by both Burg and Ali airing their grievances. Ali was unaware of report out of Cairo (above) which was agitating Burg so that issue was laid aside. Ali pressed Burg on Cohen Bill4 and Burg, helpfully, replied with some heat that he had not wanted the bill to move to full Knesset at this time, and that he felt almost betrayed by David Glass whose future in NRP would be dark if he, Burg, had anything to say about it. While neither was convinced by the other, Burg and Ali had an articulate and intelligent exchange on the settlements question. Ali did not raise with Burg question of movement of Begin’s office to East Jerusalem5 (though Linowitz had in private meeting with Burg) but did review again the need for Israel to undertake confidencebuilding measures among Palestinians of West Bank and Gaza. 5. After air was to some degree cleared by these exchanges, Linowitz pressed hard for need to agree on first day to language on agreement to resume negotiations and gave them draft text to this effect. Ali said he would have to consult Cairo overnight and that text “could be discussed” on July 3. Linowitz said the three of them should discuss it 2 July 13. 3 July 9. 4 See Document 371. 5 On June 25, Lewis met with Begin to discuss a series of press reports indicating that planning had begun to transfer the Israeli Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem. Lewis emphasized the negative impact a move would have on the course of the autonomy talks, the attitudes of U.S. leaders “from President Carter down,” and “Israel’s already battered image in the United States and Europe,” as well as the “increased diplomatic isolation inevitable when cabinet-level visitors or Ambassadors from friendly countries were unable to call upon Begin in his East Jerusalem offices.” (Telegram 11739 from Tel Aviv, June 25; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,

1308 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Egyptian mood and tried to be helpful by giving way on a number of points in reaching agreement on text of resumption statement. Ali has substantially improved his image with Israelis although they still have questions about his ability to stand up to al-Baz as they believed Khalil had done. For his part, Burg left talks generally pleased and hopeful about the possibility for progress in the future. After talks with Amb Linowitz Burg was under no illusions about implications of any Israeli moves on Jerusalem and will be discussing this matter with Begin. Christopher 389. Memorandum From Robert Hunter, Gary Sick, William Odom, and Fritz Ermarth of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 16, 1980 SUBJECT Syria (U) We met, today, per your request, on CIA’s Alert Memorandum (Tab I). We focussed not on the prospects for Assad’s removal from power2—that is beyond our ability to predict—but on likely consequences and steps we can take now. (S) In our judgment, the Israeli and peace talks angles identified by the CIA are less critical than two others: the impact on Lebanon and the potential role of the Soviet Union. It is possible—but not likely—that a change in government could be peaceful. Given the Alawite dominance over the Sunni majority (and the split in the military between officers and enlisted men along these lines), a change in government (other than from a random assassin’s bullet) is likely to take both Assad and his brother from the scene (e.g. through an Alawite coup to protect a 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East,

1310 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX —State should do a contingency paper laying out possible scenarios, risks, alternative regimes and their impact, and possible courses of U.S. action (precautionary and reactive); —we should compare notes with our key allies who have some involvement in Syria, about the situation and possible course of events (UK, France, FRG, Italy, Japan); —we should go now to both Jordan and Saudi Arabia, along similar lines, but seeking to draw on their particular knowledge and concerns about Syria. With the Saudis, we should also stress the Soviet angle; —we should also have lower key discussions with the Egyptians and Israelis on the issue—at some point stressing with the latter the need for caution during any transition beyond Assad; —at some point later, there might be value in discussions with the Soviets on the seriousness of our concerns. This would be premature, however, until we know a lot more about the situation. (S) When we get the results of these soundings, we will be in a better position to chart our course intelligently. This exercise would also get other countries sensitized to the serious risks involved, and could thus reduce the problems of ill-considered reaction to a change of regime in Damascus. (S) Tab I Alert Memorandum for the National Security Council Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency4 Washington, July 11, 1980. SUBJECT Syria Although not imminent, Syrian President Assad’s assassination or overthrow is significantly more likely today than it was before the 26 June assassination attempt. I believe that US policymakers need to focus sooner rather than later on the potential adverse regional consequences of Assad’s removal from the scene. The attached Alert Memorandum outlines briefly some of these regional implications. [handling restriction not declassified] Frank C. Carlucci 4 Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Brzezinski added a handwritten notation to Hunter, Sick, Odom, and Ermarth, dated July 15, in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum: “Pl[ea]se get together and discuss—give me your recom[mendation]s. ZB.”

1312 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX uation would generate increased tension with Syria’s neighbors, especially Israel. A weak successor might seek a limited military confrontation with Israel—such as air clashes over Lebanon or artillery duels on the Golan Heights—to unite the country, but such confrontations, especially on the Golan, could escalate to wider war. [handling restriction not declassified] A post-Assad regime might extricate itself from Lebanon even though a complete withdrawal would increase the risk of renewed civil war there. An unstable leadership probably would not sustain the steady financial drain and corrosive effect on the armed forces without substantially greater Arab financial and military support. A new regime could also fear that keeping a sizable military force outside Syria would increase the likelihood of countercoup plotting within the military. [handling restriction not declassified] It is unlikely that a successor regime would moderate Syria’s approach to Middle East negotiations. There is no evidence that Assad’s Alawite lieutenants, the officer corps, or Syrians in general support the existing peace process. Chronic domestic instability would make it extremely difficult for Syria to moderate its stance toward Israel and to play a constructive role in reaching a comprehensive peace settlement. [handling restriction not declassified] The Palestinians would welcome increased room for maneuver as a consequence of instability in Syria. They, and the Jordanians, however, would remain unwilling to enter peace talks under the Camp David framework and would also be unlikely to risk entering negotiations under a new framework until the policies of a successor regime in Syria had been worked out. By virtue of its central geopolitical position, any government in Syria would possess substantial capability to foil unilateral Palestinian or Jordanian peace initiatives. [handling restriction not declassified] A change of leadership would at least temporarily increase Syria’s isolation in the region and further erode Syrian influence in inter-Arab councils. A weak regime would invite outside meddling in Syrian affairs by those who have done so in the past, notably Iraq. [handling restriction not declassified] A new leader in Syria, uncertain of his power base, might seek additional support from the USSR in an attempt to deal with the internal threat. While most successors will want to preserve some ties to the United States in an effort to keep a balance in Syria’s relations with the superpowers, all will be compelled to maintain Syria’s military supply line to Moscow. Soviet influence in Damascus is likely to increase initially, especially if Syrian-Israeli tensions increase. A new Alawite regime is likely to seek increases in Soviet aid and closer military and security ties, but, like Assad, is probably unlikely to request the sta-

1314 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 391. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Saunders) to Secretary of State Muskie1 Washington, July 22, 1980 SUBJECT U.S. Response to Begin’s Moving his Office to East Jerusalem The Problem Sam Lewis reports2 that Begin is determined to go through with moving his office to East Jerusalem, despite our representations. There are now indications that the move may take place by early August. We need to devise a measured but firm U.S. response which will show both Arabs and Israelis that we stand by our position on Jerusalem. At the same time it will be in our interest to avoid pushing matters to the point where Begin would be given an issue he could use to bolster his failing position at home and use against the Administration. Background Begin has been thinking about moving his office to East Jerusalem for some time. Sam Lewis has had several talks with him about it, most recently on June 25,3 but all attempts to dissuade Begin have been unavailing, as have our talks here with Ambassador Evron and Interior Minister Burg. Sam believes that there is virtually no chance that Begin or his advisors will be swayed by a senior level appeal from the United States. His estimate is that a message from the President would at best meet with a polite rebuff. Begin’s reasons for wanting to make the move appear to be: —The move is necessary to prove to the world that Israel’s annexation of East Jerusalem is irreversible and that efforts by the world community, in particular the UN, will have no effect. —Concern to make the move while he still has enough time as Prime Minister to carry it through and make it permanent. (Begin knows that the Labor Party will not make the move if it comes to office but apparently believes that he can face it with a fait accompli which it will be unwilling or unable to reverse.) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

1316 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 1. A statement4 making clear that we consider the move detrimental to the peace negotiations, reiterating our position on Jerusalem, and calling on the Government not to implement the decision. 2. A determination that neither our Ambassador nor visiting Administration officials will call at Begin’s East Jerusalem office. In evaluating these steps, we need to consider carefully our basic alternatives in handling this situation. —It may be difficult over the long run to sustain a position that U.S. officials will not call on the Prime Minister in East Jerusalem. Certainly there will be many Congressional delegations that would not feel bound to comply with such a restriction. Moreover, the Israelis would be able to mount a strong argument—one that would receive sympathetic resonance in some quarters in the U.S.—that such a posture was inconsistent with our policy of not seeking to redivide the city. If we decide these considerations have the most weight, it may make sense to keep our response low key and try to get the issue behind us as quickly as possible. —The alternative is to decide that to do less than this would do unacceptable damage to the credibility of our policy on Jerusalem—in terms of our relations with the Arab states, the stake we have in eventually persuading the Palestinians to engage in the negotiations, the difficult position in which we would place Sadat, and our own image of consistent and firm policy. We believe that while the former considerations are important and must be seriously taken into account, they are outweighed by the latter arguments. We therefore recommend that if Begin goes through with his move, we be prepared to issue a statement along the lines of the attached draft, which would restate our policy on Jerusalem and have the Spokesman say, in answers to a question, that no U.S. official will meet with Begin in his East Jerusalem office. Ambassador Lewis reports5 that all the Western European Ambassadors in Israel have received instructions that they will not be permitted to call on the Prime Minister in East Jerusalem. Ambassador Lewis has several times (most recently on June 25) told Begin that he would expect to be instructed not to call in East Jerusalem if Begin moves his office there; some time back Begin alluded to this publicly, remarking that he and the Ambassador “would do business by mail” in that case. 4 A draft statement, drafted by Korn on July 22, is attached but not printed. 5 Lewis’s report is not further identified.

1318 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX our search for peace in these years; I know that both of us want to persevere until we bring our efforts to a successful conclusion. End text. Muskie 393. Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 29, 1980 SUBJECT Sadat and East Jerusalem (U) At Tab I is Roy’s Cherokee cable2 on his meeting last night with Sadat on the East Jerusalem problem. The upshot is that Sadat is leaning toward a suspension of the talks, but that he really wants to do what will best help the President, and wants us to coordinate our approaches. It was not a definitive conversation, however, since Sadat hadn’t really thought about it (he said). (S) NEA feels—and I concur—that we should get back to Sadat in fairly short order, since the Israeli Cabinet decision is supposed to be made this Sunday,3 and we will need another full round of exchanges with Sadat before then. The Friday breakfast would be too late, therefore, and NEA will be working up a cable of instructions, for clearance around and ultimately by the President (probably tomorrow). Preliminary thinking is that it would say to Sadat: —we will have a statement (Muskie?) for after the Cabinet decision (there is a draft in preparation that takes a “more in sorrow than in anger” approach, but which is straightforward on our Jerusalem position);4 1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 37, Serial

1320 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX tonomy, and the psychology that is operating. Muskie, after all, has not been to the Middle East, yet, and needs to do so at some point. Of course, there are downsides—including not raising expectations; delinking a visit from East Jerusalem—not an easy job; and not appearing to undercut Sol (to say nothing of Muskie’s probable disinclination to climb on a plane). To broaden the trip, Muskie might also go to Riyadh for a “get acquainted” visit.11 (S) Such a trip (perhaps next week or so) would not be the answer to our prayers; but it might help to calm the situation, and indicate that we are not just prepared to be passive as the situation gets more convo- FYI: Butrus Ghali has told Sol’s people that he would like Muskie to take the lead in trying to get Palestinian views into the negotiating process. That would probably not be a good thing for Muskie to attempt, at least on a first Middle East trip (the initial reaction from the Palestinians would be to demagogue in public); but this idea is consistent with the President’s approach to Hussein,12 and Muskie might again float the need for some Palestinian “involvement,” which even Burg says could be worthwhile. (S) 11 Brzezinski highlighted this and the following paragraph in the right-hand margin and wrote: “[what?] would he accomplish”

1322 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX C–130 range of forward operating bases in the Upper Gulf. This would: improve our ability to support actual combat operations; provide sites to assemble subsequent reinforcements; provide a secure logistics support complex; allow us to mount long-range operations. (S) Third, we need at least one area site where if necessary we can train 2–3 times a year in modest strength, because we are experiencing difficulty in getting approval for individual onshore training exercises. (S) Lastly, we probably need at least one base in the area for B–52 interdiction operations. (S) These four needs rank very high on our list of near term priorities—at least as high as any facilities currently programmed. (S) Preferred Location. We have looked into sites in Diego Garcia, Turkey, Israel, Somalia, Oman and Egypt. The chief advantage of Diego Garcia is ready availability. The chief disadvantage is that it is too small and remote (2700nm from Abadan). Real estate is very limited, and Navy and Air Force want priority for barracks, which are limited in any case to an estimated 4500 men—too small for a divisionsized facility. Political obstacles to early availability or usability of Turkish or Israeli bases rule them out. Berbera is too remote (1250nm from Abadan) for a staging base, and we might not be able to rely on early access in a crisis. (S) We sought a division-sized staging facility at Seeb in Oman this winter. The Omanis did not want so large and sensitive an installation near their capital. Masirah or Thumrait are within C–130 range of Abadan (800nm) but they would be within Soviet tacair striking distance in event of conflict, and are much farther from CONUS than an Egyptian site. (S) Therefore, as we informed the April 23 SCC3 in our PG/IO “Basing Concept” paper, “Egypt is clearly the preferred location . . . to support large deployments . . . in advance of a major contingency” (p.

1324 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX JCS ESTIMATE OF CONSTRUCTION COST (IN 1980 DOLLARS)5 Airfield Upgrade $57,796,000 Airfield lights/barriers 1,222,000 Water supply system 3,495,000 POL storage/supply system 23,595,000 Power generation and distribution 5,400,000 Cantonment facility (bde & sqd) 25,446,000 Airfield munitions storage and ammunition storage 1,420,000 Port Upgrade 50,300,000 Airfield spt/opns 3,053,000 TOTAL $171,727,000 (S) This Phase I package includes $10–12m. in planning and design (P&D) funds in FY 81 with construction/upgrade to begin in FY 82. At this or some later date, we may wish to add funds for B–52 upgrade. (S) Phase II: The above Phase I package is designed to dovetail into an expanded package ($101m.) increasing from a brigade to a divisionsized cantonment area, more aircraft maintenance, enlarged ammuni-

1326 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX SecDef discretionary funds. Additional planning and design funds could be included in an FY 81 Supplemental request. Reprogramming (S) Under any of the above options, DoD may have to reprogram

1328 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX fact;7 the other, a decision to move the Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem, now appears a certainty but may be delayed for several weeks. The first point the President wishes to make is that, after having given careful reflection to the considerations Sadat has raised, he does not repeat not believe that suspending the autonomy talks in response to either of these moves would be a wise decision. It will clearly not cause the Israelis to change their position and would leave us in a quandary as to how subsequently we can restore momentum to the peace process. As difficult as this Israeli move is for us, we should not allow it to derail us from the peace strategy in which we, Egypt and Israel have invested so much. The President believes that the latest round of technical-level talks in the autonomy negotiations covered useful new ground and revealed a genuinely better atmosphere for making progress. We are sufficiently encouraged to believe that however our two governments decide to react to the Israeli moves on Jerusalem we should not allow this issue to place a further burden on the negotiations. 5. We nevertheless agree with Sadat that the Israeli moves pose a definite challenge and that our two governments must make clear we do not accept them as in any way determining the future of Jerusalem which can only be resolved through negotiations. We see the Knesset bill as essentially a legal matter. While we view it seriously, we believe our reaction to it can be adequately and effectively handled by the statement we have already issued (reftel D), which states in simple terms that we do not accept the new law as determining the status of Jerusalem. The bill does not change anything on the ground as far as we can determine and we do not contemplate any further action with respect to it at this time. 6. We would also be concerned about Israeli announcement of moving the Prime Minister’s office to Jerusalem, which, as a physical act, is likely to evoke a greater reaction in Arab and Islamic countries, and to have a more negative impact on the prospect for negotiations. We plan to take the following steps if and when the Israelis carry out this move: —(A) We will issue a statement expressing our clear opposition to and disapproval of the move and reaffirming our policy that we do not accept such unilateral acts as determining the future of Jerusalem. —(B) We will maintain our present policy of refusing to allow our Ambassador or any other administration official to meet with Israeli officials (including the Prime Minister) in East Jerusalem. 7 See Document 394.

1330 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX parties should avoid any action that would detract from that central purpose. We hope that the Government of Israel will suspend implementation of this decision in the larger interest of the success of the effort undertaken by Israel, in common with Egypt and the United States, to bring about a negotiated settlement of the Middle East conflict. End text. Newsom 397. Editorial Note On August 4, 1980, a letter from Egyptian President Anwar al- Sadat to Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, expressing his dissatisfaction with Israeli actions which he viewed as impediments to the peace process, was delivered to the Prime Minister by Egyptian Ambassador to Israel Saad Murtada. In the letter, dated August 2, Sadat recounted the course of the autonomy negotiations, noting “to our disappointment and to the surprise of many of Israel’s friends, events did not take the course which was likely to bring us closer to an agreement. On the contrary, provocative and negative actions have been taken unjustifiably and in open defiance to the process and its very essence.” Sadat continued, “I am referring here to the actions which are being taken with respect to Jerusalem and the settlements, together with the repressive measures taken in the West Bank and Gaza.” Sadat reaffirmed Egypt’s “clear and unwavering” position on the peace process, outlining his country’s wholehearted commitment to peace; its adherence to the “letter and spirit of Camp David;” its preparation to “help our partners in the peace process and provide them with solutions and way out even when they fail to see the realities of the situation;” its belief in the settling of “all matters” at the end of the process; its rejection of “actions taken by Israel unilaterally and against the universal consensus with respect to Jerusalem and the settlements;” the need to respect the “historic and legal rights of the Arabs and Muslims” in Jerusalem “while keeping different functions in the city united;” the need for Israel to “desist from all settlement activities” and remove settlements built in the West Bank and Gaza; Egyptian opposition to any encroachment on the rights of Palestinians to determine their own future; and Egyptian preparation to implement the establishment of a Palestinian self-governing authority in Gaza as a first step to its implementation in the West Bank.

1332 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX vance copy of the letter, and Atherton sent it to Washington in telegram

1334 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 398. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, August 12, 1980 SUBJECT Scenario for the Autonomy Talks (U) At Tab A is a memorandum Chris prepared, based on a meeting2 I held yesterday on the way forward on the autonomy talks. It lays out a scenario for getting the talks restarted—one which, however, is highly dependent on reactions by both Sadat and Begin. Sol concurs in this ap- If you approve it, we would like to begin implementation immediately, since Roy Atherton may be seeing Sadat as early as tomorrow morning,3 and his being able to lay out our thinking to Sadat could be critical in shaping the Egyptian reaction to the recent Begin letter. The Egyptians are already talking of Sadat’s responding to Begin tomorrow, in view of the Israelis’ having published the Begin letter. (S) The letter to Sadat which you requested (Tab B)4 would not be delivered, under the proposed scenario, until the last week of August; thus it can be revised further in light of developments. At that time, you might want to write it out longhand. (S) If the proposed scenario worked, there could be as many as three public events in the near future to demonstrate that the peace process is moving forward: —public announcement of continuing bilateral technical talks (late August); —announcement in three capitals, during Sol’s next trip, on restarting the talks (early September); and 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-

1336 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the religious holidays, Roy may not be able to see Sadat until the end of this week (August 15–16). 2. Concurrent with the approach to Sadat, we would ask Sam Lewis to see Begin and explore whether there is any flexibility for an Israeli gesture that would make it easier for Sadat to resume the negotiations. (We would take care in our contacts with Sadat not to imply we are promising to deliver something from the Israelis.) At present the possibilities strike us as being: (a) some gesture on the Palestinian front, e.g. an expression of willingness to meet with moderate Palestinians and allow them to articulate their objectives; (b) an Israeli concession that could enable us to show real progress on the Heads of Agreement; and, (c) the remote possibility that Begin might be willing to postpone the transfer of his office to East Jerusalem. 3. After we have had a chance to assess the results of these contacts, Atherton would deliver a pre-positioned letter from you along the lines of the attached draft on or about August 25–26. The letter would pave the way for a trip by Sol to the area in the first week of September. 4. Sol would go with the purpose of clinching an understanding with Sadat about resuming formal trilateral negotiations. If he is successful, Sol could report to you by telephone7 during his visit and an announcement of a resumption of talks could be made in Washington, Cairo and Jerusalem simultaneously. 5. If all of this works out, a further possibility might be to try to arrange a summit meeting between Begin and Sadat shortly thereafter, with Sol or possibly Ed attending for the U.S. A number of general considerations led us to think that the above sequence of steps made the most sense: —Sadat will be easier to bring around if we have given him a bit of time to maintain his present posture in terms of domestic Egyptian and Arab public opinion, and if he does not appear to be bowing immediately to U.S. pressure. With the passage of some time, he will be better able to blur the fact that he has gotten little or nothing from the Israelis. —As long as we have Begin’s office move to East Jerusalem hanging over our heads, it will be an added obstacle in persuading Sadat to agree to a resumption of the negotiations. The timing of the steps suggested above gives us time to explore with Begin what the possibilities are for dealing with this problem. If we can’t get Begin to agree to postpone this step for a significant period of time, the next best thing would be for him to get it over with quickly (although we would of course not make that suggestion to Begin). 7 See Document 402.

1338 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 400. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

1340 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Evron opened by saying that he had two letters to deliver to the Secretary from Prime Minister Begin, one replying2 to the Secretary’s oral message of August 23 on the U.S. abstention in the August 20 Security Council vote,3 and the other on the oil MOA negotiations.4 The Secretary first read Begin’s letter replying to his oral message of August 23. The Secretary asked Ambassador Evron to tell the Prime Minister that he appreciated the Prime Minister’s warm words of friendship. With respect to the Prime Minister’s comments on the Secretary’s use of the phase “unilateral action” the Secretary said he wanted to make clear that he considers it the right of any country to determine where its capital should be established, but if there is a negotiating process going on in regard to that particular place many countries may be involved. In a circumstance such as this, unilateral actions are not helpful. It is obviously up to Israel to decide what Israel’s position in the negotiation should be. But on the issues that are the subject of negotiations, no party should prejudice the result by unilateral actions. The Secretary said that was all the phrase was intended to convey. The Secretary recalled the remarks he had made before the Security Council on August 20 in regard to the unhelpful nature of the resolutions that had been introduced in the UN this year.5 We have said this and we will continue to say this. The only way we have to salvage the 2 Begin’s August 25 letter described the U.S. abstention in the Security Council’s vote on the draft resolution concerning the Jerusalem law, particularly following the Secretary’s “strong speech,” as “incomprehensible to us.” Begin defended the Israeli naming of Jerusalem as the national capital, remarking on Muskie’s “repeated reproach concerning the so-called ‘Unilateral Action.’”Begin continued, “I am not ashamed to admit that I do not comprehend that complaint or accusation. The reason is simple. I am ready to ask any historian whether at any time in recorded history any nation, decided where its capital should be otherwise than by ‘Unilateral Action.’” “As far as Jerusalem is concerned the Israeli Nation is fully entitled to decide where its capital is,” Begin concluded, “as any other nation, old or new, has done.” (Department of State, Office of the Secre-

1342 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX process. Referring to the Secretary’s earlier comments, the Ambassador said he wanted to be sure what the Secretary meant when he spoke of “sovereign rights.” Evron asked if he could tell Prime Minister Begin that in the Secretary’s view the sovereignty of Israel in Jerusalem is not challenged by the United States and that Israel has the sovereign right to establish its Capital there. Evron said if he understood clearly, the United States does not deny Israel the right to have its capital anywhere within sovereign Israeli territory. The Secretary said this raises two points. First, whether East Jerusalem is part of the West Bank under Resolution 242 and thus not subject to any claim to sovereign rights by Israel. Second is the fact that it is agreed that the status of Jerusalem is an issue that has to be settled through negotiations. Ambassador Evron said this raises a problem that he wanted to be able to report very precisely on. The Security Council called on all states with embassies in Jerusalem to remove those embassies. That involves not East Jerusalem but West Jerusalem, since all the embassies are located on the western side of the city. Ambassador Evron asked if he would be correct in saying that at least in regard to West Jerusalem Israel’s sovereign right in that part of the city is not in question. The Secretary pointed out that he had made clear in his Security Council statement that we do not regard the call for movement of the embassies from Jerusalem as being binding. Mr. Christopher said it was his understanding that the United States had taken the position at Camp David that the ultimate status of Jerusalem as a whole would be the subject of negotiations between the parties, which is the position the President repeated in New York recently. Ambassador Evron replied that he had not been at Camp David but he was quite sure that never once at Camp David had any question arisen regarding Israel’s sovereign rights in West Jerusalem. Mr. Christopher repeated that his understanding had been that the U.S. position is that the whole question is to be the subject of ultimate negotiations. He asked Mr. Korn if this was correct. Mr. Korn confirmed that such had always been our view, and pointed out that we have never formally recognized Israel’s claim to sovereignty in West Jerusalem. Mr. Christopher said what he understood Secretary Muskie to have said was that any country, for example Mexico, could establish its capital wherever it wants if it has the power to do so, but that governments that do this must take into account the consequences for an ongoing negotiation. Ambassador Evron responded heatedly that the United States appeared to be raising new issues here. The American Ambassadors have presented their credentials in Jerusalem, you fly your flag in Jerusalem, your leaders meet with our leaders there, he said. If a question is now raised about Israel’s sovereignty in West Jerusalem, Ambassador Evron said, this will become a big problem for our domestic relations.

1344 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX public until we have agreement on dates for the meeting. Ambassador Evron agreed, and there was agreement that the two sides would be in touch to set a date. The Secretary said he would like to end the meeting on a light note. Prime Minister Begin had said he was “astonished” by my abstention in the Security Council. Tell the Prime Minister I am never astonished by what he says. On second thought, the Secretary said that it would be better not to do so. 402. Summary of a Telephone Conversation Among the President’s Special Representative for Middle East Peace Negotiations (Linowitz), Vice President Mondale, and President Carter1

1346 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Linowitz said that he had left Begin in a troubled mood, which was just right. Begin has a good sense that we will be quite demanding with regard to what Begin may do with respect to the Jerusalem move and the Golan annexation. Linowitz had also gone over with Begin in enormous detail the draft (on the autonomy talks?). It was a process he did not recommend, as the President would appreciate. The President commented that he understood Linowitz had spent five hours with Begin. Ambassador Linowitz said Sadat did not want to take the draft, but he would give it to Ali tomorrow. After their meeting, Sadat had agreed with his proposal and took Linowitz out directly to talk to the press and announce agreement. The President said he was glad both leaders were constructive. The Vice President congratulated Ambassador Linowitz on his efforts. 403. Summary of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1

1348 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The President: I understand. Well I look forward to that. Give all your friends my best regards. Thank you for calling. Prime Minister Begin: Thank you very much for everything. The President: God Bless You. 404. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, September 18, 1980 SUBJECT Memorandum of Conversation: Thursday, September 18, 1980, The Pentagon, Secretary’s Conference Room PARTICIPANTS U.S. Participants (U) Hon. Harold Brown Hon. Robert W. Komer, USD/P Hon. David E. McGiffert, ASD/ISA Hon. Robert H. Pelletreau, DASD/ISA Mr. Charles Hill, Political Officer American Embassy Tel Aviv BG Carl Smith Israeli Participants (U) Foreign Minister Shamir Israeli Ambassador Evron MG Meron, Defense Attache Mr. Bar-On, Director General, MFA Mr. Rubinstein, Asst Director General, MFA Foreign Minister Shamir said he would like to discuss the strategic situation in the Middle East and its implications for the State of Israel.2

1350 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX equipment to Egypt and Jordan. On the other hand, in its consideration of sales to Israel, the U.S. did not ask whether this or that sale would make Israel too strong vis-a-vis its neighbors. The U.S. recognized that Israel must be able to defend itself against all its neighbors. (S) Turning to the overall strategic situation, the Secretary noted that the collapse of Iran as a bulwark against Soviet expansion had adversely affected the strategic balance in the area. During the past ten years the U.S., Europe and Japan had become still more dependent on oil from that region. The importance of the Gulf as a Soviet objective had therefore increased. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was a striking reminder of Soviet willingness to use force to obtain its objectives. These considerations taken together had caused the U.S. to begin planning, programming, creating new forces and redeploying existing forces. A new military headquarters had been created for planning and to carry out potential military operations in the area. In only six months, equipment had been prepositioned on ships in the area to support a full Marine Amphibious Brigade. Two carrier task forces were being maintained in the area—the most powerful naval force ever in the Indian Ocean. In the negotiation of access agreements with countries in the area, the U.S. had been very careful to keep its visible presence low. This was a drawback, but it was also a condition of access to those countries. A high level of U.S. visibility would risk destabilizing them and easily offset the military advantages of more permanent bases. This was true even in Egypt, though less so. The U.S. had to be very cautious politically. (S) The Secretary said the U.S. saw real value in continuing its strategic dialogue with Israel even though the previous secret channel could not be used any more. Both General Jones and Ambassador Komer would be ready to continue the strategic dialogue during their visits. (S) Foreign Minister Shamir noted that when Israel heard of U.S. plans to develop Ras Banas3 it wondered why the U.S. was not equally planning to utilize the good airbases in Sinai and also the base at Sharm al-Shaykh. Since Sharm al-Shaykh, under the peace accords, would have a multi-national force to protect free passage in the Strait of Tiran, it could easily assume greater responsibility for defense of the Red Sea. There would be no political difficulties. (S) The Secretary replied that the Sinai facilities would not belong to either Israel or the U.S. Moreover, the geographic considerations of a possible Soviet attack in Iran would not suggest the use of Israeli bases. Dr. Brown said that the U.S. had not looked into the nature of the multilateral force under the peace accords. There would be differing views 3 See Document 395.

1352 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX ment been low key and secret, but this channel was no longer pos- The Foreign Minister reiterated his point that there was no need for a special effort to hide the strategic dialogue. On the contrary, during his recent visit to Egypt, he had concluded that the more the Egyptians realized the closeness of US/Israeli relations, the better Egyptian relations would be with both countries. (S) Ambassador Evron amplified by noting that the U.S. and Israel had differing assessments of the impact of some outward forms of their association. Peace became a reality only when Sadat concluded that the U.S. could help deliver Israel eventually. Israel believed that U.S. sensitivities about Arab reactions to more open strategic cooperation with Israel were a little exaggerated. If the Arabs interpreted U.S. lack of enthusiasm as the beginning of a withdrawal, that would be dangerous. The two countries could prove that this was not so by doing what many Arabs suspected them of doing anyway. Why not, therefore, make part of this strategic cooperation more open? (S) The Secretary replied that he had been the first American Secretary of Defense to visit Israel and General Jones would be the first Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to visit Israel. This kind of talk and continual reassurance, however, was not really necessary. The U.S. did not intend to turn away from Israel; Israel knew this. In fact, the two countries were so close that some kinds of formal detailed arrangements were not really necessary. Under Secretary Komer added that actually the U.S. was doing more with Israel but because it was also doing more on the Arab side, this had changed Israel’s perception.4 (S) The meeting ended cordially. (U) 4 Talks designed to “revitalize” the “strategic dialogue” between the United States

1354 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX influence in Lebanon). Since these are essentially regional issues, they are not rpt not susceptible to bilateral solutions. —The U.S. commitment to the Camp David process as the context for negotiations will continue to limit our ability in the near term to address Syrian interests in a manner sufficiently forthcoming to alter Syrian estrangement from the U.S. The one exception may be on Lebanon where Syrian and U.S. interest in maintaining stability and preventing partition continue to coincide. B. Assad regime’s future and probable successors: —Though no one can predict how long the Assad regime will survive, it is clear that it is dying. Barring assassination, the transition process is likely to be a lengthy affair and the dynamics involved in Assad’s struggle to hang on will strongly circumscribe his ability to respond pragmatically or positively to areas of primary interest to the U.S. In any case, we cannot count on Assad to act with the originality and pragmatism which characterized his rule in earlier years. —In order of likelihood successor regimes would probably be: (a) a regime dominated by the Alawite hierarchy, but without the Assad brothers, (b) an Alawite/Sunni coalition, (c) a Sunni-dominated regime. A radical Muslim seizure of power is a remote possibility. C. Implications for U.S. interests: —From the standpoint of U.S. interests none of the anticipated successors would be preferable to Assad. —Among them, however, an Alawite-Sunni coalition would probably be preferable and enjoy the best prospects for stability. It would stand the best chance of restoring confessional peace by redressing Sunni majority grievances while protecting minority Alawite/Christian interests. It would probably pursue the most moderate policies among the potential successors. —An Alawite succession would be the most dangerous. A post- Assad Alawite regime would be ideological, tough, and have the strongest ties to the USSR among the potential contenders for power. A Sunni regime might well move to reduce Soviet influence. It would, however, meet resistance from the Alawite and Christian minorities in seeking to redress Sunni grievances at the expense of Alawite privilege. These tendencies would be accentuated to the degree that a Sunni regime found itself beholden to the radical Muslim Brotherhood for support. D. U.S. policy —The best posture for the U.S. at this time with respect to the succession struggle is one of neutrality and non-involvement. Despite a clear preference for Assad, it is unlikely that the U.S. can affect his staying power. At the same time, although we believe that a Sunni/

1356 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX partment’s preliminary view, however, that this step does not alter the conclusions from the meeting. 4. For Cairo: By septel4 you will receive instructions on how to respond to Cairo 18176.5 5. For Jidda and Damascus: I–G meeting produced consensus that Saudis are the one moderate Arab power with real influence in Damascus now and under likely successor regimes. We will shortly be sending you an instruction to raise the Syrian situation with the Saudis in an effort to begin sharing our perception about, and interests in Syria’s future. In the meantime, we would appreciate Jidda’s best inhouse assessment of the Saudi-Syrian relationship, including Saudi interests and objectives, points of actual or potential friction, and forms of Saudi assistance to regime and/or its opponents. Conversely, we would welcome Damascus’ comments on Syrian perception of Saudi connection. 6. For Damascus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, Cairo, Amman, Beirut and Baghdad: We are pouching for Ambassador copy of the discussion paper6 which served as the basis for the I–G meeting discussions. We could welcome comments and suggestions about paper, as well as conclusions from I–G meeting. 7. For all addressees: This cable is for your information only and should not be discussed with host government officials at this time. Given the sensitivity and completeness of this report posts should also ensure that any comment to Department is sent in Nodis channel. Muskie 4 Not further identified. 5 Not found. 6 The discussion paper, produced by the Department of State in response to a July 22 request from Brzezinski, was forwarded to Brzezinski under an August 21 covering memorandum from Tarnoff. In the covering memorandum, Tarnoff stated that the Department of State believed “the situation in Syria justifies the convening of an IG meeting” which the Department would convene. Copies of the paper and the covering memorandum are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,

1358 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX (2) lower the price criterion (on Israel’s average oil import payments) from the highest 10% of US oil imports to the highest 20% (Israel proposes the top 30%); State and DOE propose to make these concessions provided Israel agrees to a substantially longer period of meeting these tests than it has thus far. (We want at least a 90-day measurement period, Israel has moved up from 30 days to 60 days.) (S) We would, under the State-DOE proposal, continue to insist that both criteria must be met. (Israel wants to be able to call for US supply when either criterion has been met; State and DOE believe Israel could manipulate the spot market test and trigger the agreement almost at In addition, our present proposal assures Israel that its loss of a major supplier (Mexico or Egypt) would, in and of itself, create a “strong presumption” in favor of activation. (S) Cooper and Duncan believe this offer would be a forthcoming, reasonable response to Israeli dissatisfaction with our present position. Coupled with the substantial concessions that we made in the September negotiations, it constitutes a fair interpretation of our supply assurance. It continues to protect us from Israeli triggering in other than critical supply situations; thus it incurs a relatively low risk of adversely affecting our current efforts to get increased Arabian oil production to offset the Iraq-Iran curtailment. (S) This position falls short of what is likely to be required to get agreement. While we cannot be sure of how firmly Modai will cling to his prior demands, he almost certainly will insist that compliance with either market criterion, rather than both tests, should be sufficient, and he probably will demand softer price and spot market tests than the revised offer proposed by State and Energy. (S) An intermediate position that would not jeopardize our principles or risk unwarranted triggering of the agreement would be to lower the spot market purchase percentage to 60% and, if this did not produce agreement, to indicate that we were prepared to review our position, so as to keep the negotiations going. (S) State and DOE believe, as do I and others concerned, that key considerations involved in this issue cannot be adequately covered in a memorandum. I strongly recommend that you meet with the Vice President, Stu Eizenstat, Charles Duncan, Dick Cooper, and me before making your decision.5 (S) 5 See Document 407.

1360 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Alfred Moses, Special Advisor to the President Richard Cooper, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Ambassador Henry Owen, Ambassador-at-Large, Special Representative of the President for International Economic Summits Deane Hinton, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic and Business Affairs Les Goldmann, Assistant Secretary of Energy for International Affairs Robert Hunter, Staff Member, National Security Council (notetaker) Rutherford Poats, Staff Member, National Security Council David Korn, Director of Israel/Arab-Israel Affairs, Department of State Les Goldmann began by outlining a position on which agreement with Israel could be reached today: 1) that the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) could be activated if Israel were paying for oil more than the average of the top 20% of U.S. imports; 2) we would drop the spot market test; and 3) we would change our position that there would be a “strong presumption” for activation if Israel lost either of its two main suppliers (Egypt and Mexico), to a position in which triggering would be automatic under this circumstance. At the end of negotiations yesterday, our position was that Israel would have to pay a price equivalent to the top 15% of U.S. imports; it would have to buy 66% of its oil on the spot market; and the Mexican/Egyptian case would only lead to a “strong presumption” of activation. Secretaries Muskie and Duncan

1362 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Deane Hinton said we need a way to deal with Israeli decisions on this: how can that be written down? We aren’t talking about political steps: Modai gave the example of adding a single settler leading to a cut-off of oil from Egypt. Al Moses suggested separating economic from political factors in the triggering here. Deane Hinton said that the agreement needs a little ambiguity. We need an escape if there is Israeli behavior on oil purchasing that would lead to self-imposed triggering. It shouldn’t be automatic. The President said that a verbal assurance from Secretary Duncan on this point should suffice. The language should stay in. Modai should be told that the case of a settler, or a breakdown in the autonomy negotiations, wouldn’t be involved. If Israel were to attack Egypt, or try to take back the Sinai—or something gross—and Egypt stopped supplying oil, then there would be a prohibition. All events can’t be spelled out in a document. Ambassador Owen asked about the impact in the Gulf of a 20/60 formula with a 90-day provision for automatic triggering. Secretary Duncan said that the subtleties of a formula were not that important. His overriding consideration is that, if there were a triggering in which Israel were getting U.S. oil, then in Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries there would be a devastating reaction. It would have an immediate and dramatic impact. The President noted that Israel would be permitted to trigger the agreement (under certain circumstances), and this was said a year ago. Secretary Duncan said that this was his judgment. The President said that the agreement with Israel had been publicized. Secretary Duncan said that Modai is going on a speaking tour of the United States beginning today. He (Duncan) hopes that Modai will leave Washington with a good feeling. If we go to the 20/60 formula, then we should try to hold with “strong presumption.” Goldmann may be right that we should try to get more room on the spot market criterion, and later leave it out. But he (Duncan) would hate to leave the spot-market criterion out of the agreement. This is a supply agreement, though Israel has turned it into a price agreement. This is his intuition. Ambassador Owen asked about the 90-day provision. Secretary Duncan said that if the difference lies in whether Modai walks out of the meeting today feeling bad, then it is good. He (Duncan) suggests the following tactics: we should move to 20/60, and hold the line on “strong presumption.” If that does not work, then we could have the two staffs work out various options, then discuss it again with Modai when he gets back. Ambassador Owen asked whether we should introduce the idea of the 90-day period.

1364 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX does not work, we have a choice between a) Duncan’s options approach, with the 90-day formula being one such option; or b) as Stu said, trying to nail down the 90-day provision. The President said that the overriding objective is that Israel should feel that, if it has a serious supply problem, we will step in. This should not just be loss of supply, but also if the price is exorbitant. We must prevent Israel from self-triggering, however—it would rather rely on the U.S. than on the spot market or on Egypt. We will not let that

1366 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX gust/September, the nine political directors, working with experts, are now proceeding to develop common positions on issues related to a settlement. These efforts will evidently be revealed by Foreign Ministers shortly before the nine Heads of Government/State decide at the

1368 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 2. Discussion during the two days of trilateral talks2 focused on procedural questions: How to describe this and coming meetings and how to define next steps in the negotiations. There had been serious, substantive bilaterals with both Israelis and Egyptians in the preceding days,3 concentrating on the draft memorandum of understand-ing (MOU) but the Ministerial level touched only lightly on these matters. 3. The Egyptians used both our restricted trilateral meetings and our one “plenary” to make strong statements reiterating their known positions on Jerusalem, settlements, and the need to draw in the Palestinians. The Israelis responded quietly but firmly on Jerusalem and settlements and were positive in their approach toward attracting the Palestinians. The most important aspect of these discussions was Egyptian agreement to defer discussion of Jerusalem and the settlements until the summit and proceed in the meantime with the other issues addressed in the MOU. The Egyptians also pressed for Israeli action on two bilateral matters: Egyptians in Israeli jails, and the control of a Coptic church in Jerusalem now in the hands of Ethiopian Copts. Burg promised to look into these questions personally. He seemed to be optimistic that more could be done with the issue of prisoner release and was less sanguine that the religious issue could be solved. 4. The principle debate was whether we were “resuming the autonomy negotiations” or “preparing for the summit” and whether the existing committee structure would be the vehicle for continuing the discussions or whether a general committee should be created to provide follow-up. The Egyptians tried to get priority for characterizing our continued talks as preparing for the summit through a general committee, but we joined the Israelis in insisting that “resumption” and “preparation” are two sides of the same coin and must be given equal weight, as they were in the September 3 statement which Sadat accepted at Alexandria. The Egyptian team left rather dissatisfied, though it is not clear that General Ali shares his subordinates’ strong feelings that Egypt came off second-best. In fact, he was somewhat ironic in his comments about all these “lawyers” who encroach on his “simple military approach” which would be to get on with the business at hand. 2 The talks took place in Washington. 3 Lewis met with Burg on October 6 to discuss Israeli plans and understandings for the October 14–15 meetings and fourteen points for confidence building in the hopes of producing a Memorandum of Understanding and improving, as Lewis characterized it, the “political and psychological climate among the Palestinians and thus enhanc[ing] the now rather dreary prospects for Palestinian participation in the autonomy process.” (Tel-

1370 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 410. Record of Meeting Between Israeli Prime Minister Begin and President Carter1 Washington, November 13, 1980 President Carter’s Notes Regarding his November 13, 1980 Meeting with PRIME MINISTER MENACHEM BEGIN of Israel (The White House, Washington, D.C.) I met with Prime Minister Begin privately. He was ill at ease at first. I told him that I had accepted the result of the election with equanimity. This seemed to have a surprising effect on him for some reason, and he mentioned it several times. I expressed my appreciation for his participation and contribution to the Camp David Accords and peace treaty, and my gratification that our bilateral relationships had remained strong in spite of many potential reasons for disruption of them. I pointed out our own security advantages from having a strong and free, peaceful, independent Israel. We discussed the political problems that had derived for us from the Camp David Accords. He expressed agreement that the oil commitment was very satisfactory. I told him that it would be a serious mistake for Israel to go forward with annexation of the Golan Heights. This would in effect signal to the rest of the world an abandonment by Israel of a commitment to UN Resolution 242, and it would open up floodgates of demands from other nations that the UN Resolution be abandoned or severely modified—something that we had tried to stop. I told him that in my opinion it was also a violation of the commitment made in the Camp David Accords. He didn’t respond, but I think he was impressed. He brought up the subject of military supplies to Iran, saying that they had requested such help from Israel. He didn’t acknowledge that they had already made one shipment of tires to Iran. He said that they would like to make these shipments, they thought it would help Iran-Israeli future relationships, and would give them an opening to encourage the hostage release. I told him immediately that this would be very bad for us, and I strongly urged Israel not to make any sort of further trade with Iran 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2,

1372 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Prime Minister Menachem Begin Ambassador Ephraim Evron, Israeli Ambassador to the United States Yehiel Kadishai, Director, Prime Minister’s Bureau Yehuda Avner, Adviser to the Prime Minister Reuven Hecht, Adviser to the Prime Minister General Ephraim Poran, Military Secretary to the Prime Minister Dan Pattir, Public Affairs Adviser to the Prime Minister Jacob Nehushtan, Minister, Embassy of Israel Eitan Bentsur, Counselor, Embassy of Israel

1374 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and by free negotiations with the three nations. We should continue with these efforts. He will wait for the President to decide on a summit. If the President will let him know what he decides, he will accept it. The President said that, in the meantime, we should not discuss it publicly. He does not want it thought that we are taking a unilateral decision. He will talk with Sadat and Reagan. It is likely there will not be a summit, but maybe there could be one, if it is appropriate. The Prime Minister agreed. The President said he wants to find out what Reagan thinks of an early meeting with the Prime Minister and Sadat (post-Inauguration). If he (Reagan) reacts positively, this would be the best alternative. He (the President) will explore this quietly. Secretary Muskie said that he wanted to express his own appreciation for the opportunity to be involved, for a few months, with efforts to keep Camp David going, under difficult circumstances. He appreciates all the cooperation he has received. He compliments both leaders on their historical achievement, and expressed his thanks to both of them—and especially to the Prime Minister—for their understanding. The Prime Minister said thank you. Dr. Brzezinski said that he will soon be a private citizen, and hopes to visit Israel, and play a decisive game of chess with the Prime Minister! The President said he understood that Dr. Brzezinski and the Prime Minister are still tied! The Prime Minister said that Dr. Brzezinski could come to Israel to play chess with him. But why only one decisive game? (laughter) At Camp David, the score was two-to-two, and was inconclusive. They were interesting games; but he (the Prime Minister) needs more training! (laughter) The games that Dr. Brzezinski and he had played were the first he had played since he was arrested by the Russian Secret Service in 1940. It had been 38 years since he had played chess. Dr. Brzezinski said that the Prime Minister had said this at the beginning of their first chess game at Camp David, and he (Dr. Brzezinski) had been suitably unnerved by the historic significance of it. But at the end, Mrs. Begin had said to him (Dr. Brzezinski) that it was wonderful that they were playing, because Menachem loves to play chess! The Prime Minister said that that is right, but he hadn’t! It had been a hobby when he was a boy. You don’t forget how to play. But he needs training—a fact demonstrated because Dr. Brzezinski had beaten him twice! (laughter). Dr. Brzezinski does play very well. Ambassador Linowitz said that he wanted to join in expressing personal gratitude for the chance to serve the President on these issues.

1376 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX five, since there were hundreds of casualties on both sides from the war of attrition.4 Then we could see achievement—as recorded in the preamble to the Egypt-Israel treaty, and in normalization—for the first time in 32 years in the Middle East: such a thing doesn’t happen! Some of the things could be stated on autonomy, but not all. A tripartite declaration? He would consult his friends. The President said certainly. Ambassador Linowitz will try a draft on the three countries, and will give it to the Prime Minister to accept or change. He would like to turn over to Reagan what we see as the progress and the problems. (He then invited the Prime Minister to join him outside with the press). (The meeting concluded at 12:01 p.m.). 4 Reference is to the Egyptian-Israeli War of Attrition that took place along the Suez

1378 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX year and take into account my most recent consultations with President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin.2 As you know, during my December visit both leaders agreed that important progress had been made in the negotiations toward realization of the objectives of the Camp David Accords and they expressed their confidence that they would be able fully to fulfill the promise of Camp David. President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin also affirmed3 their strong conviction that the process which you had developed with them at Camp David is, in their words, “the only viable path toward comprehensive peace in the Middle East today.” I share that conviction and deeply believe that it is in the highest interest of the United States to press forward in the weeks and months ahead in order to conclude the negotiations at the earliest possible date. I have been honored to serve as your representative in these negotiations. Respectfully submitted, Sol M. Linowitz4 Personal Representative of the President for the Middle East Peace Negotiations

1380 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX As called for by the Camp David Accords, the SGA(AC) would be established and inaugurated within one month after it has been elected, at which time the transitional period of five years would begin. The Israeli military government and its civilian administration would be withdrawn, to be replaced by the SGA(AC) as specified in the “Framework for Peace in the Middle East.” A withdrawal of Israeli armed forces would then take place and there would be a redeployment of the remaining Israeli forces into specified security locations. The parties are agreed that there must be free elections based on the principles of peaceful assembly, free expression and secret ballot, bearing in mind the need to preserve law and order. Free electoral campaigning will be guaranteed in accordance with the agreement on election modalities which has now been virtually completed. A system for apportioning representation will be determined in the course of the negotiations once the issue of participation by Palestinian inhabitants of Jerusalem is resolved. The election would be organized, conducted and supervised by a Central Electoral Commission, composed of authorized Israeli civilian personnel and local Palestinian Arabs agreed upon by the autonomy negotiators, together with other civilians—individual and institutional—as agreed upon by the negotiators. There will be free access for international media and for such experts as may be agreed upon by the parties. 2. Powers and Responsibilities of the SGA (AC) The parties thus far in the negotiating process have agreed upon at least the following areas and functions with respect to which the SGA (AC) would exercise responsibility: Administration of Justice Agriculture Budget Civil Service Commerce Culture Ecology Education Finance Health Housing and Construction Industry Internal Communication and Posts Internal Transportation Labor Local Police and Prisons Manpower Municipal Affairs Nature Preserves and Parks Public Works

1382 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX body representing the various peoples of the area in order to develop and use the water resources for the benefit of all those peoples. In connection with security, it is agreed that the inhabitants of both the territories and Israel require assured internal security and public order during the transitional period. Accordingly, it is recognized that the strong local police force, to be constituted by the SGA (AC), must help provide such security. Specific arrangements for liaison between the local police and Israeli security authorities on such security issues, as called for in the Camp David Framework, will be worked out in the course of the negotiations and will be implemented in such a way as to ensure that security is preserved. To assure external security, and in the absence of Jordanian participation as envisioned in the Camp David Framework, the responsibilities for external security set forth in the Framework must be borne by Israel. The precise arrangements remain to be specified and further discussion will be required on how to enable Israel to fulfill fully its responsibilities while minimizing the impact on the inhabitants. The parties plan the establishment of a Continuing Committee with Egypt, Israel and the SGA (AC) as members (Jordan has, of course, the option of joining under the provisions of the Framework), and with the United States also invited to participate. The Committee would decide by agreement on the modalities of admission of persons displaced in 1967, together with measures necessary to prevent disruption and disorder. The Committee would also deal with other matters of common concern, such as economic cooperation. The Committee would operate on the basis of unanimity unless otherwise agreed by the parties. As you know so well, troublesome problems still remain to be resolved and difficult negotiations still lie ahead. It is significant, however, that on December 18, 1980, President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin together issued a statement reaffirming their commitment to the Camp David peace process as “the only viable path toward comprehensive peace in the Middle East today.” With the determined efforts of both parties and with continued active participation on the part of the United States, I firmly believe that the negotiations can be successfully concluded. Respectfully submitted, Sol M. Linowitz6 Personal Representative of the President for the Middle East Peace Negotiations 6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

1384 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Following President Navon’s state visit to Cairo in October, 1980, Egypt and Israel decided to establish a “peace task force” drawn primarily from the private sector to improve mutual understanding. The two countries are now considering proposals to open consulates and cultural centers to support their diplomatic missions. Both Egypt and Israel have continued to monitor the progress of the normalization of relations, and when problems have developed they have quickly resolved the problems through normal diplomatic channels. This record of achievement and progress stands out as a dramatic example to all the countries and peoples of the Middle East of the benefits of genuine peace. Respectfully submitted, Sol M. Linowitz8 Personal Representative of the President for the Middle East Peace Negotiations 8 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

Index References are to document numbers Aaron, David L., 231 Ali, Lt. Gen. Kamal Hassan—Continued U.S. military presence in Egypt, 327 Brown Middle East trip (1979), 172 American Jewish community (see also Camp David negotiations, 33 Sanders, Edward): Camp David negotiations follow-up, Camp David negotiations planning, Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty implementation, 263, 332 negotiations, 165, 203 Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Israeli settlements in the West Bank

1386 Index Atherton, Alfred L. “Roy”—Continued Atherton, Alfred L. “Roy”—Continued Camp David negotiations—Continued Palestinian autonomy talks— Role in, 26 Continued

Index 1387 Barak, Aharon—Continued Begin, Menachem (see also Camp David Israeli settlements in the West Bank negotiations; Carter-Begin and Gaza, 68, 70 correspondence)—Continued U.S. aid to Israel, 123 Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Bartholomew, Reginald, 76, 222 negotiations—Continued al-Baz, Osama: U.S.-Israeli communications—

1388 Index Begin, Menachem (see also Camp David Boutros-Ghali, Boutros—Continued negotiations; Carter-Begin Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty correspondence)—Continued negotiations—Continued Palestinian autonomy talks— U.S.-Egyptian communications— Continued Continued Vance memoranda, 256 Eilts-Sadat discussions, 93 Palestinian autonomy talks planning: U.S.-Egyptian delegation Carter correspondence, 72

Index 1389 Brown, Harold—Continued Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty U.S. aid to Egypt—Continued negotiations—Continued Mubarak U.S. visit (May 1980) Khalil-Dayan Camp David talks discussions, 377

1390 Index Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.—Continued Brzezinski, Zbigniew K.—Continued

Index 1391 Camp David negotiations (1978) (see Camp David negotiations planning— Continued also Camp David negotiations Minimum/maximum U.S. objectives, follow-up; Camp David negotiations planning)—Continued NSC discussions, 24 Carter personal notes, 27 Overview, 26 Documentation overview, 26 Press conference, 1 Final negotiations, 57 Sanders memoranda, 25 Israeli-Egyptian meetings, 41 State-NSC briefing papers, 7 Meetings summary, 28 U.S. aid and, 18 Palestinian role, 22, 33 U.S.-Egyptian communications, 16

1392 Index Carter, Jimmy (see also Camp David Carter, Jimmy (see also Camp David negotiations; Carter-Begin negotiations; Carter-Begin correspondence; Carter-Sadat correspondence; Carter-Sadat correspondence)—Continued correspondence)—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Covert action proposal, 111 negotiations—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty U.S.-Israeli communications: implementation: Begin conversations, 133, 141,

Index 1393 Carter, Jimmy (see also Camp David Carter, Jimmy (see also Camp David negotiations; Carter-Begin negotiations; Carter-Begin correspondence; Carter-Sadat correspondence; Carter-Sadat correspondence)—Continued correspondence)—Continued Saudi-Egyptian post-treaty Lebanon conflict—Continued relations—Continued Brzezinski memoranda, 303 Carter-Sadat-Bandar discussions, Ceasefire initiatives, 77 Sarkis correspondence, 277, 278 Eilts memoranda, 312 Senior-level meetings, 277, 301 West memoranda, 342 UN Security Council discussions, Saudi regional economic plan, 320, U.S. initiative proposals, 74, 77 Strauss Ambassador-at-Large Vance memoranda, 299 appointment, 209, 246 Palestinian autonomy talks: UN Security Council discussions of

1394 Index Carter-Begin correspondence— Christopher, Warren M.—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Continued negotiations—Continued Israeli settlements in the West Bank U.S.-Jordanian communications,

Index 1395 Dayan, Moshe—Continued Draper, Morris—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty negotiations—Continued negotiations, 81 Byrd Mission, 144

1396 Index Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty (see also Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty negotiations (see also implementation; Egyptian-Israeli Egyptian-Israeli oil issues; Peace Treaty negotiations): Palestinian autonomy talks; U.S. Arab reactions (see also aid to Israel and Egyptian-Israeli Saudi-Egyptian post-treaty Peace Treaty negotiations;

Index 1397 Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Eilts, Hermann F.—Continued negotiations (see also Camp David negotiations follow-up, Egyptian-Israeli oil issues;

1398 Index Evron, Ephraim—Continued Goldman, Leslie J., 407 Goren, 347 UN Security Council discussions of Gottesman, Marum, 190 Palestinian political future, 280, Graves, Lt. Gen. Ernest, 253, 343 Gromyko, Andrei A., 3, 76 U.S. aid to Egypt, 319 Grove, Brandon, 379 U.S. aid to Israel, 318 Guiringaud, Louis de, 74 U.S.-Israeli oil agreement, 401 Gulf of Aqaba, 87 U.S.-Israeli security cooperation, 404

Index 1399 Hunter, Robert—Continued Hussein bin Talal (king of Jordan)— Continued Hussein U.S. visit (June 1980), 384, Jordanian Palestinian autonomy talks

1400 Index Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Jones, Gen. David C.—Continued U.S. aid to Egypt and Israel, 231 Gaza (see also Palestinian autonomy Jordan: talks)—Continued

Index 1401 Khaddam, Abdel Khalim, 62 Khalil, Mustafa—Continued Khalaf, Karim, 379, 385 U.S. aid to Egypt, 259 Khalid bin Abdul Aziz (king of Saudi

1402 Index Lebanon conflict—Continued Lewis, Samuel W.—Continued Strauss-Begin discussions, 270, 271, Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty negotiations—Continued Syrian political situation and, 389 U.S.-Israeli communications— Syrian presence in, Defense Continued Intelligence Agency papers, 15 Carter-Begin correspondence, 72, Tunis Summit discussions (Nov.

Index 1403 Linowitz, Sol M.—Continued MATMON program, 24, 123 Palestinian autonomy talks— Matt, Danny, 309 Continued Maynes, Charles W., 282, 308 Resumption plans (July 1980), 387, Meir, Golda, 117 Meron, Maj. Gen., 404 Sadat-Begin correspondence, 397 Merrick, Roger B., 248 Sadat discussions, 353, 402 Mishgav Am hostage crisis, 357, 360 Sadat U.S. visit (Apr. 1980), 354,

1404 Index Mubarak, Hosni—Continued Newsom, David D.—Continued

Index 1405 Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Palestinian autonomy talks (1979–1980) (see also Arafat, Yassir; Lebanon (see also Palestinian autonomy talks conflict; U.S.–PLO relations)— planning)—Continued Continued

1406 Index Palestinian autonomy talks planning— Pattir, Dan—Continued Continued Palestinian autonomy talks, 357, 358, U.S.-Jordanian communications, 163 U.S.-Saudi communications, 65 Post-treaty peace process, 411 U.S. strategy meetings, 179 Peale, Samuel R., 315, 343 U.S. white paper, 160 Pelletreau, Robert H., Jr., 404

Index 1407 Proctor, Robert, 336 Quandt, William B.—Continued Pustay, Lt. Gen. John, 296, 332 U.S. aid to Israel, 122, 223 Quandt, William B.: Raff, Eitan, 104 Camp David negotiations: Rafshoon, Gerald “Jerry”, 204 Department of State planning Rahmi, Abu, 75 paper, 6 Ransom, David, 218 Follow-up, 62

1408 Index al-Sadat, Anwar (see also Camp David al-Sadat, Anwar (see also Camp David negotiations; Carter-Sadat negotiations; Carter-Sadat correspondence)—Continued correspondence)—Continued Palestinian autonomy talks— Camp David negotiations—Continued Continued Follow-up, 59, 73 Strauss discussions, 286, 290 Israeli-Egyptian meetings, 41

Index 1409 Saudi Arabia (see also Saudi-Egyptian Saunders, Harold H.—Continued post-treaty relations)—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Camp David negotiations—Continued negotiations, 80 Response, 63 Crawford memoranda, 81 Camp David negotiations follow-up, Palestinian responses, 214

1410 Index Saunders, Harold H.—Continued Sick, Capt. Gary—Continued Palestinian autonomy talks— Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Continued implementation, 332, 336 Sadat U.S. visit (Apr. 1980), 354, Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty

Index 1411 Soviet Union—Continued Strauss, Robert S.—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Israeli settlements in the West Bank negotiations, 221

1412 Index Tarnoff, Peter R.—Continued UN Security Council (see also UN Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Security Council discussions of negotiations, 199 Palestinian political future)— Israeli settlements in the West Bank Continued and Gaza, 109, 118 Palestinian mayor expulsions, 367

Index 1413 U.S. aid to Egypt—Continued U.S.–PLO relations—Continued Presidential Review Committee Brzezinski memoranda, 249 discussions, 172 Lebanon conflict contact proposals, Turner memoranda, 105 U.S.-Israeli communications, 319 Saunders memoranda, 350 U.S. aid to Israel (see also U.S. aid to U.S.-Palestinian communications, 100 Israel and Egyptian-Israeli Peace U.S.-Saudi communications, 114 Treaty negotiations): Viets memoranda, 280 Brown Middle East trip (1979) Young resignation, 281, 282 discussions, 176 Camp David negotiations and, 18, 24, Valdez, Abelardo L., 374

1414 Index Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, Arab Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty reactions to, 248 negotiations—Continued Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty U.S.-Jordanian communications,

Index 1415 Vance, Cyrus R.—Continued Veliotes, Nicholas A.—Continued Palestinian autonomy talks— Jordanian peace negotiations role, 91 Continued Palestinian political future, 297 U.S.-Jordanian communications, Vest, George S., 311, 408 Vienna Convention, 192 Weizman discussions, 292 Viets, Richard N.: Palestinian autonomy talks planning, Camp David negotiations follow-up,

1416 Index Weizman, Ezer—Continued West Bank/Gaza—Continued UN Security Council discussions of Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty Palestinian political future, 283 negotiations on (see also U.S. aid to Israel: Palestinian autonomy talks Brown memoranda, 212 planning)—Continued Carter discussions, 325 U.S.-Egyptian communications, Quandt memoranda, 122, 223
