National Security Policy  143
It was likewise proposed that the promotion of all officers above 
the rank of Major General or its equivalent in the other Services should 
be made on the recommendation of the Secretary of Defense rather than 
upon recommendation by a Service Secretary. This move was designed 
to encourage an over-­all rather than a Service point of view among 
officers of senior rank. In this connection, the proposed reorganization 
would seek authority to transfer an officer from one Service to another 
with the officer’s own concurrence.
With respect to cutting down the number of Assistant Secretaries 
of Defense, Mr. Coolidge indicated that the proposed recommenda­
tions had not gone as far as Mr. Vinson and other Congressional critics 
would like us to go. We believe that many of the demands for wholesale 
reduction in the number of Assistant Secretaries were not realistic. If 
we attempted to get rid of too many such people, we would find our­
selves back in the Forrestal days, with a Secretary of Defense who was 
simply physically unable to carry out all the details of his responsibil­
ity. Nevertheless, according to these recommendations the Secretary of 
Defense would plan to review the operations of each of the Assistant 
Secretaries to see that there was no duplication or inefficiency. Thus far, 
only one Assistant Secretaryship will be abolished.
Secretary McElroy commented that whatever one called these 
Assistant Secretaries, their functions were necessary, and it was easier 
to induce better men to serve if they were given the rank and title of 
Assistant Secretary of Defense.
At this point the President said that he would presently he obliged 
to leave the Council meeting, and he would like to offer one or two 
thought for discussion after his departure. The President said he firmly 
believed that if this reorganization could achieve the elimination of the 
artificial roles and missions of the Services, and depend instead on the 
unified commands, and if, secondly, we could get rid of the concept 
of “separately administered” referred to by Mr. Coolidge, and thirdly, 
if we could achieve sufficient financial flexibility in the hands of the 
Secretary of Defense, the President was convinced that we would 
have achieved three great legislative changes which very such needed 
to be made. On the whole, therefore, the President seemed to indi­
cate approval of the proposals which had been outlined by Secretary 
­McElroy and Mr. Coolidge.
Mr. Cutler pointed out that since the recommendations which had 
been presented for information to the Council had yet to be formally 
presented to the President for his approval, the content of the proposals 
should not be discussed outside the walls of the Cabinet Room except 
under most careful security safeguards. The President agreed, and said 
he expected the foregoing recommendations to be coordinated, and 
he hoped that the Military Services would vigorously support these
