604 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI night. And frankly he was not inclined to seek such authority unless the ALCM counting rules, distinguishability rules and other elements of common ground were as agreed in Moscow. If he could get Shevardnadze’s assurance on that, he might seek authority. It appeared the sides had a serious difficulty. The Secretary continued that there was no one on his side of the table who did not think that we had had a clear understanding on this. It was important now to hear from Shevardnadze on SLCM issues other than the upper limit and get back to what the Secretary thought the sides had agreed in Moscow—­political declarations. On the other hand, maybe the sides just had an insoluble problem that would prevent them from solving this for the summit. Shevardnadze replied that a serious question was who interpreted political statements. If the U.S. side felt it to be an empty phrase, why should the Soviet side accept it? The Soviet side believed a political statement should designate effective limits, but these would not be incorporated into the START Treaty. The Secretary rejoined that perhaps they were passing in the night. The formulation of the declaration that they had worked on in Moscow called for the U.S. to state the numbers of SLCMs it would have for five years and for the Soviets to state their numbers for five years. It was not legally binding but a political statement. Maybe the sides were hung up on the wording. The Secretary continued that the U.S. side could not agree to say that it would not have more than a certain number. As the sides had discussed in Moscow, the U.S. wanted flexibility to build the number of SLCMs it wanted to build. The Soviet side would know what that number would be for five years. The U.S. would state that number in advance and not exceed it. What else was Shevardnadze asking the U.S. to do? Shevardnadze responded that the Soviet side wanted to cap the upper limit and do so jointly. This was the ultimate goal—­to limit the arms race. The second point was that the sides should not retreat from the principles agreed back in 1987 and should not be angry about the inspections that were agreed. Why was it that, when the sides could use any form of verification for land-based ballistic missiles, they could not use the same—­including on-­site inspection—­for SLCMs? All of that was agreed; he could quote from the record. Or was it a case of misunderstanding between the sides? Shevardnadze argued that it was another question to have a bad agreement that did not limit the arms race. That was something he would be loath to see. He would prefer no agreement. Without an upper limit the arms race would continue endlessly. He proposed that he and the Secretary think on this issue.
