1442 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement hold technical talks on controls, and appear designed to cover France. Communist China would presumably also be affected. Insistence on a cessation “for all time” would represent a change from last year’s Soviet negotiating position which provided for a sus­ pension of “two or three years.” It also implies rejection of the Western view that each yearly extension of a test suspension would depend on the effective operation of an inspection system and satisfactory prog­ ress toward major and substantial disarmament measures. Khrushchev states explicitly that “we cannot agree” with these Western “reserva­ tions and conditions”, claiming that (1) controls can be easily estab­ lished and (2) that the West itself has been responsible for failure to agree on disarmament measures and therefore advances the condition of “satisfactory progress” as a means of sabotaging a suspension of tests. (These points had also been made in Soviet propaganda reaction since August 22.) It remains to be seen whether Moscow will insist on Western accept­ance of the Soviet concept of the “purposes” of negotiations as a pre-­condition to the actual beginning of negotiations. It will be recalled that Moscow sought Western agreement to a similar set of “purposes” prior to the Geneva technical talks but sent its delegation despite West­ ern failure to comply. At the same time, it has long been the Soviet position that a test ban must be “unconditional” and independent from other disarmament measures and Moscow can be expected to maintain this position in negotiations. Khrushchev’s suggestion in Pravda that the USSR will seek United Nations approval of a test ban at the 13th General Assembly and his demand that negotiations last only two or three weeks indicate his intention of generating maximum pressure on the West to agree to a “simple” test ban. Khrushchev’s other major point was the statement that continued Western testing “relieve the USSR of the obligation it had assumed uni­ laterally” regarding a suspension of tests. The Supreme Soviet decision of March 31 and several statements by Khrushchev and Gromyko had provided for such a move and strengthen the view that, knowing the United States had scheduled a series of tests during the summer, Mos­ cow was exploiting a normal interval between Soviet tests for political purposes. August and the autumn months have traditionally been a Soviet testing season. Khrushchev did not state explicitly whether the USSR actually intends to resume testing; nor did he indicate whether Moscow would join the United States and Britain in suspending tests for one year once negotiations begin. Khrushchev’s acceptance of the Octo­ ber 31 date for the opening of talks, despite earlier Soviet propaganda complaints that this date was too late, suggests an intention to conduct tests in the interim. In such an eventuality Moscow would apparently calculate that world opinion can be persuaded that the USSR is entitled
