Dominican Republic 517 DR–27. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Mann) to the Consul General in the Dominican Republic (Dearborn)1  Washington, October 10, 1960. Dear Henry: I have scarcely been at my desk for two weeks and hence I have not had time to get into the Dominican problem in the depth that I will do in the near future. My first impression is that the problem of dealing effectively with Trujillo was made more difficult by the reluctance of the Foreign Ministers at San José to go along with a realistic program designed not only to bring about orderly elections but, equally important, to insure an orderly transition to a genuinely democratic regime. The latest I have is that the Brazilians may be planning some kind of an OAS committee to “observe” elections and while I would like to hear more about this if and when Brazil actually makes a proposal along these lines before coming to any final decision, I am afraid that this would be a “whitewash” operation which would not do credit to anyone connected with it. If there is not going to be effective multilateral action and if we are limited by our non-­intervention commitments in what we can do unilaterally, the question comes to mind as to whether there is really any chance of convincing the Generalissimo that in his own interest—­given the strength and depth of popular feeling throughout the hemisphere on the issue of his dictatorship—­he should, after making arrangements for a provisional government publicly committed to holding elections by a date certain, leave the country with his family and official entourage so as to permit an orderly transition to an anti-­communist democratic regime to take place. There are a lot of people in the States who apparently sincerely believe that the Generalissimo might be induced to leave. I doubt it myself but I am also aware that this is a matter involving subjective judgment which it would be difficult to prove beyond peradventure of doubt. I should like on a very personal and confidential basis to have your views concerning this and, in particular, who the best intermediary might be. For example, the name of Wilbur Morrison, Vice President of Pan American Airways, has been suggested. If the approach is not to be made 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/9–2960. Confidential; Eyes Only. The source text is a carbon copy bearing Mann’s typed name. A type-­written note on the source text indicates that this letter was mailed on October 18.
