methods of recruiting, training, organizations capable of
immediate military employment, etc.”
The armaments of this country are separated into the Army and Navy; each
branch including, in the United States, its air service.
The Army is divided into combatant and non-combatant branches.
The organization of the Army varies in different countries in accordance
with national conditions, which are determined by varying factors such as
distances, terrain, weather, resources and population, physical and social
conditions, morale, communications, sources of supplies, etc.
The details or manner of training and organization cannot be profitably
discussed because such matters are primarily of domestic concern.
However, in regard to the definition and special characteristics of the
various factors which constitute the armament of a country in time of peace,
particularly with reference to organizations capable of immediate military
employment, the general subject of character of service might be discussed
with the idea of placing all peace time military forces on the voluntary
basis. In this connection, it should be noted that the abolition of
conscription would be the most effective step which could be taken toward
the material reduction of peace time armed forces. In addition, a general
abolition of conscription and the consequent reduction of the number of
reserves would tend to render more nearly equal the length of time
necessary for various nations to put their armies into the field at full war
strength. It should be noted, however, that this government, because of
difficulty in recruitment, would oppose any general requirement which
provided for voluntary service for periods greater than a three year
enlistment.
The discussion of the various factors which constitute the Naval armaments
of a country in time of peace should be restricted to a consideration of the
tangible and material units of naval strength capable of physical
measurement.
At the Conference on the Limitation of Armament, held in Washington,
November 12, 1921, to February 6, 1922, one of the general principles laid
