International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
297
January should assure continuing healthy, non-inflationary U.S.
growth through 1978 and into 1979. While slower domestic growth
would no doubt reduce our trade deficit, I doubt that it would
strengthen the dollar on the foreign exchange markets; investors will
have more confidence in a dynamic rather than a stagnant United
States. Moreover, an expanding U.S. economy is necessary if we are to
overcome the twin dangers of trade protectionism in industrial coun-
tries and lagging growth in developing countries.
It is important that vigorous U.S. growth be matched by expansion
in the other strong industrial economies, as we agreed at London, if the
U.S. deficit is to be reduced.
I have been encouraged by the growth targets that Prime Minister
Fukuda has set for Japan in 1978 and his commitment to reduce the Jap-
anese current account surplus. He has recognized the need to put aside
traditional limitations on Japanese Government borrowing to finance a
budgetary deficit, and has substantially increased the degree of gov-
ernmental stimulus. Whether these actions will be sufficient to enable
Japan to realize its goals remains to be seen, but the direction is cer-
tainly right.
I welcome your statement that a high rate of employment and rea-
sonable economic growth are priority objectives of German policy, and
am glad that you have adopted a more expansive credit and financial
policy. If it appears that these measures will not have the desired result,
in terms of domestic growth or international balance, I trust that you
will be prepared to consider whether further stimulus measures by the
Federal Republic would be helpful. Higher German growth is needed
to reduce the problems we face in foreign exchange markets, while con-
tributing to the economic well-being of the entire industrial world.
If the United States can adopt a strong energy program, if Japan
can achieve its announced growth targets, and if the Federal Republic
can fulfill its growth potential, I am confident that the U.S. current ac-
count deficit will decline and that disorder in the foreign exchange
markets will subside. We must, as you point out, be continually alert to
the danger of inflation, which could undermine all this good work.
A successful conclusion of the MTN and refraining by European
Community nations from protectionist actions will also be of great help
in assuring a stable economic system. I will be discussing this with
President Giscard d’Estaing next week.5
I share your views about the importance of continued close inter-
national cooperation and consultations on these issues. The periodic
5 At the end of Owen’s December 28 memorandum (see footnote 1 above), Carter
instructed Brzezinski to add this paragraph. Carter visited France January 4–6, 1978.
