410
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
of the Nehru-Nasser relationship enabled Pakistan to crack through
India’s long blockage of Pakistani efforts to use its Islamic heritage to
forge bonds with the Arabs.
10. (C) The decline into irrelevance, and finally collapse, of CENTO
in 1979 enabled Pakistan to shed the only substantial block against its
entry into the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), a Third World forum
valuable in Pakistan eyes, however lame (and pro-Communist) its
recent deliberations in comparison with the great NAM days of the
early 1960s. A determined multilateralist, with a strong anti-Western
bent, Foreign Advisor Agha Shahi has given these multilateral impulses
renewed vitality during the present martial law government’s 30
months at the helm, adopting for himself the international role—albeit
diminished—that Bhutto had sought and expanding Pakistan’s influ-
ence in the Group of 77, the UN, the Islamic Conference, and the NAM.
11. (C) Pakistan’s role in the non-proliferation field since the explo-
sion of an Indian device ended South Asia’s nuclear virginity in 1974
has also been an important element of its quest for security. This has
featured regular promotion of a South Asia nuclear free zone—opposed
by India but supported by a growing number of UN members, includ-
ing the U.S. In later years, it has also included a decision to develop
Pakistan’s nuclear capabilities to the threshold of a nuclear device—
and consequent nuclear parity with India—as an additional pressure
on India to come to terms on a nuclear-free regime for the region. This
last has brought Pakistan directly into conflict with American non-
proliferation objectives, straining the Pakistan-U.S. tie and depriving
Pakistan of most U.S. assistance.
12. (C) Pakistani isolation and weakness: As Pakistan enters the
1980s, it feels weak, threatened, and isolated, notwithstanding its per-
sistent efforts to enhance its security. Its patrons appear unreliable
or stretched to their maximum utility. The United States seems less
interested in playing a role in the region than it once did, and its
energies seem sapped by a failure of consensus within, by its non-
proliferation concerns, and by the Iranian distraction. The prospect of
an Indira Gandhi government or alternatively continued instability in
India is worrying. Whatever comfort Zia and Agha Shahi may derive
from solidarity with the Iranian revolution, the Ayatollah is no substi-
tute for a strong and friendly Shahinshah in Tehran. And to the north,
the Russian bear gets nastier, more aggressive, and less restrained. In
Islamabad, meanwhile, the Soviet Embassy seems bent on a new activist
campaign to sow dissent and discord.
13. (C) Domestically, Pakistan’s political fabric is fragile, having
once again backed away from popular elections which, without PPP
participation, would doubtless have produced Janata-like instability in
the classic Pakistan pattern. The country has failed to evolve a viable
