December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
729
207.
Editorial Note
Following his morning meeting with Israeli Prime Minister Mena-
chem Begin and the Israeli Cabinet on March 12, 1979, President Jimmy
Carter accompanied Begin to the Knesset where the two leaders ad-
dressed the assembled legislature. Secretary of State Cyrus Vance re-
called in his memoirs that the “session was a stormy one with much
shouting and hectoring of Begin by the Communists and some
members of his own Likud party.” (Vance, Hard Choices, page 248) In
the midst of the proceedings, one Likud member of the Knesset, Geula
Cohen, was ejected from the chamber. In his address, Carter delivered
what he termed “the speech of concern and caution and hope.” Noting
the “somber responsibility of us all to exert our energies and our imagi-
nations once again to contemplate the tragedy of failure and the legiti-
mate exultation if we bring peace,” the President urged Israelis and
Egyptians to continue to work toward achieving the peace treaty. The
full text of Carter’s speech is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book
I, pages 424–428. During speeches made by Begin and opposition
leader Shimon Peres, Carter instructed Vance to meet with the Israeli
Cabinet that afternoon, asking him to “concentrate” on the Israeli oil
supply and Egyptian access to Gaza. (Carter, Keeping Faith, page 423)
To guide the Secretary’s conversation, Carter’s handwritten notes
posed two questions, upon which Vance added his own handwritten
responses. First, Carter asked, “Can the negotiating nations—or their
designated liaison teams (representatives)[—]have free access to the in-
habitants of Gaza or the West Bank during the time of negotiations to
determine the modalities of the establishment of self government—and
during the elections?” In the margin next to this question, Vance wrote,
“yes—but.” Second, Carter asked, “Is the sale of oil from Egypt during
coming years under normal marketing procedures adequate, provided
the U.S. will guarantee adequate supplies of oil to Israel under all cir-
cumstances?” Vance answered, “No.” (Notes made by President Carter
during Begin’s Speech to the Knesset, March 12; Carter Library, Plains
File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 3/79)
At 4:45 p.m. on March 12, Vance and Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski met with Begin and his
Cabinet. No memorandum of conversation or official record of that
meeting has been found. Handwritten notes from the meeting, kept by
U.S. Ambassador to Israel Samuel W. Lewis are in the Department of
State, U.S. Embassy Tel Aviv, Principal Officers Program Files, Lot
85F104, [unfoldered Lewis spiral notebook]. Vance recalled in his
memoirs that the meeting “got nowhere. Each side repeated its prior
positions and we remained deadlocked. Finally, when it became clear
that nothing new would emerge, we adjourned.” Begin, Vance re-
