Afghanistan
841
This is, Mr. Secretary, what I would like to tell You in regard to
Afghanistan.
[Omitted here is a portion of the letter unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Sincerely,
A. Gromyko4
4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
312.
Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[memorandum number not declassified]
Washington, August 1980
Soviet-Afghan Incursions Into Pakistan
([classification marking not declassified])
Summary
Moscow is able to launch small-scale air and ground incursions
into Pakistan at any time, but this does not appear to be Soviet policy
at present. Since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in late December,
two ground incursions and 14 air incursions have been confirmed, only
one of which appeared to be deliberate. Moreover, high-level Soviet
authorities have expressed concern about some of the confirmed inci-
dents and as late as mid-May were investigating them. In fact, the
Soviet presence appears to have reduced the number of air and ground
incursions into Pakistan to below the number allegedly made by
Afghan forces before the invasion. ([classification marking, codeword, and
handling restriction not declassified])
Pakistani officials, however, believe that at least some of the inci-
dents were staged by the Soviets to put pressure on Islamabad. On 3
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support
Services, Job 82T00150R: Production Case Files, Box 2, Soviet-Afghan Air and Ground
Incursions Into Pakistan. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]. A
typed statement on the first page reads in part: “This memorandum was prepared by
[less than 1 line not declassified] of the NFAC Southwest Asia Analytic Center, Office of
Political Analysis. It was coordinated with the Directorate for Operations, the Office of
Strategic Research, and the National Intelligence Officers for the USSR, and the Near East
and South Asia. Information available as of 29 August 1980 was used in its preparation.”
