1955 109 Americans in China concerned this took away [garble] give to two sen­ tences our draft and still left Americans where they were when these talks started. Said I held no brief for exact wording our para one, what I was interested in was substance which I considered vital. Willing con­ sider any wording he might suggest with same substance. At end long discussion these lines both tacitly agreed neither had anything more to say and agreed meet Thursday with usual fencing as to who was going to do most thinking over subject during interim. At close this phase he said wished “raise another point” and brought up “propaganda campaign” which had been “launched in order slander Chinese people” etc. Since beginning talks PRC “has repeatedly made clear its conciliatory attitude” questions “mistreatment” raised. PRC could “endlessly recount miserable treatment” captured Chinese in Korea, campaign was having “adverse effects” talks here etc. I had clear feeling he had received specific instructions make statement and that he was somewhat reluctant do so. I deliberately showed anger and curtly replied I did not understand his motive in raising, accounts I had seen were factual interviews with men released. Our free press, accounts not unique almost all released have told similar accounts, fault was not with accounts but with treatment that gave rise to accounts, these reports had raised anxiety in US over Americans in China and made it all more important find early resolution to problem. He was somewhat taken aback and endeavored smooth atmosphere before we left. Gowen NOTE: Mr. Waddell’s Office (FE) notified 8/17/55 3:25 p.m. EMB (CWO) 91. Telegram 499 from Geneva1 Geneva, August 16, 1955, 8 p.m. 499. From Johnson. At 7th meeting August 16 I began by referring to Wang’s statement last meeting that he desired deal concretely with problem of return civilians of respective countries rather than in abstract terms. Said I agreed entirely this approach and I had come here to seek concrete, 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/8–1655. Secret; Limit Distribution.
