Arms Control and Disarmament  1599
440.	 Memorandum of Conference with the President1
Washington, March 13, 1959
OTHERS PRESENT
Dr. Killian
General Goodpaster
Dr. Killian said that further study had disclosed possible ways of 
decoupling a seismic signal from an atomic explosion. The use of large 
cavities would be a way of doing this. For each kiloton of yield a cav­
ity of about 100,000 cubic meters (i.e., about 100 feet in radius) would 
be required. From the standpoint of monitoring, this presents a very 
real loophole, in that it becomes difficult to set any kind of a threshold 
for detectable tests. Accordingly, agreements to suspend testing in the 
atmosphere, and to limit testing to explosions outside the atmosphere, 
would seem to be indicated.
It is also technically possible to conduct weapons tests in outer 
space out to about 180 million miles. Conceivably a satellite detec­
tion system could be established that would be capable of detecting 
unshielded tests out to that distance, but this could be countered by 
shielding of weapons with lead shields that would prevent detection of 
tests up to several hundreds of kilotons.
In summary, a system with a low threshold cannot be guaranteed.
The President said he may want to have a session of a couple of 
hours’ duration with Macmillan here next week. He would want Dr. 
Killian to come up by helicopter.
The President added that he takes with some seriousness Khru­
shchev’s statement that the Soviets are not testing small weapons. He 
added that this is being carefully studied at his request.
Dr. Killian said that if the Geneva talks should be recessed for 
political reasons, there are technical reasons supporting a decision to 
leave open the possibility of exploring techniques of monitoring and 
inspection, and in particular to see if agreement can be reached on con­
ducting some tests to observe their effects and detectability.
A.J. Goodpaster
Brigadier General, USA
1 Source: Technical aspects of detecting nuclear testing. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower 
Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on March 17.
