114
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
missions for North Yemen in the 1960s and for Iraq against the Kurds
in the 1970s. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction
not declassified])
The Soviet military advisory mission in Afghanistan has more than
doubled since the coup last April. It now numbers between 600 and
1,000, but there is still considerable room for further expansion. The
Afghans, for example, probably will be unable to handle their logistics
problems if the situation worsens, and Soviet military personnel might
be dispatched to facilitate the movement of men and materiel to the
various combat zones. ([classification marking not declassified])
Moscow will face a dilemma if—despite expanded assistance—the
situation deteriorates to the point where only massive Soviet military
intervention could save the Afghan Marxists. This could happen if the
Islamic insurgency spreads to other urban areas of Afghanistan and if
the military withdraws its support from Taraki. Moscow’s decision to
publish two authoritative warnings in less than a week about outside
interference in Afghanistan is indicative of Soviet concern about a
possible replay in Afghanistan of recent developments in Iran. This is
also reflected in the current Soviet propaganda effort to portray the
current government as respectful of Islam and mindful of the teachings
of the Koran. ([classification marking not declassified])
The Soviets would be most reluctant to introduce large numbers
of ground forces into Afghanistan to keep in power an Afghan Govern-
ment that had lost the support of virtually all segments of the popula-
tion. Not only would the Soviets find themselves in an awkward morass
in Afghanistan, but their actions could seriously damage their relations
with India, Iran, and—to a lesser degree—Pakistan. As a more likely
option, the Soviets probably could seek to re-establish ties with those
members of the Afghan opposition with whom Moscow has dealt
profitably in the past.5 ([classification marking not declassified])
5 In a likely reaction to this paper, Brzezinski sent a memorandum to Vance, March
28, indicating that in response to Soviet support and possible participation in the Afghan
Government’s efforts to destroy the insurgency, “the President stated that we should
notify Iran, Pakistan, and India of this and publicize Soviet involvement.” (Department
of State, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Intelligence Liaison Files, TIN 980643000019,
Box 3, Afghanistan, Non-Vector 1980–1985) A status report from Tarnoff to Brzezinski,
April 5, described the activities undertaken by the Department of State per Carter’s
instructions. These measures included sending cables with talking points to the Embassies
in Tehran and Jidda, a proposed letter to Indian Prime Minister Desai, and a message
for Ambassador Hummel to communicate to Pakistani officials. Additionally, Tarnoff
reported that the Department issued a statement “denying sharply” Soviet accusations
of U.S. meddling in Afghanistan. (National Security Council, Carter Administration
Intelligence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May 1978–7 Dec 1978) The Department’s
public statement attacking the Soviet allegations of U.S. interference in Afghanistan was
issued on April 2. (Don Oberdorder, “U.S. Blasts ‘Baseless’ Soviet Charges,” Washington
Post, April 3, 1979, p. A12). See also Document 44.
