390 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX of January 22 with Hermann Axen,5 which had resulted in Ambassador Grunert’s presentation of new language on the nationality issue which was acceptable to us, the UK, and the FRG, but which was still causing problems for the French.6 The Ambassador thought that if we could not bring the French around in the near future the only sensible alternative was to break the linkage we had hitherto maintained between the conclusion of the Consular Convention and the development of US–GDR relations in other areas. With regard to MFN, Ambassador Bolen said he was not arguing that we should necessarily grant it to the GDR now but that we ought not to reply to this primary GDR concern with a categorical no; we ought to make them understand that their actions on various issues in which we are interested, including human rights matters and claims, could have a positive influence on the prospects for MFN. Mr. Christopher observed that, while the GDR was perhaps doing as much as it could, its present performance could not match the Soviet record. Jackson-Vanik was pretty specific. We did not expect any repeal of it but we did think that we could find ways of bringing China and the USSR through it. The GDR, however, could not match up on the basis of general performance and certainly not if one included their record on emigration in the equation. 5 In telegram 382 from East Berlin, January 24, Bolen reported his January 22 conversation with SED Politburo Secretary Hermann Axen. During the conversation, Axen stressed the need to improve economic and cultural relations between the two countries and that “the United States must acknowledge that the GDR has citizens.” If the U.S. Government would officially recognize that fact, Axen told the Ambassador, “we take these few words and put them down on paper we can drink a glass to this right away.” Bolen assured Axen that the U.S. Government “clearly recognize GDR citizenship and that GDR Consuls have a right of access to GDR citizens” and that “there exists a basis for resolution in the U.S. proposed mirror-image statement.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790036–0713) See also footnote 6 below. 6 In late 1978, having failed to reach an agreement on issuing a statement on nationality, the Department proposed a new solution to the issue. Dubbed the “Circle of People” approach, the proposal sought to clarify, in mirror statements, that each country would have access to its citizens held under arrest in the other country. Goodby delivered the proposal to Grunert on November 3, 1978, in a tour d’horizon meeting at the Department. (Telegram 280985 to East Berlin and Bonn, November 4, 1978; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780455–0667) As the Department prepared to make its proposal known to the East German Government, the French representative in the Bonn Group raised objections to the statements, suggesting that the text conferred recognition to the East German Government of an East German nationality. Reporting on the French concerns, Stoessel noted that the French representative also “indicated to us privately that Paris takes a dim view of the protracted bilateral US–FRG discussions of the text.” (Telegram 21614 from Bonn, November 24, 1978; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780484–1108) The Department of State reply in telegram 300497 to Bonn, November 28, 1978, instructed Stoessel that the matter should be dropped unless the French bring it up. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780489–0629)
