Afghanistan 1. Summary: Afghan Foreign Minister Amin claims that he has evidence that Pakistan is providing cross-border support for subversive operations against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA). End summary. 2. During a call on Foreign Minister Hafizullah Amin on Aug 14 to discuss multilateral issues, I informed him that I had conveyed to Washington and Islamabad the concern he expressed on July 31 over the state of Afghan-Pakistani relations (ref D). I told him that Amb Hummel had discussed this matter with Minister of State Agha Shahi, who stated that Pakistan was following a definite policy, rigidly applied, to restrain and naturalize [neutralize?] any elements or individuals who might want to make trouble in Afghanistan (ref C). 3. Amin retorted that Pakistan was “not putting that policy into practice.” He claimed that Kabul has evidence of Pakistani complicity in a large number of anti-Afghan cross-border operations to support subversion against the DRA Govt. Amin explained that his govt was not making this evidence public at this time because it does not want to bring out into the open any conflict with Pakistan if it can avoid it, and, besides, the Afghan Govt had contained such threats. If pushed too far, however, warned Amin, the Afghans are prepared to publicize their complaints and take necessary countermeasures. 4. When I asked what part of the Afghan-Pakistani border was involved in this alleged infiltration, Amin retorted, “all of it—from China to Iran.” He hurriedly added that Afghanistan was not making similar charges against Iran, which, he noted, has been controlling its side of the Afghan-Iranian border “in a friendly fashion.” I observed that there are many regions along the international boundary over which neither Islamabad nor Kabul appear to exercise complete control. Amin responded that his govt could easily allow trouble to exfiltrate over into Pakistan from its side, but, until now, has ensured that this has not happened. 5. When I described the recent Pakistani return of the Afghan MIG– 17 as a cooperative, friendly gesture of good will, Amin acknowledged that Islamabad had indeed handled that affair well, and commented, “we appreciated it.” However, this single act did not, in his mind, outweigh the Pakistani machinations of which he complained earlier. 6. While on the topic of Afghan-Pakistani relations, I reminded Amin that, as Amb Eliot had informed him earlier, the USG “recognizes the existing boundary between Afghanistan and Pakistan as the legitimate international border” (ref E). This, I explained, was implicit in our initial recognition of Pakistan in 1947. Without making any specific reference to the information conveyed in ref B, I alerted Amin to the possibility that he might see this USG position reaffirmed publicly. Amin made no comment. I also once more suggested that the best way
