Chemical and Biological Weapons
261
tive committee of experts lacks precision in some areas (e.g., it does not
designate the authority who would convene the consultative com-
mittee), we believe the Convention is now an improved instrument. We
must continue to bear in mind, however, that the Swedes and others
will continue to press their case for formal revision of Article V at the
second BW Revcon, whether or not this agreed interpretation of the
current consultative provisions is ever invoked.
11. Chemical Weapons. Suprisingly little controversy was engen-
dered by the review of Article IX, dealing with negotiations on a chem-
ical weapons convention, a subject that had been the focus of non-
aligned concerns at the PrepCom last July. The imminent establishment
by the Committee on Disarmament (CD) of a working group on CW
undoubtedly helped defuse the situation. Therefore, most delegations,
particularly the Non-Aligned, seemed content to make the customary
criticism of the alleged lack of progress in our bilateral talks with the
USSR and to call on the CD to begin immediate multilateral negotia-
tions. However, they stopped short of seeking any far-ranging discus-
sion on a CW prohibition. A number of delegations did take the oppor-
tunity of citing the indispensability of effective verification measures to
any CW convention—a point we trust was not lost on our bilateral CW
negotiating partner.
12. Peaceful biological research. On the other hand, Article X on co-
operation in peaceful biological research was singled out for substan-
tial comment by the Non-Aligned, evoking memories of recent lengthy
debates in the UN and elsewhere on the peaceful uses of nuclear en-
ergy. Taking their cue from the background paper on scientific/techno-
logical developments in the field of biology (Bacteriology) as well as
the UN SSOD’s endorsement of the “close relationship” between disar-
mament and development, several delegations, led by Romania, Yugo-
slavia, and Brazil, pressed for commitments from developed countries
to make info on such scientific/technological developments available
on a more regular and systematic basis to all parties. They also sought
(and obtained) a call in the final declaration for developed states to pro-
vide increased technical assistance, such as the training of personnel
and transfer of equipment and technology in relevant areas of biolog-
ical research. The reaction from eastern and western delegations was
extremely cautious, with the USSR citing the extensive amount of
assistance already taking place and the western Europeans expressed
privately their concerns over the potential effect on commercial propri-
etary interests of any subsequent efforts to “institutionalize” transfers
of technology in this field.
13. The negotiations with the Soviets on compromise language for
the section on the final declaration on Article V ultimately led to agree-
ment on the question of future Review Conferences. While the BW con-
