812 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 —A general conclusion, which proved very useful, was that we judged that the military was not in a very effective or high state of readiness, especially for night air combat missions. (6) Finally the Director mentioned that, in early January, he directed that a biweekly SITREP be provided to the Delta force. —The purpose of this was to provide, at least biweekly, our best estimate as to the hostage locations. —This was not represented as gospel, but rather provided to the task force commander in order to give him something concrete to factor into his planning. b. Training. (The DCI noted this as primarily a CIA function.) (1) He mentioned that we provided a secure site for 42 days during the November-December timeframe. —We provided the entire logistics support for Delta during this time. —He noted that their stay at our facility was kept entirely secret, both while Delta was there and even when they made three trips in and out. (2) He noted that our personnel stayed with Delta force during the entire time that they were in training. (3) He mentioned that, included in our logistical support, we provided the helicopter pilots with navigational training [1½ lines not declassified]. He said that this helo support was continuous and was even provided on the Nimitz, where our personnel zeroed all the equipment just prior to lift-off. (The Director then remarked to ADM Holloway that he had been somewhat surprised that our people were able to provide this type of service and training to qualified military pilots.) (4) In addition to the above the Director mentioned that all Delta’s requirements, e.g. arms, equipment, etc. were provided by the Agency. c. Planning and preparation assistance (1) [3½ lines not declassified] (2) [1½ lines not declassified] —[4 lines not declassified] —[4½ lines not declassified] (3) In another vein, the Director commented on our role in selecting Desert 1. —He noted that, while this was a military operation, we were able to offer some ideas or suggestions at various points. —In January, the planning centered around staying overnight at a captured airfield. This would have entailed holding the airfield, and all those therein, for about 32 hours. We, as well as some others at DoD, were somewhat leery about whether this could be done with the required secrecy.
