Yugoslavia
847
257.
Memorandum From Robert Hunter of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 22, 1978
SUBJECT
FMS Credits for Arms Sales to Yugoslavia
In authorizing moderate expansion of our arms transfer relation-
ship with Yugoslavia last September, the President specifically
excluded FMS credits.2
There are now indications that the Yugoslavs will ask for limited
FMS financing (State estimates no more than $10 million in FY 1980).
The State Department memorandum at Tab II3 asks for a decision
in principle to permit such financing—while understanding the limited
funds available and the need for Congressional consultations. (Normal
budget procedures would still have to be followed.) State argues that
the prospects for selling two $10 million-plus systems (unspecified)
would be enhanced if the authority were available; and that our ability
to respond positively on the financing question would enhance the fall
visit here of the Yugoslav Defense Minister. It would improve our ties
to the military, and underline our commitment to post-Tito Yugoslavia.
State argues that the limitation on credits was placed in the Presi-
dential Decision because we did not expect to be asked. I recall that
we also wanted to keep the program low-key, in view of the still-
tentative nature of our improving relations.
Now, however, I agree it would be valuable to take this extra
step. This does not seem to be sufficiently important to require the
President’s personal approval.4
Defense and ACDA agree with the State memo.
Recommendation:
That you concur with the extension of FMS financing to Yugoslavia
in principle, and sign the memorandum at Tab I.5
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia: 4–12/78. Confidential. Sent for
action. Jessica Tuchman Mathews concurred.
2 See Document 242 and footnote 4 thereto.
3 Not attached.
4 Inderfurth wrote “DR information only?” in the margin. Aaron replied “Yes”
underneath.
5 Aaron wrote “I agree” and signed for Brzezinski an August 22 memorandum to
Vance, informing the Department of State of the recommendation to permit the extension
of FMS financing for Yugoslav arms transfers. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 57, Yugoslavia:
4–12/78)
