intention was not to end negotiations in this matter, confirmed the
previous decision.
3. This action, taken admittedly in consequence of threats recently
reiterated by the Japanese and of intimations of British
opposition, I can only consider as definitely putting an end to all
hopes of securing from the Peking regime favorable action in
regard to the Federal contract. A more favorable conjuncture
could not have been hoped for. Chang, who himself had signed
the supplementary agreement made in September, 1921,72 was
prepared to make the clarification agreement, subject only to its
receiving approval from the Minister for Foreign Affairs who
probably has the most friendly attitude in regard to the United
States of any official of China and personally was most anxious to
have the agreement given effect, but who felt compelled, under
duress of political circumstances, to bring the matter before the
Cabinet. He has assured me he presented the question as a choice
between possibly offending the Japanese by failure to observe a
monopolistic contract and possibly offending us by failing to
meet the test, as our Government regards it, of the policy of the
open door and of the sincerity of China in cooperating in that
policy. That the Cabinet should on this presentation of the case
have repudiated or postponed indefinitely the execution of the
Federal contract is, in my opinion, final evidence that reliance can
no longer be placed upon the Peking authorities by the American
company to effect its rights under their contract. I can no longer
recommend therefore that they continue to exert effort along this
line.
4. However, I would advise most earnestly that prior to
abandoning possibility of progress upon the basis of the Federal
contract, the American interests concerned and the Department
[give consideration to?] an alternative plan I have discussed with
Davis. This is in essence the following: In view of the lack of
active support from the administration in Peking, although
already having contractual rights which assures its legal consent
to carry out the contract, a practical solution of the difficulties of
