656 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement workers without adversely affecting the interests of his principal supporters. In general, labor is pessimistic regarding its prospects under his government. 19. In the face of rising leftist opposition, Ydígoras will probably try to pursue a middle course calculated to limit the political appeal of the left, even at the risk of alienating some of his rightist support. Despite his authoritarian background, he would probably be reluctant to resort to unusually repressive measures. 20. Ydígoras tenure of power depends ultimately on the continued support of the armed forces, which he will make every effort to ensure. The principal ground force commanders favored his election. Although the commander of the air force favored the MDN candidate, he is a strong proponent of constitutional order. Ydígoras’ character as a professional soldier and his strong personality will facilitate his retaining the backing of the military. The Armed Forces 21. Guatemala has a 9,000 man army with an integral air force consisting of about 200 men (33 of them pilots) and 39 aircraft (ten of them F–51 fighters obtained from the U.S.). Under a 1955 bilateral military assistance agreement, the U.S. has undertaken to provide grant aid in the amount of $500,000 for the equipment and training of one infantry battalion. Most of this equipment has been delivered. The air force has also received some reimbursable military aid from the U.S. 22. The essential function of the Guatemalan armed forces is to protect the incumbent regime against internal or external revolutionary action. It has no other capabilities of consequence. Although constitutionally prohibited from engaging in political activities, the military are nevertheless a political factor of decisive importance in that, in critical circumstances, the continuance or withdrawal of their support can determine whether an incumbent government will stand or fall. Aware of this, every government seeks to ensure the continued support of the armed forces by the appointment of reliable officers to positions of command and by favorable treatment in terms of pay and perquisites. Normally the armed forces will support the incumbent government, up to a certain point. That point is reached if and when popular antagonism toward the government reaches such a pitch that serious disorder is clearly impending. In such circumstances, the armed forces’ responsibility for the maintenance of order is conceived to be overriding, and the proper means of preserving order is conceived to be a change of government. The armed forces thus cease to be the defense of the regime and become the active agent in its overthrow. In such a case, in conformity to longstanding tradition, the obligation of the military to the outgoing president is reduced to responsibility for assuring his
