848 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement for survival, specifically including minimum civilian needs and conti­ nuity of Government. With respect to recovery in the event of general war, the policy would direct planning towards this end. I pointed out to the President that no one at the moment was quite sure about the extent and nature of recovery measures and the Council had not felt it prudent to direct that these be maintained in a high state of readiness. I also pointed out to the President that the action called for a report from OCDM as to what the planning would involve so that the President could then have a judgment as to what measures should be directed. The President said he thoroughly agreed with this approach. With respect to the request that OCDM make this report, I indi­ cated to the President that the Draft Record also requested Defense to report on the general effect of the changes in the military sec­ tion. I indicated that I was encountering considerable resistance from Defense and JCS to the inclusion of this request in the Record of Actions largely at least on the ground that it was not specifically agreed upon in the Council meeting although I had indicated an intention to call for a report. I said that the JCS particularly felt that too many requests for studies were being levied upon them by the NSC. I told the President that I was in negotiation with respect to the inclusion of this request for a study, with the Office of the Secretary of Defense and with General Twining, and that I would include it if I could get their agreement; otherwise, we would approach the prob­ lem in a different way. In this connection I told the President that we were having consider­ able difficulty in getting ahead with some of the studies which had been requested. For example, I reported that the Maritime Study had come back without the factoring-­in of nuclear damage and that I had declined to accept the report for the Council. The President then said that with respect to our problems for the future, perhaps he would get Secretary McElroy and the Chiefs to go again to some point removed from Washington and their staffs, to dis­ cuss the question of where we were really going with respect to our military establishment. He wonders whether we’re facing up realisti­ cally to the problems ahead and said that he was not too impressed with the continuation of our thinking on the basis of roles and missions for particular services. I indicated to the President that I thought the Chiefs were working very hard at their problems despite their funda­ mental differences and the President agreed, saying that he thought that this was about the best set of Chiefs of Staff that he had had in his administration. We discussed then some of the fundamental differences such as those deriving from the question of “how much is enough” of retalia­ tory capability.
