588
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
215.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, June 2, 1953.
SUBJECT
Economic Aid to Iran
PARTICIPANTS
Mr. Norman Paul, DMS
Mr. Robert Black, DMS
Mr. Arthur L. Richards, GTI
Mr. R. Bernard Crowl, GTI
Mr. John H. Stutesman, Jr., GTI
At their request, Mr. Paul and Mr. Black called on Mr. Richards fol-
lowing instructions from Mr. Stassen to open conversations with the
Department regarding increased economic aid to Iran.
Mr. Paul stated that he was informed that Secretary Dulles and Mr.
Stassen in Karachi had discussed the Iranian situation and had come to
the conclusion that it was not practical to press for a solution of the
Anglo-Iranian oil dispute at this time. They were of the opinion, how-
ever, that Iran’s agrarian economy should be kept afloat and that
perhaps $15 or $20 million should be added to the presently-proposed
TCA and economic aid programs for Iran in FY 1954. The thought was
that Iran’s essential foreign exchange requirements might be met in
some degree in ways such as purchasing vehicles, spare parts, and sim-
ilar commodity items for Iran. The conversations between DMS and
State should determine (1) a general level of the FY 1954 program, and
(2) the kind of items necessary to include in the program.
Mr. Richards stated that he expected Ambassador Henderson’s ar-
rival on consultation this week to give rise to high-level policy discus-
sions regarding Iran. He pointed out that it was still somewhat unclear
whether our government policy was to endeavor to keep Iran’s
economy afloat even though Dr. Mosadeq’s government might thereby
be strengthened. He pointed out that there was an influential body of
opinion that any assistance to Iran beyond the present level could only
serve to keep Mosadeq in power and remove certain pressures upon
the Iranians to come to an early settlement of the oil dispute.
Mr. Paul said that they have no intention of “running with the
Ball” but would appreciate being advised when a policy decision has
been taken in regard to increasing presently-proposed levels of eco-
nomic aid for Iran.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 84, Tehran Embassy Files, general classified
records, Box 14. Secret; Security Information. Drafted by Stutesman.
