Comprehensive Test Ban
577
235.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of Energy
Schlesinger1
Washington, June 14, 1979
SUBJECT
CTB Enhanced Test Program (U)
This is in response to your memorandum of May 42 concerning the
CTB Enhanced Test Program. I recommended development of this pro-
gram to the President3 to redress the growing asymmetry in US and So-
viet testing rates, and to investigate some of the uncertainties involved
in maintaining reliability without testing. The President directed me to
proceed on this basis but was concerned that the additional tests
should support a CTB—e.g., the program should investigate reliability
problems rather than generate “new” warhead development needs.
Subsequently, the President reaffirmed his support for this effort in the
context of his review of the Quicksilver II testing plan.4 (S)
In light of this support, the preliminary incremental amounts you
mentioned do not appear unreasonable and I am optimistic that the
Administration will support such a request. I understand that the FY 81
figure is in fact consistent with the preliminary request DOE has al-
ready submitted to OMB.5 We need to move quickly, however, since
the Committee mark-up of the FY 80 budget is in progress and we are
losing valuable time for carrying out additional tests prior to the advent
of a CTB. Consequently, it is requested that you facilitate participation
by your staff and the lab directors in the ad hoc NSC Working Group to
ensure prompt completion of the Enhanced Test Program for review by
the President. (S)
In this regard, Assistant Secretary Sewell of your staff has previ-
ously submitted a list of prospective members6 and Frank plans to
draw from this list in establishing the panel. Frank also tells me he
would welcome an opportunity to discuss with you any further sug-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 13, Comprehensive Test Ban (CTB), 1/79–9/80. Secret. Copies sent to Vance, Brown,
Jones, Seignious, and Press.
2 See Document 230.
3 Not found.
4 Not found.
5 Not found.
6 Not found.
