1979  737
166.	 Memorandum From the Military Assistant to the 
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Odom) 
to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs 
(Brzezinski)1
Washington, November 16, 1979
SUBJECT
Brezhnev Message on the NORAD Alert
I am attaching TASS comments on the missile threat assessment 
call.2 (U)
I believe you will recognize the line as straight from Brezhnev’s 
message to the President.3 As I suspected from the tone, it was not a 
serious communication but an opening shot in a propaganda cam-
paign designed to take advantage of the President and what the Soviets 
believe they know of his attitude toward nuclear weapons. That is why 
my proposed reply to Brezhnev was sharp. I still believe it would be 
wise to send that version. Otherwise we are going to be in second place 
throughout this exchange, and we may see the Soviets succeed in work-
ing up public support in the U.S. and Europe for a major investigation. 
Soviet operatives in the U.S. and Europe will undoubtedly try to get the 
“no nukes” groups into the streets on this issue. (S)
Marshall Shulman did not like the idea of a reply at all. He would 
not give me a comment on the Gates’ version.4 There is no reason, he 
argued, to overload the circuits with another protest now.5 (S)
Defense, Komer and his staff, thought the Gates’ version was much 
too soft. They were trying to toughen it. (S)
I provide this background so that you may, if you wish, get Brown 
to support you on a response that will preempt this Soviet campaign 
which could possibly affect adversely the LRTNF decisions next 
month. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 15, Crisis Management: 11/78–5/80. Secret; Outside the System. Sent for informa-
tion. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.”
2 Attached but not printed is an FBIS report entitled “TASS Comments on Recent 
Malfunction at NORAD Headquarters,” dated November 15.
3 On November 14, Dobrynin called on Vance to deliver a message from Brezhnev 
to Carter: “Reports have been received that recently, due to some erroneous actions, the 
US technical systems gave a signal of a nuclear missile attack on the United States which 
resulted in putting appropriate means on alert,” and that “according to reports the inci-
dent was reported neither to you nor to the Secretary of Defense, nor to any responsible 
officials.” For the full message, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, 
Document 233.
4 Not Found.
5 Brzezinski wrote in the margin: “he is right!!”
