1977  153
radar cross section, reliability, guidance performance (the guidance 
systems are only about 70% common), and operational flexibility of 
the technique for mounting in the B–52. The merits of a stacked rack 
(9 TALCM) and a rotary rack (7 TALCM or 8 ALCM) for internal car-
riage are debated. A competitive flyoff will let the competition settle the 
argument.
(3) The unit cost of the successful missile will probably be lower 
because of each contractor’s motivation to incorporate manufacturing 
economies into his design.
In summary, I expect the life cycle cost of the program will be less 
with a competitive flyoff in spite of the increased R&D cost; as a bonus 
we should get maximum performance and minimum risk of contrac-
tor protests. Finally, we hedge against program disaster in the unlikely 
event of one contractor completely failing to meet program objectives.
You asked when we could certify to the Congress that the require-
ments of language in the FY 78 Authorization Bill have been met. The 
clearest case for assurance of meeting operational requirements and for 
knowledge that the termination would produce minimal cost is at the 
end of the flyoff in October 1979. Prior to that we could make the certi-
fication based on our internal estimates at almost any time, conceivably 
even before the preliminary development flight tests from the B–52 are 
completed for both missiles. I question, however, whether we could be 
convincing to the Congress. There is likely to be protracted acrimonious 
exchange with the defenders of the missile that was selected out; mak-
ing a choice after flyoff would greatly reduce (though not eliminate) the 
points of argument. I have attached answers to the other questions you 
asked with the exception of tentative deployment plans.5 I assume you 
were asking about numbers, intended utilization, and basing. We are 
still sorting these out and I will provide an answer later.
Harold Brown
5 Attached but not printed are three one-­page papers—“Cruise Missile Deployment 
and Costs,” “ALCM Program Plan,” and “TALCM Program Plan”—­and a one-­page chart 
of an overview of costs for the cruise missile program.
