1977  193
development of a substantially more capable missile. A decision to 
develop a new missile can and should be made on considerations that 
are for the most part separable from those of providing a new basing 
system to maintain ICBM survivability.
II. The vulnerability of Minuteman has properly been a matter 
of continuing concern, and it is not too soon to pursue alternatives to 
­Minuteman silo-­basing. However, the threat to the Minuteman is not so 
imminent or certain that commitment to the development of a specific 
alternative system must be made now.
III. Minuteman will remain a significant survivable component of 
the US deterrent throughout most of the 1980s, that is, until the Soviets 
succeed in developing and deploying an adequate number of warheads 
of greatly improved accuracy [less than 1 line not declassified]. Such accu-
racy can be achieved either in a new generation of Soviet missiles, or by 
an upgrade in accuracy beyond that now projected in Soviet systems 
presently deployed. We are basing this conclusion on evaluation of 
the destructive interaction among attacking warheads (i.e., fratricide), 
which makes two-­on-­one attacks very difficult for purposes other than 
to increase system launch reliability.
IV. Conceptually, the trench-­based M–X system has advantages 
in survivability over Minuteman III against attacks of very high accu-
racy. However, an assessment of its survivability can only be demon-
strated through calculation and certain limited tests. Considering the 
complexity of the system, considerable uncertainty will remain in such 
assessments.
Survivability of the M–X relies on secrecy of location of the missile. 
If by technical or intelligence means the attacker can determine, even 
approximately, the location of the missile within the trench, the M–X 
system survivability would be severely compromised.
Whereas the vulnerability of Minuteman is particularly sensitive 
to achievement of high accuracies, as noted above, the M–X is vulnera-
ble to attack by large numbers of less accurate RVs.
M–X is based on a much smaller land area than is Minuteman. 
Therefore, the M–X trench-­based system is considerably more sus-
ceptible to “pin-­down” under protracted nuclear missile attack than 
is ­Minuteman III. The vulnerability of M–X to pin-­down, in combina-
tion with a possible shoot-­look-­shoot attack on M–X requires further 
assessment.
V. In addition to novel basing systems, less costly options, such as 
defensive measures, for enhancing survivability of existing Minuteman 
silos should be more fully explored, recognizing that the defended area 
need be only a few hundred meters across, thereby allowing the use of 
relatively simple protection measures.
