National Security Policy 1197 anxious to do whatever was necessary for security, but wished to avoid the development of a SPUTNIK complex. He felt we must be concerned with developing a gauge with which to measure the value of space pro­ grams. He noted that the cost of space programs was still rising when Dr. Glennan’s chart ended in 1970. He was not prepared to say that he would support a program of $2.4 billion for space activities in 1970. Dr. Glennan said he did not disagree fundamentally with the President’s views. However, in developing a long-­range plan he assumed that programs already started would continue. He had been careful to point out that at various specific dates in the future decisions should be made as to the continuance of various programs. This year had been one point of decision. He had already decided not to embark on a full-­scale man-­in-­space program beyond MERCURY. Dr. Glennan also pointed out that a substantial portion of the funds going into the development of vehicles would result in the ability to launch satellites or to engage in manned space flight. The President recalled that two years ago $1 billion was spoken of as the upper limit of the space program. Now it appears that the $1 billion ceiling will be breached in 1962. The President said he was reluctant to spend sums of this magnitude on space activities. He had no hesitation in supporting vast programs for the security of the country, or programs designed to acquire specific scientific information, or programs which were necessary for psychological reasons; but he believed the $1.9 billion which he had seen on the chart should be cut back. Mr. Gray then called on Dr. Kistiakowsky to present a report by a panel of the Science Advisory Committee on “Man in Space”. Dr. Kistiakowsky said he wanted to estimate the cost of landing a man on the moon. He assured the Council that what he had to say was very unpleas­ ant, particularly to Mr. Stans’ ears. Dr. Kistiakowsky said that to land a man on the moon after 1970, we needed to develop a rocket bigger than the SATURN rocket. A panel of the Science Advisory Committee, consist­ ing of industry men as well as long-­haired scientists, had concluded that the man-­in-­space program cannot now be justified on scientific grounds, but can only be justified on the basis of an emotional urge for exploration such as the urge which motivated Columbus. The President said that, like Isabella, we were hocking our jewels for this purpose. Dr. Kistiakowsky, continuing, said that the man-­in-­space program could also be justified on the political ground of prestige. He noted that no money could be saved by eliminating instrumented flights and going directly to manned flights because development of the instruments was an essential prerequisite of man’s flight into space. After this introduction, Dr. Kistiakowsky dis­ played charts showing that the total cost, 1961–1975, would be $3 billion for SATURN, and from $25.5 to $53 billion for NOVA. The composite expenditures for SATURN and NOVA, 1961–­1975, would be from $33.5
