Yugoslavia 859 —Should any intelligence exchange arrangement be surfaced to the USSR, moreover, it could result in a Soviet estimate of greater US-Yugoslav collusion and result in a negative Soviet attitude with unpredictable effects but possibly including Soviet efforts toward destabilization in Yugoslavia in the post-Tito period beyond those which the USSR may now contemplate. Such a concern would weigh heavily in Yugoslav consideration of undertaking the exchange agreement and may, in fact, limit the degree of that exchange. —It also must be noted that the Yugoslav intelligence service is believed to engage in acts of assassination against Croatian elements around the world. At a time when the US is fostering the ideal of human rights, a new arrangement, if it became known, would appear to be in contradiction to that ideal. —Also not to be overlooked is the unknown motivation behind this Yugoslav initiative and the possibility that the Yugoslavs subsequently could cite this arrangement to their own advantage. d. On balance, it probably would be to the advantage of the US to participate in an intelligence exchange with Yugoslavia. Such an exchange would provide an opportunity to obtain intelligence difficult to gain from any other source. Moreover, an intelligence exchange might benefit US foreign policy interests. This is a determination, however, which others should address. From an intelligence point of view, we see no overriding obstacles providing that the exchange arrangement is closely monitored. 4. Modality of Exchange: We would agree with Ambassador Eagleburger’s assessment that the arrangement for any intelligence exchange is of particular importance. a. [4 lines not declassified] b. Belgrade would be the preferred locale for the exchange and the DAO the logical instrument to effect it. Such an arrangement would have the advantage of postponing immediate decisions on what to provide by referring the question to Washington. Specific actions would be required before release of information: —The originating agency should approve the release of any of its reports used as a basis for information to be passed. —NFAC and DIA should make an assessment of the net gain to be derived in providing the general type of information that would be passed. —The US Ambassador in Belgrade should have final approving authority on the passing of specific information. —Approval should be obtained from national-level authorities of both countries to insure that information exchanged has highest level official sanction. —Intelligence exchanges should be conducted on a reciprocal basis. c. Long term commitments should not be made and the exchange arrangements should be continued only as long as they prove to be in the best interests of the US.
