794  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
23. For historical reasons, there has long been bitter enmity between 
the Haitians and the Dominicans. The Haitians particularly hate and 
fear Trujillo. As a consequence of this fear, the Duvalier regime was 
hesitant to provoke Trujillo by imposing the sanctions invoked against 
him by the Organization of American States, but finally did so.
24. In early 1959, when the Duvalier regime was threatened by 
Castro, the Dominican Republic was prepared to intervene to prevent 
hostile (Cuban) access to its land frontier with Haiti. It might again con-
sider doing so to forestall or counteract the rise to power of a Haitian 
regime associated with Castro. Dominican intervention in such a case 
would be more likely to take the form of active assistance to anti-Cas-
tro Haitian elements than of outright military invasion. Dominican 
support, however, would tend to discredit any Haitian faction which 
accepted it.
25. If the Trujillo regime were to be overthrown, the attitude of 
any successor government toward Haiti would depend on its character. 
A Dominican military junta, or any genuinely liberal regime, would 
probably be preoccupied with domestic problems, but would be as 
concerned as Trujillo to prevent or counteract the establishment of a 
pro-Castro regime in Haiti. On the other hand, a pro-Castro regime 
in the Dominican Republic would probably give active support to the 
establishment of a pro-Castro regime in Haiti.
HA–27.	
Telegram from the Secretary of State to the Embassy in 
Haiti1

Washington, October 18, 1960, 8:13 p.m.
124. For Ambassador Newbegin.2
Following for your information and guidance in discussing cur-
rent Haiti economic and financial problems. Following presentation 
credentials and initial discussions, your recommendations requested 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.5-MSP/10–1860. Confidential. 
Drafted by Warner; cleared in draft with Atwood, in substance with W. Ellory Dension, 
of the Loan Division of the Export-Import Bank, and with Hebert N. Higgins of the Office 
of the Special Assistance for Mutual Security Affairs; and signed by Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Milton Barall.
2 Ambassador Newbegin presented his credentials to the Haitian Government on 
November 4.
