296  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
in 1960–1961 a supersonic missile with improved guidance and a range 
of at least 100 n.m., suitable for employment against a wide variety of 
targets.
15. Naval-­launched missiles. The Soviet navy probably now has 
the capability to launch subsonic cruise-­type missiles from a few 
converted submarines of conventional design, although there is lit­
tle direct evidence of submarine-­launched missile development in 
the USSR. We estimate that the current system could deliver nuclear 
warheads against land targets within about 200 n.m. of the launching 
submarine. These cruise-­type missiles could be launched by a sub­
marine only after surfacing. We believe, however, that in 1961–1963 
the USSR will probably have a submarine-­launched ballistic missile 
system available for first operational use in a prototype submarine 
of new design. This system will probably be capable of delivering a 
nuclear warhead from a submerged submarine to a range of about 
1,000 n.m.
16. We estimate that during 1959–1960 the USSR will begin equip­
ping its surface fleet with surface-­to-­air missiles having a maximum 
range of 20 n.m., with effectiveness at altitudes from 50 feet to at least 
40,000 feet. A Soviet shipborne surface-­to-­air system for use against tar­
gets at higher altitudes and longer ranges will probably become avail­
able in 1960–1961. These systems, while primarily for air defense, could 
be modified for employment against surface targets. Late in the period 
of this estimate, the USSR will probably also have available a missile 
system for use in anti-­submarine warfare.
17. Soviet space programs. We believe that the ultimate foreseeable 
objective of the Soviet space program is the attainment of manned inter­
planetary travel. The program is supported by extensive Soviet research 
efforts in a number of related fields, including rocket propulsion, elec­
tronics, space medicine, astrobiology, astrophysics and geophysics. 
Present activities appear to be directed toward the collection of scien­
tific data and experience applicable to future space accomplishments, 
the ICBM program, and basic scientific research. Soviet requirements 
for space vehicles have probably been established for fairly specific sci­
entific and/or military purposes in accordance with a planned step-­by-­
step progression.
18. Soviet success in ballistic missile development and earth sat­
ellite launchings to date leads us to estimate a considerable Soviet 
capability for early accomplishments in space including: surveillance 
satellites, recoverable aeromedical satellites, lunar probes and impacts, 
lunar satellites and planetary probes to Mars and Venus (1958–1959); 
“soft landings” by lunar rockets and recoverable manned earth satel­
lites (1959–1960); a manned glide-­type high altitude research vehicle
