December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
581
168.
Telegram From the Consulate General in Jerusalem to the
Department of State1
Jerusalem, January 18, 1979, 1122Z
174. For the Secretary from Atherton. Subj: Meetings January 17
With Dayan and Begin.
1. In addition to morning and afternoon sessions with Israeli nego-
tiating team January 17 (septel),2 Sam Lewis and I had tete-a-tete lunch
with Dayan and Ciechanover and, at Dayan’s initiative, Sam, Herb
Hansell and I met privately for hour and three-quarters at the end of
day with Begin and Dayan at Prime Minister’s residence.
2. At lunch, Dayan spent considerable time probing our view of
events in Iran, their significance for area situation, and reasons for
Sadat’s invitation to the Shah to visit Aswan.3 I used occasion to make
point that, in our view, Iranian developments only underline impor-
tance of completing Egyptian-Israeli negotiations. In response to Day-
an’s question whether Sadat still wants to complete treaty, I said we be-
lieve he does and that he sees Egyptian-Israeli settlement as necessary
element in dealing with overall strategic situation with Egypt playing
stabilizing and moderating role in area.
3. I stressed to Dayan that the President and you continue to be
committed to helping achieve Egyptian-Israeli settlement. Having said
that, I emphasized the importance you attach to having some better evi-
dence than we now have that your personal involvement in resumed
Ministerial talks would have reasonable prospect of producing suc-
cessful outcome. I said we realize issues relating to West Bank/Gaza
side letter and ambassadorial exchange would have to be dealt with at
a higher level than Hansell and me, but that you did not want to re-
enter the talks only to get bogged down in haggling over Articles IV
and VI legalisms. It was therefore important to be able to demonstrate
that these issues could be cleared away. This could not be accom-
plished by simply rejecting Egyptian proposals now on the table. We
needed to start from common acceptance of fact that we are where we
are and look for ways to deal with those proposals which meet Israeli
concerns while retaining substance of what Sadat believes he needs.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840171–0492. Se-
cret; Immediate; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Cairo and
Tel Aviv.
2 In telegram 177 from Jerusalem, January 17, Atherton summarized at length the
first two discussions with the Israeli team on Articles IV and VI, held from 10 a.m. to
noon and from 4:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, P840171–0498)
3 The Shah of Iran and his wife, Empress Farah, arrived in Aswan on January 16. He
was escorted by Sadat to a secluded hotel on an island in the Nile. (Christopher S. Wren,
“Shah Lands in Upper Egypt, Looking Gaunt and Weary,” The New York Times, January
17, 1979, p. 1)
