Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I due to continuing stagflation. Policies to which the US contributed in the last six months have somewhat reduced this danger: (a) Macro-Economic Policies. At London, the seven leading industrial nations committed themselves to sensible growth and stabilization targets for 1977. These commitments strengthened pro-growth groups in the German and Japanese governments, and hence contributed to the German and Japanese expansionist decisions which will probably be taken soon, and which should yield good growth records in 1978, after a dismal German growth record in 1977. Summit stabilization pledges probably also strengthened the commitment of the French, British, and Italian governments to needed and painful anti-inflationary policies. (b) Financial Indebtedness. In your first six months, the US played a large role in bringing about international agreement to establish a new $10 billion IMF facility to make loans to developed and developing countries that are running deficits.4 This has been a major success, even if one has to look among the corset ads to find press articles about it. (c) Trade. Bob Strauss’ agreement with the European Commission has gotten the long-stalled Tokyo Round trade negotiations moving again, although there are still serious obstacles ahead.5 (d) Energy. Your domestic energy program6 set the stage for a continuing attack by the main industrial countries on one of the main threats to growth and price stability in the industrial world: the imbalance between global energy supply and demand. None of this is going soon to solve the economic problems facing the industrial countries, particularly the weaker European nations. But our policies in the first six months have helped to get things moving in the right direction. And they have helped to strengthen the international institutions—IMF, Summitry, GATT—within which further progress can be sought. 4 Reference is to the Witteveen facility, named after IMF Managing Director H. Johannes Witteveen, allowed the IMF to borrow funds from member countries to disburse to other member nations. The facility became operative in February 1979. 5 At a July 11 meeting in Brussels with representatives of the European Commission, Strauss outlined a timetable to continue the Tokyo Round talks (see footnote 4, Doc-
