1956 1231 740. Letter 48 from Johnson to McConaughy1 Letter No. 48 Geneva, October 31, 1956 Dear Walter: Just a very brief note late tonight in the hope that I will have a reply from Wang early tomorrow morning on the postponement of the meet­ ing. (I have just drafted a telegram letting you know the status as of tonight.) I felt November 15 was as far as I could safely shoot for and it is evident that even this date has thrown them into something of a spin as I still have no reply. I take it that it is not the intent of the Department that I build this up into too big an issue, and, if he doesn’t agree will have to play it by ear. I had thought of trying to handle the whole matter of postpone­ ment from Prague, but as I was very anxious to go over the summary and history of the talks decided that I must come down here to do that if they were to be gotten off to you in this week’s pouch which leaves tomorrow. I was and still am confident nothing dramatic is imminent there. We have had to work very hurriedly on these today in the expec­ tation I will be able to leave for Prague early tomorrow, and to connect with tomorrow’s pouch. It was physically impossible to recopy all of the White Paper in its revised form in time for tomorrow’s pouch. I am therefore enclosing with this letter only the major revisions with an indication as to where they are inserted and the full revised copy will be sent in Sunday’s pouch. I think that with a few minor changes it would be possible to use the article we have done for Current Foreign Relations as a substitute for the original summary section of the White Paper. Of course, this somewhat depends on the audience to whom we are primarily direct­ ing the White Paper. You will note that in our Foreign Relations article we have struck the note that in spite of their failures, the talks did accomplish something and it was therefore a good idea to hold them. This may be very good for some audiences but it inevitably tends to give the Chinese Communists something on the credit side of their ledger. One could make the approach that the talks were a complete failure because of Chinese Communist intransigence, but it seems to me this tends to impugn the wisdom of holding them. I have tried to preserve a balance between extremes here, but undoubtedly Walter and the Secretary will want carefully to consider particularly the note 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
