Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1021
worried. Then, the Soviet side would present its understanding and 
explain why the U.S. side need not be worried. The U.S. side had pre-
sented its numbers, which it thought was reasonable for both sides. The 
Soviet side had now presented its views of U.S. forces. Brooks added 
that he would be happy if Ladygin could guarantee that the U.S. side 
would have 75 B–2 bombers. Brooks said that, for the Soviet forces, 
however, the Soviet side had merely given him his numbers back. He 
told Ladygin that the Chief of the Soviet General Staff had agreed to 
present the Soviet side’s “reasonable plans.” Therefore, Brooks would 
take back to Washington that the Soviet side intended to download 
those specific missile systems shown and maintain the SS–N–18, and, 
by luck, Brooks had gotten all the figures right.
12. Specifically referring to downloading, Brooks said that he had 
heard three reasons in Ladygin’s presentation as to the justification of 
the Soviet downloading position. First, political—­the sides don’t sign 
treaties with the intention of breaking them. Second, technical—­the 
SS–N–18 could not be uploaded because of the design of the current 
front end section. Third, military—­even if the Soviet side had some 
breakout potential, so did the U.S. side (Trident II and heavy bombers). 
Brooks stated that he did not think that Washington’s reaction would be 
good. First, Washington would not believe that Brooks was so brilliant 
that he had gotten all of the Soviet side’s plans right. What Washington 
would understand was the Moiseyev changed his mind or that some-
one didn’t follow his orders and, thus, the Soviet side didn’t come 
through with their numbers. In terms of the Soviet side’s explanation 
of why there should be no concern about breakout, the U.S. side had 
heard these arguments before and Washington would be unimpressed.
13. Nazarkin said that the sides were working under the prem-
ise that all numbers were hypothetical and that if the Soviet side had 
presented its views, the sides would have been working from differ-
ent “planes.” He noted that this was obviously not to the U.S. side’s 
liking but that breakout potential—­which hypothetically favored the 
U.S. side—­would be better discussed in this fashion. Ladygin said that 
Brooks had mentioned the U.S. side’s view of Houston. He said that he 
had thought that Baker represented the U.S. government. The Soviet 
side believed that Houston had been agreed by Baker. The Soviet side 
had confirmed its part by implementing B–1 accountability.
14. Regarding the presentation, Ladygin said that if Brooks were to 
tell Washington that Moiseyev had changed his mind or that an officer 
hadn’t followed orders, he would mislead them. The Soviet General 
Staff had very disciplined officers that followed orders. In addition, if 
Brooks were to say that these numbers represented a realistic view of 
Soviet forces, he would mislead Washington further. Ladygin said that 
he was not in a position to tell the U.S. Congress to fund 75 B–2 bombers.
