March 27–December 31, 1979 931 moderate regime of King Hassan, but also to tip the strategic balance in the entire area. It is an undisputed fact that Algeria has renounced any territorial claim in the Sahara. The late President Boumedienne stated that in the most unequivocal terms at the Arab Summit held in Rabat in 1974. Therefore, the reopening of the issue at this point and the introduction of more tension and violence should be attributed to another factor, namely foreign intervention. It is mainly for this reason that we have responded positively3 and without delay to King Hassan’s request for military assistance despite his government’s acquiescence to the unprincipled policy of Arab rejectionists. Within two days from his request, Morocco received some badly needed light arms and ammunition. We are currently reviewing with them other requests for defense material. The situation in the horn of Africa is also a source of concern. The Soviets are trying to consolidate their grip on Ethiopia and South Yemen, thus threatening the Sudan and the Arab Peninsula. The use of Cuban soldiers and East German experts is growing steadily. Other countries in the region are watching these developments with apprehension. On the other hand, both Iran and Afganistan are witnessing upheavals that border on civil war. The situation there requires vigilance and scrutiny. It is an aggravating factor to many governments, especially those of the Gulf-States where any degree of tension is apt to increase the sense of uncertainty and insecurity that is in existence already. I believe that these events and any other developments which may take place in the future can be confronted effectively however alarming they might be. I believe that the Egyptian people, with their inherent moral and spiritual strength, together with their resourcefulness and historic awareness, are most capable of bearing that responsibility. We have a bright record of struggling against adverse influence in the most difficult circumstances. When it becomes an established fact that Egypt is strong enough militarily, the forces of aggression and subversion are deterred. A greater measure of stability occurs. Both of us would avoid many complications which would have consumed much of our energy and resources. I have no doubt that this is your reading of the geopolitical realities involved. It is incumbent upon us to increase our preparedness to meet such situations before it becomes too late. We can not wait and 3 On September 1, Sadat offered aid to the Moroccan military in its ongoing campaign against the Polisario Front in Western Sahara. (Edward Cody, “Sadat Offers Morocco Arms to Fight Rebels in Sahara,” The Washington Post, September 2, 1979, p. A32)
