March 27–December 31, 1979
931
moderate regime of King Hassan, but also to tip the strategic balance in
the entire area. It is an undisputed fact that Algeria has renounced any
territorial claim in the Sahara. The late President Boumedienne stated
that in the most unequivocal terms at the Arab Summit held in Rabat in
1974. Therefore, the reopening of the issue at this point and the intro-
duction of more tension and violence should be attributed to another
factor, namely foreign intervention. It is mainly for this reason that we
have responded positively3 and without delay to King Hassan’s re-
quest for military assistance despite his government’s acquiescence to
the unprincipled policy of Arab rejectionists. Within two days from his
request, Morocco received some badly needed light arms and ammuni-
tion. We are currently reviewing with them other requests for defense
material.
The situation in the horn of Africa is also a source of concern. The
Soviets are trying to consolidate their grip on Ethiopia and South
Yemen, thus threatening the Sudan and the Arab Peninsula. The use of
Cuban soldiers and East German experts is growing steadily. Other
countries in the region are watching these developments with
apprehension.
On the other hand, both Iran and Afganistan are witnessing up-
heavals that border on civil war. The situation there requires vigilance
and scrutiny. It is an aggravating factor to many governments, espe-
cially those of the Gulf-States where any degree of tension is apt to in-
crease the sense of uncertainty and insecurity that is in existence
already.
I believe that these events and any other developments which may
take place in the future can be confronted effectively however alarming
they might be. I believe that the Egyptian people, with their inherent
moral and spiritual strength, together with their resourcefulness and
historic awareness, are most capable of bearing that responsibility. We
have a bright record of struggling against adverse influence in the most
difficult circumstances.
When it becomes an established fact that Egypt is strong enough
militarily, the forces of aggression and subversion are deterred. A
greater measure of stability occurs. Both of us would avoid many com-
plications which would have consumed much of our energy and re-
sources. I have no doubt that this is your reading of the geopolitical re-
alities involved. It is incumbent upon us to increase our preparedness
to meet such situations before it becomes too late. We can not wait and
3 On September 1, Sadat offered aid to the Moroccan military in its ongoing cam-
paign against the Polisario Front in Western Sahara. (Edward Cody, “Sadat Offers Mo-
rocco Arms to Fight Rebels in Sahara,” The Washington Post, September 2, 1979, p. A32)
