1977  97
Secretary Brown: I guess we all agree that these forces must be addi-
tive to the forces procured for other reasons. Let’s turn now to our strat-
egy for East Asia. We’ve covered much of it already.
Mr. Christopher: It’s important that we continue to be an Asian 
power, not only for the smaller countries but for the Chinese.
Mr. Duncan: We need to maintain our current status, by, for exam-
ple, staying in the Philippines.
Mr. McGiffert: I would go further and look for a few small steps we 
can take in the direction away from reductions.
Secretary Brown: We can fill out the wing of aircraft in Korea. That’s 
a small plus, isn’t it?
Mr. McGiffert: Very small, because aircraft can be easily moved out.
Secretary Brown: Could we leave ground forces in East Asia?
Mr. McGiffert: We might consider leaving one of the Second Divi-
sion’s brigades in Okinawa, although there may be real estate problems.
Mr. Christopher: I see an advantage to moving all the ground forces 
back here; we might want to use them somewhere else.
Dr. Brzezinski: We must maintain our military presence in East Asia 
for now except for the withdrawal from Korea. We need to make some 
moves that show that our military commitment to Korea is unaffected 
by the withdrawals. I am worried about that recent Chinese statement. 
We need to look at some positive steps: perhaps more aircraft or rota-
tional exercises with ground force units.
Secretary Brown: Such things are part of a package that I am send-
ing to the President. I would like to sum up now.
We talked about Europe, in particular the important difference 
between declaratory policy and actual capability. Few of us believe that 
we can match the Soviets in Europe, although some thought (George 
Brown) that we could work toward a strategy of minimum territorial 
loss if we maintained 3 percent real growth per year for NATO spend-
ing. Most believe, however, that we would suffer territorial loss in a 
conflict. But we must continue to work on improving the conventional 
link of what I call the NATO Tripod (to distinguish it from the Strate-
gic Triad). We might have to augment our theater nuclear forces, but 
first we want to work on conventional force improvements. After this 
attempt has succeeded or failed, we will turn to theater nuclear forces; 
land-­based cruise missiles are critical.
We talked about what we might do outside of Europe during a war 
with the Warsaw Pact. We agreed that additional forces that could take 
initiatives against the USSR to make up for European losses could be 
important. But it is not clear exactly what we could do.
We discussed local wars. We agreed that the Middle East and the 
Persian Gulf are critical, and also that the forces needed for local wars
