January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1073 Vice President Mubarak said they (Israelis) would have access and be able to move freely. Time would make everything disappear. The President asked Secretary Vance if Ambassador Linowitz was ready with his language. Secretary Vance said yes, he would take it out with him. It is based on Camp David plus mention of religious sovereignty. Vice President Mubarak said this is very important. It is something that is felt by all Moslems. He had spent a whole day in Tunisia on nothing but Jerusalem. They never mentioned the West Bank or Gaza. It is as if God stays in Jerusalem. Secretary Vance noted that the next withdrawal occurs on the 26th of January. That is the last step until the final withdrawal. The President said that after the 26th all of us will need to show each other our plans and try to put them into effect in order to get maximum influence. Ambassador Linowitz is good here at home and with Begin. He communicates with Begin better than Ambassador Strauss. Vice President Mubarak replied that Begin is hard to get along with. He noted that Begin recently talked about Golan and how it would always remain Israeli territory. Dr. Brzezinski recalled that Begin had told him at one time that he would give up an eye, part of his arm, before he would part with the Sinai. He says one thing, but later he changes. Vice President Mubarak noted that Israel had said it was ready to negotiate with the Syrians. If some agreement could be reached, it would be very good to stop the Russians. The Soviets are doing their best with the Syrians. President Assad knows that it would be a disaster for his regime if Sadat succeeds in getting something. He knows he would have to follow. The President remarked that lately Assad had been worse than Qadhafi. He was more subservient to the Soviets. Vice President Mubarak said the situation was boiling internally in Syria. Secretary Vance said that once we are past the 26th, it will require pressure by both Egypt and the U.S. If we are not together, Begin will try to drive a wedge between us. Vice President Mubarak said that the recent meeting between Sadat and Begin was just to pave the way for pressure later. President Sadat feels 100% the same way about U.S. and Egyptian pressure. He wanted to pave the way with Begin psychologically and make it easier for the United States. Without the efforts of President Carter later on and with tremendous effort, we will get nothing. The President smiled and said he would prefer to remain in the background but that he was available if it was essential.
