National Security Policy 731 to think that it can safely pass on added costs to the consuming public. As a result these Boards of Directors soon price their product right out of the market. Mr. Gray asked Mr. Clarence Randall whether he wished to make any comments. Mr. Randall replied that he certainly did but he would try to spare the President and the Council a lengthy recital of his very strong feelings on the subject. Mr. Randall then expressed himself as very deeply concerned about the erosion of the U.S. trade position. He was convinced that what was really vital above all else was a contin­ uation of the policy of liberalizing trade which the President had pro­ claimed and stood for since the beginning of his first term. There was another matter which concerned him, said Mr. Randall, and which had not thus far been mentioned in the discussion. This was our obvious and increasing dependence on overseas markets for certain very important raw materials. As for the National Security Amendment, Mr. Randall [illegible in the original] it was never intended to apply other than in a very broad sense. We must therefore continue to look upon its appli­ cation in the broadest possible sense. The President expressed thorough agreement with Mr. Randall’s position on this point. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed the subject in the light of an oral presen­ tation by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs. b. Noted the President’s statement that, in reaching decisions as to restrictions on U.S. imports, one important consideration should be the damage to national security which could result from restrictions which might weaken the ties which bind us to our allies in the collective secu­ rity effort. c. Noted the President’s agreement that the interdepartmental study of the U.S. competitive position in world markets, being con­ ducted under Department of Commerce auspices, should when com­ pleted be referred to the National Advisory Council for consideration of the implications for the U.S. domestic economy and finances as well as the U.S. balance of payments. NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, subse­ quently circulated for the information and guidance of all departments and agencies. The action in c above, as approved by the President, subsequently referred to the Secretaries of Treasury and Commerce for appropriate implementation. [Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.] S. Everett Gleason
