With reference to Section IV of the Joint Commission report “with regard to the Note relating to the Preparatory Commission’s Commentary on Questions II (b) and III”, which deals with the question of military expenditure, the position of the American Delegation has been set forth in the statement of the delegations of the Argentine, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and the United States of America on page 49 of document C. P. D. C. A. 170 (i) and in the declaration of the delegations of Germany, the Argentine, Japan, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United States of America on page 97 of the same document.13 With reference to Section V of the report of the Joint Commission “with regard to the Preparatory Commission’s Commentary on Question V (a)”, concerning the principle on which it is possible to draw up a scale of armaments taking into account certain specified factors, the American Delegation’s position is contained in documents C. P. D. C. A. 170 (b)14 and C. P. D. C. A. 73 (b) page 3. With reference to Section VI of the Joint Commission report “with regard to Question I (a)” on the influence of the material resources of a country on its war strength, the point of view of the American Delegation is to be found in the text submitted by the delegations of the British Empire, Bulgaria, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and the United States of America on page 2 of document C. P. D. C. A. 170 and in the explanatory statement of the Delegation of the United States on pages 9 to 14, inclusive, of the same document.15 In connection with Section VIII of the Joint Commission report “with regard to Question VII” on the subject of regional self-sufficiency, the attitude of the American Delegation has been set forth in a statement of the Delegation of the United States on page 8 of document C. P. D. C. A. 170 (c).16 Should the Department desire to submit any written communication containing comment on the report of the Joint Commission, it will be necessary that I be so informed by telegraph in order that the document may reach the Secretariat before December 31st.
