Arms Control and Disarmament 1641 thinks he is thinking of this additional provision because he anticipates Khrushchev will turn down the President’s proposal. Then, if he does turn it down, evidently due to our friend’s home situation and the elec­ tion coming up, he does not feel he can let the thing break up. In any event, the President is very concerned about it and does not think they are on sound ground. Goodpaster said the President had questioned whether there was an agreement on the 50 kilometers. CAH said we did agree on that. (2) Goodpaster said the President will be in early tomorrow, around 7:30, and if we have our draft reply ready for his consideration he had told Arch Calhoun to send it over and Goodpas­ ter will make communications arrangements for it. CAH said we hope to have the draft within about half an hour. (3) Discussed Macmillan’s statement that he would be willing to send a brief message. CAH said Macmillan is not reserving the right to veto the thing, merely to talk to us again about it. 5:55—The President telephoned. Said that this statement of Macmil­ lan’s position is different from the previous one, and he doesn’t think we can object too much to this because he says “three powers”. Also doesn’t think our people can object too much if there is no atmospheric pollu­ tion. CAH said his understanding is that Macmillan would like to come back and go over the thing again in the event of their being a refusal to agree on the atmospheric. President reiterated he is now of the dispo­ sition it would not hurt us too much; looks with favor on the proposal as now laid before us. CAH said we hope to have a draft reply ready shortly; thinks we should say that if they do refuse to do anything on the atmospheric tests, we would consider again Macmillan’s suggestion. 459. Memorandum of Conversation Among Principals of Geneva Test Group1 Washington, April 15, 1959 SUBJECT Geneva Nuclear Test Negotiations 1 Source: Macmillan proposal to offer unilateral moratorium on underground and outer space testing while negotiations on those issues are underway. Secret; Limit Distri­
