apparently successful effort to avoid any necessity of allowing questions in which the United States is interested to be referred to League organs on which there was no American representation. While the solution arrived at technically keeps intact the Permanent Advisory Commission as at present constituted, i. e. a commission on which there are only represented military, naval and air experts of the States members of the Council, and while during the forthcoming Preparatory Disarmament Conference that body will retain its same designation, it may be pointed out that, for the duration and purposes of the Conference, this body becomes in reality a technical subcommittee of the Preparatory Commission. The enclosed communication from Sir Eric also points out that the Council has decided to increase the number of members of the Joint Commission, which is associated with the Preparatory Commission, by the addition of four members specially competent to deal with questions connected with industry and transport and to include a national of each of the following States: United States of America, Japan, Germany, and the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics. No request, however, is made of the Department at this time to inform the Secretariat of the name of the member of the American delegation, competent to deal with questions connected with industry and transport, who may be designated to sit with the Joint Commission. I shall endeavor to ascertain if and when such a request is to be made and shall inform the Department promptly. In this connection, it may be pointed out that this decision to permit American representation on the Joint Commission for the purposes and duration of the Preparatory Disarmament Conference was likewise influenced by the desire to avoid the necessity of submitting to League organs on which the United States was not represented questions in which it was interested. During the week-end following the adjournment of the Council and the Assembly of the League of Nations I took occasion to go to Geneva and at that time had an opportunity to discuss various matters informally with Mr. Madariaga, of the Secretariat of the League, and with Sir Eric Drummond. As pointed out in my telegram No. 69,70 both these officials told me that the view is generally held in Geneva that the heads of the various delegations,
