Europe. It is the policy of the Department to view with disfavor the
exportation from the United States of military equipment to, or intended for,
Russia, and in view of this fact the Department would not look with favor
on the sale at the present time by your Department of Liberty engines for
export to that country, Germany, Austria and Hungary. Article 170 of the
Treaty of Versailles89 provides that “importation into Germany of arms,
munitions, and war material of every kind shall be strictly prohibited”.
However, Article 201 of the same Treaty provides that
“During the six months following the coming into force of the
present Treaty, the manufacture and importation of aircraft, parts
of aircraft, engines for aircraft, [and] parts of engines for aircraft,
shall be forbidden in all German territory.”
Similar provisions to those of Articles 170 and 201 of the Treaty of
Versailles may be found in the Treaty of St. Germain (Articles 134 and 147,
respectively) and the Treaty of Trianon (Articles 118 and 131,
respectively).90 The foregoing treaty provisions would appear to have no
bearing on the importation into Germany, Austria and Hungary at this time
of civilian aircraft engines, parts, et cetera. Whether this is true of military
aircraft matefial, et cetera, is not so clear, in view of the provisions of
Article 170 of the Treaty, which might possibly be held to apply. In the
event that your Department should consider the sale of Liberty Aviation
engines in any of the three above mentioned countries, it would seem
advisable to give further consideration to this point. Upon your request the
Department will be pleased to take this point under further advisement.
Far East. In so far as China is concerned I would call attention to the
Presidential Proclamation of March 4, 1922,91 a copy of which is enclosed
herewith, making unlawful the exportation of arms and munitions of war to
that country which would seem to prevent the exportation to China of
aviation engines for military purposes. There would be no objection to the
exportation to China of aviation engines if this Department were satisfied
that they would be used for commercial purposes.
This Department would, however, like to be advised of any requests for the
sale of aviation material or war supplies to any foreign government, as the
