Apparently the intention of the draft reply is, by offering a program of
negotiations that would be acceptable, to conciliate Chinese nationalistic
feeling. My conviction is that any question whether one or another program
is acceptable to the Chinese must be discounted. No considerable element
of the Chinese will accept any one of them. … It is my hope that wide
publicity will be given by the Department to the protest from Eugene Chen,
in accord with the lines of a later telegram which will give a suggested
reply, which reduces to absurdity the claims his faction and other Chinese
factions have advanced and which also have been put forward by certain
Americans who have been propagating the idea that by a wholesale
renunciation of our rights we would win over the Chinese.
4. It seems to me, assuming as granted that we are sincere in our
declarations of sympathy in regard to what is genuine in the aspirations of
the Chinese people internationally, that it is not our immediately essential
problem to declare in the face of Chinese importunities how much we will
or must concede of our rights; it is to decide how we can arrange as a
practical matter to grant what is necessary to the fulfillment of our own
obligations and to avoid appearing to fail in carrying out the promises we
made at the Washington and the Tariff Conferences. …
5. I assume your intention is to make the proposed draft reply public. If this
were done, it would be considered by those few officials who read it as an
academic recital of details not in themselves of any interest. It would seem
to the very primitive native press, and to Chinese opinion in the large,
merely to indicate that our Government felt lukewarm toward the proposals
made by the British; that our Government was unable or unwilling to
suggest of its own accord any alternative except generalities which are
rendered meaningless by the “joker” they contain; and that our
Government, in disavowing imperialist motives and avowing readiness to
accept for its nationals the same treatment which is acceptable to the other
nations, is abandoning the leadership accruing to it out of the Conference at
Washington and is reverting to the policy by which other nationalities are
allowed to do the fighting for the United States. I admit regretfully that
among the Chinese there is rather generally a disposition to believe that we
may be expected always to make concessions up to the utmost limit and
