348
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
131.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, January 2, 1980, 1–3:25 p.m.
SUBJECT
Iran, Christopher Mission to Afghanistan, SALT and Brown Trip to China
PARTICIPANTS
The President
CIA
The Vice President
Deputy Director Carlucci
State
White House
Secretary Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Deputy Secretary Christopher
Hamilton Jordan
Lloyd Cutler
Defense
Jody Powell
Secretary Brown
David Aaron
Deputy Secretary Claytor
MINUTES
The President began by saying that the NSC would first discuss
Iran and Pakistan and then reduce the membership to the statutory
members for a more private session.
Dr. Brzezinski said that the Secretary of State would update the
Council on the Iranian hostage situation and, time permitting, there
should be a discussion of our longer term strategy towards the Iranian
Government.
The Secretary of State said that we had a successful vote on Monday
in the UN Security Council2 and that since that time we have been
working with others to clear up the language of the resolution on
sanctions. He thought this would be completed by the end of the day.3
The President asked what the prospects were for the approval of
the sanctions resolution. The Secretary of State replied that he could
not guarantee nine votes. He said that we had eight certain votes, but
not nine. The Secretary of Defense pointed out that there will be new
members on the Council. The Secretary of State responded that we
would gain the vote of the Philippines who were coming on the Council,
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, NSC Institutional Files (H–
Files), Box 57. Top Secret; Sensitive. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room at the
White House.
2 December 31. See Document 128.
3 The draft sanctions resolution is attached to the January 6 Iran Update memoran-
dum from Saunders to Vance. The draft asks that all states impose trade sanctions against
Iran and notes French and British objections to the resolution. (Department of State,
Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot
82D85, Iran Update Jan 1980)
