Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Attachment Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter6 Washington, January 9, 1978 SUBJECT U.S. Offers in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations This is a brief report on the status of the multilateral trade negotiations (MTN) in Geneva, particularly with respect to the tabling of U.S. and other countries’ offers in mid-January, which will mark the beginning of the negotiating stage. You will recall that last summer we agreed with the European Economic Community (EC) to a timetable for getting the negotiations under way.7 This timetable required that offers on tariff and nontariff measures would be tabled during the week of January 15, 1978. The tabling of such offers would set the stage for the months of hard bargaining that will be necessary to conclude an agreement. The countries participating in the MTN have agreed that offers on agricultural tariffs and nontariff measures would be made in response to specific requests from other countries. Offers on particular industrial nontariff measures would also be made in response to such requests and would be additional to multilateral negotiations that are directed toward the development of general rules or codes on government procurement practices, subsidies and countervailing duties, product standards, customs valuation, quantitative restrictions, and import licensing. Outlines or texts of draft agreements on these subjects have been developed to serve as negotiating documents. An informal understanding has been reached that tariff offers by developed countries on industrial products would be tabled according to a harmonization formula proposed by Switzerland that requires larger reductions on high rates of duty than on low rates of duty and that would result in an average tariff cut of 40 percent. It appears, however, that the EC will not be in a position to table a detailed offer to achieve this result. In fact, as you know from your discussions last week in Paris and Brussels,8 the EC’s ability to table any tariff offer, in 6 Limited Official Use. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the page. 7 See Document 43. 8 Memoranda of conversation of Carter’s meetings with Giscard in Paris and Jenkins in Brussels, both on January 6, are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
