Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 687 Secretary Vance: It is a serious mistake to go ahead with the rescue because (1) the Red Cross visit has accounted for all hostages and all of them are OK;2 (2) our allies are beginning to move—on April 21 they will plan to adopt sanctions. We should not go forward. There will be loss of lives (5–15 hostages); risk to other Americans and maybe Europeans; and our allies will not understand this. Secretary Brown: When do you expect the hostages then to be released? Secretary Vance: I don’t know—but maybe one-third of them will get killed in this. Maybe after the Majlis elections. Secretary Brown: Majlis will be less amenable to release Zbigniew Brzezinski: We have the problem of timing. If we do not now undertake the rescue, later may be too late. There is also a strategic issue here—Iran is drifting leftward, and we need to lance the boil (which is the hostage issue). The President: Schmidt is deeply concerned over the negative effects of pressure in Iran,3 and I am also concerned over a failure to act. If the Majlis meets and nothing happens, we will be faced with lengthy detention. Lately the Iranian government has not been disavowing the threats to the lives of the hostages. I don’t think our rescue option will itself improve as time passes. If we are left with only the military option, the element of surprise will diminish, whereas now the economic sanctions are lulling the militants. On balance, it is better to go ahead. Delay will cause deterioration in the region. I will stick with the decision I made. Zbigniew Brzezinski: (Summarizes questions for further discussion: nature of any additional punitive action? What governments to be informed, and when, about the rescue? What disinformation campaign? How to get Americans out of Iran? Possible foreign reactions, notably Soviet? Reaction to a possible failure? Updating the operational scenario?) Secretary Vance: (Feels that it would be a mistake to consider any additional punitive actions.) Zbigniew Brzezinski: It is important that we do not look as if we are acting out of desperation. Should examine carefully other options. 2 On April 15, a Red Cross representative in Tehran visited all 50 hostages during a 7-hour visit. (Memorandum from Saunders to Vance, Christopher, and Newsom, April 15; Department of State, Official Files of [P] David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Lot 82D85, Iran Update April 1980) Lang submitted a full description of the Red Cross visit. (“Visit to the Hostages,” April 15; ibid.) 3 See Document 253.
