584 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 the statements of Dr. Brzezinski and Bob Komer. They are also feeling pressure because they are not doing enough and their public opinion supports us on the Olympics. The President suggested two dates to trigger allied action: two weeks after the Majlis first meets or after the World Court ruling. The President suggested that Allies, such as the FRG, could say that the United States has been patient and they (the Allies) have been patient; they want to be friends with Iran, and they want to help deter the Soviets. But if after a couple of weeks beyond the dates the President had indicated, the Iranians are still unprepared to release the hostages, they would simply have to break diplomatic relations and impose sanctions. The President said that if the Allies could be persuaded to take that position, he thought it would help quite a bit. He thought that this action would be sufficient to get the hostages released. Dr. Brzezinski asked why he thought that. The President replied because he thought a break in relations with all the Western countries and Japan would be extremely damaging, both politically and economically. It would affect Bani Sadr, Khomeini and Beheshti. Indeed, the President said he did not see any other real threat as tangible and as effective as that. Dr. Brzezinski said to get the Allies to do this will be quite difficult. They will see in breaking relations a threat of a retaliatory oil cutoff. Therefore, we will have to be damn convincing that we will take action which could have the same result. Admiral Turner said that he was skeptical that a break in relations would impact on Khomeini or the Iranian Parliament. It would impact on Bani Sadr, but he does not have the power to release the hostages. Admiral Turner said that he thought that Khomeini had reneged on the earlier scenario because he saw the secular authority of Bani Sadr gaining too much power. The President was then handed a message which he reported as indicating that Bruce Laingen’s wife had said that the hostage families were meeting on the possibility that the Shah might be returned to the United States for medical treatment. They opposed that.11 Mr. Powell reported that the families do not want the Shah back in the country. 11 In their March 22 letter, the hostage families wrote Carter that they had organized themselves into the Family Liaison Action Group and that they were “alarmed and outraged” by reports of U.S. involvement with the Shah, particularly Jordan’s presence in Panama. The group felt that the United States “should in no way be negotiating, publicly or privately, on behalf of the Shah.” The families were prepared to “object strongly and publicly” if the Shah returned to the United States or was treated in a U.S. military hospital “because we know such action will ruin what chances may be left for getting our people out of Iran.” They also charged Carter with being “insensitive” to their feelings and those of the American people. (Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 3/80)
