Chapter 4, February–April 1990 615 concessions we are prepared to make. Now it is for the Soviet leaders to undertake a new decision. An exchange at the top level will be required. At this point Gen. Peresypkin arrived, and Akhromeyev suggested that we return to the question of ALCMs, and asked Peresypkin to begin with comments on the distinguishability rules in the Moscow elements of common ground. Peresypkin: I have a number of questions on the ALCM paper. On the external differences, each side is free to interpret those differences the way it wants to. This might lead to an impasse. So what we might have as a result is we have one set in mind and you have another set. Can you be more specific? Then we might agree on the differences between nuclear and non-­nuclear ALCMs. Bartholomew: Notice there are two standards, and that will limit any possible misunderstanding—­differences must be observable to national technical means and visible to on-­site inspection. What we have thought of and talked of in Moscow are size, length, diameter, more than just color. So the external differences meet a standard—­ observable by NTM. Other differences are visible to on-­site inspection. Note the on-­site inspection. You can come and look and we can go and look. Burt: In Geneva we discussed functionally-­related observable differences, and I asked Soviet experts to give me examples of functionally-­ related observable differences. I never heard one example. We then worked to narrow differences. Your side was not satisfied with national technical means, and in Moscow we made a big concession in allowing experts to observe with on-­site inspection. Bartholomew: Please look at the next point. To get at the question of these differences we exchange information and exhibit the missiles to confirm the information and confirm the distinguishing features. Burt: We have an Air Force General on our delegation, we would be happy to set up a meeting to discuss this further tomorrow morning. Bartholomew: What we have constructed in our proposal is a whole system of openness—NTM, information exchange, on-­site inspection—­to give each side confidence in distinguishing between nuclear and conventional ALCMs. One last point, after the missiles are identified you get to go to a non-ALCM heavy bomber base or to a converted heavy bomber base and go to the weapons storage area and say you want the 7th, 11th, and 19th missiles pulled and you will be able to see that they are not nuclear-­armed missiles. Peresypkin: You took the time to try to convince me this was enough to distinguish nuclear from conventional ALCMs. You have confirmed my fears. This is not an idle question. We are concerned by the fact that bombers have the capability to deliver nuclear weapons unless we agree on distinguishing features. The points for mounting of missiles, the mounting units themselves, are different for nuclear than
