140
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
other demands for US-flag tankers, the proposed level of cargo prefer-
ence would not create a demand for new US tanker tonnage which
would adversely affect the current world tanker surplus. Embassy rep-
resentatives were unhappy and recalled our London summit pledge to
reject protectionist measures. We have undertaken an urgent review of
how to deal with the problems which the preference measure poses for
our Treaties of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation.” In the margin
adjacent to this portion of Vance’s report, Carter wrote: “This is my de-
cision. We’ll just have to make the best of it.” (Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 18, Evening Re-
ports (State): 7/77)
On July 11, the administration announced that it would support
the introduction of cargo preferences. The preferences were to be
phased in over a 5-year period, increasing 1 percent per year from an
initial rate of 4.5 percent, so that by 1982 9.5 percent of all U.S. oil im-
ports were to be carried in U.S. ships. (“Carter Would Ship More Im-
ported Oil On Tankers of U.S.,” The New York Times, July 12, 1977, page
39) Carter’s support for cargo preferences proved controversial. Re-
publicans charged that the decision was motivated more by politics
than by the national interest and that it represented “a blatant political
payoff” for the political and financial support Carter received from the
maritime sector during the 1976 Presidential election campaign. On Oc-
tober 19, the House of Representatives voted against the cargo prefer-
ences bill; many contemporary observers attributed the bill’s defeat at
least in part to the allegations of political payback lodged against the
Carter administration, as well as Congressional supporters of the bill.
(Congress and the Nation, volume V, 1977–1980, pages 297–299; Judith
Miller, “Republicans Attack Cargo Preference,” The New York Times,
August 2, 1977, page 50 (quotation is taken from this article); and
Martin Tolchin, “House Defeats Bill to Give U.S. Tankers Cargo Prefer-
ences,” The New York Times, October 20, 1977, page 1)
