delegation to the Plebiscitary Commission and stated that he did not know
of any such opinion expressed by them and if such opinion was expressed it
was not that of the Arbitrator or of the United States he was sure. The
Secretary then stated that he understood the memorandum to be a definite
setting forth of the fact that Peru would make no practical suggestion for the
settlement of the matter and insisted upon having possession of both the
towns of Tacna and Arica. He said that if this were the case it would seem
useless to carry on further conversations with the Peruvian Ambassador;
that he felt that it would be necessary for him to make a proposal of his own
which could be taken or rejected by the two Governments as they saw fit;
that it appeared impossible to reach any solution of the matter if the
Peruvian Government was not willing to look at the matter from common
sense and a practical standpoint. The Secretary further said that it was the
first intimation which had been made that Peru insisted on Arica being
turned over to Peru alone. The Ambassador then tried to point out that he
meant to convey this same idea in his conversation with Mr. Stabler on
September 4.40 After this discussion as to the general tenor of the
memorandum presented by the Ambassador in which Mr. Ellis interjected
several remarks, apparently in the desire to better his client’s position
before the Secretary, the Secretary stated that the preliminary verbal
statement of the Ambassador suggesting a line to the south of the Azapa
Valley as a southern boundary of the Peruvian part of the province was
entirely out of the question and was nothing but a slight modification of
Peru’s original proposal for a line and a port to Bolivia at Vitor and that it
could not be considered at all. The Ambassador stated that as the Secretary
had indicated that suggestions from Peru would be in order he had now
complied with his instructions and had presented the suggestions which his
Government desired to make. The Secretary reiterated his statement that he
now felt that it would be necessary for him to make a definite proposal and
that he was considering doing this.
STABLER
39 Supra.
40 N. B. The Peruvian Ambassador stated to Mr. Stabler, Sept. 4, 1926, that
Peru would be glad to consider any proposal the Secretary of State might
