976 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III “papers which describe the US position and what we believe to be the Group of 77 position on major international economic issues, and what we believe to be areas of agreement and disagreement. Subjects covered include trade, resource transfers, commodities, monetary issues, debt, technology transfer, illicit payments and multinational corporations. The Jamaicans will comment on these papers before Cooper sees Patterson.” In the margin adjacent to this section of Vance’s report, Carter wrote: “Keep me informed with an outline of the issues.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 19, Evening Reports (State): 6/78) Eight papers on North-South issues were given to Patterson on June 23; copies of all eight are attached to a June 23 memorandum by Alexander Watson, Director of the Office of Development Finance in the Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs, Department of State. (Memorandum from Watson to Cooper and other Department of State principals; National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, Richard N. Cooper, 1977–1980, Lot 81D134, Box 3, Memorandums RNC—1978) Carter subsequently sent all eight papers to British Prime Minister James Callaghan, under cover of a July 7 letter in which he noted that he “would very much appreciate” Callaghan’s opinion on them. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 20, United Kingdom: Prime Minister James Callaghan, 6–9/78) 308. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, undated Outline of Major North/South Issues I. Trade US and G–77 agree on desirability of maintaining open trading system with expanded opportunities for LDC exports. Disagreement focuses on the following: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 19, Evening Reports (State): 7/78. No classification marking. Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Most of LDC demands seem unreasonable. JC.” The paper was originally sent to Carter under cover of the June 28 Evening Report from Vance, who noted: “You requested an outline of the issues involved between the US and the Group of 77. [See
