Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII “qualitative change” had taken place in the region with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and said he told Carter he would be discussing with Amb Hummel how to approach Pakistani requirements and how best to proceed from here in light of events in Afghanistan. Zia said he was especially encouraged by Carter assurance that he would do his best “to keep our differences away from this important issue.” 6. He then reviewed recent Afghan-Pakistan events, noting that short of involving itself physically, all concerned had said the USSR would go to any lengths to protect the existence of the regime that overthrew Daoud in April 1978. “But in the end, the Russians have become involved physically” in massive numbers, with three divisions in Afghanistan already and 5–7 divisions poised to enter. He had reports that Soviet troops have been seen no more than ten miles from Parachinar, on Pak-Afghan border; they already occupy Ghazni, Jalalabad, and Kandahar. “We will confront them, no doubt,” he said, “but we must know where we stand.” 7. He recapitulated his discussion with Soviet Amb last week in which Soviet Amb asked for “understanding” of Soviet position. “What understanding?” Zia says he asked; “You have committed aggression against my neighbor. You say the regime invited you in. Who invited you?” When Amb said Babrak, Zia replied that Babrak was not in power when troops descended on Kabul. Soviet Amb fudged, stressing Soviet friendliness for Pakistan and emphasizing gains which could accrue from cooperation between the two countries. Zia says he demurred, citing Pakistan principles and the presence of Soviet troops in Afghanistan. “Will you get someone to call you into Pakistan too?” he asked. 8. Soviets have not issued “threats against us,” Zia said, but the line “is clear. If they can enter Afghanistan, they can enter Pakistan too.” He added his concerns about India to this mix as well, concerns based on presence of Indira Gandhi as either “king-maker or queen herself.”4 He noted Soviet relationship with India and Indian noises about possible arms for Pakistan from Pakistan friends. “India,” he said, “can forget that we will ever look east after what has happened in Afghanistan. It would be in India’s interest to share our concern about that.” But, he concluded, Pakistan must know where it stands with the U.S. Brzezinski statement says U.S. will stand by 1959 agreement, even to “defending Pakistan, if necessary.” President Carter’s statement of 4 January “gives impression that nuclear issue need not 4 Indira Gandhi became Prime Minister of India on January 14.
