676
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
affecting either his basic acceptability as despot or his ability to govern.
He is honest, works extremely hard, is omnipresent, engages in frenetic
activity (sometimes we suspect for its own sake), all of which creates
an image of concern, of things happening, and of forward movement.
Countless mass rallies and provincial trips promote what Ceausescu
terms “socialist democracy” and are designed to give important groups
and citizenry in general a sense of identification with regime and
Ceausescu personally, while total control is retained. Ceausescu has
carefully nurtured a number of separate and sometimes competing
systems to provide information from grass roots to him, result of which
is that he is probably as well informed as any ruler can be within
limitations of a 24-hour day. Yet he has also institutionalized a mecha-
nism whereby ordinary citizens can address petitions for redress of
grievances directly to him, thereby furthering the useful image that he
is just and will see that justice is done if only a way can be found to
bypass the stupid and perhaps venal advisors around him who keep
the “truth” from him. Finally, he has successfully implanted belief
among all Romanians, perhaps also wearing a little thin, that price
for Romania’s foreign policy independence from Soviets is internal
orthodoxy: While we view this as a myth and believe Ceausescu could
liberalize substantially without incurring Soviet wrath, such a premise
is extraordinarily helpful in muffling dissent and insuring the “order
and discipline” he feels necessary to achieve his ambitious economic
goals. Some senior advisors (e.g. PM Verdet, FonMin Andrei) are now
privately expressing a variant, arguing that present controls must be
maintained until economic development has been attained, and imply-
ing that realization can take place thereafter.
9. Withal, Ceausescu has his weaknesses, but we do not consider
them either singly or in combination as overly dangerous to stability
of his regime. He is vain; he can make shoot-from-the-hip snap judg-
ments and decisions which adversely affect achievement of goals he
seeks to accomplish; reliability of information on domestic develop-
ments and policy alternatives he is provided depends on candor of his
advisers, a trait his style does not encourage; his toleration of son
Nicu’s aberrations vividly illustrates adage that, in this society of
alleged equals, there are those who are more equal than others. In
his major departure from pragmatic politics, he fervently believes in
creating the new Communist man—a person technically competent to
perform in a modern economy but ideologically motivated by the tenets
of “revolutionary communism”. This is a tough task anywhere, and
more so here where Romanians have historically been generally indif-
ferent to ideologically based doctrines of human behavior; while the
education system and the creative arts have suffered, most Romanians
do not take this element seriously and have shrugged it off as a personal
idiosyncrasy of their otherwise quite rational ruler.
