202
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
Please undertake
the above,
and inform
the President
on
implementation.2
Zbigniew Brzezinski
2 Attached but not printed is Newsom’s October 10 covering memorandum to
Saunders, forwarding Brzezinski’s memorandum. Citing Brzezinski’s memorandum as
indicative of the President’s interest in the situation in Afghanistan, Newsom observed:
“with the changed circumstances and some of the indications which we have had of
Amin’s desire to improve the contact with us, the time has come for a further review
of our basic approach to Afghanistan.” Newsom further noted that recently Amin had
sought to improve communication with the United States and, with Amstutz due back
in Washington for consultation, his presence could be a “focal point” for a review of
current U.S. options regarding Afghanistan. Newsom contributed to that review in the
SCC meeting on October 26. See Document 76.
74.
Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the
Department of State1
Kabul, October 9, 1979, 0835Z
7392. Subj: The Position of Amin and Afghanistan’s Independence:
Part Two of Two. Ref: Kabul 7326.2
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary. Though the dominant position of the Soviets in
Afghanistan is probably due more to Hafizullah Amin than to any
other Khalqi leader, Amin is a nationalist. His vision for Afghanistan
may be a Marxist one—but it is for an independent state. Amin is
probably sincere in professing a desire for friendly relations with the
rest of the world, but he has made clear too that he sees Afghanistan
as belonging naturally to the pro-Moscow camp of “Socialist” countries.
Though claiming that his country will not meddle in the internal affairs
of other countries, he speaks of supporting progressive and liberation
forces everywhere, and the Pakistanis are worried about Amin’s fre-
quent abstruse references to the Afghan peoples between the Oxus and
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790462–0311.
Confidential; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, and New
Delhi.
2 See Document 72.
