Comprehensive Test Ban
415
and what strings might be attached; and steadiness in any event is the
best stance both in dealing with the Soviets and in terms of domestic re-
actions. But—this said—we should certainly greet it as a significant
step and avoid any suggestion that we are downplaying it. Thus, I
think the best line might be to say:
—We regard it as a positive step toward a fully comprehensive test
ban;
—It is a helpful evolution in the Soviet position on a key issue in
the CTB negotiations;
—We will want to give the Soviet statement full consideration in
the context of the proposals and positions that both sides have ad-
vanced in the Geneva negotiations.
176.
Memorandum From the Acting Director of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency (Keeny) and the Director of the
Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs (Gelb) to Secretary of
State Vance1
Washington, November 3, 1977
CTB Developments
Summary
Following up on Brezhnev’s 60th Anniversary speech,2 the Soviet
CTB Delegation has presented to our Delegation important proposals
which could provide a way out of the CTB impasse. The essence is that
the Soviets are now willing to accept a three-year halt in conducting
PNEs and are willing to have a three-year treaty banning weapon tests
which would enter into force without Chinese and French accession.
There are still a number of critical points for us which are unclear or not
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P770197–1650. Se-
cret. Drafted by Alan Niedle (ACDA/MA); and cleared by Edward Ifft (PM/DCA),
Cowey, Avis Bohlen (EUR/SOV), Wreathem Gathright (S/P), Shulman, and Louis
Kahan (PM). A stamped notation on the bottom of the first page of the memorandum
reads “CV.”
2 On November 2, Brezhnev announced that he wanted a treaty that banned “nu-
clear weapons tests, so that no such tests will be conducted underground, as well as in the
atmosphere, in outer space and under water,” including a “moratorium on nuclear explo-
sions for peaceful purposes, along with a ban on all tests of nuclear weapons for a definite period.”
(“Address by President Brezhnev Before the Central Committee of the CPSU: Halting the
Production and Testing of Nuclear Weapons [Extract],” November 2, 1977, Documents on
Disarmament, 1977, pp. 679–680. Emphasis in the original.)
