El Salvador  613
highly obtained purposeful and, unfortunately, extremely versatile and 
able student leaders in international communism’s pay. As a group, 
they still do not appear to have been completely disabused of their illu-
sions with respect to Castroism and what it stands for. One thing is 
clear: Lemus is anathema to the large majority and is unlikely ever to 
re-­win students’ confidence or support.
9. Campesino. Thus far this overwhelming majority had taken no 
part in current disturbances. The campesino has [illegible in the origi-
nal] some interest as a spectator but no propensity to include his voice 
of his “machete” in current happenings. Embassy knows that travelling 
pro-Castro/Communist teams have been proselytizing to the country-
side but as yet they do not appear to have succeeded in setting imagi-
nations afire. Lemus, as a President, is thought to be relatively popular 
among this class, but as a man, Osorio is still reversed by the campesino 
and the “little” man of Salvador. Thus, while dormant at the moment, 
the campesino is not happy or content with his lot and a spark in the 
right place could set this very volatile element afire. Moreover, should 
the situation in the capital become chaotic at any time, the campesino’s 
weight can be expected to make itself felt.
While the fall of the Lemus government does not appear immi-
nent, should it occur, it would in all likelihood take the form of a vol-
untary abdication or ouster. In case of the former, the Vice President 
constitutionally would succeed to office, i.e., in the following order: 
Costa, Esquivel, Alvarez, Escapini. None is a military man. While much 
would depend on attendant circumstances, there is a strong chance that 
the military would intervene and set up a governing Junta with the 
results described below.
If Lemus were ousted, the Communists would not be in a position 
to seize control. The Osorio strategy and tactics to [illegible in the orig-
inal] have been effectively hidden and would seem to indicate that he 
would continue to remain in the background and refrain from imme-
diately taking over. However, the possibility should not be entirely 
discounted.
The most likely development in case of an ouster would be a mil-
itary Junta. In such case the odds are that the power would shortly 
thereafter be transferred to Osorio, who would seek to constitutionalize 
his tenure, possibly through elections.
The advent of Osorio would still keep El Salvador oriented toward 
the West and favorable towards the Osorio but by no means as friendly 
as under the present government. I am not completely certain that 
Osorio would return to his former strong anti-Communist position 
although there is good reason to believe that in deference to the military 
he would do so. The winds of nationalism are blowing more strongly 
here than for some time. Criticism of the U.S. has been stirred from
