58 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I president’s spokesman on foreign policy; second, that I had no objection to Brzezinski’s offering Carter independent foreign policy advice—in fact I encouraged the president to seek a variety of views—but that I must be able to present to him my own unfiltered views before he made any foreign policy decision. Carter readily agreed, and we turned to other subjects, including other names for cabinet posts.” (Ibid., page 34) 13. Memorandum From Zbigniew Brzezinski, Richard Gardner, and Henry Owen to President-Elect Carter1 New York, November 3, 1976 This memorandum contains our recommendations for action in ten key areas of foreign policy and national security where we believe action should be taken in the six months between election day and May 1, 1977. In each of these areas, we have divided our recommendations into two parts—decisions you will have to face (e.g., because of legislative requirements or already scheduled international negotiations) and further decisions we recommend as being in the national interest. In preparing this memorandum, we have drawn upon the “option papers” supplied by Jack Watson as well as our own independent study and analysis. [Omitted here are an introductory paragraph and the table of contents.] 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 41, Transition: Foreign Policy Priorities, 11/76. No classification marking. Sent to Carter under a November 3 memorandum from Brzezinski, Gardner, and Owen, indicating it contained the “foreign policy priorities for the first six months.” Another copy of the memorandum is in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Counsel and Deputy Chief of Staff Files, Transition Files, Transition Notebooks. In addition to this memorandum and overview memoranda prepared by Ball, Sorensen, Warnke, and Vance, Carter– Mondale Policy Planning Group members Lake and Schaffer prepared 42 separate foreign and defense policy options papers. Copies of these papers are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, 1976–1977 Transition File (Anthony Lake), Box 112, Options Papers: Foreign and Defense Policy (Originals): Undated [I], [II], and [III] and in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Counsel and Deputy Chief of Staff Files, Transition Files, Transition Notebooks.
