930 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III MECHANISM FOR ESTABLISHING THE COMMISSION Two choices exist for establishing the Commission (1) Executive Order A Commission authorized by Executive Order can be initiated immediately with a prescribed membership; be given carefully prescribed responsibilities; and operate under a statutory base for agency funding and manpower sharing. This approach would clearly define Presidential interest, allow more direct control over the Commission by the White House, and provide a test of public reaction and interest before the Administration modifies programs or requests legislation. Such authorization, however, would still require an appropriation from the Congress. To enable the Commission to be established immediately, some money could be allocated from the President’s Discretionary Account while an appropriation was being sought. (2) Executive Order Accompanied by a Message on World Hunger to the Congress This variation of the Executive Order mechanism offers the advantage of option (1), but also provides an opportunity to communicate the recommendations of the World Hunger Working Group, to broaden the framework within which the Commission will conduct its work and offers an opportunity to make near-term changes in existing programs. Perhaps most important it provides a very appropriate opportunity to lay out your overall world hunger policy, without having to wait until the Commission completes its report. To wait that long without any major statement from you might be too long. Such a message could also contain a request for an appropriation for the Commission. DECISION Executive Order Only Executive Order and Message to Congress11 BUDGET We recommend a budget of $2 to 2.5 million per year for each year of the Commission’s operation. There are three options for funding: (1) Funding by the Agencies Utilizing funds from agency budgets is difficult because most funds are already committed. In addition, present interagency conflicts might be aggravated as the agency contributing the bulk of the support could feel it had a preemptive right over the work of the Commission. 11 Carter indicated his approval of this option.
