536 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement I thought we had made. Agreement in principle should be sufficient to reach agreement on words. 30. I said we did have clash of views on nature of dispute in Taiwan area, but I had taken position from beginning of talks important first task is not to reach agreement on nature dispute, but to agree we will not go to war about it. I had not tried impose our views on him in regard to dispute or nature of dispute. I had simply tried state in straightfor­ ward terms that clash of views should not cause war between us. I did not believe that Wang’s draft clearly set forth that intent. I did not want to repeat my previous statement, which in large part covered points he had made. I did think most important question we face is whether or not we each clearly and unambiguously state we do not intend let dif­ ferences between us in Taiwan area lead us into hostilities. 31. I said last paragraph of Wang’s draft stated Foreign Ministers should discuss and settle question of eliminating tension Taiwan area. If he felt he could say that without sacrificing his position, I could not see why he could not also say he was determined differences in Taiwan area should not lead to war. It was important this be said clearly. In saying it, I did not see why or in what way it prejudiced his position. 32. I said that I had several times in the past pointed out that fol­ lowing issuance of agreed announcement on renunciation of force, if he wished to raise other matters within scope of talks, I would be prepared discuss them. 33. I said I was disturbed we have not gotten further ahead on agreeing on a text. Regarding my draft, as I understood his position, he had no objection in principle with respect first paragraph but felt that it did not go far enough in establishing concrete measures for settling disputes. Was that correct? 34. I said he had specifically objected to paragraph two of my draft. I wondered what words he might want changed. 35. I said he had made no mention of paragraph 3 of my draft. Could I take it therefore that he had no objection to that? 36. I said in regard to my fourth paragraph, could I take it he did not object but felt it was prejudiced by following paragraphs? 37. I said in regard to last two substantive paragraphs, could I take it that there should be a specific reference to Taiwan area, such as he had made in last paragraph his draft, so as to make clear Taiwan was covered? 38. I said I still was not clear why he objected to individual and col­ lective self-defense. I thought we both would want to include statement on that. I would appreciate any comments Wang might want to make.
