number of years, it may be considered a test question whether two great
American nations, such as Chile and Peru, do or do not really desire to
reconcile their differences in a practical and lasting manner for the best
interests of the peace of the Western Hemisphere. The Chilean Government
or the Peruvian Government would unquestionably place itself in a most
disadvantageous and untenable position before world should either the one
or the other decline to accept a proposal for settlement which is to best
interests of continental peace, which impartial judges deem a fair and
equitable solution of the matter, and which would appeal most decidedly to
the unprejudiced judgment of the entire Western Hemisphere.
If no practical suggestions are put forward for an equitable and lasting
solution in which cool counsel prevails and wherein idea for promotion of
peace of the American continent takes place of purely selfish and
sentimental desire, it would then without doubt become the Secretary’s
distinct duty, as he has been advised officially by the Governments of both
Chile and Peru that they would consider any proposal he would make, to
formulate and to present to both Governments a final and conclusive
proposal.
You will please take earliest opportunity available to see President Leguía
in purely personal manner and, in light of what I have stated above,
endeavor to obtain from him statement on whether or not he wishes speedy
and practical termination of Tacna-Arica question. I have informed both
Ambassador Velarde and Dr. Salomón and Mr. Ellis as well that I do not
feel I am at liberty to delay this question much longer.
You are instructed to confer orally with President Leguía and to leave no
memorandum or aide-mémoire of substance of your remarks. What you say
I must leave largely to your discretion. What I have done is to outline
general situation. This is an occasion, however, in which a very emphatic
statement must be made in order to reveal clearly consequences entailed by
policy of delay or unwillingness to reach settlement of this matter along
equitable and practical lines.
KELLOGG
