3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 448 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI and, especially, to see an increase in the emigration of Soviet Jews would continue. 141. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, August 29, 1978 SUBJECT The Dresser Case The Dresser case has again erupted into controversy,2 and is becoming politically messy. Following Jim Schlesinger’s reclama,3 it was agreed by all the parties that we would obtain an assessment from the Defense Science Board4 in order to provide a solid basis either for a negative or a positive decision. My hope had been that an authoritative DSB assessment would permit us to reach a unanimous and final decision, thus putting the matter to rest without your involvement. However, though the State/Commerce decision was clearly hasty, both agencies are unwilling to reconsider their positions in spite of the clear-cut character of the DSB assessment, and are insisting that you now make the final decision. The principal conclusions of the DSB report are as follows: 1. Deep-well drilling technology is a critical technology, which is wholly concentrated in the U.S.5 2. Rock drill bit manufacture is high volume and its supporting design and application technology are critical technologies. These technologies are concentrated in the U.S. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 89, Economics/International: 8–12/78. Secret. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter initialed the memorandum and wrote, “Jody [Powell] is preparing statement.” 2 In August, Kreps approved the $140 million drill bit deal with the Soviets, unbeknownst to Brzezinski who read of the approval in the paper. Schlesinger opposed the technology deal, believing that national security would be compromised. Brzezinski questioned whether it was still appropriate to continue with the deal. See Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 322–325. 3 Not found. 4 Not found. 5 Carter wrote in the right-hand margin, “We knew this.”
