3. The statement that Chinese nationalistic aspirations would be satisfied
through the Japanese plan by placing wireless under control of the Chinese
Government would not deceive the Chinese at all. They would know no
commercial enterprise could afford sinking money into wireless stations in
China under conditions obtaining at this time without relying upon profits
of the enterprise for the payment of the debt, for which retention of such a
control would be necessary as would make possible working the stations on
commercial lines without danger that militarists would make such
interference as has bankrupted all railroads in which an effective control has
not been retained by foreigners, and that, therefore, any concession to
Chinese control would be one only of appearance. I asked Baron
Shidehara40 last June during my conversation with him in Tokyo,41 whether
in fact that would not be the case and whether the Mitsui Station for
instance would not under the Japanese plan substantially remain Japanese
as it is now. He acknowledged smilingly that each station would doubtless
remain affected with, the national character of those interests which had
constructed it.
4. Considering the Japanese argument on a basis of economics, it does not
appear to me to be sound for the reason that it presupposes that construction
of two large stations would be required by any alternative plan. The fact is
that establishment of a successful radio system in China, with or without a
consortium, requires one high-powered station in addition to the Mitsui
Station; even apart from its mechanical defects the Mitsui Station is not
fitted for service as a main station, owing to its being remote from the
business center of China. I believe the real point of the whole Japanese
opposition is this: they would prefer China to be served by a station under
their own control though it is inadequate for trans-Pacific work, rather than
have an adequate station built near Shanghai by Americans or any other
nationality.
5. Inasmuch as no one wants to build stations the cost of which it will not
be possible to repay out of the profits of operation, it is also fallacious to
argue that the erection of stations adequate for communications of a world-
wide nature would impose upon the Chinese Treasury an unnecessary and
intolerable burden.
