580
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
the same time, both Ceausescu and his wife have several relatives in
the power structure. The regime is stable. Short of his accidental death,
Ceausescu seems likely to be around for the foreseeable future. At 60,
he is the youngest East European leader, is in apparent good health,
and has no known political opposition. The population is kept on a
short leash, even by East European standards, although Romanian
leadership could substantially relax present internal controls without
risking Soviet retaliation. It is evidently Ceausescu’s belief that, to attain
difficult development goals, the population must be strictly controlled.
As a result, there is little freedom of expression, people are afraid to
deviate from the official line, officials avoid responsibility, and people
are generally cynical.
4. Internal problems are those brought about by rapid industrializa-
tion at the price of insufficient supplies in the consumer sector. Social
tensions are rising and muted, but serious dissatisfactions exist among
the workers, the national minorities (especially the Magyars), and the
intellectuals. Although these problems are real, the regime will be less
and less able to count on a docile population, and Ceausescu may have
to rearrange his priorities. There is no indication that any one problem
will become a danger to the regime’s continued existence in the next
few years.
5. Well known for its flexible foreign policy, Romania has been
successful at establishing political and trade relations with an unusually
diverse group of countries in its attempt to obtain support from all
directions for its relatively independent views from the Soviet Union.
Romania is a weak link in the Warsaw Pact alliance as it participates
in Warsaw Pact activities to a minimal extent, it has only limited loyalty
to its alliance with the Soviet Union, and its armed forces are rela-
tively untrained.
6. Ceausescu is an able tactician who, without changing his goals,
has shown a certain amount of personal flexibility in handling difficult
situations. He will probably attempt to solve crises on a case by case
basis and, where there is a conflict, by removing the symptoms rather
than altering Romanian external or internal objectives in any substan-
tive way. Whether he is successful will depend in part on external
factors over which he has no control and on a race between attaining
industrial development and the demands of a population rapidly grow-
ing in sophistication.
ECONOMICS:
7. While skillful in producing impressive statistics (Romania has
claimed the highest rate of production increases in Eastern Europe for
years), in terms meaningful to the population, Romania is also the
poorest East European nation, except for Albania. For example, its level
