August 8–September 17, 1978
155
sizes the obligation of Member States in the United Nations to act in ac-
cordance with Article 2 of the Charter. Article 2, among other points,
calls for the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and for Members
to refrain from the threat or use of force. Egypt and Israel in their agree-
ment signed September 4, 1975,3 agreed: “The Parties hereby undertake
not to resort to the threat or use of force or military blockade against
each other.” They have both also stated that there shall be no more war
between them. In a relationship of peace, in the spirit of Article 2, nego-
tiations between Israel and any nation prepared to negotiate peace and
security with it should be based on all the principles of Resolution 242,
including the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war and
the need to work for a just and lasting peace in which every state in the
area can live in security. Negotiations are necessary to determine how
best to apply and implement the principles of Resolution 242 and fulfill
all of its objectives in the circumstances which exist today.
—Peace is more than the juridical end of the state of belligerency. It
should lead to normal relations between nations. Progress toward that
goal can accelerate movement toward a new era of reconciliation in the
Middle East marked by cooperation in promoting economic develop-
ment, in maintaining stability, and in assuring security.
—Security is enhanced by a relationship of peace and by coopera-
tion between nations which enjoy normal relations. Under the terms of
peace treaties, the sovereign parties can agree to special security ar-
rangements such as demilitarized zones, limited armaments areas,
early warning stations, special security forces, liaison, agreed programs
for monitoring, and other arrangements that they agree are useful.
Agreement
Taking these factors into account, Egypt and Israel have agreed:
1. They are determined to reach a comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East conflict through the conclusion of peace treaties on the
basis of the full implementation of all the principles of Security Council
Resolutions 242 and 338. Their purpose is to achieve peace and good
neighborly relations. They recognize that, for peace to endure, it must
involve all the nations who have been principal parties to the Arab-
Israeli conflict; it must provide security; and it must give those people
who have been most deeply affected by the conflict a sense that they
have been dealt with fairly in the peace agreement.
2. They undertake not to resort to the threat or the use of force to
settle disputes. Any disputes shall be settled by peaceful means in ac-
cordance with the provisions of Article 33 of the Charter of the United
3 See footnote 6, Document 24.
