Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  389
 ICBM Sublimit. The US proposes a limit of 3000–3300 ICBM RVs. 
The Soviets have stated that they will accept such a sublimit only if it is 
applied to SLBM RVs as well.
 Constraints on Non-­deployed Systems. The US in the past has advo-
cated constraints (not clearly specified) on certain non-­deployed ICBMs 
(mobiles, heavies, and modern ICBMs). This position has been under 
review since the beginning of the year, and the delegation is under 
instructions not to address this subject. (There is, in fact, no review 
underway.) The Soviets recently introduced a new position, which 
would limit the number of spare missiles at deployment sites; other-
wise excess missiles could be located only at specific locations (storage 
sites, repair facilities, elimination sites, etc.), but with no limits on num-
bers. The Soviets would apply these constraints to all types of strategic 
systems including ALCMs and SLCMs.
Tab B
Paper Prepared in the Department of State4
Washington, undated
Gaps in the U.S. Position. (Extracted from PM paper “Status of 
START”, 10/20/89)5
 RV Counting Issues. While we agreed at the Washington Summit 
on RV counts for existing types of missiles, we have not yet taken a 
position on how to count RVs on future types of ballistic missiles.
 Non-­deployed Missiles (i.e., spare missiles not deployed on launch-
ers). The US position is currently under review. This issue is partic-
ularly significant because NDM limits drive much of our verification 
position.
 Mobiles. The US does not currently have a position on how many 
warheads to permit on mobile ICBMs, and what other limits we may 
seek on mobiles. We are reexamining key elements of our mobile ver-
ification plans, including the utility of deployment areas. Numerous 
other blanks within our mobile verification position remain.
 PPM. The US position on what ballistic missile motor production 
facilities to subject to perimeter portal monitoring is also under review. 
4 Secret.
5 Not found.
