Although the Arbitrator is of the view that the conclusions heretofore set forth in this Opinion and Award are in effect decisive of these claims set up by the respective Parties, the Arbitrator does not consider himself to be entitled by the Terms of Submission to pass upon these claims as substantive matters. The Arbitrator is empowered to decide whether or not a plebiscite shall be held, and having decided in the affirmative the Arbitrator is then empowered to fix the conditions of the plebiscite, but the Arbitrator holds that the conditions which it is within his competence to impose are those which relate to the holding of the plebiscite and the matters which were to have been established by the special protocol contemplated by the Treaty of Ancon. The claims presented by the Parties do not relate to the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out. The Arbitrator therefore dismisses these claims’ of both Parties on the ground that they are not within his jurisdiction. THE PAYMENT OF THE TEN MILLIONS Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon provided, in the third paragraph relating to the contemplated special protocol, that this protocol should prescribe “the manner in which the plebiscite is to be carried out, and the terms and time for the payment of the ten millions by the nation which remains the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.” As this payment by the terms of Article 3 depends upon and is to follow the plebiscite, it is deemed to be within the duty of the Arbitrator under the agreement of submission to determine the time and terms of payment. The matter is one in which there is no controlling legal principle. It is a question to be determined within certain general limits of fairness in the light of the treaty obligation. Chile in her case has informed the Arbitrator of her present desires, but doubtless because in her view of the case it was unnecessary to do so, Peru has not discussed the plan for the payment of the ten millions suggested by Chile or indicated her present views on the subject. Chile, however, in addition to proposing a plan of payment, has also indicated her present readiness to accept an arrangement which was at one time acceptable to Peru, namely, the arrangement for which provision was made in the Billinghurst-Latorre protocol of April 16, 1898. This was as follows: “Article XV. The indemnity of ten million pesos prescribed by Article III of the Treaty of October 20, 1883, will be paid by the country that shall become the owner of the provinces of Tacna and Arica on the following terms: one million within the period of ten days, reckoned from the proclamation of the general results of the plebiscite; another million within the following year; and two millions at the end of each year of the subsequent four years.
