320 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 114. Hotline Message From General Secretary Brezhnev to President Carter1 Moscow, December 29, 1979 Dear Mister President, In answer to your message of 29 December I consider it necessary to inform you of the following. It is impossible to [One can in no way] agree with your evaluation of what is occurring in the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan. We have already sent through your Ambassador to Moscow in a confidential manner to the American side and to you personally a clarification [an explanation] based on facts of what is actually occurring there, as well as the reasons which caused us to respond favorably to the request of the Government of Afghanistan for the introduction of limited Soviet Military contingents.2 The attempt taken in your message to cast doubt on the very fact of the request itself of the government of Afghanistan for sending our forces to that country seems strange. I am compelled to note that it is certainly not a question of anyone’s perception or lack of perception of this fact, or agreement or disagreement with it which determines the actual state of affairs, which consists of the following.3 The Government of Afghanistan during the course of nearly two years has numerous times turned to us with this request. In point of fact one of these requests was sent to us on 26 December of this year. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, Carter/Brezhnev Hotline Afghanis 12/29/79. Top Secret; Sensitive; Specat. Copy received in the Joint Staff of the JCS. This message was sent via the Direct Communications Link between Washington and Moscow. Unless otherwise noted, bracketed insertions in the text and footnotes below reflect alternate translations written on the copy by an unknown hand. Attached but not printed is a covering memorandum from Shulman to Vance, December 31, in which Shulman characterized the Department of Defense translation of Brezhnev’s message as a “quick, rough initial translation,” which carried the risk “that the President will misinterpret a high-level Soviet communication and respond inappropriately.” Noting the importance of Brezhnev’s message, Shulman advised Vance: “We also need to sensitize the White House to the importance of having qualified Department Russian language speakers review the translation of all future incoming hotline messages.” Also attached but not printed is Brezhnev’s message in the original Russian. 2 In the left margin at the end of the paragraph, Carter wrote: “The leaders who ‘requested’ SU presence were assassinated.” 3 The alternate translation of the last sentence reads: “I am compelled to note that is certainly not anyone’s perception or lack of perception of this fact, or agreement or disagreement with it, which determines the actual situation. The situation consists of the following.”
