Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (1) We seek PRC comment and guidance regarding the five principal options as outlined in the Issues Paper. Note: The Issues Paper’s options differ from those contained in the DCC’s summarization of issues. (2) The PRC should approve a White House-chaired working group to prepare an options paper for the President by October 31. That paper should analyze the implications of the principal aid strategies for funding levels, the organization of US foreign assistance programs, and other issues. The working group’s report would define issues for Presidential decision and assist OMB in its preparations of the FY 1979 budget review. The following points are relevant to the PRC meeting: (1) The strategic options for foreign assistance. The attached Issues Paper’s five options for foreign assistance appear broad, but the choice among them could have a serious impact on (a) the direction of US foreign assistance programs and (b) their relation to US foreign policy objectives. To illustrate, Option 5, “Multiple Objectives”, could most easily incorporate assistance programs in support of a variety of US foreign policy objectives; for example, an initiative for Caribbean countries. Option 3, a “poor country” strategy, if narrowly defined, would make initiatives in middle-income developing countries relatively difficult. (2) The effectiveness of US assistance: The President requested the DCC to examine the overall effectiveness of US assistance programs (see Presidential Memorandum of June 27, Tab IIA).3 The DCC could not agree on an assessment of the multilateral and bilateral components of US assistance programs. In contrast, the Brookings report contains a sharp critique of the bilateral programs’s current effectiveness. The DCC and Brookings reports call for improvement in US assistance programs and both, as well as PRM 8-Track III, accept a strong US focus on meeting basic human needs (BHN). Taken together, these findings indicate that we must design programs that (a) reach poor people more directly, and (b) will be more effectively administered by the US. (3) Relations with Congress. An expansion of US assistance will require improved understanding on Capitol Hill of the Administration’s objectives. The imbroglio over the appropriations bill4 illustrates the need for an Administration initiative seeking broader Congressional and public support for US foreign economic policies. 3 Printed as Document 268. 4 Apparently a reference to the Carter administration’s effort to secure the removal of country-based restrictions on the provision of direct or indirect foreign assistance by the United States.
