Eastern Europe Region
111
32.
Memorandum From Paul Henze of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 15, 1979
SUBJECT
CIA’s Book and Periodical Distribution Program for Eastern Europe and USSR
Stan Turner has provided a report (Tab 2)2 in response to your
memorandum to him of January 26, 1979 (Tab 3)3 requesting a status
report on the book program. The report provides striking evidence of
the effectiveness of this program (I have marked in red certain key
passages which I recommend you leaf through if you have time) and
demonstrates that the program has made highly productive use of the
extra funds which you directed be allocated to it nearly two years ago.
The report reveals, however, that the program is being curtailed in
FY 1980, by cancelling an increase of $1.5 million which was originally
planned. Leveling off (actually slightly reducing) a program such as
this after it has gained momentum from expansion is especially unwise
and not cost-effective. Funds projected for a FY 1981 increase ($1.5
million) may also not materialize, for the FY 1981 budget process is
likely to entail as much squeezing as we have been through on FY
1980. I am told by highly reliable sources in CIA that there is no good
reason to cut this program; they made an effort to keep it expanding.
They, and I, have the suspicion that Turner, knowing your interest in
it, sacrificed it to OMB’s bookkeepers. Whatever the motivation, I do
not believe we should let this excellent program “plateau off”. Funds
added to it are among the most productive CIA spends for covert
action. In fact, this program constitutes a large part of what is left of
CIA’s covert action program and they constitute most of what we
are doing against our highest-priority target—Eastern Europe and the
USSR. I have prepared a short memorandum from you to Turner
requesting that funds be reprogrammed to permit continued expansion
in FY 1980.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Horn/Special,
Box 3, Chron File: 3/79. Secret; Sensitive. Outside the System. Sent for action.
2 Not attached.
3 See footnote 6, Document 29.
