734
Haiti: U.S. Relations with Haiti1
1 A brief history of U.S. relations with Haiti between 1957 and 1959, prepared by 
the Second Secretary of the Embassy in Port-au-Prince, Virgil P. Randolph, III, was trans-
mitted to the Department of State in despatch 83, August 24, 1959. (Department of State, 
Central Files, 611.38/8–2459)
HA–1.	
Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Middle 
American Affairs (Wieland) to the Assistant Secretary of  
State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1

Washington, January 9, 1958.
SUBJECT 
Authorization to Ambassador Drew to Discuss with Haitian Officials Factors 
Involved in Restoration of Normal Relations.
With respect to our proposal relating to steps Ambassador Drew 
will take on his return to Port-­au-Prince to attempt to resolve the Talamas 
case,2 the Ambassador hopes to be in a position to explain to President 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 738.00/1–958. Confidential. Drafted by 
Edward Little, Deputy Director of the Office of Caribbean and Mexican Affairs; and cleared 
with Albert Post of the Office of Inter-American Regional Economic Affairs. Paragraphs 1, 
4, 5(a), and 5(d) were also cleared by telephone with Kenneth Wright, the Assistant Chief 
of the Cuba-Haiti-Mexico Branch of the International Cooperation Administration. A 
marginal notation by Rubottom indicates the Assistant Secretary’s approval of the list of 
suggested elements in the memorandum. A separate notation on the source text indicates 
that a copy of the memorandum was given to Ambassador Gerald Drew on January 10.
2 On December 29, 1957, Ambassador Drew had returned to Washington for consul-
tation regarding the case of Shibley Jean Talamas, an American citizen who was beaten 
to death while in the custody of Haitian police on September 29, 1957. Talamas, who had 
been accused of political activity against the Haitian government, had surrendered himself 
voluntarily to Haitian authorities after they had assured Embassy officials that Talamas 
would not be harmed.
Following Drew’s return to Port-­au-Prince on January 14, 1958, extensive negotia-
tion between the two governments produced a settlement along the following lines. The 
Haitian government publicly expressed its regret over the circumstances surrounding 
Talamas’ death, reaffirmed guarantees for the security and well-­being of American citi-
zens in Haiti, and agreed to pay an indemnity to the Talamas family. The United States 
had sought to obtain the dismissal of the officers responsible for Talamas’ death, but the 
Haitian government would agree only to have them court martialed and disciplined. 
The agreement was embodied in an exchanged of notes between the governments of 
the United States and Haiti at Port-­au-Prince on February 5, 1958. The Embassy at Port-­
au-Prince transmitted the texts of the notes, which were made public at the time, to the 
Department of States in despatch 357, February 5, 1958. (238.113-Talamas, Shibley Jean)
