244
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
reducing Japan’s current account surplus. It fell far short of our require-
ments in its extent and in its specificity. Indeed, it was a minimal initial
bargaining position which eschewed any formal commitments to
achieve a deficit on current account by a particular date, to increase sig-
nificantly the economic growth target for the next fiscal year, or to ex-
pand imports of manufactured goods dramatically.2
We instructed our Embassy in Tokyo to convey disappointment at
this response; to note the priority we attach to Japanese assurances to
the international community that it will take the steps necessary to
achieve a current account deficit as soon as possible; and to inform the
Japanese that Ambassador Alan Wolff, Bob Strauss’ deputy, would be
prepared to come to Tokyo on December 4–7 to continue the discussion
of these issues as a prelude to a possible trip by Bob in mid-December.3
Intelligence sources indicate that Prime Minister Fukuda recog-
nizes that his hastily-prepared $3 billion import promotion program
and the recent appreciation of the yen will not be sufficient to reduce
Japan’s huge current accounts surplus for many months. Thus Tokyo
will remain vulnerable to growing pressures from the United States,
Western Europe, and non-OPEC developing countries to buy more or
sell less. Consequently, Prime Minister Fukuda has ordered his eco-
nomic advisors back to the drawing boards to draft additional substan-
tive measures, including tariff cuts, quota increases, and a higher eco-
nomic growth target. He has evidently decided to send a new budget to
the Diet in January, instead of waiting till April—which suggests that
he has further measures for domestic expansion in mind—to meet pres-
sures from the Japanese business community. The Prime Minister faces
an uphill battle on his import policies because his Ministries are feeling
the heat from special interest groups—particularly small and interme-
diate size businesses and farmers. Expressions of our concern about
growing protectionist pressures in the U.S. have lent urgency to Fu-
kuda’s efforts, and our soundings—with Ambassador Mansfield, Japa-
nese newsmen, the Japanese Foreign Ministry—suggest that the con-
tinued application of pressure from us (provided it is adroit and
unobtrusive) provides the Prime Minister with much-needed leverage
with recalcitrant Ministries.4
2 Widman reported on the results of the visit of U.S. officials to Japan in a No-
vember 22 memorandum to Blumenthal. (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection,
1977–1980, Chronological File, Box 3, 11/77)
3 Telegram 281957 to Tokyo, November 24, transmitted the U.S. reaction to the Jap-
anese response. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770436–1167)
4 In his November 30 Evening Report to Carter, Vance noted that both he and Mans-
field believed “that we are on the right track and that it is important at this time to con-
tinue to move forward with steady but not excessive pressure, trying to reduce some-
what the public air of confrontation which the press has given our discussions.” (Carter
