Arms Control and Disarmament  1257
Because of the sensitivity of this Report, copies have been circu­
lated only to those agencies represented on the NSC Ad Hoc Panel and 
to the Department of State. A copy of the Report is available, in the 
office of the Executive Secretary, NSC, for reference by other regular 
participant members of the Council.
James S. Lay, Jr.
Executive Secretary
cc:  The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology
Enclosure
Memorandum From Killian to Gray
Washington, March 28, 1958
SUBJECT
Transmittal of Report
In accordance with Action No. 1840 of the National Security Coun­
cil, as approved by the President on January 9, 1958, I submit herewith 
a report of the Ad Hoc Working Group devoted to the following three 
studies in the area of nuclear testing:
“(a) A study of the losses to the United States consequent on a total 
suspension of nuclear tests at specific future dates.
“(b) A symmetrical study of the losses to the USSR that would 
accrue from cessation of nuclear testing, using the same hypothetical 
dates.
“(c) A study of the technical feasibility of monitoring a test suspen­
sion, including the outlines of a surveillance and inspection system.”
The Ad Hoc Working Group submitting this report is made up of 
representatives nominated by the President’s Science Advisory Com­
mittee, the Department of Defense, the Atomic Energy Commission 
and the Central Intelligence Agency.
The Ad Hoc Working Group, in preparing this report, limited itself 
to the technical feasibility of monitoring nuclear tests and to the tech­
nical losses that would result to the U.S. and the U. S. S. R. from a ces­
sation of tests. Although the Group considered some of the military 
implications of these technical losses to the U.S. and the U.S.S.R., a com­
plete evaluation of these military implications would have required 
extensive studies by the Department of Defense and these are not yet
