723.2515/1729 supp.: Telegram [Document 261] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, December 8, 1925—9 p.m. For Pershing: I am greatly disappointed over suggested postponement of election, and wish to emphasize solicitude President feels touching possibility that delay may furnish ground for complaint. Of course you will understand that there is no desire that proceedings should be expedited at expense of their integrity or of making appropriate arrangements for holding of plebiscite, but we do desire that there should be no delay in formulation and promulgation of regulations and holding of registration and election beyond what is absolutely necessary. In your letter to Edwards,83 a statement was made that committee on registration and election regulations should “with good will all around” be able to report to Plebiscitary Commission by end of December. In view of length of time that committee has had matter under consideration would it not be possible for committee to report at earlier date? Could not a week, or perhaps two, be saved this way? I notice also that it is suggested that Commission might be able to adopt and promulgate regulations on or about January 15, assuming report by committee by end of December. Would it not be possible after committee’s report is in to expedite proceedings preliminary to adoption and promulgation of regulations? By bending considerable effort to that end, could not whole matter of adopting regulations be disposed of early in January? Assuming that registration should begin within approximately 30 days after promulgation of regulations and that equal period be allowed for registration, could not hearing of appeals be so expedited that, with time that might be saved in promulgation of rules, holding of election might be brought to early part of April? I do not desire to suggest any course that is impractical, but I am sure you will desire to hasten proceedings as much as possible in interest of all concerned. It seems quite clear to me that promulgation of regulations which must be complied with, will not only make impossible any complaint for delay, but will afford standard of action which will be helpful in all future proceedings. In view of fact that Commission can change dates if advisable, is it not desirable that initial dates be fixed for as early date as is consistent with assembling voters for purposes of registration and with expeditious hearing of appeals? I do not desire in slightest to underestimate your personal interest or interest of all who are doubtless hard at work with you, but importance of speeding up matter is so great
