Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX negotiated. These will include questions of title to land, control over land transfer, the responsibilities of the Palestinian police force, control over water resources, control of the bridges, etc. Laying out these issues would by itself demonstrate that a serious negotiation is ahead. —In addition to the discussion on agenda, we would have a discussion with the Israelis particularly on how to handle the question of the settlements during and in the negotiations. The purpose would be to explore possible understandings. If the Israelis question why we are doing this, the answer would be that President Carter made a promise to President Sadat on this subject at Camp David, and it was on that basis that Sadat agreed. Therefore, something must be done to clear up this misunderstanding. However, we would go beyond simply trying to sort out the Camp David misunderstanding and put the issue in the context of how settlements might be handled in the upcoming negotiations, but looking to the future, we might assure Israel that we are prepared to work for the right of Israelis to live in the West Bank, provided their living there is not part of a program of continuing land annexation. Aid Strategy and Public Posture On the question of aid, we would continue our consultations with the Israelis on the two airfields but would not respond otherwise to Israeli requests for additional aid for Sinai redeployment costs while our efforts go forward to get the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty completed and an agreed basis for West Bank/Gaza negotiations. Our position would be that the Administration will be delivering to Congress in January a message proposing authorization for a fund to support the peace effort. This would include everything from possible U.S. help with the costs of Israeli redeployment to assistance with a refugee solution, assistance for development in the West Bank and Gaza, and support for regional projects. We would tell the Israelis that we are not prepared to discuss the cost of evacuation from Sinai now. We would have the option of saying explicitly that we will not discuss this until it is clear how the West Bank/Gaza negotiations will be organized, or we could leave this implicit. When we are satisfied that Israel is working in good faith for implementation of the Camp David general framework, we could begin listening to the Israeli presentation on this subject, but we would hold off a response until sometime next year when we are satisfied with the progress in those negotiations.12 Publicly, we would try to seize the high ground, starting immediately making the following points: 12 Carter underlined this sentence and wrote in the left-hand margin: “mandatory.”
