206 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 A US bank may have beaten Bonn to the punch by obtaining a court order to seize Iranian government shares in the Krupp conglomerate. Fearing hostile reaction from Tehran, Bonn issued a strong disclaimer of any government involvement in the court order. The Ministers of Finance and Economics have publicly “deplored” what they view as the US bank’s interference in West German foreign policy. [portion marking not declassified] While the French have voiced support for the US position on the hostages, they have attempted to keep commercial dealings with Iran outside the dispute. [2½ lines not declassified] Recent publicity surrounding a French move against Iranian assets taken a month ago may, however, draw Paris more directly into the financial tangle with Iran. At that time, French courts issued an order freezing Iran’s $1 billion stake in the European uranium enrichment group, EURODIF. The French move stems from Iran’s failure to fulfill its financial obligations as a 10-percent shareholder in the Tricastin uranium enrichment plant in France. [portion marking not declassified] [2 paragraphs (17½ lines) not declassified] Other Non-OPEC [1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified] Oil Producer Reactions Although the major oil exporting countries recognize the special circumstances of recent US actions, the blocking of Iranian assets has raised a few apprehensions. These countries are especially concerned over the precedent being set by the blocking action since the US measure was tied to Iran’s attempt to withdraw its funds rather than to the seizure of the American Embassy, which most OPEC countries have at least privately condemned. [portion marking not declassified] • UAE officials feel that the US move was misguided and will force a reevaluation of UAE foreign investment policies as well as those of other oil producers. [3½ lines not declassified] • Kuwait has publicly commented favorably that the US move is a case of “extreme action, provoking extreme measures.” [2 lines not declassified] • Although some Saudis are upset about the precedent set by the US action, [1½ lines not declassified] SAMA’s investment operations and policies remain unchanged. • Iraq, because of its own confrontation with the Khomeini regime, has intentionally avoided criticism of US actions. In any event, Iraq has almost no assets in the United States; its foreign holdings are widely dispersed throughout the West and Communist countries. [2½ lines not declassified]
