1190 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 3. Against this background of an increasing Soviet ballistic missile threat, and the absence of an active defense on our part, some divergent views emerged in the PB with respect to certain elements of the over-all policy. Before taking up these policy issues, perhaps the Council would want to note the following key provisions of the proposed policy on which the PB is in agreement. a. The policy statement encompasses only those objectives which contribute directly to the defense of the North American Continent and to the protection of that part of our retaliatory capability which is based on the North American Continent. b. An effective continental defense system is considered to consti­ tute one of the key deterrents to an attack on this country. c. Intelligence estimates reflect that the period of the 1960’s will represent a transition from a largely bomber threat (now drawing to an end) to threat consisting mainly of Soviet ICBM’s—with the prospect that in a few years the principal threat to the U.S. will be Soviet ICBM’s supplemented by a mix of bombers, submarine-launched ballistic mis­ siles and possibly cruise-type missiles. d. The achievement of a major Soviet ICBM capability in the early 1960’s will take place during a period in which the U.S. will largely depend on its U.S.-based air retaliatory force. Accordingly, during that period special attention should be given to measures for minimizing the vulnerability of our strategic air retaliatory forces to ICBM attack. e. Recognition is given to the increasing importance—and diffi­ culty—of acquiring timely strategic warning of Soviet attack on the U.S. The paper also includes recognition of the prospect that with the Soviet acquisition of an operational missile capability, U.S. officials may have to accept intelligence warning judgments based on limited evi­ dence—therefore, the risks which are inherent in certain “high prior­ ity” intelligence collection programs must be weighed against the even graver risks inherent in failure to obtain strategic warning. f. A capability for tactical warning against attacks by aircraft, bal­ listic and non-ballistic missiles, and by CW and BW agents, is singled out for particular effort—along with a requirement for completing the bomb alarm and fallout reporting systems for SAC bases, and the undertaking of a national attack surveillance system. g. In restating present policy requirements for an integrated air defense system providing defenses in depth against enemy aircraft and non-ballistic missiles, the proposed revision calls for an improved capa­ bility of various elements of the system to act independently should integrated functioning of the system be compromised by ballistic mis­ sile attack (the objective being to prevent a “free ride” by the enemy over the U.S. in such an eventuality). h. The proposed policy, as revised, specifically calls for passive defense measures (in addition to active defense) to protect our retalia­ tory capability—including such measures as increases in mobility, dis­ persal, hardening, reduction of reaction time, the capability to mount an air borne alert of SAC bombers, and the protection of command communications centers. i. Another agreed policy revision points to the need for developing procedures and doctrine which will provide course command and con­ trol of our retaliatory and defensive forces within the time dimensions of a surprise missile attack. The objective is to insure the survival of
