608
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
representative at the UN; and South Korean policy as examples of in-
stances when HA was cut out of the decision-making process.
We believe she is right that there is a widespread perception in the
Department that the emphasis given earlier to human rights has gradu-
ally taken a backseat in Administration concerns to security factors,
and therefore that neither human rights considerations nor HA need be
given as much attention as formerly. This has led a number of Bureaus
to downplay human rights issues and may have increased the sense of
an adversarial relationship between HA and the rest of the Department
on both sides of the issues. The key conceptual divergence from the bu-
reaus is at the end of Patt’s memo where she emphasizes the need for us
to convey a “consistent message” on human rights where the Bureaus
argue human rights is only one of our policy interests and we must also
convey other messages as well.8
Patt makes three procedural suggestions for better routine integra-
tion of human rights concern in decision making, all of which are at
least as much complaints about what decisions are being made as how:
—Fuller integration of human rights considerations into economic
decisions such as Ex-Im and CCC programs. Our sense is that these are
being adequately considered in the Interagency Group.
—Restructuring the AECB. Patt’s right that there is now no sys-
tematic factoring of human rights concerns into specific decisions, as
there is with the Interagency Group for economic assistance. But S/P’s
attempt to assess the decision record on these issues (in February of
1979)9 led us to conclude that the policy is about right even if the proce-
dures are somewhat less neat than they might be?
—Earlier notification to other donor governments of MDB votes.
Patt is right that decisions a few days before major votes may reduce
the seriousness with which other governments take our “consulta-
tions”. Part of the problem is the inability of the US representatives on
the MDB to give us sufficient advance notice of pending loans.
2. Personnel issues, and especially better staffing of HA and
human rights training for other officers.
—Too few slots. Our impression is that HA does not now have a
numbers problem but that stronger management would help inside the
bureau.
—Personnel’s “failure” to fill slots—quickly—with quality people;
and
—Lack of interest in human rights training on the part of other
FSOs.
8 Christopher placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this paragraph.
9 Not further identified.
