840 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 252. Memorandum From William B. Quandt of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, May 9, 1979 SUBJECT Middle East Initiatives (U) You asked me to think of steps that might be taken to assert our commitment to the Egypt-Israel treaty and to the next stage of negotiations. It seems to me that we need to be clear concerning the target of our efforts. If we are trying to influence the Saudis, then public statements may be the wrong way to proceed. If we create an anti-Saudi mood in Congress, we may find that we have tied our own hands. If instead we are addressing a domestic audience, a different strategy is called for. (S) Possible actions: —If the Saudis are adamant in their refusal to fund the F–5Es for Egypt, we could publicly state the facts of the situation and request that Congress appropriate an additional $52.5 million to guarantee $525 million in FMS credits to cover the costs of the F–5E program. Simultaneously, to preempt negative Congressional action, we could say that the F–15 program is under review. —Approach both the Saudis and Egyptians privately for a frank review of the dangers of letting their quarrel go further. Rather than taking sides, we would do our best to get them talking again. —Background briefings attributed to “high Administration officials” that are critical of the Saudis and which are strongly supportive of Egypt, Israel, and the next phase of peace talks. Alternatively, an inspired Reston2 column. —Tell the Saudis to withdraw one of their diplomats [1 line not declassified]. —Public statements by the State Department spokesman, Secretary Vance, or the President. These have high visibility, but tend to reduce our flexibility. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 51, Middle East: 3–6/79. Secret. Sent for information. The top of the memorandum bears the stamped notation: “ZB has seen.” A copy of the memorandum was sent to Hoskinson. 2 Reference is to New York Times columnist James “Scotty” Reston.
