September 18–December 16, 1978 427 —Oil. The two sides are far apart.5 The Egyptians have just received new instructions which move away from our compromise draft. They do not want to give Israel “right of first refusal” on oil purchases. 2. Medium Issues. —Termination of Security Arrangements. Sadat wants to set a specific date by which the security arrangements in Sinai will come to an end. His delegation realizes that the Israelis will not accept this, and will try to stick with a general review clause as is now in the draft. —Navigation. The Israelis reopened this issue and suggested some new language. The Egyptians have it under consideration. —Obligations. The Israelis want to title this article “Priority of Obligations”. The Israelis [Egyptians?] refuse. We suggested dropping the title. Finally, we still have a series of bilateral questions to work through with the Israelis. On the whole, virtually no progress was made today except on the military annex. There will be some talks over the weekend, but we cannot expect much real progress until after the Israeli Cabinet meets on Sunday and the Egyptian delegation returns. Footnote: Dayan repeated today that the negotiations for the West Bank/Gaza would be “ten times” as difficult as the Egypt-Israel peace treaty talks. This is especially true, in his view, now that we are insisting that the powers and responsibilities of the “self-governing authority” should be defined before the elections (is provided for in the Camp David Framework). 5 Among a number of issues, the question of the timing of Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai oil fields divided the Israeli and Egyptian oil negotiation teams. On November 4, Atherton met with the Israeli Minister for Oil Yitzhak Modai and the Israeli oil delegation. In the course of the conversation, it emerged that Egyptian resistance to Israel’s original proposal for a continued role in Sinai oil operations after the implementation of the peace treaty stemmed largely from concerns that this infringed on Egyptian sovereignty. Atherton affirmed the U.S. belief that “there is no basis in international law for continuing exploitation of Egyptian resources” after the treaty came into force. Furthermore, Atherton noted, supply to Israel would be assured in that the treaty would include provision for non-discrimination in trade. (Memorandum for the Record, November 4; National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 8, Oil)
