International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 663 that the OECD Ministerial has not yet been set but consideration was being given to the first days of June.3 Turning to the other traditional Summit topics, Owen suggested that trade matters would probably not take up too much time. Monetary reform would probably be limited to some discussion of the substitution account and North/South issues (food and energy) would receive minimum attention. The traditional section on macro-economic policy presents a problem. Owen said that once we attempt to go beyond generalities it becomes extremely difficult to know which way to go. He asked van Lennep and Marris if they had any ideas. Marris said he is not certain that any of the various OECD activities would be sufficiently ripe to be worthy of inclusion at this level. It was suggested that van Lennep might issue a progress report on Marris’ efforts which could inform governments and thus contribute to the preparations of the Summit. Van Lennep said it was essential that such effort be kept within the OECD. 3 The OECD met at the Ministerial level June 3–4, 1980. 229. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic Summits (Owen) to President Carter1 Washington, December 18, 1979 SUBJECT Upcoming Decisions (U) Decisions you make in your next few weeks will have a significant effect on the international economic scene between now and the Venice Summit. (C) 1. Energy. In the wake of the December 10 IEA Ministerial meeting we have a fair chance to bring the world oil price escalator under control—by continuously adjusting the industrial countries’ oil import ceilings to changing oil availabilities.2 Other IEA governments will 1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 160. Confidential. Sent for information. 2 The IEA Governing Board met in Paris on December 10. For more information on the meeting, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXVII, Energy Crisis, 1974–1980, Document 251.
