1956  877
our next meeting I would be able make choice from these two drafts so 
that our talks would move forward. If I had no other matters at hand he 
would like raise another matter with me.
28. Reading from prepared but handwritten statement Wang 
continued. He must lodge serious protest against my side over out­
rage of my authorities in causing death of Chinese student Mr. Daniel 
Pao. Pao went to US in 1948 study civil engineering at University of 
Florida. He applied return after receiving master’s degree 1950. How­
ever my authorities refused him permission and put him under sur­
veillance. This was an overwhelming pressure on his mind. In May 
1952 in order strengthen surveillance over him my authorities forcibly 
sent him sanatorium on pretense his contracting TB. Two months later 
he mysteriously died obviously he died as result persecution of him 
by my authorities.
29. Wang said I had often repeated in our meetings pledge that my 
side had never persecuted Chinese nationals. But no amount sophistry 
could cover up fact such persecution. He must again demand my side 
promptly stop such wanton persecution against Chinese nationals and 
give responsible account death Mr. Pao.
30. Wang said next he would also appreciate any information about 
these Chinese students and nationals he had asked me to make inves­
tigation of and if there any information available he would be ready 
listen to it. Also he continued await reply from me about status Chinese 
in US prisons.
31. I said I wondered what extent his government was willing go 
in attempt make these absurd allegations regarding Chinese in US in 
order attempt confuse people regarding their failure release people 
they said they would release on September 10 last year. His statement 
regarding Mr. Pao apparently came down allegation that US maintains 
institutions called sanatoriums where we liquidate people for reasons 
which are not clear. I had heard many allegations concerning my coun­
try over years but I must say this was new one. Liquidation of people or 
their execution without public and due process of law was something 
that happily not known my country, contrary situation in other coun­
tries with other forms government.
32. I said simply on basis information he had given regarding 
Pao it appeared very simple case of somebody who contracted TB, 
was sent to one of sanatoriums which maintained throughout US for 
treatment this disease, and unfortunately he did not recover. To jump 
from that to statement that he obviously died of persecution was con­
clusion that even most gullible person knowing anything about my 
country could not accept.
33. I said I had not brought into our conversations here what 
I could only call the barbarous treatment that Americans imprisoned
