506
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
fluence the human rights policies of the governments concerned and
the lending policies of the banks.
The Interagency Group should consider our policy toward
problem countries in terms of an entire year’s pipeline of MDB projects.
U.S. bilateral assistance programs, economic and military, and fi-
nancing programs such as FMS, Exim Bank, OPIC, etc., should also be
considered along with MDB loans. Such a review would decide how
best we can seek to achieve defined objectives with the various policy
instruments available to us, yet keeping in mind our other interests.
Once the most fruitful strategy has been agreed upon for each problem
country, we would then bring our influence to bear and there would be
time for countries to effect improvements. Such changes would be
taken into account in deciding our assistance policies to these countries.
I hope you find these suggestions useful as a way to proceed.
C. Fred Bergsten5
5 Bergsten signed “Fred” above his typed signature.
157.
Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)1
Washington, August 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Human Rights “Sanctions”
We continue to believe that case-by-case decision making holds
the best hope of making our human rights policy effective in varying
situations, and of keeping it in balance with other foreign policy in-
terests. But we also see a need for agreement on some general prin-
ciples which would help guide individual decisions.
Three issues of special concern to us are whether we ever should
deny IFI loans which serve basic human needs to countries under re-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Di-
rector, Records of Anthony Lake, 1977–1981, Lot 82D298, Box 4, TL 8/1–8/15/78. Confi-
dential. Drafted by Jennone Walker on August 9. Anderson initialed the memorandum.
Another copy is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
North–South Pastor Files, Subject File, Box 56, Human Rights: 6–12/78.
