472  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
have access to the full range of scientific research published throughout 
the world.
Scientific Capabilities in Major Scientific Fields
80. Soviet scientists have made striking progress over the past few 
years in many areas of fundamental research. In mathematics, many 
fields of physics, and a few fields of chemistry, fundamental research 
appears to be comparable in quality to that performed in the US. In at 
least some fields, the best Soviet scientists are as gifted and competent 
as the best in the West, and have a similar potential for wholly new 
discoveries.
81. Atomic Energy.7 There is substantial evidence that the USSR is 
continuing to expand steadily not only its military atomic energy activ­
ities but its program for non-­military uses. We estimate that the Soviet 
atomic energy program will continue to enjoy the very high priority 
that has been accorded to it in the past. The USSR is conducting exten­
sive research in all major fields related to atomic energy, including con­
trolled thermonuclear reactions.
82. The USSR is engaged in a comprehensive reactor development 
program which will permit it to keep generally abreast of world prog­
ress in this field. Although the USSR appears to have revised its ambi­
tious mid-1960 nuclear power goal from 2,000–2,500 megawatts down 
to 1,400 megawatts of electric power, this reduced plan is still quite 
substantial, and is within Soviet capabilities if a high priority effort is 
devoted to it. The USSR will probably make further offers of technical 
aid, as well as of assistance in the construction of nuclear power sta­
tions, within the Bloc and to non-Bloc countries.
83. Physical Sciences. The present capabilities of Soviet scientists in 
the various fields of physics and mathematics are comparable to those 
of scientists in the leading nations of the West. Greatest capabilities are 
exhibited in nuclear physics, solid state physics, theoretical physics 
and high-­speed digital computers. In the geophysical sciences, Soviet 
capabilities are also generally comparable to those of leading Western 
nations; during the next five years significant advances will probably be 
made in geomagnetism, permafrost research, geochemical prospecting, 
and polar geophysics. Recent progress has also been achieved in chem­
istry and metallurgy, notably in high-­temperature alloys and ceramic 
cutting tools. Soviet capabilities in electronic component development 
7 For further details on Soviet atomic energy research and nonmilitary programs, see 
NIE 11–2–57, “The Soviet Atomic Energy Program,” 7 May 1957 (Limited Distribution). 
Soviet atomic energy activities of direct military significance are discussed below in 
Chapter IV. [Footnote is in the original.]
