Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II hold stocks for local marketing and protect perishable crop production inputs such as feed and fertilizer. Storage in isolated rural areas provides a measure of security when local harvests fail. National storage capacity allows countries that rely on the international market to import basic foodstuffs when prices are low. The types of facilities for which there is a growing need as people in developing countries move out of subsistence farming and begin to rely on purchased food include: village market facilities, financial arrangements for holding stocks, grain drying, cleaning and processing centers, transport systems, central storage and milling facilities, outlets for consumers and port facilities for export or import. The amount of food which developing countries’ food distribution systems will have to carry is projected to increase from 250 million tons in 1978 to roughly 400 million tons by 1990. Between 1980–85 the World Bank proposes a substantial investment program to assist the poorest developing countries meet their growing food distribution infrastructure requirements. This program will increase by 20–25 million tons the capacity of these governments to assure access to food by the neediest. The Summit members should endorse the proposed IBRD investment program to enhance the ability of the low-income developing countries to distribute a continuing flow of food to their poorest consumers. To accelerate the rate of investment, the Summit countries should commit their bilateral aid agencies to give priority consideration to specific IBRD requests for co-financing and technical assistance in projects designed to improve the food storage and distribution capacity of low-income countries. The Summit should urge other bilateral and multilateral donors to extend similar co-financing support to this significant investment in LDC food security. Food Aid Enhanced national food supply and distribution systems are essential to providing food security for the poorest developing countries, but many of these countries will continue to face rising food import needs beyond their capacity to pay. The Summit countries recognize this problem and have completed the new Food Aid Convention (FAC) to establish a higher floor for cereal food aid commitments. While pledges of 7.5 million tons under the new FAC are significantly higher than the previous Convention, they fall short of the international community’s target of 10 million tons. The Venice Summit should strongly urge new donors, particularly the OPEC countries, to join the new FAC in order to achieve the international goal. The Summit countries could announce their intention to ensure their ability to meet their food aid commitments under the new FAC by
