492 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement USSR has a nuclear-­powered submarine, we believe that a program for its development has reached an advanced stage and we estimate that a reactor could be available for installation in 1957. Development of nuclear power plants for cruisers may follow the operational testing of a nuclear-­ powered icebreaker, which will probably occur in late 1958 or early 1959. We believe the USSR is presently capable of adapting nuclear warheads to torpedoes and depth charges. 142. Although the evidence pointing to the existence of Soviet guided missile submarines is not conclusive, we believe that the USSR will construct or convert submarines for surface-­to-­surface guided mis­ sile launching. Converted boats with topside missile stowage could already be in operation. Twenty submarines with topside missile stow­ age could be converted by the end of 1958, and by mid-1962 the USSR may have a total of about 30 guided missile submarines built on basi­ cally new designs, including boats with nuclear or other improved pro­ pulsion systems. Air defense missile systems for surface vessels, also capable of modification for shore bombardment purposes, could prob­ ably begin to be available in 1958; the unfinished hulls of six cruisers, which have been in Soviet shipyards since the cessation of the cruiser construction program several years ago, may be completed with guided missile armament. 143. The operating efficiency of Soviet naval forces, while still below that of the US Navy in some fields, is quite high and will con­ tinue to improve. The submarine force is undergoing intensified train­ ing, particularly in long-­range operations. The principal weaknesses of the USSR as a naval power will continue to derive from the wide separation of its sea frontiers and its inability to control the sea routes between these areas, although improvements in inland waterways will increase its ability to interchange smaller vessels including submarines. The lack of adequate supply lines to its Northern and Far Eastern fleet areas and the land-­locked position of its fleets in the Baltic and Black Seas are additional handicaps. 144. Submarine Construction. The Soviets will probably continue to place primary emphasis on submarines in their naval construc­ tion program. Since 1950 the Soviets have built about 300 submarines of postwar design. It is estimated that about 50 boats, “W” and “Q” class, will be built during 1957. We estimate that the total number of Soviet submarines of all types at the end of 1957 will be about 500. Throughout the period of the estimate we believe that the production of medium-­range submarines will continue at about the present rate of 20 per year. The most recent evidence indicates that the program for production of “W” class conventional propulsion long-­range subma­ rines has been curtailed and may possibly be terminated this year. The
