3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
202
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
be likely to be productive, since the Soviet commitment to “the Vladi-
vostok agreements” (and by extension to the negotiations of January
and February, 1976) was a matter of principle, and was accompanied
by strong emotion. It was clear from the lengthy discussion following
that fundamental differences of recollection and interpretation re-
mained on what was agreed to by the United States at Vladivostok and
the subsequent negotiations. Dobrynin insisted that Secretary Kissin-
ger had agreed, and President Ford had affirmed in writing, on aggre-
gate ceilings, on counting ALCMs as MIRVs and on a 2500 km range
limit on ALCMs. He also thought, but less certainly, that agreement
had been reached on a 600 km range limit on SLCMs and GLCMs. He
insisted that the language used at Vladivostok had referred to “air to
surface missiles,” and had not, in a number of specific instances, in-
cluded the adjective “ballistic.”
Moreover, Dobrynin added, the Soviet leadership was uncertain
until April or May where the present Administration stood on these
points, since they had been repeated by Brezhnev in his letters to Presi-
dent Carter, and had not been specifically rejected in the President’s re-
sponses. He also cited the Brzezinski press conference of April 14 as evi-
dence that the US administration still held to the position that bombers
carrying ALCMs would be counted under the MIRV aggregate. The
Secretary refuted this interpretation of the Vladivostok agreement, and
said that the press conference referred to did not constitute a formal
statement of the Administration’s diplomatic position. He added that
further arguments about Vladivostok would be sterile, and could not
lead to productive discussions when Gromyko came.
Dobrynin responded by saying that the essence of the matter, as he
saw it, was that the negotiations were premised upon the acceptance by
both sides of a rough strategic equivalence, and that the US efforts to
limit Soviet ICBMs, their principal reliance in that equivalence, ap-
peared to them as an effort to gain a strategic superiority through nego-
tiations, since US advantages in submarines, bombers and now cruise
missiles, would not be equally limited. “As they see it in Moscow, you
here think we are weak economically and have other problems, and ex-
pect us to yield to your demands for superiority, but we won’t. We are
prepared to make any sacrifices necessary, and our people will, when
they understand that the US is unwilling to accept parity.”
There followed some inconclusive discussion whether it would be
useful, in the absence of other agreement, to conclude an agreement on
the Vladivostok ceilings on delivery vehicles and MIRVs, perhaps with
4 For a summary of Brzezinski’s April 1 press conference, see Don Oberdorfer,
“Brzezinski: Hopes for the Future,” The Washington Post, April 2, 1977, p. A1.
