Chapter 2, January–June 1989  31
Moscow.” Baker declined to commit to a date, responding: “We had to 
be certain that we had completed our review and that we were comfort-
able with its results. He was, however, prepared to say that we should 
have a full-­fledged ministerial meeting in Moscow in May with experts 
participating. We might be able to set a date for resuming NST at that 
time.” Shevardnadze replied that “this was all right.” Following a 
brief discussion of global anti-­terrorism and anti-­narcotics efforts, as 
well as the opening of consulates in Kiev and New York, the two men 
concluded their meeting with agreement to meet in Moscow in May. 
Baker flew from Vienna to Washington later that day. (Memorandum 
of Conversation, March 7; Department of State, Executive Secretariat, 
S/S-IRM Records, Lot 93D187, JAB Papers March 1990)
8.	
Memorandum From Linton Brooks of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, March 27, 1989
SUBJECT
Arms Control Review
Attached is a proposed NSR2 for the arms control review along 
with a forwarding memorandum3 to the President. The draft has been 
informally reviewed by Paul Wolfowitz (Defense), Jon Howe (JCS), Ron 
Lehman (prospective ACDA) and Reggie Bartholomew (State), as well 
as by our working level contacts in DOE and the DCI’s staff.
We have assigned due dates which, except for START and Defense 
and Space, are optimistic but attainable. Due dates for START and 
Defense and Space are exceptionally ambitious but are necessary in 
order to complete an initial review by early May. We think it is import-
ant to have this first pass through the START issues completed by 
then in light of (a) the President’s commitment to make tentative deci-
sions in April and to complete the review by May 9, and (b) Secretary 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, Richard A. Davis Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF01590–009, Arms Control PCC 
[2]. Secret. Sent for action. Sent through Kanter. Brackets are in the original. A stamped 
notation at the top of the memorandum reads: “Signed.”
2 Attached but not printed. See Document 10.
3 Attached but not printed. See Document 9.
