102  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
for improving their ICBM forces, he noted that some of the questions at 
issue went beyond assured destruction and into war-­fighting capability 
on the US side as well. He noted that some of the Soviet talk and think-
ing about what we perceive as dangerous can also be found reflected in 
our own military forces and thinking.
Secretary Brown said that we have in our current defense guidance 
a directive that if deterrence fails, we should limit damage to the extent 
possible. He noted that our plans for damage limitation were based 
almost entirely upon the objective of limiting escalation. The objective 
is to give the Soviets an incentive not to wipe out population. However, 
we have no useful plan in military terms for actually limiting damage 
to the US. This may be true as well in the Soviet Union, but this is dubi-
ous in light of their large air defense system and their uncertain civil 
defense capability.
General Brown noted that the war planners would welcome some 
way to limit damage; however, it appears to defy solution to limit 
damage through weaponry given what we have and what they have. 
Secretary Brown noted that we are staying away from both active and 
passive defenses, whereas they are continuing to pursue such defenses 
except for ABM. However, there really may not be any significant dif-
ference in the damage limiting capability of the two sides.
Spurgeon Keeny commented that they had much the same prob-
lem as General Brown had described on their side with large yield 
weapons opposite them. Secretary Brown noted that our damage lim-
iting capability was confined to limited targeting on the Soviet Union.
General Brown said that the latest C3 study indicated that the 
Soviets may not be able to distinguish between the limited attack and a 
full-­scale attack on the Soviet Union. Secretary Brown offered the view 
that their very hard command and control indicates a concern about 
continuity during a war. While this would probably be useless in a 
full-­scale war, the question is whether they think so. Spurgeon Keeny 
noted that we have an airborne command and control post from which 
someone could draw the same conclusions. Secretary Brown said that 
this was not meant simply to save the members of the Democratic 
Party. The important question was not that the Soviets would be able 
to succeed at saving the leadership but rather how they perceive the 
situation.
Bob Bowie said that he was impressed by the Soviet civil defense 
effort. [3 lines not declassified] the Soviets have a long-­term civil defense 
program. [3 lines not declassified]
General Brown indicated that it was not our goal to match Soviet 
forces except in some areas, and that we had worked to offset certain 
Soviet capabilities and intended to continue to do so. He emphasized 
that we needed an adequate number of improved systems in order to
