864 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement not desiring to return, are being careful to play both sides of the fence, sometimes to protect relatives, and probably sometimes to not slam any doors if later they change their minds. I agree that this is a very difficult situation to handle and for the moment have no thoughts on what we may be able to do. I have been trying to think of some way that I could casually make the point to Wang during the give and take for what it might be worth. I think it entirely possible that apart from their obvious desire to use this for their propaganda play, they are, in fact, also being somewhat misled by the situation. I sent your office a telegram last night on Wang’s request to post­ pone this week’s meeting. It was as welcome to me as I am sure it was to you. You will see that Warsaw suggests he may be going back to attend the funeral of Bierut. I had not thought of this and think it may well be correct. At the same time, I think it entirely likely that they may be planning some new move for the next meeting. While, as you see from my telegrams, I feel that we are pretty near the end of the road, we nevertheless cannot forget the Communist ability to ignore every­ thing that has happened in the past and radically shift positions. I agree that Chou’s memorandum to Nehru does not appear to threaten an early break but do not understand how they feel that publication of the “entire proceedings” on the second agenda item constitutes any pres­ sure on us. The entire substance has certainly been made public in our respective statements and it does not seem to me that there is anything substantial that can be added thereto. Incidentally, while I greatly appreciate the copies of the memoran­ dums contained in your 1750 I am left a little puzzled as to whether Nehru simply handed the Memorandum over without discussion, or whether there was some discussion between himself and the Secretary, and if so what its nature might have been. I hope that I know at least as much about what may have taken place in this regard as Wang may know. I would also be interested in knowing whether or not there was any discussion of Indian functions under the Agreed Announcement and Implementation beyond that indicated in our Memorandum for Cooper to give to Nehru. That is, I would be very much interested in knowing to what degree the Indians may have expressed satisfaction or dissatisfaction, as this would assist me in governing the statements I make here to Wang in this regard. In the absence of any instructions to the contrary, I will assume that your 1751 will still be applicable to the March 22 meeting. I am not very impressed with the point in the first sentence of paragraph 2 of those instructions and in this regard will plan to confine myself to expressing disappointment over their making the March 11 statement rather than the violation of our understanding with regard to making statements. He had told me at the previous meeting that they were going to make a statement on renunciation and I only implied that we might make
