National Security Policy 957 SUMMARY OF THE ESTIMATE 1. Over the next decade, we believe that the stature of the USSR and of Communist China in the world will continue to increase mark­ edly, thus posing increasingly serious challenges and a growing men­ ace to the US and the West.3 (Para. 18) 2. In the world in general, recent Soviet behavior contributed to a spreading popular impression that the East-­West struggle, or cold war, was entering a period of greater movement and fluidity, and that the direction of this movement was toward a diminution of cold war tensions. Viewed objectively and realistically, however, the East-­West relationship remains fundamentally hostile. The emerging Soviet ICBM capability, dramatized in the eyes of the world by the Lunik shots, is altering military power relationships. Confidence that the trend of events is in their favor remains a keynote of the behavior of the Soviet leaders, and they assert that the overall growth of their relative power position has now reached the point where major consequences will be manifest on the world scene within the foreseeable future. (Paras. 13–14) 3. Our views of Soviet power and policy are fully stated in our forthcoming estimate on this subject. In brief, we believe that: a. Soviet economic and scientific strength will continue to grow at a rapid rate. b. The Soviets, despite some force reductions, will maintain a high level of conventional military forces and will greatly increase their long range attack capabilities, above all through a substantial ICBM buildup. c. In the Soviet view, the emerging standoff of intercontinental striking forces marks a stalemate only of general war capabilities. They consider that this situation of mutual deterrence would open up new opportunities for advancing Communist power by political, economic, and perhaps even limited military means. We believe, however, that even then they would not wittingly assume serious risks of general war. We believe that they would draw back if the Western response were of such vigor that in their view more extensive Soviet involvement would entail either serious risk of general war or net political loss. At the same time, we believe that the chance of their miscalculating risks may increase if they remain convinced that their relative power is growing. d. Soviet foreign policy will remain devoted to the same objectives as heretofore. At least over a five-­year period, elements of both a policy of pressure and one of reducing tensions will probably be adopted at 3 The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, believes that the importance of the ICBM requires that the third sentence of paragraph 2 be inserted in this initial paragraph to read: “In particular, the emerging Soviet ICBM capability, dramatized in the eyes of the world by the Lunik shots, is altering military power relationships.” [Footnote is in the original.]
