Romania 679 unlikely as it seems now, to “unleash” the Securitate would be an invitation to conflict. 14. Militia as an organization is not now and is unlikely to be in the future a significant power group. Nevertheless, given fact that every hamlet in Romania has its town policeman or two, often the only governmental authorities permanently on the scene, acquiescence by militia in government policies is essential for internal administration. Mass Media 15. All Romanian mass media are totally under party and, therefore, Ceausescu control and consequently constitute no destabilizing threat. Because of the resulting towering dullness, incompleteness, and distortion, however, Radio Free Europe (RFE) has won here the highest percentage of listenership in any East European Country and is the USG program with single most significant impact on Romania. RFE’s power to make Romanians aware that there are viable alternatives to present regime policies, even within a Communist system, as well as its news broadcasts on domestic events not covered by Romania media, terrifies Ceausescu regime concerning RFE’s potential to instigate, focus, and mobilize anti-regime discontent, and causes Romanian officials even now to regard RFE as a major destabilizing force. To an extent they are right. Labor Groups 16. Official labor organizations are totally tame and are under complete party/state control; their only real function is to act as moderately important transmission belts of orders and policies from top down. There is no threat here, even under extreme circumstances. 17. Nevertheless, as Marx correctly noted and Jiu Valley miners have demonstrated, industrial workers have potential for militancy. GOR’s industrialization program is now two decades old, and first influx of workers in new industries who were fresh-from-the-farm peasants dazzled by bright city lights are beginning to be replaced by their less rustic children who could form a classic industrial proletariat. GOR officials are increasingly aware of this situation, but regime has yet to develop effective policies to deal with it although year-old “new economic mechanism,” still only partially implemented, is designed in part to meet some worker concerns. Grievances of kind familiar to Western trade union leaders do already exist, and ad hoc organizations could spring up to seek their redress, as in Jiu Valley affair and more recent “free trade union” (SLOMR) incident. As shown by both examples, however, GOR would have quickly and efficiently to defuse situation and destroy any incipient organization capable of serving as vehicle for expression of complaints of workers and others. While we therefore believe that in immediate future GOR
