224
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
73.
Study Prepared by the Ad Hoc Inter-Agency Group on
Human Rights and Foreign Assistance1
Washington, August 15, 1977
[Omitted here is the table of contents.]
PRESIDENTIAL REVIEW MEMORANDUM/NSC–28:
HUMAN RIGHTS
This study is submitted in response to the NSC memorandum of
May 20, 1977,2 requesting a review of United States foreign policy with
respect to human rights. The major sections of the study are keyed to
the NSC memorandum.
This study takes as its starting point the human rights policy artic-
ulated consistently by the President since his inauguration. Decisive ac-
tions have been taken to advance this policy both by the President and
by the Secretary of State. Reactions have occurred around the world.
Day-to-day decisions which must be taken to advance the cause of
human rights will require a careful weighing of the circumstances in in-
dividual countries. The study refines the overall thrust of our policy,
evaluates the instruments at our disposal to carry it out, and considers
costs, risks, and tradeoffs.
I. Definition of U.S. Objectives in the Area of Human Rights.
A. Overall Objective.
The overall objective of our human rights policy is to increase ob-
servance of human rights by governments.
1. Definition of Human Rights.
Generally accepted expressions of these rights are found in the
United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, adopted by the United Nations in 1948. To maximize our effec-
tiveness, our policy should be directed to the most fundamental and
important human rights, as set forth below, and should include the
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 44,
PRM–28 [1]. Confidential. Dodson sent a copy to Mondale, Vance, Harold Brown, Blu-
menthal, Bell, Kreps, Lance, Young, Gilligan, Turner, George Brown, and Reinhardt
under a September 7 covering memorandum. (Ibid.) Another copy of the study, which
Schneider circulated in the Department of State, AID, and USIA under a September 2 cov-
ering memorandum, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary:
Records of Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot File 81D113, Box 23, PRM–28–I.
2 See Document 46.
