Chapter 4, February–April 1990 621 that if you don’t accept what I am about to lay out, then we can just assume that what I’m presenting never existed. We see, for our part, a package on ALCM in which everything is interrelated. You accept all of it or you reject it. Let me outline the elements of our positions. One, that the range of the SRAM-­type missile, ALCM for you, would be 600 kilometers. Two, that the numbers of Soviet and US heavy bombers within the 1,600 level would be floating but there would be an upper limit set at a certain level—­there would be a sub-­ceiling. The Soviet side proposes that there be 90–115 bombers. Third, we agree on the counting rule for heavy bombers that has the US with ten with a maximum number of twenty. For our side the respective figures would be eight and a maximum of twelve. And the Soviet side would have the right to have 40 percent more bombers. Shevardnadze: If we take this approach what would the difference in the numbers of warheads be—­the numbers of actual ALCMs deployed? Akhromeyev: Well, it’s difficult to say because it depends upon the actual deployment of the bombers. Shevardnadze: I’m asking only for the maximum. In Moscow, we saw very big numbers. Akhromeyev: Yes, but that was strictly an internal count. We don’t know what the actual numbers would be. Bartholomew: My colleague is summarizing our agreement and differences. Note that if we look at the agreed common elements from Moscow, you’ll see that we’ve returned to agreement on all of those elements with two exceptions. What the Marshal is saying is not any different from that. Shevardnadze: Yes, this is what was agreed in Moscow and we do stand by it. Akhromeyev: I am simply reporting on what our position is and what we have agreed. The fourth element is on the counting of long range future bombers and for our part we want to have that governed by the same rule as the counting rule for existing bombers. That is ten for the US bombers, twenty maximum. Eight for Soviets, twelve maximum with the right to have 40 percent more bombers to compensate for the additional number of ALCMs that the US would have. Bartholomew: We had said, for future bombers, that rather than using the counting rule for existing bombers, that we would have ten/ twenty split for both the US and the Soviets when it came to future bombers. They’re saying, keep the same counting rules applying for the existing ones and simply apply that to the future as well. And that means that 40 percent would also apply—­in the future they would have the right to have 40 percent more bombers.
