and Technical Advisers in informal conferences. Perhaps more time was
devoted to this particular subject than to any other phase of the work, with
the possible exception of debt consolidation. Many interests directly
concerned with the question of rates of duty to be assessed against a given
article had representatives in Peking from the very beginning of the
Conference. The tobacco and oil interests were particularly concerned and
kept highly paid representatives here throughout the time the question of
Rates was under discussion. The California Raisin Growers, automobile and
tire manufacturers, ginseng growers, and various other interests were
directly concerned and took occasion to express their views either in oral or
written form. Many informal conferences were held with the tobacco and
oil representatives who were most anxious to keep the rates at the lowest
possible figure.
 
While there was general interest in the whole question of rates by all the
Delegations, as evidenced by the official proceedings of the Subcommittee
on Rates, the American, Japanese and British Delegations evinced much
more interest in this subject than did the others. The Japanese were perhaps
more vitally concerned, as the rates affected a wider range of Japanese
commodities than of any other country. From the beginning it was clear that
they would contend for as low rates as could be obtained, especially on
low-grade cotton goods and low-priced commodities of Japanese
manufacture. It was a slow and tedious process to bring them to assent to a
program which would yield approximately $90,000,000, knowing, as they
did, that such a program would require a substantial increase in rates over
those they had at first expected to obtain. It was only by Mr. Saburi’s
special trip to Japan in January that the Japanese Delegates were enabled to
revise their program in such way as to fall in with the general desire to
accord rates high enough to yield $90,000,000 per annum. The attitude of
the American Delegation was one of liberality towards the Chinese as far as
the American trade could consistently bear the burden. While tobacco was
looked upon by the American Delegation as a luxury, care was taken not to
allow the rate to be fixed so high that the trade in American raw tobacco
would either disappear or be seriously affected. Oil took the grade of a
