Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
115
crimination, as well.14 I have just removed all restrictions on American
travel abroad, and we are moving now to liberalize almost completely
travel opportunities to America.15
The United Nations is a global forum dedicated to the peace
and well-being of every individual—no matter how weak, no matter
how poor. But we have allowed its human rights machinery to be ig-
nored and sometimes politicized. There is much that can be done to
strengthen it.
The Human Rights Commission should be prepared to meet more
often. And all nations should be prepared to offer its fullest cooperation
to the Human Rights Commission, to welcome its investigations, to
work with its officials, and to act on its reports.
I would like to see the entire United Nations Human Rights Divi-
sion moved back here to the central headquarters, where its activities
will be in the forefront of our attention and where the attention of the
press corps can stimulate us to deal honestly with this sensitive issue.
The proposal made 12 years ago by the Government of Costa Rica, to
establish a U.N. High Commission[er] for Human Rights, also deserves
our renewed attention and our support.16
Strengthened international machinery will help us to close the gap
between promise and performance in protecting human rights. When
gross or widespread violation takes place—contrary to international
commitments—it is of concern to all. The solemn commitments of the
United Nations Charter, of the United Nations Universal Declaration
for Human Rights,17 of the Helsinki Accords, and of many other inter-
national instruments must be taken just as seriously as commercial or
security agreements.
This issue is important in itself. It should not block progress on
other important matters affecting the security and well-being of our
people and of world peace. It is obvious that the reduction of tension,
the control of nuclear arms, the achievement of harmony in the trou-
bled areas of the world, and the provision of food, good health, and
education will independently contribute to advancing the human
condition.
14 See footnotes 7 and 8, Document 9.
15 During his March 9 news conference, the President announced that the restric-
tions on travel to Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea, and Cambodia would be removed on
March 18; see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, p. 340 and “Last Travel Curbs Removed
by Carter,” The New York Times, March 10, 1977, p. 11.
16 For information on the 1965 proposal, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol.
XXXIV, Energy Diplomacy and Global Issues, Document 323 and Foreign Relations,
1964–1968, vol. XXXIII, Organization and Management of Foreign Policy; United Na-
tions, Documents 344 and 347.
17 For text of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the UN Gen-
eral Assembly on December 10, 1948, see Department of State Bulletin, December 19,
1948, pp. 752–754.
