Human Rights
299
Thus the preliminary FY ’78 allotments (which are informally pre-
sented to Congress at the beginning of each fiscal year), had to be re-
viewed to test their consistency to the new legislative directives, as well
as to Administration policy. The review took some time since a number
of difficult questions had to be answered including:
—Should any Title I assistance be provided to a country which is
judged to be a gross and consistent violator of human rights?
—Should Title I assistance be diverted away from gross and con-
sistent violators or lesser violators and toward those nations which
make progress or have good human rights records?
—How do we avoid creating a “consistent and gross violator” hit
list?
—Should all Title I agreements, or just agreements with consistent
and gross violators, be amended to require host governments to report
on the use of Title I food or proceeds; or, alternatively, should some
other method be sought to guarantee the human rights provisions of
Title I legislation are met?
In order to avoid the designation of any country as a consistent
and gross violator, it was decided (essentially by Christopher) to re-
view Title I allotments for all countries and to require “troublesome”
countries (as defined by the human rights working group) to provide addi-
tional reporting showing that the aid is indeed reaching the needy.4
In order to avoid a possible leak (there have been many from the
Christopher group) the list of those countries being considered as trou-
blesome was not presented to the interagency group. Instead, consulta-
tions were to be held with the interested parties. Apparently State got
so hung up in internal debate on the list, that they never got around to
consulting NSC. I have spoken to Oxman about this and will talk to
Schneider also. It appears to have been an honest mistake made under
severe time pressures.5
As to the current state of things, instructions have been issued to 4
of the 29 Title I countries to begin negotiating the FY ’78 Title I Agree-
ments. All four of these—Korea, Indonesia, Bangladesh and Guinea—
are considered of concern on human rights grounds, and will therefore
be required to provide the new reporting showing that the aid benefits
4 See Document 86.
5 Brzezinski underlined the word “State” and the fragment “to consulting,” added
three parallel lines next to the portion of the paragraph that begins with “debate on the
list” and ends with “severe time pressures,” and wrote: “Please let me know if this has
been ironed out—We should be involved. Check with pertinent NSC staff. ZB.” Tuchman
sent an action memorandum to Armacost, Pastor, Richardson, and Thornton on No-
vember 23, summarizing her November 22 memorandum to Brzezinski and requesting
that they inform her of any opposition to the countries in their portfolios appearing on
the “troublesome” countries list. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Mate-
rial, Global Issues—Mathews Subject File, Box 10, Human Rights: Public Law 480,
11–12/77)
