World Hunger and Food Policy 827 —Developing flexible policies to deal with the wide range of problems faced by developing countries in meeting their food requirements. Some developing countries already have sufficient supplies and expected foreign exchange earnings to purchase all the food imports they are likely to need. Another group of countries can attain this position with help. For some, increased agricultural development assistance can expand food production, others would benefit most from reduced trade barriers, while still others need help such as liberal credits to finance imports in short supply years. An effective U.S. and international food strategy must deal meaningfully with all these varied situations and needs. —Continuing efforts to deal intelligently and effectively with other factors affecting world hunger such as accelerating worldwide losses of arable land from mismanagement of the resource base (deforestation, overgrazing, soil erosion, salination, etc.), the rising cost of energy, chemicals and raw materials required by agriculture, and limitations on water for agriculture imposed by growing competition among nations and regions. —Finally, it is impossible to ignore the transcendent problem of population growth rates, which not only threaten the long-term food supply/demand balance, but have profound implications for a range of related factors vitally affecting life on this planet including deforestation, loss of croplands, urbanization, social unrest, and public health. Based on current growth rates, the world’s population will double to 8 billion people by 2010. Over 90 percent of the projected population increase will occur in developing countries which are most susceptible to hunger and malnutrition. Existing population/family planning programs in many countries have shown first signs of success; clearly they must be further improved and expanded if we are to avoid prodigious strains on food and other natural resources. I hope the foregoing provides a useful list of issues for the Commission’s consideration. Michael P. Boerner, Director of the Office of Food Policy and Programs will be the Department of State’s liaison officer with the Commission. You may be assured that the Department of State will cooperate fully with the Commission in its endeavors. Sincerely, Cyrus Vance
