Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
595
result in freeing the hostages by no later than two weeks after the
Majlis convenes, and in any case no later than mid May, you will join
with us at that time in complete and formal severance of all diplomatic
relations with Iran. Without this kind of support from our close friends,
the U.S. will have little choice but to undertake further and more severe
unilateral actions.
It is important to keep the attention of the Iranians on the issue of
releasing the hostages. While the departure of the Shah from Panama
was dictated by medical considerations, his presence in Egypt has the
effect of again removing the extradition of the Shah as a possible
element in the arrangements for release of the hostages. We had sought
to enable the Shah to have necessary surgery in Panama, but that proved
impossible given his assessment of the medical circumstances there.
We will want to be in close touch with your government during
the days ahead so as to share assessments of changing circumstances
and to coordinate our actions in the most effective way possible. No
one can dispute the fact that the patience of the American people during
this crisis has been extraordinary. That patience will not endure in the
face of further Iranian inaction. I trust you will agree that it is now
time to bring home forcibly to Iranians the consequences of their ille-
gal action.
Thank you again for your help during this difficult time.4
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
4 In his memoir, Vance noted that except for a positive response from Trudeau, the
formal replies to the letter expressed strong endorsement of the U.S. diplomatic approach
but counseled restraint. (Vance, Hard Choices, p. 407) Giscard’s response was transmitted
in telegram 85716 from Paris, April 1. Schmidt’s letter to Carter is in telegram 85936
from Bonn, April 1; and Thatcher’s response is in telegram 86045 from London, April
1. (Department of State, Records of David D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs, Subject Files, 1978–1981, Lot 81D154, Iran NODIS Cables Apr 1980)
Trudeau responded March 31. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Middle East File, Box 32, Subject File, Iran 3/27/80–3/31/80) The Japanese Embassy
responded March 26 that Japan was alarmed at the prospect of imposing more sanctions.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box 64, Outside the
System File, Iran Non-Meetings Hostage Crisis 1/80–3/80)
