Eastern Europe Region
9
4.
Executive Summary of a Paper Prepared by the Policy
Review Committee1
Washington, undated
Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC–9
COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF EUROPEAN ISSUES
[Omitted here is discussion of U.S.-West European relations,
NATO, economic issues, and East-West security issues (MBFR, SALT,
and CSCE).]
V. Eastern Europe
This PRM response analyzes four possible options for US policy
toward Eastern Europe:
A. Differentiate more sharply in favor of Eastern European countries
which demonstrate greater foreign policy independence from Moscow. In
effect this means increasing the preferential status of Romania at the
expense of Poland, Hungary, and the others. Since there are limits to
how much further we can go with Romania, and given the unlikely
prospect that the others will soon show foreign policy independence,
this option by itself could result in US immobilism toward Eastern
Europe.
B. Be more forthcoming toward Eastern European countries that are
relatively more liberal internally. In effect this option favors Poland and
Hungary over Romania and the others. While this approach would be
the clearest signal of our belief in human rights, it would inhibit our
flexibility to pursue a close relationship with countries (e.g., Romania)
which do not meet our human rights criteria but whose activities serve
our interests in other ways.
C. Give preference to Eastern European countries that are either relatively
liberal internally or relatively independent internationally, but limit our ties
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 27, PRM–
9 [1]. Secret. Sent to Brzezinski under a March 1 covering memorandum from Borg. On
March 2, Michael Hornblow, Acting Staff Secretary of the National Security Council
forwarded the paper to the members of the Policy Review Committee. (Ibid.) On March
4, Treverton sent Brzezinski a memorandum analyzing the study paper. Treverton wrote
that the full report was “long and loose” but that some parts, “for instance the section
of Eastern Europe—is quite good.” Referring specifically to the Eastern Europe section
and the four alternatives proposed by the paper, Treverton argued that “the difficulty
with much of the discussion, even the four broad alternative approaches, is that it is
very political in character. There is, for instance, little mention of the looming problem
of Eastern European debt with Western financial institutions. That would bear on our
ability to implement any approach.” (Ibid.)
