1979 617 something like the open trench if MPS is rejected. He noted that verification difficulties would be very serious in SALT III no matter what our basic concept because of system mobility. Personally Gen Jones said he leans toward the trench. Regarding missile commonality and size, he said we must understand that building a 110,000 lb. missile will mean designing it for the Trident. It will be called the D–5, or Trident II; M-X will be regarded as cancelled. We may attain a $3–4B saving from commonality, but the Chiefs regard this cost saving as very dubious. The Chiefs believe that the common missile will be another TFX. It will involve a delay of 6 months to a year, when we’ve already delayed too much. It will yield a missile with less capability than permitted by SALT. Thus, we shall have a perception problem involving cancellation of M–X and delay of a new missile. Ergo, the fully common missile is not a good idea. The Chiefs believe that if commonality seems as important, a 150,000 lb. partly common missile is the way to go—­two stages in common, a third stage to achieve an M–X capable of carrying 10 MK–12As, and a best effort on common components. The Chiefs would also propose going forward with a Trident II, but later than envisioned in Option 5. Dr. Brzezinski asked how many RVs the 150,000 lb. missile would carry in the absence of a fractionation level. Harold Brown said as many as 20 MK–4s could be carried, but with that many RV releases there was a problem of reliability and accuracy. Gen Jones said a 190,000 lb. M–X would use all our head room under SALT and match the SS–19 in throw weight—­a 150,000 lb. missile would have only 700 lbs. less throw weight capability. The SS–19 has 7900 lbs—­a 150,000 lb. missile would have 7200 lbs. Stan Turner asked whether the 150,000 lb. missile could be mated with an aircraft. Harold Brown said yes. Stan Turner asked about putting it on a truck. Harold Brown answered only two stages would be used in effect. The truck would be deploying the D–5. George Seignious said that if one looked in the long term to negotiations beyond 1985, it appeared there could be a race between RVs and aimpoints, and arms control might end up trying to limit both weapons and aimpoints. Stan Turner said the Soviets pursued forces that gave them warfighting and reserve strategic capabilities. Harold Brown said we could afford to, and some time ago did concede to the Soviets over all strategic equality, but we could not accommodate their quest for warfighting advantages. If they wanted to strive for those advantages, we would simply have to move to deny them. David Aaron said if we can effectively restore force survivability in the face of Soviet threats, then we may have a chance to negotiate the forces downward. But we will never get them to agree to limitations if we allow them to make their counter force achievements stick.
