X
Preface
of trade negotiations launched in September 1973 to a successful con-
clusion and to secure congressional approval of the resulting agree-
ments; it also documents the administration’s attempt to increase sales
abroad through an export promotion initiative, as well as its effort to
convince the Japanese government to open its domestic market wider
to U.S. exports. In addition to seeking out new markets abroad, the
Carter White House helped domestic producers facing import competi-
tion at home in sectors such as steel, shoes, and textiles. A major issue
faced by the administration in the international monetary realm was
the recurring downward market pressure on the U.S. dollar; here, the
volume documents the administration’s attempts to arrest the dollar’s
decline through domestic and international measures, including coop-
eration with West Germany, Japan, and Switzerland. The volume also
documents the evolution of the G–7 summit, whose origins are covered
in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy,
1973–1976. During the four years that Carter was in the Oval Office the
G–7 summit was institutionalized; it also served as a forum in which
members not only discussed economic policies, but coordinated them,
most notably at the 1978 summit in Bonn.
One theme that emerges from these documents is the increasing
importance of West Germany and Japan as both economic partners and
economic rivals of the United States. Whereas in the previous Foreign
Relations foreign economic policy volume it was the U.S.-French rela-
tionship that took center stage, in this volume the sheer number of doc-
uments pertaining to relations with West Germany and Japan speak to
the extent to which relations with Bonn and Tokyo absorbed the en-
ergies of Washington officials (although France does not disappear, as
Paris’ cooperation was essential to the successful conclusion of the
Tokyo Round). A related theme is the changing nature of the United
States’ role in the world economy, a change apparent in, for example,
Washington’s vigorous efforts to convince Bonn and Tokyo to adopt
expansionary economic policies in order to spur global growth, as well
as its approach to issues such as the dollar pricing of oil, the role of Spe-
cial Drawing Rights in the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the
creation of an IMF substitution account. Finally, there is the issue of
confidence. Long before Carter’s July 15, 1979, “malaise” speech, in
which he spoke not only of energy policy but the country’s “crisis of
confidence,” policymakers worried about the economic implications of
the national and international mood: a May 6, 1977, memorandum
from Brzezinski to Carter on the eve of the London G–7 summit, for ex-
ample, was entitled “Confidence is the Theme.”
During the 1976 presidential campaign, Carter promised to adopt
a new approach to U.S. relations with the developing world. The vol-
ume documents his administration’s efforts in this regard, examining
