Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  353
“largest.” Thus, the U.S. side would have to consider whether it could 
accept the word “the” in Article I.
30. For example, Burt continued, suppose in 1995 the largest exer-
cise planned by the U.S. side was Global Shield, and it was scheduled 
for September. Suppose that the next largest exercise that year took 
place in May and the third largest was planned for December. The 
U.S. intent was to notify Global Shield because it would be the largest. 
Suppose the May exercise was conducted, but in August Global Shield 
was canceled: in that case, our intent would be to notify the December 
exercise, the third largest. But in that case, the Soviet side would be able 
to say that the United States had violated the agreement, because “the 
largest exercise” in 1995 had taken place in May and the U.S. side had 
failed to provide notification. The U.S. side wanted to avoid that kind 
of ambiguity, Burt explained; we did not want to debate over what was 
“the” largest exercise. This was why the U.S. proposed to say “one” 
major exercise in Article I. But the intent was to notify global shield, if 
it took place.
31. Nazarkin said he understood the U.S. problem, and that the 
Soviet side would await U.S. confirmation that the change was accept-
able. Burt pointed out that this could also be a problem for the Soviet 
side; Nazarkin confirmed that this was correct. After a brief caucus, 
Nazarkin said it appeared the Soviet side did have the same problem, 
and that the problem Burt had just described was a real problem. He 
said that apart from Article I, the Soviet side was prepared to agree 
that the entire text was ready. Regarding Article I, he proposed that 
the sides think about a way out of the situation Burt had described very 
precisely, and come back to the subject at the next day’s meeting.
32. Burt suggested that although the legal experts had agreed that 
“the” conformed to the Russian text, perhaps “a” could also work. 
Burt said that if the Russian text was compatible with “a,” then he 
thought the issue could be resolved. Nazarkin said Burt was correct 
in saying that “A” would bring the English text closer to the Russian 
version, but there was still a problem concerning the kind of exercise; 
“a major” was not necessarily equivalent to “the major.” Nazarkin 
asked whether, with this wording, the U.S. side would be able to 
refrain from notifying the Soviet Union of Global Shield. Burt replied 
negatively, quoting from a May 5, 1989 letter from Defense Secretary 
Cheney to Soviet Defense Minister Yazov: “The U.S. is prepared to 
notify you no less than fourteen days in advance of conduct of the 
U.S. strategic air command exercise “Global Shield,” on the under-
standing that in the same year the USSR will provide 14-­day advance 
notification of a major Soviet strategic forces exercise involving heavy 
bomber aircraft.”
