382 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 can coordinate between the Waldheim channel and the Panamanians, we can reinforce the UN package on the critical question of “the right of the Iranians to seek legal extradition”. If we fail to coordinate with the Panamanians, we risk their taking some unilateral action that undermines the UN effort, destroys our bargaining posture with Ghotbzadeh and scares the Shah to death. Now that the Panamanians are involved in this process, we have little choice but to treat them seriously and keep them generally informed. If this present negotiation appears to have a real chance for success, it is equally important that we brief the Shah, as he will become nervous as stories about his “extradition” appear in the Panamanian and international press. It seems that at the point and time that our latest position is seriously considered by the Iranians, Lloyd Cutler and/or myself should fly to Panama to reassure the Shah. Or, to quote Gabriel Lewis, “he should be a part of this conspiracy”. When I returned tonight, I contacted Harold Saunders and was debriefed by him. He said that one thing that we might do to involve and also utilize the Panamanians would be to give them tomorrow a general report on the recent proposal that was sent to Iran,9 and that since a critical element of it involved the principle of Iran being able to “seek the legal extradition of the Shah”, we might encourage them tomorrow to contact Ghotbzadeh directly, tell him that they are ready to play a role in the resolution of the crisis and ask him to accept the most recent UN proposal which contains the language on extradition that is important to them. Mr. President, there is a lot more I could tell you, but believe that this covers the major points. I will be at home tomorrow and will be glad to help further in any way possible. 9 In telegram 10588 to Panama, January 13, the Department sent the language of the proposal the United States provided to Waldheim on December 12, which the Secretary- General conveyed to Farhang. The proposal suggested a three-step process for ending the crisis: adoption of a Security Council resolution which recognized the legitimate right of Iran to seek extradition and the return of the Shah’s assets, the establishment of an international Committee of Inquiry to investigate allegations of human rights abuses under the Shah’s former regime, and the simultaneous Iranian release of all hostages. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870108-1032) U.S. officials drafted the proposal language in an effort to more precisely define the sequence and timing of the included elements, which Iranian officials recently had suggested to Waldheim. (David Andelman, “Security Council Again Delays Vote on Iran Sanctions: Only Confirmation is Awaited,” New York Times, January 13, 1980, p. 11)
