711.4216 M 58/55
[Document 392]
The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State
WASHINGTON, February 24, 1925.
No. 198
SIR: I have the honor to refer to your note of the 13th instant, and to inform you that the
Government of Canada have observed that public hearings have recently been held by
the War Department in Washington on an application made by the Sanitary District of
Chicago for permission to increase the quantity of water which that District is now
permitted to divert from Lake Michigan under authority of the Secretary of War and
that the question whether, in accordance with the recommendation of the Chief
Engineer, the amount permitted to be diverted should, under certain conditions, be
increased to 8,500 cubic feet per second instead of 4,167 cubic feet per second, to
which the Sanitary District is limited under a recent judgment of the Supreme Court of
the United States, was also considered.
The Dominion Government now desire me to state that, while they would not wish to
oppose any interim measure which may be necessary to protect the health of the
inhabitants of the city of Chicago, they feel compelled to reiterate the protest they have
already made against the abstraction of water from the St. Lawrence basin12 and, in
order that there may be no misunderstanding, I desire to take this opportunity of
making it clear that the Government of Canada do not surrender any claims that might
be put forward for consequential losses already suffered or which may possibly be
suffered in the future on this account. The Dominion Government are of opinion that it
is impossible to lose sight of the fact that the effect of the present increase in permitted
diversion of water will be to postpone the relief for which the navigation and other
interests injuriously affected by the attitude of the Chicago Sanitary District have been
waiting already too long, and which, subject only to the paramount necessity of
safeguarding public health, these interests are now entitled to receive.
I feel sure that you will readily appreciate that the injury to Canadian interests by any
lowering of the natural level of the Great Lakes connecting waters and the St.
Lawrence River by the diminution of their natural water supply is of constantly
increasing importance not only on account of navigation on the Great Lakes and lower
St. Lawrence River but also on account of power development. The Government of
Canada have not failed to recognise that United States interests are likewise
substantially affected by this question.
