Non-Proliferation 989 initially, for example, carry forward the discussions already held by CD experts on exchange of international seismic data to monitor a test ban. —A working group would provide an opportunity for the Soviets, if they were so inclined, to exploit third world pressures on issues such as verification, where our position is considered by many to be unnecessarily demanding. Progress in the trilateral talks might actually be hindered by a working group if the result were increased Soviet resistance to acceptance of our position on key issues or, alternatively, might result in a weakened verification regime and would jeopardize Senate ratification of a CTB Treaty. —Some of the U.S. positions in the trilateral talks (e.g., on duration of the treaty), could be exposed in the working group discussions and be subject to severe criticism. We would come under pressure to modify them, probably from domestic, as well as foreign critics. 387. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva and the Embassy in the United Kingdom1 Washington, September 3, 1980, 2316Z 234386. Subject: Bartholomew/Bessmertnykh Meeting on NPT Issues. Refs: A, Geneva 11751;2 B, Geneva 11698.3 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800420–0217. Confidential; Immediate. Sent for information Immediate to Moscow. Drafted by Napper (EUR/SOV) and Steiner (PM/DCA); cleared by Palmer (PM/DCA), Combs, Jr. (EUR/ SOV), Bohlen (EUR/RPM), McGaffigan (S/MS), and Jones (ACDA/MA); and approved by Bartholomew (PM). 2 Telegram 11751 from Geneva, September 3, reported on the September 2 Trilateral NPT Review Conference talks. The U.S., UK, and Soviet Delegations “decided the conference President should be pressured to break the impasse on the language of the final declaration. The Soviets indicated that they would be willing to take public positions on key Article VI issues which they will attempt to present as concessions and indications of flexibility. These positions would include acceptance of: “a deadline for conclusion of trilateral negotiations on a CTBT (1982), a CD working group on CTB (but only if all five NWS participate), and a nuclear testing moratorium (again, only if all NWS participate). (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800419–0331) 3 Telegram 11698 from Geneva, September 2, reported that “prospects can hardly be considered good for consensus outcome” of the NPT Review Conference, “and there is a real possibility for a divisive conference result that would be portrayed by many as demonstrating that the NPT has not served the interests of its non-nuclear weapon state (NNWS) parties and that non-proliferation efforts are losing ground.” The Mission also warned that “over the last week or so, the more militant Non-Aligned Delegations, primarily Yugoslavia, Sri Lanka, and Mexico, have strengthened their grip on the Group of 77, and have taken assertive and uncompromising positions on key conference issues, especially in the area of arms control.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800417–0402)
