666
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
246.
Editorial Note
Speaking from the White House Briefing Room at 3:10 p.m. on
April 7, 1980, President Jimmy Carter charged the Ayatollah Khomeini
with full responsibility for not placing the hostages under Iranian Gov-
ernment control and announced that the United States was breaking
diplomatic relations with Iran. Carter simultaneously imposed several
measures against Iran. First, he ordered the Secretary of the Treasury
to put into effect official economic sanctions prohibiting exports from
the United States to Iran in accordance with the sanctions approved
by 10 members of the UN Security Council on January 13 but vetoed
by the Soviet Union. (See Document 147.) He expected the shipment
of food and medicine to be minimal or nonexistent. Second, he stated
that Iran’s assets would be formally inventoried as would be the out-
standing claims of U.S. citizens and corporations. This was to facilitate
the processing and payment of these claims. Carter also promised to
initiate legislation in Congress for claims against Iran. Third, Carter
announced a strict enforcement of visa issuance, including the invalida-
tion of all visas currently issued to Iranian citizens for future entry
into the United States, the non-reinstatement of current visas, and new
visas only for “compelling and proven humanitarian reasons.”
In his concluding remarks, Carter said that the United States had
“acted at all times with exceptional patience and restraint in this crisis,”
had supported Secretary General Waldheim’s efforts, and would con-
tinue to consult with its allies and other friendly governments on these
steps, and “on additional measures which may be required.” Carter
also stated that “the steps I have ordered today are those that are
necessary now. Other action may become necessary if these steps do
not produce the prompt release of the hostages.” (Public Papers: Carter,
1980–81, Book I, pages 611–612)
Carter’s instructions to the Department of State for breaking
relations, the text of Executive Order 12205 for economic sanctions, his
message to Congress reporting on U.S. actions, and the text of Executive
Order 12206 on visas are ibid., pages 612–615. U.S. allies were informed
of these developments in telegram 91816, April 8. They were asked to
withdraw their Ambassadors as a sign of solidarity, to think of a
complete break in relations, and to adhere to the economic sanctions.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800175–0062)
An undated paper prepared in the Department of State, entitled “Euro-
pean Reaction to Our Request on Iran,” listed the responses of U.S.
allies (including Canada and the EC Commission) to telegram 91816.
As reported in this paper, the EC–9 Ambassadors met with Bani-Sadr
on April 12 to demand the release of the hostages, their respective
governments agreed to consider further steps, and the modalities of
