3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
292
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
were to insert ourselves into that conflict in support of Muslim coun-
tries who support the rebellion.
The Soviets and Cubans have legality and African sentiment on
their side in Ethiopia—they are helping an African country defend its
territorial integrity and countering aggression. They can monopolize
this position only if we permit them to do so. Our recent actions and
policy statements have placed us firmly behind these principles, too,
and we should not waver from them. We should, in fact, be very careful
to avoid any appearance of a persisting sentimental tilt toward So-
malia, because the Soviets will exploit this against us in Ethiopia and in
Kenya. If Somalia is invaded and we do back some counteraction, we
must be very clear about the circumstances. The wily Somalis already
know that it is in their interest to claim and appear that they are being
invaded—and they may well work out a scenario that achieves this
aim.
The way to bring home to the Soviets and Cubans the high cost of
further consolidation of their position in the Horn is to cool relations in
other areas and take steps that force them to weigh the costs of Horn in-
tervention against gains they have been expecting from other aspects of
their relations with us. Possibilities include:
• Straightforward abandonment of Indian Ocean Talks.
• Abandonment of talks on limiting conventional arms transfers.
• Suspension of SALT.
• Limitations on economic relations, transfer of technology, etc.—
announced or unannounced.
• A more active program of challenging, critiquing and countering
Soviet initiatives elsewhere in Africa and in the Third World.
• Abandonment of joint space ventures.
• Demonstrative efforts to consult with the Chinese—without
specifying the exact purpose of the consultations.
• Selective restriction of those cultural exchange activities which
are, on balance, more advantageous to the Soviets than to us.
In respect to Cuba, I find the suggestions Bob Pastor makes in his
memorandum to you of 28 February appealing. Perhaps we should
broaden our consideration of possible efforts against the Cubans and
systematically review every aspect of our present relationship from the
viewpoint of how adjustments disadvantageous to the Cubans could
be made.
We must not neglect the public relations/propaganda dimension
of the problem. So far, I fear, the U.S. Government has provided the
world a spectacle of being rather undifferentiatedly fussed up about
the Horn but incapable of doing much except sputtering and de-
nouncing. When we take any of the actions listed above, we should
give advance thought to how we announce and explain them. Our
statements and backgrounders to the media and our broadcasts over
