942  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
4. If, after five years, the sides have not reached agreement on a 
regime for telemetry transmission, either side will be free to adopt the 
current practices of the other side. Current practices means those in 
effect on December 1, 1990.
Exemptions (to be provided)
Miscellaneous
1. For purposes of the treaty provisions on data denial, the U.S. 
small ICBM will be treated as though it were an existing type of ICBM.
2. The sides will conclude a separate agreement, to be signed at the 
same time as the START treaty, establishing the Joint Compliance and 
Inspection Commission upon START signature.
End text
8. FYI. Washington intends that the proposal to conclude a sep-
arate agreement establishing the Joint Compliance and Inspection 
Commission upon START signature recognizes that it may not be fea-
sible to have technical details of the information and tape exchange 
worked out by early February. Early JCIC creation will allow us to 
resolve those details prior to entry into force. Early JCIC creation will 
also speed resolution of the issues associated with creating an agreed 
regime for telemetry transmission. End FYI.
9. Negotiating group should press the Soviets to accept this new 
approach. In doing so, negotiating group should be aware that the fol-
lowing issues are still under review:
— Exactly how we will delete national security information.
— Exactly how we would exclude re-­entry vehicle data from the 
requirements for information exchange. (i.e. whether it includes all 
re-­entry vehicle data throughout the flight or only transmitted after 
re-­entry vehicle separation).
Negotiating group should avoid foreclosing U.S options on these 
matters pending further guidance.
10. Although the paper provided the Soviets spoke of a five year 
transition regime, the Soviets were told we could accept three years. 
Negotiating group may renew this offer in the context of overall agree-
ment on the U.S. approach. Following this transition period, the negoti-
ated transmission practices would apply to all existing and new types, 
as agreed. The sides also discussed an approach where the requirement 
to maintain current practices applies to all types—­existing and new—­
during the transition period. Under this approach there would be no 
need for explicit reference to the small ICBM. Negotiating group may 
accept such an approach.
