Human Rights 329 2. Improve Relations with Congress Relations between Congress and the Administration in the human rights area are at a very low ebb. It is hard to accept, given your own deep commitment to this issue, but most human rights advocates in Congress believe that, were it not for their continuing pressure and vigilance, the Administration would renege on its commitment to human rights. The situation has been complicated by the fact that the Right wing has recognized this issue as a golden opportunity to turn a “liberal” issue to its own ends. It became a common pattern this year for members to be enthusiastically proposing and voting for human rights restrictions on aid measures and IFI funding bills, only to turn around and vote against final passage of the bill. Thus we face a strange alliance of both ends of the ideological spectrum that caused us so much difficulty during this past year with the IFI appropriations and other issues. One of the main reasons we have not been able to win Congress’ trust, is that with the best of intentions, we have found it impossible to implement some of the legislation in this area. A strict interpretation of the Harkin amendment, for example, would have us create a “hit list” of “gross and consistent violators” of human rights. Congress did not think through the damage such a list would do to our overall foreign policy. This is only one example among many where both Congress and the Administration would gain from listening to the other in a quiet and apolitical forum. Before relations deteriorate further, we should initiate a series of working meetings—chaired by the Vice President—with the prominent Congressional human rights advocates from both Houses and both parties. A specific agenda for these meetings would be set through staff consultations, but with active Congressional participation. It would be made clear to those invited that they were not being called to the White House to hear the Administration’s position, but to think through the problems involved in implementing legislation now on the books, (as well as other problems) and to actively participate in working out mutually satisfactory resolutions. As a starting point, there should be at least one meeting devoted to bilateral assistance policies (economic and military), and one to the IFIs, with explicit discussion of what Congress really expects from the US delegations. There should also be a meeting devoted to policies toward the USSR and Eastern Europe, where we might begin to build a consensus about the Jackson-Vanik problem. Such a series of meetings is most appropriate to the White House, not only because we are trying to build trust in Administration’s policies in this area, but because ultimately, we would be asking the Members to rethink their own legislation—something that could not be done effectively at a lower level.
