118 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement The Second Sessions of the Committee of 21 took place in Buenos Aires from April 27 to May 8, 1959.14 The Committee ultimately settled on thirty-­three (33) draft resolutions for approval by the Council of the OAS. While the limitations of space preclude a discussion or even a listing, of all of the resolutions approved by the Council on July 8, 1959, mention of several items will demonstrate the subjects covered and the range of problems under the purview of the Committee of 21: The Inter-American Economic and Social Council (IAECOSOC) as advisory agency of the OAS on specific economic problems: Measures to increase the flow of private investments and public capital; Analysis of commodity price-­support systems and export subsidy policies; Evaluation, development, coordination of transportation in Latin America; Studies of wool and mineral markets; Studies on regional industries; Latin American regional market: Problems of excessive fluctuation in the markets for basic products; Liberalization of international trade in basic products: Coordination of technical cooperation and assistance activities; Survey and evaluation of natural resources; Development of the home-­building industry and financing of low-­ cost housing; University training of technicians; Promotion of economic development through agrarian reform, In February, 1960, the President of Brazil addressed to President Eisenhower an Aide Memoire15 suggesting that the delays attendant upon completion of the IAECOSOC’s country-­by-­country economic surveys indicated the desirability of certain limited but immediate steps. The measures set forth by President Kubitschek were as follows: 1. Strengthening of measures for financing Latin-American development, preferably through the Inter-American Development Bank. 2. Technical and financial program for the development of agriculture and of the food industries in conformity with the individual characteristics of each country. 3. Measures to ensure adequate prices and market conditions for raw materials and primary commodities which are basic to the economic and social stability of Latin American countries. 4. Financial and technical assistance to an intensive program for the training of experts in economic development and for the campaign against illiteracy. 14 Documentation on the Buenos Aires sessions of the Committee of 21 is in Department of State decimal file 363 as well as in the following Department of State lot files: OAS Files, Lot 60 D 665 and Rubottom Files, Lot 61 D 279. 15 The text of the Brazilian Aide Memoire, which President Kubitschek handed to President Eisenhower on February 23, 1960, is in Department of State file 371.04/2–2360.
