596 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I tion that any cheating which might affect our national security would be discovered in time for us to respond fully. For many years, we have monitored Soviet strategic forces and Soviet compliance with the SALT agreements with a high degree of confidence. The overall capability remains. It was certainly not lost with our observation stations in Iran, which was only one of many intelligence sources that we use to follow Soviet strategic activities. We are concerned with that loss, but we must keep it in perspective. This monitoring capability relates principally to the portion of the new agreement dealing with the modernization limits on ICBM’s and to only a portion of such modernization restraints. The sensitive intelligence techniques obviously cannot be disclosed in public, but the bottom line is that if there is an effort to cheat on the SALT agreement, including the limits on modernizing ICBM’s, we will detect it, and we will do so in time fully to protect our security. And we must also keep in mind that quite apart from SALT limits, our security is affected by the extent of our information about Soviet strategic forces. With this SALT II treaty, that vital information will be much more accessible to us. The agreement specifically forbids, for the first time, interference with the systems used for monitoring compliance and prohibits any deliberate concealment that would impede verification. Any such concealment activity would itself be detectable, and a violation of this part of the agreement would be so serious as to give us grounds to cancel the treaty itself. As I have said many times, the stakes are too high to rely on trust, or even on the Soviets’ rational inclination to act in their own best interest. The treaty must—and the treaty will be—verifiable from the first day it is signed. And finally, how does SALT II fit into the context of our overall relations with the Soviet Union? Because SALT II will make the world safer and our own Nation more secure, it is in our national interest to control nuclear weapons even as we compete with the Soviets elsewhere in the world. A SALT II agreement in no way limits our ability to promote our interests or to answer Soviet threats to those interests. We will continue to support the independence of Third World nations who struggle to stay free. We will continue to promote the peaceful resolution of local and regional disputes and to oppose efforts by any others to inflame these disputes with outside force. And we will continue to work for human rights. It’s a delusion to believe that rejection of a SALT treaty would somehow induce the Soviet Union to exercise new restraints in trou-
