192
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
ment and suggested that we all adjourn to Holly Cabin rather than con-
tinue the discussion in two places. The Secretary agreed.
While arrangements were being made to move to Holly, Dayan
said that of the three zones mentioned in the paper, so long as Weizman
agreed with the deployments described for the two westernmost zones,
then he had no problem. All of the problems, as he pointed out, are in
the zone from 20 to 40 kilometers west of the old international frontier
between Sinai and Palestinian mandate. He did not see a way to reach
agreement at Camp David on all of the complex problems in that zone,
and suggested leaving negotiations on these issues for the next phase,
retaining the status quo while those negotiations went on.
Secretary Vance asked Weizman whether the dispositions of forces
described in paragraphs C1, C2, and C3 were generally consistent with
his understandings with Sadat. Weizman said that they were, though
some rewording and readjustment would be necessary.
The Dayan-Weizman-Vance meeting then adjourned to Holly,
where it was joined by the remainder of the Israeli Delegation and by
Saunders, Atherton, and Quandt. Begin began by asking Rosenne to
read out slowly the text of the US Sinai proposal. Begin then initiated a
paragraph-by-paragraph discussion, after some preliminary and rather
prolonged discussion among the Israelis in Hebrew.
Begin said that according to his agreement this evening with Presi-
dent Carter, paragraph B would be dropped and would be replaced by
language which stated in essence that the issue of the Israeli settlements
“would be decided in the peace treaty.” After further discussion in
which Dayan restated his view of the difficulty in resolving the com-
plex issues in the easternmost zone at this point, Dayan suggested re-
vising paragraph B to read, “Except as otherwise agreed in the final
peace treaty, Israeli armed forces will be withdrawn from Sinai.” He
said that this should be coupled with a statement that during the period
of negotiations for a final peace treaty, the status quo should prevail,
and that all the issues involving that zone will be discussed and de-
cided in the negotiations for the final peace treaty.
Begin then went back to a paragraph-by-paragraph approach,
saying that the first paragraph was fine, and that the second paragraph
should read, “All the principles of UN Resolution 242 will apply in the
resolution of the dispute between Israel and Egypt.” (He stressed that
the dispute was between the two countries, and did not just involve
Sinai. Secretary Vance agreed.)
They then agreed that the word “full” in paragraph A would
follow the first word “the”, rather than precede the word “Egyptian”.
There was some objection by Begin to the use of the word “full” but he
dropped it.
