1955 3 Vietnam. It could be argued in each of these cases that unification is purely an internal matter. But in reality resort to force would endanger international peace and security. The same applies to China. The U.S. believes that the principle of non-­recourse to force is valid not merely for the U.S. and its allies, but for all. (16) If the CPR questions the acceptance of the foregoing princi­ ple by the U.S. and its allies, you may in response point to the purely defensive character of our arrangements with the Republic of China, particularly exemplified in our 1954 Mutual Defense Treaty. (17) If the CPR has practical matters at issue with the U.S. which they would like to bring up, you are authorized to take note of what the CPR representative has to say in this respect and report to me and await appropriate instructions. (18) You will seek to arrange your talks with the CPR representa­ tive so that you will be able to return from time to time to your regular post at Prague, for I deem it important that the people of Czechoslo­ vakia should not feel that the U.S. is disinterested in their fate, the fact being quite the contrary as the President has personally made clear to you. If you should feel that you cannot adequately discharge your responsibilities as Ambassador to Czechoslovakia and at the same time discharge your present special mission, you will promptly inform me. Sincerely yours, John Foster Dulles 2. Telegram 312 to Geneva1 Washington, July 29, 1955, 7:01 p.m. 312. Essential Ambassador Johnson have full freedom telegraphic communications with Department and interested posts during forth­ coming Chinese discussions. Following procedures will apply: Telegrams will be numbered in regular consulate series without external designator but carrying internal caption for or from Johnson. Outgoing telegrams will be signed Gowen. This will not imply or require consulate concurrence nor should any such telegrams receive any distribution within consulate. Dulles 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–2955. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kreer (SS).
