Chapter 2, January–June 1989  73
A second issue was sea-­launched cruise missiles, Gorbachev con-
tinued. The Soviets saw that the U.S. position had not changed, that the 
U.S. was arguing that a simple political declaration would be enough. 
Gorbachev asked whether the sides should do the same for strategic 
weapons: to propose a simple political declaration? That would clearly 
mean nothing. If we agreed on a START treaty with unlimited SLCM 
deployments, this would be an unacceptable situation.
Gorbachev said his third point was the link between START and 
the ABM Treaty as signed in 1972. This was a fundamental point for the 
Soviets. He understood that the Secretary did not want to engage now, 
but he wanted to say these things for the Secretary to think about.
Gorbachev noted that the U.S. reaction to his London proposal on 
fissionable material had been decidedly cool, but he would still like 
to propose a bilateral treaty on this subject, leading eventually to a 
ban on production. Gorbachev also wanted to stress that the Soviets 
were ready at any time to agree to a complete ban on nuclear testing. 
They welcomed the agreement by the U.S. to continue consultations 
on a chemical weapons ban. He suggested that the sides perhaps agree 
here on a joint statement. He knew that President Bush attached a lot 
of importance to CW. Such a statement could push the process for-
ward. He asked whether the Secretary had any comment or whether he 
should proceed directly to conventional forces.
The Secretary said the U.S. did have an interest in CW and was 
prepared to continue the bilateral discussions, but we were not ready 
to issue a joint statement. This should probably await the resumption 
of our exchanges. The Secretary said that he had already spoken with 
Shevardnadze about SLCMs, as well as the resumption of talks on pro-
tocols to the PNET and TTBT with a view toward submitting the trea-
ties for ratification. Regarding fissionable material, the Secretary said 
he was not in a position to be any warmer on this subject than before. 
Regarding ALCM counting rules, this was one of the tough issues that 
we would have to tackle in START if there were to be progress.
The Secretary said he was aware of the differences between our 
countries’ positions on the ABM Treaty, but we could not take them 
up on this occasion. The U.S. was concerned, for example, about the 
Krasnoyarsk radar, Gomel, and the whole issue of compliance. We 
wanted to take all these subjects up, but not at this meeting.
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
