limited to accredited representatives of the Chinese Ministry of
Communications, the Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph Company
of Delaware.
 
The Radio Corporation of America, while financially and technically
interested in the problems to be discussed, is not a party to the Federal
contracts. This Corporation has indicated a desire to entertain as its guests
in the City of New York accredited representatives of the Chinese Ministry
of Communications, the Mitsui Company and the Federal Telegraph
Company of Delaware that they may there study wireless communication
systems and find, if happily they may, a means whereby the Japanese and
American interests may by cooperation between their respective projects
amicably solve the wireless difficulty which has for so long been the subject
of discussion between the Governments of China, Japan and the United
States. If the Government of the United States may be informed that the
foregoing suggestion is acceptable to the Governments of Japan and China,
it will be pleased to communicate that fact to the Radio Corporation of
America to the end that invitations may be accordingly issued.
WASHINGTON, October 28, 1926.
[Enclosure 1]
If China depends for overseas wireless service upon the Peking station
alone, the development of such service will be retarded to the injury of
China and as well to the injury of other countries and their nationals. The
Peking station is not thought to be technically efficient; it is badly located;
but a small portion of China’s overseas traffic originates in the Peking area;
the station must depend for the greater part of its traffic upon the land lines,
incurring in consequence for its messages additional expense, delay and
liability to mutilation. The station cannot furnish effective competition with
the cable and perhaps could never develop revenues sufficient to pay for
itself. Moreover one receiver and one transmitter alone could not establish
efficient circuits with the many wireless stations of the world. The delays
on such circuits would discourage not encourage development of the
service. On the other hand, the American interests concerned believe that a
