284
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
62.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, January 12, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Report for 1977: A Critical Self-Appraisal
I. THE INHERITANCE
The international position of the United States at the end of 1976
was not good.
Our Allies were uneasy about our constancy, our will, and our
ability to lead. Our adversaries were openly speculating about the po-
litical consequences of “the general crisis of capitalism.” The Third
World was generally hostile or disappointed. The American public dis-
trusted our policies and deplored the apparent lack of moral content in
our actions and goals.
More generally, there was a widespread sense abroad that the
United States was fearful of global change, indifferent to the newly sur-
facing aspirations of mankind, and thus unable to exercise creative
leadership, designed to propel historical change in the right directions.
More specifically,
—The Europeans—though the overall relationship with Europe
had been improving since the 1973 “Year of Europe” fiasco2 and the
energy-related political crisis of 1974—were uneasy that the United
States was not genuinely in favor of European unity. There was a
feeling that the U.S. ranked its relations with the Soviet Union above
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Out-
side the System File, Box 49, Chron: 1/78. Secret; Eyes Only for the President. Brzezinski
sent the memorandum to the President under a January 13 cover memorandum, noting
that he, Aaron, and the NSC Staff had prepared it and suggesting that parts of the memo-
randum might be shared with top congressional leaders and a “friendly columnist.” He
also recommended that the President provide a copy to Rosalynn Carter, as he believed
the First Lady would “find it informative.” The President wrote “no” on the cover memo-
randum next to the recommendation that the memorandum be shared with congres-
sional leaders and the press; however, he underlined Rosalynn’s name and wrote “ok” in
the margin. The First Lady added the following notation: “Zbig, I made very few com-
ments but found it very interesting. I’d think some of it could be presented to press. R.” In
the top right-hand corner of the cover memorandum, the President wrote: “Zbig—I read
it all & agree with most of it.”
2 Reference is to Kissinger’s April 23, 1973, address entitled “The Year of Europe,”
which he delivered before the annual meeting of Associated Press editors in New York.
In it, Kissinger proposed the promulgation of a new Atlantic Charter and the articulation
of common objectives. For the text of the address, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol.
XXXVIII, Part 1, Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1973–1976, Document 8.
