1980 793 US-Soviet relations deteriorate still further. In this environment, we believe the Soviets would be motivated to compete more vigorously with the United States by deploying additional improved systems. Further, without SALT II constraints they probably would retain many of the older systems that would have been deactivated under the provisions of the Treaty. The projection assumes that the Soviets would field a large force of highly fractionated ICBMs to increase their striking capabilities, and that they would seek still further to improve the survivability of their forces by deploying larger numbers of mobile ICBMs and MIRVed SLBMs. Static Comparisons of US and Soviet Intercontinental Striking Forces 26. Figure 1 illustrates projected trends in the number of weapons in future Soviet forces and in their explosive power, with and without SALT II limitations. The top two charts compare the moderate SALT-­limited Soviet forces, and the SAL/No-SAL force, with a US SALT-­limited force that is based on Department of Defense projections. The charts show that the projected Soviet SALT-­limited forces would improve relative to the projected US force in the early and middle 1980s, but that the trends would become less favorable to the Soviets in the second half of the decade if SALT II limits remained in effect throughout the period. The charts also show that Soviet forces could match or exceed those of the United States in the late 1980s if SALT II limitations expired in 1985, the Soviets expanded their forces, and the United States continued to develop its forces as currently programed: —In online missile RVs and bomber weapons, the present US lead becomes very small by the early 1980s. The United States would regain the lead in the late 1980s under SALT-­limited conditions, unless the Soviets deployed 10 RVs on all their MIRVed ICBMs. However, the Soviets could achieve an advantage in the late 1980s if the SALT II Treaty expired in 1985 and the United States did not change its programed force. —In online equivalent megatons, the Soviet forces maintain their current lead in each of these assumed circumstances. 27. The bottom two charts in figure 1 illustrate the prospects for Soviet force improvement and expansion under conditions in which SALT II is abandoned and the Soviets begin a buildup this year. In these circumstances, we project that Soviet forces would achieve qualitative and quantitative characteristics that would substantially exceed those that they would be likely to have under SALT II: —In numbers of online missile RVs and bomber weapons, the Soviets would be able to deploy more highly fractionated ICBMs and SLBMs (for example, a 20–RV SS–18 in 1985) than they could under SALT II. Owing to this greater flexibility, the number of Soviet missile
