318
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
4. Concerning the question of linkage, the President said that he
thought our answers2 to King Hussein would help to clarify our own
views on this. He told Ambassador Atherton to give a copy of the an-
swers to the Egyptian delegation.3 There was some discussion of the
question of priority of obligations, the arrangements for a U.N. force,
free passage in the Strait of Tiran, and other minor problems. Con-
cerning the question of Gaza, the President expressed his view that it
should be mentioned in the text that the final status of Gaza was not de-
cided by the establishment of the border between Egypt and Israel.
5. Finally, the President indicated that he would like to be able to
come to the Middle East in the near future, and that his own schedule
would permit a visit in late October or early November.
2 See footnote 4, Document 91.
3 Ibid.
90.
Telegram From the Department of State to Secretary of State
Vance in Pretoria and the Embassies in Egypt, Israel, and
Saudi Arabia1
Washington, October 18, 1978, 0257Z
Tosec 120078/263638. Jidda for Saunders from Atherton. Subject:
Blair House Talks—October 17.
1. We met first today with El-Baz and his colleagues bilaterally.
They handed us a proposed annex2 on oil and after some discussion in-
dicated that they were now ready to begin negotiations with the Israelis
on this subject. We conveyed our view that assurances about long-term
supply of oil to Israel would be important in determining how soon the
Israelis were willing to withdraw. El-Baz took the position that this
could not be expressed in a contractual undertaking but “an under-
standing,” might be reached about it.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840148–2579. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Sterner; cleared by Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O);
approved by Atherton. Sent for information Immediate to the White House. Vance was in
Pretoria for discussions on the Namibian question with South African officials.
2 A copy of this proposal has not been found.
