1118 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Four Premises First: I am writing from the premise that Sol with the President’s full support will be pursuing his negotiations with every effort to conclude them as early as possible. A lot of good work is being done on possible solutions to the issues. I am leaving the issues and the tactics of the negotiations aside for a moment, although decisions on strategy could affect how Sol begins to talk with Sadat next week.2 Second: The main issue to be kept before us is how hard we can press to conclude the negotiations in May or June and how much attention we should give to the option of suspending negotiations. Whether or not we might choose that option, we have to address the issue soon because the Egyptians are already locking us into a May 25 final deadline and closing off options for keeping the negotiations alive beyond June or beyond 1980. Sadat may well be planning another dramatic initiative. If we are going to suspend negotiations this summer, we need to do so on the right issue. Third: An immediate operational issue in the management of the larger peace process is how to deal with a number of issues outside the negotiations themselves. They will affect our ability to conclude them and to win Palestinian and Arab acceptance for them or to keep the door open for further peace initiatives if we cannot. I am thinking particularly of probable moves by the Arabs or the Europeans to bring the Palestinian rights issue back to the UN Security Council next month or after May 25. If we are going to shape those efforts we will need to make our views known soon. Fourth: How we manage the peace process this spring will affect the cooperation we can expect on building our security framework in Southwestern Asia as well as Saudi cooperation in keeping oil production up and prices down. My own view is that we should press the negotiations as long as substantive work is being done to define the issues and solutions to them. An active negotiating process is better than a void if it is serious. How big a milestone May 25 is will depend on how much we make of it—whether we and Sadat choose to make it a cut-off point or whether we continue and try to convince others that serious work is still going on. However, there is a very real alternative of suspending negotiations over the right issues. 2 Linowitz was scheduled to leave for the Middle East on March 21 for six days of talks with the Israelis and Egyptians.
