Afghanistan Prince Fahd said that is very important. Dr. Brzezinski continued that Ambassador West will talk to Prince Saud about leasing transmitter time because we feel that the indignation of the rest of the world is shared quietly by the 50 to 60 million Moslems in the Soviet Union. Prince Fahd said that was true. They have the feeling that this Islamic fervor is against any one act of invasion such as that by the Soviets. He had not witnessed a comparable reaction to any other single act. He thought that the Soviets had not imagined that the reaction would be so intense and so deep. This is very important. They have witnessed an international outcry all around the world. Dr. Brzezinski said that we think this calls for a response on many levels. Most importantly is the level of the Islamic world. We are also prepared to respond in several ways to help Pakistan militarily and economically. We intend to strengthen our military presence in this part of the world. We are not asking for bases from anyone but we are negotiating with a number of countries for the use of facilities so we are able to respond quickly and effectively to any threat. We will respond on the level of psychological broadcasts as well. We are prepared to work with every country in the region to strengthen security. We indicated to the Pakistanis that the 1959 agreement is still valid but we are also planning to work with other countries to organize economic and military assistance for them. Mr. Christopher said that our trip to Pakistan was better than anticipated but also different than anticipated. The President had announced that he was prepared to go to Congress to seek nearly a half a billion dollars in assistance, including two hundred million dollars in military credits and other economic assistance. Somewhat to our surprise the Pakistanis asked us not to send this until they had a better understanding of what the reaction of their other friends would be. No doubt Saudi Arabia is aware that Pakistan has enormous needs in military and economic fields. Their balance of payments deficit is greater than a billion dollars a year and even more urgently the Pakistan army needs to be reoriented back to the West, since it is now focused mostly in the East. This move requires some change to the Pakistani military and increased infrastructure. So now it is of great importance to know what other nations can do. We would ask your comments on your evaluation of Pakistan’s needs and your own discussion with the Pakistanis. Prince Fahd said that Saudi Arabia had for many years been giving Pakistan very good aid in military and economic fields trying to be as supportive and helpful to Pakistan as they can possibly be. They know that if they buoy up Pakistan economically that people will be able to breathe more easily. Also, they are prepared to do whatever they
