336 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement as we could. The discussion is developing very much as anticipated and our principal worry at the moment, as pointed out in the telegrams, is how to prevent a complete deadlock from arising over our refusal to admit the “higher level conference” as a subject for discussion. I am glad to know that arrangements are underway for bringing me back to Washington. This has been a most interesting and useful experience for me and I am, in some ways, reluctant to leave at this point. However, as we seem to be moving toward a one meeting a week schedule, there really is not enough work here to justify keeping two officers away from CA when you are so short-­handed. Bob Ekvall was glad to know that you were consulting with Defense on trying to improve his position here. At the moment, his orders have expired and he is technically AWOL, so some action will have to be taken rather quickly. Doug and I have been reading with interest the despatches from Taipei and Hong Kong which you have been sending. We also appre­ ciate the trouble you took in rounding up the collection of documents that we had asked you for. They will be helpful to us as we move fur­ ther into the next phase of the talks. Best regards, Ralph N. Clough 254. Telegram 86 to Prague1 Washington, September 30, 1955, 3:07 p.m. 86. Verbatim text. For the Ambassador. Deptel 789. First paragraph draft statement on renunciation use of force, amended to read as follows: “One of the practical matters for discussion between us is that each of us should renounce the use of force to achieve our policies when they conflict. The United States and the PRC confront each other with policies which are in certain respects incompatible. This fact need not, however, mean armed conflict, and the most important single thing we can do is first of all to be sure that it will not lead to armed conflict.” 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–3055. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated Priority to Geneva for Johnson as telegram 805. Drafted by ­McConaughy; cleared by Sebald and Phleger.
