1630 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Our representatives might make carefully prepared statements at the opening session in Geneva on April 13th, recapitulating the progress and difficulties in the negotiations, and pointing out the possibility of action to capitalize immediately on the areas of agreement already reached or in prospect. Simultaneously letters from you and me to Premier Khrushchev, perhaps along the lines of the enclosed draft, might be delivered in Moscow endorsing the approach. In order that our suggestion might not seem to be advanced as a propagandistic gesture, it might be made privately and released publicly only after sufficient time for a Soviet response—unless, of course, a premature leak forces our hand. These thoughts are being discussed here with Selwyn and your Embassy. Because I believe we have an opportunity to give a new and sounder impulse to these negotiations, I wanted to bring them to your attention directly and to hear your views. With warm regard As ever, 452. Telegram 8816 to London1 Washington, April 4, 1959, 3:38 p.m. 8816. Following is text of message to Prime Minister Macmillan from President for immediate delivery. Advise date and time of delivery. QUOTE. April 4, 1959 Dear Harold: One of the most heartening aspects of our talks here was the accord we found in our strong convictions as to the importance of the nego­ tiations in Geneva for the controlled suspension of nuclear weapons tests. These talks offer the one early possibility for a first step toward enforceable disarmament and toward control over, the future develop­ ment and spread of modern means of destruction. I have been giving further thought to what we might do to revi­ talize these negotiations. I believe it is important to give a note of hope 1 Source: Transmits letter from Eisenhower to Macmillan on nuclear test suspension talks. Secret; Niact; Presidential Handling. 6 pp. NARA, RG 59, Presidential Correspond­ ence: Lot 66 D 204, Eisenhower to Macmillan.
