National Security Policy  569
years after initiation of the project. The USSR itself probably has the 
capability, with about six months’ preparation, to place an earth sat­
ellite in orbit from Chinese territory. There is as yet, however, no firm 
evidence of the initiation of any projects to launch earth satellites from 
the territory of Communist China.
90. Nonmilitary applications of atomic energy. There is evidence of 
a further reduction in the ambitious Soviet nuclear power program 
announced in February 1956 as part of the Sixth Five-Year Plan. At that 
time, the USSR set a mid-1960 goal of 2,000–2,500 megawatts of nuclear-­
electric generating capacity. However, a Soviet reply to a UN question­
naire in March 1957 described a program which could produce a total 
capacity of about 1,400 megawatts by that date. Recent statements by 
Soviet officials indicate a planned capacity of about 700 megawatts in 
mid-1960. We estimate that an additional 200 megawatts or more could 
be obtained from dual-­purpose reactors installed at plutonium produc­
tion sites, giving the USSR a total of at least 900 megawatts by mid-1960 
if the latest plans materialize. Continued references to the 2,000–2,500 
megawatt goal by leading Soviet authorities indicate that the progres­
sive decrease in nuclear generating capacity planned for 1960 reflects 
a slippage in Soviet plans rather than a reduction in the Soviet nuclear 
power program. The USSR is conducting extensive research on con­
trolled thermonuclear reactions.
91. Soviet employment of radioactive isotopes and radiological tech­
niques in medical, chemical, metallurgical, biological, and agricultural 
research lags behind that of the US by up to five years. While the USSR 
has been actively employing these means in research investigations, little 
originality has been displayed and only recently has the quality of this 
type of research shown improvement.
92. Despite this lag, the USSR has initiated a sizable technical assist­
ance program in nuclear energy within the Bloc and has offered aid in 
this field to a number of non-Bloc countries. To encourage collaboration 
among nuclear scientists within the Bloc, the USSR established in 1956 
a Joint Nuclear Research Institute near Moscow. Although the USSR is 
a member of International Atomic Energy Agency, its attitude toward 
the agency has been passive. Future Soviet activities outside of the Sino-­
Soviet Bloc probably will continue to be largely limited to unilateral 
offers of aid to non-Bloc nations. However, visits by Soviet scientists to 
Western nations and Soviet participation in international conferences 
may be increased.
93. Physics and mathematics. Some Soviet scientists in the various 
fields of physics and mathematics are the equals of those in the lead­
ing nations of the West. Greatest capabilities are exhibited in theoretical 
mathematics and physics, high-­energy nuclear physics, low tempera­
ture physics, solid state physics, and acoustics. Research during this
