National Security Policy  585
been reached as a result of one or more of the following factors: dissatis­
faction with the performance of BISON and BEAR; progress in develop­
ing new or improved bombers; confidence in Soviet ability to acquire an 
ICBM capability at an early date. Contributing to the decision may have 
been a Soviet belief that the USSR’s medium bomber force, together with 
a small heavy bomber capability, is at least temporarily acceptable as a 
deterrent force, and for use against the US should general war occur.
142. The Soviets will almost certainly continue to strive for 
technological superiority over the US in intercontinental weapon 
systems. Presumably they set great store by the ICBM as posing an 
entirely new type of threat. But Soviet military planners almost cer­
tainly feel that even though they have good prospects of acquiring 
a substantial long-­range striking capability with missiles, manned 
bombers will still be required. Manned bombers, especially advanced 
types, will provide the Soviets with flexibility and diversification of 
attack capabilities, and will remain particularly applicable for attacks 
on small, hardened targets, damage assessment, and reconnaissance. 
We therefore believe that the USSR will retain a large force of long-­
range bombers throughout the period of this estimate, although its 
size will probably decline gradually. Its inflight refueling techniques 
will probably be improved and extended to a larger part of the force; 
however, there is no present evidence of the development of an air­
craft specifically for use as a tanker. Improved electronic and other 
supporting equipment will probably be provided. Air-­to-­surface mis­
sile launching capabilities will probably be augmented as more effec­
tive missiles are developed.
143. Future projections of the strength and composition of Soviet 
Long Range Aviation are complicated by the fact that at present the 
entire Soviet medium and heavy bomber industry is in a state of tran­
sition, involving considerably less current production than a year or 
two ago. Production at BADGER plants now appears to be tapering 
off, although it will probably be sufficient to provide moderate further 
increases in the jet medium bomber force. The one identified BISON 
plant, at Moscow, has continued to produce aircraft of this type at a low 
and uneven rate, while its design bureau has been working to develop 
a new type of large bomber. A total of about a dozen BISONs have been 
completed since April 1958, bringing cumulative production to about 
100 aircraft. While considerably less evidence is available on BEAR 
production, we believe it unlikely that any new BEAR bombers have 
been produced for well over a year, or that more than 50 to 60 were 
produced altogether. In the interim, the one identified producer has 
probably been overhauling existing BEARs, modifying some aircraft of 
this type for transport use, and building a few new transports of the 
CLEAT type (similar to the BEAR). Despite the decline in long-­range
