376  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
THOR-JUPITER—With regard to the IRBM program, Mr. McElroy 
specified that only eight of the planned twelve squadrons of THOR-­
JUPITER will be organized. Four of these eight squadrons will go to 
the U.K. and one to Okinawa. The basis for this decision is that none of 
our allies desire IRBMs to be based on their soil. Mr. McElroy admits, 
however, that we must take into consideration the countries’ desire to 
buy IRBMs from us.
The President asked why we spent billions on these systems which 
are to be deployed among our allies and then and only then ascertain 
from them whether the systems are acceptable. The real question is 
whether we are doing our homework ahead of time. Mr. Quarles then 
commented that when the ICBM programs were given the highest pri­
ority, the State Department asked for a high priority also for the IRBM. 
Mr. Quarles stated that State still feels that it is valid to have the IRBM 
and is not happy about the reduction to eight squadrons, wishing to 
have ten squadrons to meet the Norstad commitment. He pointed out 
that the remaining two squadrons can be taken care of through MAP 
procurement if the countries involved desire the weapons.
In this connection, Mr. McElroy stated that the development of the 
GOOSE, a long-­range decoy, is being dropped, as is SNARK.
TITAN-ATLAS—The Department of Defense plans to retain TITAN 
in the ICBM program since the scientific community considers it supe­
rior to the ATLAS despite the fact that it comes in a year later than 
ATLAS, and like ATLAS is a liquid-­propelled missile. The time in which 
MINUTEMAN can take over is unknown. Currently, the Department of 
Defense plans to program eleven squadrons of TITAN and nine squad­
rons of ATLAS.
Manned Bombers—In the manned bomber field, production of the 
B–52G is being stepped up to five or six planes per month. This is being 
done because “the B–47 is undergoing fatigue.” One squadron of B–52s 
replaces two squadrons of B–47s.
Mr. McElroy went on to say that the Department of Defense con­
sidered cutting back B–58s and actually is planning to buy only three a 
month. Some procurement of this aircraft is considered justified since 
its speed of mach 2 will be a great advantage, and a limited number of 
these going in against Soviet defenders can open the way for the B–47s 
and B–52s.
Here the President interposed the question of why we produce 
B–58s along with more B–52s. He concurs with the policy of introduc­
ing a few new high performance aircraft for psychological purposes, 
but he questions the retention of TITAN, ATLAS, B–52s and B–58s. He 
voiced the question, “How many times do we have to destroy Russia?” 
This question, though rhetorical, was partially answered by General 
Twining when he stated that the total wings in the active Air Force go
