Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 691 1. Embargo all imports from Iran to the United States. This can easily be done under the existing provisions of IEEPA and amounts to approximately $1 million per month. Treasury will prepare the necessary implementing regulations. (C) 2. Prohibit the export of food and medicine to Iran. IEEPA provides authority to prohibit all exports except private donations of food, clothing and medicine. The SCC agreed that private donations would continue to be excepted since this includes packages to the hostages and clear humanitarian gifts. A finding will also be prepared under the Export Administration Act prohibiting exports on the grounds that Iran is assisting international terrorism by its acts. (C) 3. Prohibit the Use of U.S. Passports for Travel to Iran. There is statutory authority for the President to invoke measures short of war in order to induce the release of hostages. Use of this statute to prohibit using passports is subject to challenge under the provisions of the subsequent Passport Act which does not provide such authority for hostage cases. If applied to U.S. journalists, we can anticipate an immediate challenge; but court action will require some time. We can probably defeat such a challenge on grounds that the safety of U.S. citizens is endangered by remaining in Iran; however, we will not cite that as our reason in the initial announcement. (S) 4. Prohibit all Financial Transactions with Iran, Including any Transactions in Connection with Travel to Iran. If drawn tightly and applied immediately, this would prevent a U.S. citizen from buying a ticket to leave Iran. A group composed of representatives of State, Justice, Treasury, Commerce and the Counsel to the President will meet to draw up regulations which are as tight as possible to pressure all U.S. citizens to depart Iran as soon as possible. The group will also examine the potentially serious policy and constitutional problems relating to the application of this order (under IEEPA) to the press. (S) 5. Telecommunications. Matt Nimetz will meet today with representatives of COMSAT to explore the technical implications of interrupting satellite communications with Iran. It was agreed that continued contact with Iran was sufficiently beneficial for intelligence purposes and for maintaining contact with Laingen and intermediaries in Tehran that we should not order an immediate interruption by COMSAT. However, unless there are overriding technical reasons, we should call for an extraordinary meeting of INTELSAT members within 30 days to consider barring Iran from use of the INTELSAT system. The SCC recognized that we may be unable to muster a two-thirds vote in INTELSAT, but considered it desirable to signal our intent to pursue our efforts to isolate Iran internationally. (S) 6. Close Offices of Iran Air, the National Iranian Oil Company, and the Iranian Natural Gas Company in the United States. They would be given
