30 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 7. Editorial Note On March 4, 1989, Secretary of State James Baker traveled to Vienna for the opening of the Conventional Forces in Europe negotiations. On March 7, he met twice with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze at the Residence of the U.S. Ambassador. During a private meeting from 9:55 to 11:05 a.m., Baker informed his counterpart “that the U.S. Government was currently engaged in a thorough review of the overall situation and our relationship with a view to identifying new opportunities for moving that relationship forward,” and that it would not finish this review before the end of April. Shevardnadze responded “that on one hand the new U.S. Administration was in the process of developing its policy. This was quite natural. The Soviet side recognized that this was not a simple process. Any new government of whatever country looked for new approaches and new procedures, taking into account new conditions and past experience. Accordingly, the Soviet Union was not dramatizing this pause and this slow-­down in the relationship between our two countries. The Soviet Union understood the reasons for it, and considered it normal. But, on the other hand, the world was anxious about the future because the world was greatly affected by the state of relations between the USSR and the U.S.” (Memorandum of Conversation, March 7; Department of State, Dennis Ross Files, Lot 03D102, US/Soviet Memos of Conversation—1989/1990) In a plenary meeting that lasted from 11:05 a.m. to 12:05 p.m., Baker and Shevardnadze addressed the resumption of the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks: “On START, the Secretary recalled his comments in the one-­on-­one meeting that the U.S. wanted to build on the progress made to date. The U.S. strategic review would be completed by the end of April. Therefore, he suggested that their next ministerial take place in early May. The U.S. was reviewing its strategic modernization programs and this would of course affect the U.S. negotiating position. He could not give a date for resuming talks today, but he wanted to emphasize that the Administration was committed to completing a START treaty.” The Krasnoyarsk radar continued to be “a barrier to completing a START agreement,” he said, and the U.S. position “would not change.” Notwithstanding Krasnoyarsk, Baker “repeated that the U.S. was committed to a START treaty, assuming that we could overcome this and other obstacles.” In reply, in reference to “the Nuclear and Space Talks, Shevardnadze said that a great deal of work had been done and this provided a good foundation. He had wanted to suggest that the NST negotiations resume in April. He understood this was not possible, but suggested that he and the Secretary agree to resume the talks in the second half of May, i.e. after the Secretary’s visit to
