International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979 627 [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to a shift from dollar to SDR oil pricing.] 218. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Strauss) to President Carter1 Washington, June 8, 1979 SUBJECT Decision on Extension of Specialty Steel Import Relief This memorandum discusses options regarding the duration of an extension of specialty steel import relief. As I noted in my May 18 memorandum on specialty steel,2 all agencies had agreed to recommend that you extend import relief for six months in the form of progressively larger bimonthly quotas. During the past several weeks, Congressional interest in this case has intensified. To date, 34 Senators and 54 members of the House have written either you or me; they almost unanimously favor a substantial extension of import relief. If we were to respond to these strong Congressional concerns, which were evident in your meeting with the Congressional Steel Caucus on June 7,3 relief would have to be extended at least 1½–2 years. There is not a good economic case for extending relief that long and I would not recommend that you do so. However, you may want to consider an eight month extension of relief as well as a six-month extension. Attachment 1 outlines my recommendations on quota levels for an eight month extension of relief.4 I personally recommend that you extend import relief for eight months rather than six months. This longer relief period is more responsive to Congressional concerns but because of the phase down of 1 Source: National Archives, RG 364, 364–80–4, Special Trade Representative Subject Files, 1977–1979, Box 7, Steel File #2. No classification marking. A stamped notation indicates that Strauss signed the original. 2 Not found. 3 On June 7, Carter met with the Congressional steel caucus in the Cabinet Room from 9:04 until 9:34 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation was found. 4 Attachment 1, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Bimonthly Quota Levels, By Product Category, for Eight-Month Extension of Relief.”
