950 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI the START Treaty, the Soviet RSM–50 (SSN–18) SLBM was stated as equipped for three weapons, although it has earlier been stated as having seven weapons. In order that there be no ambiguities on this matter between the sides, I wish to tell you this. True, in the Joint Statement adopted in Washington in December, 1987, we indicated that this missile was attributed seven weapons. In actuality, however, we had tested the missile of this type both with a seven-­weapon front end and with a three-­weapon front end, and the greater number of those missiles (about three quarters of them) have been deployed precisely in a three-­weapon configuration. However, following the position of counting the maximum number of RVs with which a particular missile has been tested, we indicated the larger number of weapons for this missile in the Joint Statement. Subsequently, the missiles with seven weapons were being replaced by the three-­weapon missiles. By the time of the data exchange, as of September 1, 1990, we only had those missiles equipped for three weapons. The launch of a RSM–50 SLBM equipped for more than three RVs conducted earlier, in August, 1990, was used, among other things, to destroy the remaining seven-­weapon front end. The value of the accountable RSM–50 SLBM throwweight, after re-­configuring those SLBMs for a three-­weapon front end, has not changed. Thus, the seven-­weapon front ends for the RSM–50 SLBM have been retired and their inventory completely destroyed. I wish to call your special attention to the fact that we have gone even further than the US side proposed in terms of the START Treaty. Namely, we decided to destroy the retired front ends. All presently deployed Soviet RSM–50 SLBMs are equipped for three-­weapon front ends of a new design that makes it impossible to place more than three RVs on them. The US side will be able to satisfy itself of it at the time of inspections to verify the numbers of RVs on ballistic missiles. I would also like to add that the Soviet Union does not produce, nor has any plans to produce, seven-­weapon front ends for the RSM–50 SLBMs. Now, as to the question of downloading of accountable RVs on ballistic missiles of existing types, this matter can be considered agreed upon. Third. On the question of criteria to be used in defining a new type of an ICBM or an SLBM, we took into account the US concern and have broadened the applicability of the “ten or more per cent” criterion as opposed to our previous position.
