Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 2. Please pass to the White House Eyes Only for the President and Dr. Brzezinski. 3. In order to focus discussion on how the situation in Tehran can evolve relating to the hostages and the work of the UN Commission, we developed the middle and final stages of the scenario as a basis for discussions in Washington, Tehran, and New York on how to proceed. You will have an opportunity to study the revised scenario in Washington Friday and Saturday.2 V is planning to return to Tehran Sunday. One possible action for Friday is discussed below. 4. Begin text of revised scenario. Scenario—Second Revision I. Principles and Procedures The United States and Iran renew their commitment to resolve the crisis between them through completion of the previously agreed scenario.3 The following is a suggested development of events in the days ahead: II. Transfer of the Hostages (Objective: March 15–25) A. March 15 or 16: Election results are announced. B. March 16: V returns to Tehran with a personal message from Jordan to Bani Sadr4 which would make the following points: —President Carter appreciates President Bani Sadr’s message stating that the transfer of the hostages to the control of the Revolutionary Council would take place no later than March 25.5 —President Carter appreciated this direct communication and has asked Jordan to discuss with B and V agreed steps that could be taken to make possible an early end of the crisis between the two countries and also ask them to report to President Bani Sadr steps that the US has taken. —The US is prepared to continue restraint in its public posture for a few more days, despite the increase in public pressure for it to adopt stronger measures. —The US has urged the UN Commission to complete its work and to be prepared to return to Iran to do so in coordination with the Iranian authorities. Until the time is right, we have urged the Commission also to maintain restraint in its public posture. —When the hostages are transferred, the US will regard that as a clear indication of President Bani Sadr’s willingness to continue,
