Afghanistan 901 344. Research Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 PA 81–10001 Washington, January 1981 [Omitted here are a title page and a cover page.] Sino-Soviet Relations and the Impact of the Invasion of Afghanistan ([classification marking not declassified]) Overview The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the US response to it produced a sharp reaction in China that led Beijing to squelch domestic debate over foreign policy, reduce its meager relations with Moscow, and expand contacts with Washington. ([classification marking not declassified]) China’s decision in January 1980 to suspend the resumption of political negotiations with the USSR originally slated for this spring ended the latest phase in bilateral relations that began after China’s denunciation of the 1950 Sino-Soviet Treaty in April 1979. During that period, political fluidity in China and heightened tensions resulting from China’s invasion of Vietnam created a situation in which dissonant voices called for a lessening of China’s hostility toward the USSR and an increase in bilateral economic exchanges. ([classification marking not declassified]) Proponents of a less hostile policy toward Moscow may have included centrist leaders in the Chinese Politburo. Their influence was strengthened by a temporary alliance with party leftists during the spring of 1979, when Deng Xiaoping and his allies were beset with political problems. ([classification marking not declassified]) In subsequent months, Deng gradually isolated his leftist opponents, and they were finally removed from the Politburo at the party’s Fifth Plenum last February. Although the centrists remain powerful figures on the Politburo’s Standing Committee, the growth of Deng’s influence has reduced their ability to redirect policy. The trend has been toward a strengthening of Deng’s grip on domestic affairs, languishing relations with the USSR, and improved ties with the United States. ([classification marking not declassified]) 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support Services, Job 82T00150R: Production Case Files, Box 3, Sino-Soviet Relations and the Impact of the Invasion of Afghanistan. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A statement on the cover page reads: “This paper was prepared by [less than 1 line not declassified] Office of Political Analysis. It was coordinated with the Offices of Economic Research and Strategic Research and reviewed by the National Intelligence Officers for East Asia and the USSR-Eastern Europe.”
