664 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement in intellectual circles far more, particularly among the University students who where resentful of cramped old-­fashioned quarters in the University. The equipment in the laboratories was old. If something could be done to provide more modern equipment, to go ahead with construction of the University city, and to provide adequate scholarships on a repayment basis over 20 years, this would do a great deal towards stemming the spread of Communism in University circles. President Ydigores discussed the question of scholarships at some length and indicated he would like to have an organized program with a fixed number available each year. He spoke several times of the desire not to have these as charity, which would cause resentment, but to put them on a paying basis, requiring the beneficiary to repay the amount of the scholarships over 20 years. The President said he would like to establish a system of cooperation with the governments of the other republics of Central America in keeping track of and controlling the movements of Communists. He was setting up an agency in Guatemala for this purpose and then intended to seek regional cooperation. He could not include Mexico as he did not trust that country. The president then expressed his support for the idea of greater Central American unity. He felt this could best be achieved first in the economic field, but felt that local vested interests and nationalisms might make political unity something which only our children or grandchildren might see. At the Rotary luncheon expressions of gratitude were forthcoming for the U.S. share in making possible the new vocational school which will be devoted to the development of special skills among Guatemalan workers. At a meeting with representatives of agriculture they stressed the importance of coffee in the Guatemalan economy, pointing out that this provided three quarters of the value of all Guatemalan exports. A great deal was said about the fact that lower coffee prices might result in a drop in farm wages and stimulate a recrudescence of communism The agricultural representatives indicated that they are approaching a position of agreeing to the principle of withholding a portion of production providing other coffee-­producing countries would agree to do likewise. They felt that such an idea could only he effective if African producers also agreed to cooperate. They expressed fear that African coffee growers because of lower labor costs might take over a part of the traditional Guatemalan market in the U.S. These representatives of agriculture also expressed agreement with the program of the Government aimed at diversification of agriculture in order to be self-­sufficient in food. They were thinking in terms of a loan of unstated size to help out in this process of diversification to other crops such as rubber and cocoa.
