Human Rights
417
text concerning the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention was
modified to enable U.S. support.3 The resolutions on the Southern Af-
rican apartheid issues, while unacceptable, were nevertheless pur-
posely moderated to enable U.S.–WEO abstentions. Useful Third
World initiatives on new national and regional human rights commis-
sions were adopted. The U.S. candidate for the HRC’s subcommission
was re-elected. USDel was able to keep the idea of a UN High Commis-
sioner for Human Rights alive. Measured against Soviet wishes to ex-
tinguish the idea, this was an accomplishment. African and other
non-aligned support was key to the success of U.S. and WEO efforts to
achieve the positive actions recorded by this HRC session. The cooper-
ation and skill of the Senegalese chairman was important to the success
of our efforts. Just as important, however, there were clear indications
of a continuing new non-aligned thrust on human rights issues that is
compatible with and contributive to our policies. End summary.
1. The 34th session of the HRC, comprising 32 nation-members,
ended March 10 and represented a singularly successful session from
the U.S. standpoint. The following is a preliminary assessment for the
Department’s possible use in transmitting to those posts we ap-
proached on HRC issues. USDel believes that the pre-session ground-
work efforts at USUN and in capitals with other governments contrib-
uted importantly to the overall positive outcome of the session.
2. The conference was generally characterized by an atmosphere of
principled compromise and substantive progress on most of the human
rights issues before it. Confrontations were rare and when they did
occur the Soviets-EE’s and especially the Cubans were more often the
losers than the U.S. and WEO’s.
3. For the first time meaningful follow-up action was taken under
the HRC’s confidential “1503” procedures, i.e., closed debates and
votes. Moreover Uganda was the first country ever to be singled out for
further investigation under these procedures. A “prominent African” is
to be approached to investigate conditions there. Additionally a deci-
sion was taken to require Equatorial Guinea either to respond mean-
ingfully to the complaints against it under the confidential procedures
or be confronted with a public debate at next year’s session. Solid Af-
rican pressure (Ivory Coast, Lesotho, Rwanda, and especially Senegal
and Nigeria) pushed through these decisions over Soviet-EE and some
other Third World opposition. It was decided to ask the Secretary-
General to establish “contacts” with Paraguay to obtain further infor-
3 Reference is to the Geneva Convention Relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, adopted in Geneva on August 12, 1949. Commonly known as the
Fourth Geneva Convention (GCIV), the treaty contains provisions relating to the status
and treatment of protected persons in occupied territories.
