1124 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Sr. Beltran said he had talked to Mr. Black,5 (IBRD), who was very interested in his program—in fact, he had never seen him so sincere. Mr. Black said he would be prepared to send a delegation to Lima to study ways of helping, but that this could probably not be organized before January of next year. Sr. Beltran said he was delighted at the prospect, but that, because of the urgency of making a start on both resettlement and housing in order to rally the hopes of the under-­privileged, something had to be done during the intervening six months. A great deal more financing would be needed for these programs. Addressing Mr. Dillon, Sr. Beltran asked “Can you help us tide over this period?”— adding that a further problem was IBRD’s restriction confining its loans to foreign exchange needs. Mr. Dillon replied that the Bank could get over this restriction if it wished. Sr. Beltran agreed that Mr. Black should find a way of getting around this restriction. He then said that during his stay in New York he had explored the possibility of obtaining loans from various private banks, mentioning in particular Morgan Stanley. The bankers he spoke to, however, had not been optimistic over floating a loan at this early stage in Beltran’s program. This avenue did not therefore appear very hopeful unless Peru had the good fortune of landing the counterpart of the $100 million Prudential loan to Mexico! When Mr. Achilles asked whether there had been any talk of a mixed IBRD-­private bank loan, Sr. Beltran replied that he had discussed this with Morgan Stanley, who had not been encouraging except for the possibility of small amounts from private banks. Mr. Dillon asked what chances there were of more effort, particularly more taxes, on the Peruvian side, as there is an impression that the few very wealthy in Peru don’t contribute enough. Mr. Achilles mentioned that Beltran had done a good deal in the field of tax collection, which he asked Beltran to explain more fully. Sr. Beltran then explained that through Mr. Black he had engaged a Dutch tax expert by the name of Lieftinck and two assistants to reorganize the tax collection system. Among other measures the banks are now required to report interest paid. All foreign banks and one Peruvian bank have so far complied, but Beltran is insisting under threat of fine, which he thinks will now make it easier for local banks to comply in the face of their clients’ displeasure. Beltran had also launched a local bond issue as a new experiment which, despite pessimistic forecasts by many, was a great success. The issue raised 250 million soles and was 63% oversubscribed. Additionally, taxes have been increased. 5 Eugene R. Black, President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
