734
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
solutions, but I hope you and others in Washington will consider
whether, and how, a special effort should be made to avoid the predict-
ably adverse results for USG interests if we persist in our present
courses with Pakistan. I see these results here and world-wide to be
(in priority order):
A. A USG failure to give meaningful support to Pakistan could
very well cause the Soviets to conclude that the USG does not have
the serious intention to counter further Sov expansionist moves in this
region or elsewhere. And a weak Pakistan, without substantial support,
would likewise tempt the Sovs to increase their pressures on Pakistan—
such as raids on Pak territory—that would pose new challenges for
the region and for the USG that would be difficult or impossible for
us to counter.
B. A number of our important friends will find it impossible to
understand why we withhold support for Pakistan. We placed heavy
pressure on the Europeans, Saudis, and Japan to increase their aid to
Pakistan, which many have already done. Others, including the PRC,
are watching us closely to see whether we will respond effectively to
the many global challenges that beset us. No matter how carefully we
explain our very real budgetary problems and our domestic economic
difficulties, many will conclude that the USG lacks the capability, and
perhaps also lacks the will, to play the role in the world that they want
us to play and that we say we want to play.
C. More parochially, and of lesser importance, is the severe effect
on U.S.-Pak bilateral relations if we withhold support. President Zia
and many others will conclude that we are so unhappy with him that
we are deliberately trying to topple his government so we can deal
with another, perhaps elected, govt more to our liking, and perhaps
more responsive to our anti-nuclear views. Many Pakistani leaders will
also suspect, bizarre though it may seem, that the USG, the Sovs, and
India have some secret understanding that involves keeping Pakistan
weak. Whatever the exact content of these unjustified Pak suspicions,
we can be sure that there will be a sharp rise in anti-Americanism
and an even greater Pak disposition to espouse leftist “nonaligned”
positions. These public manifestations of a Pakistani turn away from
the USG will in turn have deleterious effects on the attitudes of other
countries who will see them as evidence of USG mishandling of
relations with Pakistan.
7. Actions that it is possible for us to take to remedy these conse-
quences are few, and at best palliative. I do not recommend that we
re-structure our existing security agreement of 1959, because I do not
see it in our interest to tie ourselves too closely to this Pak Government,
which is hardly a strong and reliable partner, and which has nuclear
and other policies [with] which we profoundly disagree. No foreseeable
