866
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
The GOY plans to produce up to 200 Eagle II’s. P&W estimates
that it would gross, either through direct sale or co-production, an
average of approximately $1.5 million per engine. If the co-production
scheme is approved, the first of the engines would be completed in
1985 and the last around 1988.
Factors for Approval
—Given Yugoslavia’s strategic location, its influence in the Third
World, the eventual post-Tito transition, and Yugoslavia’s determina-
tion to reduce its dependence on the USSR, we should continue to
support its desire to increase cooperation with the West.
—The Yugoslav military is one of the most important all-Yugoslav
institutions in the country and will be a decisive factor in the post-Tito
era. One of our important goals has long been to increase our access
to the military at all levels. Technical assistance to the GOY for TF30
co-production would provide us with a key instrument to pursue this
goal and would tie the Yugoslavs to a Western supply source for years.
—If successful, the TF30/Eagle II program would reduce military
reliance on the USSR—a Yugoslav Air Force objective—and eliminate
Yugoslavia’s total dependence on the Soviets for high performance
aircraft.
—The TF30 is a sophisticated engine but none of its technology
is classified.
—The engine co-production arrangement would be consistent with
our policy not to transfer offensive systems to Yugoslavia.
Factors for Denial
—Current US arms transfer policy, PD/NSC–13, prohibits the
licensed manufacture of significant combat equipment such as the pro-
posed jet engine in non-exempt countries.
—Yugoslavia’s role as a leader and spokesman for the Non-Aligned
Movement has often led the GOY to take positions opposed to ours
in international forums.
—However improved its human rights record may be in recent
years, Yugoslavia has an autocratic, one-party political system with a
strong internal security element andseveral hundred political prisoners.
—Approval of this co-production arrangement could lead to simi-
lar co-production requests from other non-exempt countries more
closely oriented to the West.
Recommendation:
I recommend that you grant an exception to our arms transfer
policy guidelines to authorize the co-production arrangement on the
grounds that it would be in the national security interest of the
United States.
