Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
635
2. The Census of Claims against Iran will be accompanied by legisla-
tion to permit the families of the hostages to begin legal action against Iran
and its assets in the U.S.
3. An economic embargo which could be total, if you decide to add food
and medicine.
4. A cut-off in all visas for Iranians except humanitarian cases and
exiles/refugees.
In addition, we are preparing for a new approach to our allies to
urge further actions on their part—including the withdrawal of their
Ambassadors shortly after our actions go into effect. We also are explor-
ing some military “gestures” (surveillance, jamming, overflights) which
would underscore the seriousness of the moment. The problem is that
some of them may heighten Iranian military readiness and thus conflict
with other options on which you have been briefed. JCS and CIA will
do a quiet analysis before Monday.3
Finally, it is extremely important that the agencies get 24 hours’ advance
notice so that everything will proceed smoothly and we remain in
full control.
The following sets forth the specifics on the diplomats’ explusion
and the decision needed on including food and medicine in the
sanctions.
Expulsion of Iranian Diplomats
—From the time of notice of explusion, the diplomats would be
allowed until the departure of the last plane out of the country the
following evening to leave the United States.
—All Iranian diplomats and all official Iranian representatives of
purchasing missions here would be included in the order. Only one
diplomat now would be allowed to remain in Washington for an addi-
tional five days to handle turnover to a Protecting Power. Military
officials will be expelled, but military students and their liaison officers
would be permitted to remain.
—Those diplomats wishing to apply for residence or asylum would
be permitted to do so from Europe or other locations after expulsion.
3 April 7. According to a memorandum for the record prepared by Carlucci, discus-
sion of military options took place after the April 4 SCC meeting devolved into a smaller
group. Carlucci noted that while everyone agreed that a heightened Iranian state of
readiness could complicate other options, they felt that such alertness would work to
U.S. advantage “since when the Iranians adjust to heightened U.S. activity whatever we
do would be less noticed.” Carlucci added: “I am somewhat skeptical of this.” (April 4;
Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R:
Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator, Box 13)
