32  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Baker’s May 10-12 ministerial meeting in Moscow where, he told 
Dubinin, “he would be in a position to discuss NST [Nuclear and 
Space Talks] in detail.”
Because the schedule for START is so ambitious and so impor­
tant, we have included considerable detail (due dates, etc.) in the NSR 
itself. While we would normally not include this level of detail in a 
Presidential document, in this case we think we need the strongest 
impetus we can get behind the review if we are to have any chance of 
finishing on time. Nick Rostow has discussed this with Boyden Gray, 
who has no problem with our approach.
As part of the review, we task the Arms Control PCC with deter-
mining a date for resumption of START talks. The schedule laid out in 
the NSR protects a date as early as mid-June. We think anything earlier 
is unrealistic. Our guess is that the review will raise dozens of issues for 
decision, if only because many of the decisions made in the past year 
will be reopened by agencies which were on the losing side.
The review of areas other than START and Defense and Space is 
straightforward. The conventional arms control tasking includes those 
items agreed at the recent Deputies Committee review of European 
relations. The tasking on Nuclear Weapons Free Zones meets your com-
mitment to the Australian Foreign Minister that we would review the 
topic. Finally, the NSR tasks a review of so-called “naval arms control.” 
While there is no enthusiasm for either the topic or reviewing it any-
where in government (including on the NSC staff), naval arms control 
is a major Soviet propaganda initiative and we think it essential the 
President be able to say he has reviewed it.
We have omitted all mention of non-­proliferation from this NSR. 
The question of whether the Arms Control PCC or another body will 
deal with such issues has not been decided. Because we believe it is 
vital to distribute the Arms Control NSR in the next few days, we have 
elected not to wait for the resolution of that issue; once it is resolved 
we believe follow-­on tasking to review our proliferation policy will be 
appropriate.
RECOMMENDATION
That you sign the memorandum to the President at Tab I forward-
ing the arms control NSR for his approval.4
Nick Rostow, Nancy Menan, Don Mahley, Will Tobey, Judyt 
Mandel, Bob Blackwill, Condi Rice and Phil Zelikow concur.5
4 Scowcroft indicated his approval.
5 Brooks bracketed this line and wrote in the left-­hand margin: “ALL CONCUR IN 
DRAFT.”
