expressed by Mr. Oudendijk. He suggested, however, that the scheme of levying the taxes be simplified as much as possible and to that end suggested that it would be well to have the 2½ per cent on ordinary goods and 5 per cent on luxuries, enforced at the same time. Mr. Ewerlöf opposed the proposal contained in Yin 70, but approved that contained in Yin 71 and supported Mr. Hioki’s suggestion that the matter be referred to a small subcommittee. Dr. Yen said that the Chinese Delegation had no desire to force anything on the foreign Delegations. He voiced the belief, however, that the various Delegations were really agreed on the content of the two resolutions, although they did not quite agree as to the form in which they had been put. To sustain his point, he said that the French Delegation had presented a resolution which seemed to combine both the resolutions he had introduced. Dr. Yen took occasion to explain that at the beginning of the Conference the Chinese Delegation had thought that the 2½ per cent surtax would not be sufficient for the various purposes and for that reason they had declined it. They were now, however, ready to proceed and he thought Mr. Hioki’s suggestion that it be referred to a small subcommittee was a good one. Such a subcommittee, in his opinion, could consider the original American proposal, the Chinese proposal and the French proposal and he suggested that the subcommittee resolution be prefaced with a suitable introduction combining the three proposals. Mr. Strawn expressed doubt as to whether Yin 70 and Yin 71 could be combined and, on behalf of the American Delegation, said that they would not want any suggestion in Yin 70 as to the amount which it might be expected could be raised from these revenues. He again reiterated the willingness of the American Delegation to give the 2½ per cent and 5 per cent at the earliest possible moment, but he did not think it would be well to attempt to combine the two proposals. Dr. Wang went into great detail in explaining the reasons prompting the Chinese to submit the two resolutions and he said that it seemed necessary to fix some sum as the approximate figure around which it would be necessary to work and that, since the general discussion had seemed to lead to a belief that the approximate amount required for the abolition of likin, the consolidation of debts and other needs would be in the neighborhood of ninety or one hundred million dollars that figure had been named in the
