496 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 141. Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1 Washington, November 21, 1978 SUBJECT Telephone Conversation between President Carter and Prime Minister Begin, November 21, 1978 President Carter: Good morning. Prime Minister Begin: Good afternoon or good morning to you. President Carter: I hope you had a nice . . . Prime Minister Begin: Today our Cabinet votes2 on a tremendous issue—namely, that we are prepared to sign the peace treaty with Egypt, if Egypt is prepared to do so. In other words, we give up our reservations. President Carter: Mr. Prime Minister, that is very good news. We are very pleased to hear it. Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir. President Carter: We will encourage President Sadat as we have in the past to accept the treaty text without change. Prime Minister Begin: The text alone. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 22, Israel: 11/78–2/79. Secret. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Begin from 9:33 a.m. to 9:55 a.m. on November 21. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) The transcript was found attached to a November 21 covering memorandum from Quandt to Brzezinski stating that “[a]t times it was very difficult to understand Begin and his remarks are not completely recorded here,” though Carter’s were “verbatim.” Quandt also noted that this was a “more complete” transcript of the conversation. An earlier, draft summary version, bearing Carter’s handwritten corrections, is in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 11/77–2/79. 2 The Israeli Cabinet issued a statement on November 21 that “The Government of Israel is prepared to sign the treaty of peace with Egypt that was presented to it for consideration by the delegation of Israel to the peace negotiations, if Egypt is ready to act likewise. The latest proposals submitted by the Government of Egypt are inconsistent with the Camp David Agreements, and are unacceptable to Israel. After the signing and ratification of the treaty of peace between Egypt and Israel, Israel is prepared to start negotiations in order to reach agreement on the implementation of the administrative autonomy in Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza District, in accordance with the provisions of the ‘Framework for Peace in the Middle East;’ agreed at Camp David.” Dinitz delivered a copy of the statement to Ghorbal and Atherton to Vance on November 21. (Telegram 295235 to Tel Aviv, November 22; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, State Department Out, Box 114, 11/18–30/78. A copy of the version delivered by Dinitz is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 4, unlabeled folder.
