Afghanistan 107 will probably peter out. Actively stimulated, it conceivably could spark the reaction suggested above. Unilateral and bilateral mechanisms appear to exist to provide this support; each has singular advantages or disadvantages attached. PURPOSE: Covert Action (CA) could be undertaken against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) with objectives ranging from harassment to the actual overthrow of the present communist government. The principal purpose would be to demonstrate to the Soviets and the Third World that the U.S. is not willing quietly to acquiesce in the absorption of another country into the Soviet orbit. The main risk in undertaking such a CA program would come from the Soviet Union. In the event of a lightning, and successful, coup d’etat in Kabul, it is unlikely that the Soviets would intervene militarily. A gradually intensified insurgency could lead to escalating Soviet military countermeasures. While the Soviets would be unlikely to introduce line troops into Afghanistan, they could easily provide virtually limitless supplies of military equipment, military “advisors,” pilots, etc. UNILATERAL VS. MULTILATERAL CA: Limited CA activities can be undertaken unilaterally. For example, we can intensify our propaganda campaign and supply funds to insurgent groups without collaborating with other countries. Unilateral CA has security advantages, but would be far less effective than programs undertaken jointly. Because of geographical considerations, the cooperation—or at least tacit endorsement—of the Government of Pakistan (GOP) would be almost mandatory if we were to provide significant material support to the insurgents. Such cooperation is by no means assured; the GOP would be likely to demand a high price in return for its cooperation—viz. greatly increased military and economic assistance. This would involve us in supporting the political status quo in Pakistan. The GOP would run the risk of its actions boomeranging, leading to serious instability in Pakistan. The Afghans have the capability of stirring up Pakistan tribals—particularly in Baluchistan. Some insurgent leaders have good connections with Saudi Arabia, and there have been reports that aid from that country already has been sent to exile leaders in the Peshawar area. In view of the influence that Saudi Arabia has had on Pakistan, the Saudis could usefully front for us with the GOP and serve as a conduit for aid to the insurgents, probably via exile elements. Other countries might play lesser roles. [less than 1 line not declassified] are willing to cooperate in an anti-DRA propaganda
