1302  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
any, but extensive experience in the local effects of underground shots 
would be needed before any such difference could be established.)
One could expect to contain the shot completely without venting 
by using as little as 500 feet distance to the surface if more disturbance 
of the surface were allowed; such disturbance would still not be charac­
teristic of an explosion rather than an earthquake. Burial depth required 
will vary with somewhere between the 1/3 and 1/4 power of the yield; 
a reasonable formula is 400 W0.3 feet (W in KT).
No activity above background was discernable either above the 
ground or in the tunnel leading to the explosion chamber, which was 
blocked off only 200 feet from the shot site. Thus the absence of activity 
is not merely absence of a radioactive cloud at several hundred miles, 
but of any radioactivity above ground or in any other region accessi­
ble without drilling. The horizontal access tunnel, 1700 feet long from 
the portal, showed some slabbing and cavein for several hundred feet 
beyond the point where it was blocked.
Exploration of the region around the zero point by drilling in from 
the tunnel at a distance of 210 feet has revealed that the solid fission 
products are contained in a shell a few feet thick at a radius of 55 feet. 
After four months the peak activity measured along a line at the level 
of the zero point was 800 mr/hour, while along a line aimed at a point 
50 feet below zero from a point 210 feet away horizontally the peak was 
40 r/hour. Outside of the shell the activity as measured by a counter 
was indistinguishable from background. Peak temperature along the 
horizontal line was 45°C, along the other line it was 65°. Diffusion 
appears to have carried elevated temperature into the zero point, and 
some rise above ambient is also noted out to about 70 feet.
Thus a 55-­foot radius hole appears to have been established 
momentarily but then to have collapsed, and the falling in appears 
to have continued up to a point 400 feet above zero, where a hole 25 
feet in radius and 25 feet high was discovered in drilling. This hole 
contained gaseous fission products at the same concentration as they 
appear inside the 55-­foot radius region around zero, so the entire vol­
ume in between appears to be simply connected. This accounts for only 
a few percent of the gaseous fission products, and it is thought that the 
remainder were trapped in the resolidification of the molten rock. The 
region from 55 feet to 130 feet is still impervious but was apparently 
crushed since the drilling shows water return but no core return. It has 
not yet been feasible to detect this crushed region by sonic measure­
ments even from inside the tunnel, so that detection by sonic means 
from above the surface is at least very difficult.
III. Diagnostic Experiments
Diagnostic experiments necessary for weapon development can be 
easily carried out underground. The yield can be measured by shock
