Romania 655 to resolve the problem. There has been too much talk and too little action. The Secretary also expressed concern about the situation in Lebanon, noting that the problem should be addressed in a comprehensive rather than fragmented way. Andrei referred to Greek-Turkish problems, and the Secretary noted that he had just seen Cypriot President Kyprianou.2 All the parties were in agreement that a solution must be found regarding Cyprus. The Greek-Turkish dispute concerning the Aegean was very difficult, the Secretary said, and he suggested that Romania join with others in urging the two countries to find a lasting resolution to these issues. 10. The Secretary and Andrei met for almost 30 minutes. Immediately following their meeting, Counselor Nimetz continued the discussion of international issues with Andrei.3 Nimetz briefly described the status of SALT negotiations, and responded to several additional questions from Andrei concerning the Camp David Accords and the Lebanese situation. Vance 2 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXI, Cyprus; Turkey; Greece, Document 55. 3 No record of the separate conversation was found. 210. Editorial Note On November 22–23, 1978, the Warsaw Pact’s Political Consultative Committee (PCC) met in Moscow to approve a report by Unified Warsaw Pact Forces Commander in Chief Marshal Viktor Kulikov and adopt a joint declaration on several aspects of international affairs. The meeting in Moscow sought to reach agreement on increased defense expenditures by Pact members to countermand Soviet perceptions of an emerging imbalance of power between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact. Speaking at the meeting, increasingly frail Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev cautioned that “imperialism has now acquired an ally—today’s China.” Brezhnev continued: “They have already begun to feed today’s China, to supply it with weapons, and to push it toward hostile excursions against the socialist countries.” Setting out Soviet expectations for the meeting, Brezhnev added “The NATO countries coordinate their actions care-
