The above Sub-District is in charge of a Commissioned officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police who resides at any one of the posts, as circumstances demand. All the posts are visited once a year by the Commissioned Officer mentioned and by the officials of the Canadian Department of the Interior. In regard to the duties of members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police stationed in the Eastern Arctic, it may be added that all the Mounted Police Detachments in the Eastern Arctic are Post Offices and Customs Ports, and the Non-Commissioned Officers in charge have been appointed Postmasters and Collectors of Customs. Furthermore, the duties of members of the Force stationed in the Eastern Arctic include the supervision of the welfare of the Eskimo for the Department of Indian Affairs, educating them as far as possible in the White Man’s Laws and issuing destitute relief where necessary, enforcement of all the Ordinances and Regulations of the Northwest Territories, including Game Laws and the protection of Musk Oxen, and the issue of Game, Animal and Bird Licenses to the various Trading Companies, the supervision of liquor permits, the enforcement of the Migratory Birds Convention Act for the Department of the Interior; the enforcement of the Criminal Code and Assistance to the Post Office and Customs Department, as set forth in the last paragraph above, as well as to the Department of Mines and Agriculture in the collection of Eskimo material and ethnological and biological specimens. Members of the Force are also called upon to assist in the taking of the Census and assisting the Director of Meteorological Service in the taking of readings at the different Posts from time to time, and to supply topographical information to the Federal Service. In addition, Police patrols to surrounding settlements and Eskimo villages and also extended patrols to remote points are also made by each detachment for the purpose of obtaining the information required. In bringing the above information to your notice, I have the honour to renew the assurance conveyed to you in my above mentioned note of the Canadian Government’s readiness to afford the MacMillan expedition any assistance within the power of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the other Dominion officers in Canadian Northern territories. I have [etc.] H. G. CHILTON
