666  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
35. At this point, 11 a.m., Wang consulted at some length with his 
interpreter. Also messenger brought in three-­page Chinese letter which 
Wang glanced at briefly before proceeding.
36. Wang said this morning he had specifically pointed out negoti­
ations between us should be aimed at bringing about peaceful solution 
of dispute between us in Taiwan area and relaxation tension in Far East. 
Therefore, he held negotiations should not be held under overhang­
ing threat of force. As he had pointed out this morning, statement by 
Secretary contained flagrant threats against his side, and it seemed to 
him that such threatening utterances on part of Secretary of State of US 
would not rpt not bring people of US any good. Nor would these state­
ments raise prestige of American people.
37. Wang said I had spoken much about US peaceful intentions in 
world. However, if US genuinely willing, not by words but by action, to 
demonstrate its peaceful intent, it was capable making great contribu­
tion to world peace. Today, people of world capable making own judge­
ments, which made not on basis words but actions demonstrated. From 
development of events in field of disarmament, from establishment of 
military bases around world, from open intervention in internal affairs 
Korea, and armed intervention in Taiwan, people of world able judge 
by whom peace being breached, and that all these events run against 
international law and justice.
38. Wang said, in mentioning these past events he had no interest 
go into debate with me, for I well knew we could hold long debates 
without coming to any useful conclusion. He wished only make specific 
mention events in Korea and Taiwan. He convinced history would pass 
judgement as to which side had engaged in intervention in domestic 
affairs of others, as well as which engaged in armed aggression. People 
of world will make own judgements.
39. Wang said that I had referred to drafting of announcement 
renouncing use force and setting forth principle of peaceful settlement 
of disputes. He was sure I well aware their efforts this direction, that 
is, that they were striving in this direction to bring about agreement. 
On question of an agreed announcement on renunciation of force, their 
side had repeatedly made concessions. If both sides followed principles 
international law and both shared same desire for peace, hard for him 
see why latest draft Chinese side unacceptable.
40. Wang said this morning I had again stated US had no intent 
demand Chinese side renounce its legitimate rights, or abandon its 
views, or renounce pursuit its policies. However, in next instant I had 
again raised question of US right of self defense in Taiwan area and had 
stated US would not renounce its claims to individual and collective 
self-­defense in Taiwan area. This latest statement practically refutes all 
my other statements and renders them meaningless.
