14  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
remunerative, nearly all facets of our relations with Latin America are 
good.
In the last quarter of 1957 Latin American total exports to the United 
States began to slump, with prospect of a decline in 1950 of at least seven 
per cent. The problem has been especially critical in lead, zinc, tin and 
copper. Coffee, the most vital commodity of all, started to decline but 
this was stopped by the main producers holding coffee off the market; 
most experts are predicting serious trouble ahead for the coffee market. 
Although we extended financial assistance to Mexico, Bolivia, Chile 
and Peru, which were affected by the metals decline, this was offset 
by the profoundly negative impression created by the Administration-­
sponsored bill last year for increased tariffs on lead and zinc.
Recommendations:
It is recommended that:
(a) The Department continue to emphasize to Congress and business 
leaders the importance of a continuing stable and liberal trade policy as 
an instrument for attainment of broader U.S. foreign policy objectives. 
Conversely emphasize damage to U.S. trade, investments and interna-
tional relations generally which are caused by restrictive actions.
(b) Resist strongly any tendencies within the U.S. Government to 
yield to protectionist pressure and oppose, so far as possible, any spe-
cific restrictive actions, except as clearly justified in the national interest.
(c) Review within the Department the present policy against nego-
tiation of reciprocal trade agreements on a bilateral basis.
(d) Review within the Department the U.S. policy toward Latin 
American market integration proposals and participate freely in joint 
study projects on this subject.
V
Soviet Bloc Trade
While making determined efforts to evaluate the precise scale and 
objectives of Soviet Bloc economic offensive in Latin America:
(a) Maintain the existing policy that the U.S. is not opposed to 
expansion of trade in non-­strategic commodities with the European 
Soviet Bloc, but encourage individual free-­world countries, wherever 
feasible and desirable from a foreign policy standpoint, to minimize 
such trade or financial arrangements with Communist China.
(b) Continue to induce Latin American governments to adhere to 
relevant COCOM security trade controls, as applied to the Sino-Soviet 
Bloc, and
