Human Rights
585
the carrot more than the stick, but I think it is just not right to “wel-
come” the improvements in this field when the period since Helsinki
has seen, inter alia, legal action against journalists, backsliding in the
GDR, and allegations that journalists have been poisoned and
harassed.
187.
Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (Derian) to
Acting Secretary of State Christopher1
Washington, June 13, 1979
The Non-Governmental Community’s Recommendations for
Strengthening U.S. Human Rights Policy
In a series of discussions by Roberta Cohen of HA with leading
human rights organizations, the following perceptions and recommen-
dations emerged. The groups included: Amnesty International, the In-
ternational Commission of Jurists, the International League for Human
Rights, Freedom House, the Lawyers Committee for International
Human Rights, the UNA–USA, the Washington International Human
Rights Law Group, Internet, the National Council of Churches, the
World Council of Churches, the B’nai B’rith International, the United
States Catholic Conference, the American Jewish Committee, the
American Association for the Advancement of Science, the Council of
Hemispheric Affairs, the American Association of Publishers, and
Khronika Press. Without an attempt to screen, the following are their
views:
I. Perceptions: NGO’s, while strongly supportive of the policy and
the establishment and activities of the Human Rights Bureau, are
deeply disturbed by what they perceive as the policy’s declining visi-
bility. The following was cited as evidence of a clear backing away from
strong human rights advocacy:
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs,
1979 Human Rights Subject Files, Lot 82D102, SHUM—NGO 1979 Programs With USG.
No classification marking. Drafted by Roberta Cohen on June 14 and concurred in by
Schneider and Salmon. Tarnoff initialed the memorandum. Cohen sent a more detailed
version of the memorandum to Schneider under cover of a May 18 memorandum. (Ibid.)
Christopher was acting for Vance, who accompanied the President to the Vienna summit.
