regularly established banks, as were the temporary operations of the War
Finance Corporation. Cooperative marketing especially would be provided
with means of buying or building physical properties.
The National Government has almost entirely relieved the farmer from
income taxes by successive tax reductions, but State and local taxes have
increased, putting on him a grievous burden. A policy of rigid economy
should be applied to State and local expenditures. This is clearly within the
legislative domain of the States. The Federal Government has also
improved our banking structure and system of agricultural credits. The
farmer will be greatly benefited by similar action in many States. The
Department of Agriculture is undergoing changes in organization in order
more completely to separate the research and regulatory divisions, that each
may be better administered. More emphasis is being placed on the research
program, not only by enlarging the appropriations for State experiment
stations but by providing funds for expanding the research work of the
department. It is in this direction that much future progress can be expected.
THE PROTECTIVE TARIFF
The present tariff rates supply the National Treasury with well over
$600,000,000 of annual revenue. Yet, about 65 per cent of our imports
come in duty free. Of the remaining 35 per cent of imports on which duties
are laid about 23 per cent consists of luxuries and agricultural products, and
the balance of about 12 per cent, amounting to around $560,000,000, is
made up of manufactures and merchandise. As no one is advocating any
material reduction in the rates on agriculture or luxuries, it is only the
comparatively small amount of about $560,000,000 of other imports that
are really considered in any discussion of reducing tariff rates. While this
amount, duty free, would be large enough seriously to depress many lines of
business in our own country, it is of small importance when spread over the
rest of the world.
It is often stated that a reduction of tariff rates on industry would benefit
agriculture. It would be interesting to know to what commodities it is
thought this could be applied. Everything the farmer uses in farming is
already on the free list. Nearly everything he sells is protected. It would
seem to be obvious that it is better for the country to have the farmer raise
