566
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Recommendation
That you authorize the Working Group on Human Rights and For-
eign Assistance:
(1) to select from the list at Tab 2 several MDB projects (subject to
your approval), including the IBRD Railways II loan to Argentina,
which the U.S. will oppose; and
(2) to prepare comprehensive descriptions of our views on them10
for presentation to a few governments in an effort to solicit their oppo-
sition to them. (This recommendation is strongly supported by the
Treasury Department.)11
10 An unknown hand underlined the phrase “comprehensive descriptions of our
views on them” and placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this and the pre-
ceding numbered point.
11 Christopher initialed his approval on February 5, noting that he approved “as
modified—see note attached.” The attached note has not been found.
180.
Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, January 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Evening Report
[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]
Human Rights Country Reports. Over the weekend and this
morning, we finished up all 115 country reports. On the whole I’d say
(recognizing the inherent difficulties of this public, sensitive kind of re-
porting) that the quality is very good.2 Certainly much better than the
two previous years. There are striking inconsistencies between reports
which derive from three main sources: very different amounts of access
and knowledge; political importance of the country to the U.S.; and
personal interest in a particular country (positive or negative) by a
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 37, Evening Reports: 1–3/79. Secret.
2 In the NSC Global Issues Cluster’s January 24 evening report, Tuchman Mathews
commented, “NSC staff have now reviewed about 70 of the 114 country reports. They are
much improved over last year’s.” (Ibid.)
