Putumayo, and the Caquetá Rivers must be established in perpetuity as well
as in general all the rivers common to the two countries.
I handed to the Brazilian Chargé on January 6 a memorandum95 embodying the
Colombian suggestion and stating that, animated by the sincerest desire to be of service
to both Governments in arriving at a satisfactory solution of the present difficulties, the
Government of the United States would be glad to transmit the views of the
Government of Brazil in the premises to that of Colombia, should this action be the
desire of the Brazilian Government.
I read this memorandum to the Brazilian Chargé and asked him if he knew what his
Government’s attitude would be toward establishing the boundary by recognizing a
section of land east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as Colombian territory. Senhor
Gracie answered no, but said that he would cable to his Government for instructions.
I added that I took for granted that any settlement of this question would involve the
withdrawal of Brazilian opposition to the Colombian-Peruvian treaty and I then stated
confidentially that should the Government of Brazil decline to recognize as Colombian
any territory east of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line, and should Brazil be willing to grant
freedom of navigation of the rivers mentioned in perpetuity to Colombia, as was
granted for 10 years by the Treaty of Commerce and Navigation signed on August 21,
1908, at Rio de Janeiro between Brazil and Colombia, I should be disposed to use my
good offices to obtain Colombia’s recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as had
been done by the Colombian Executive in the unratified treaty of 1853 between Brazil
and Colombia.
The Chargé assured me that he would regard my statement as strictly confidential and
would not transmit it to his Government; you may, therefore, should the matter be
discussed between the Brazilian authorities and yourself, state as your personal opinion
that the Government of the United States might be disposed to use its good offices,
should the Government of Brazil express its readiness to grant freedom of navigation of
the rivers in question, to have the Apaporis-Tabatinga line recognized by Colombia.
You will cable fully all developments.
HUGHES
95 Not printed.
96 Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. I, p. 303.
95 Not printed.
97 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. LXXIV, p. 9.
95 Not printed.
