involves at once sullenly suspicious attitude towards foreign nations and a
rather complacently self-conscious conviction that Chinese have scored once
and can do it again when they want to. Representative Chinese talk in more
or less detached fashion about the defects and possibilities of mass action,
half apologizing for the abatement in the movement of self-assertion and
half-threatening recrudescence of it if occasion should arise. I believe there is
still the possibility of a new movement which might be set in train by affront
to their pride even by some casual accident as the situation is still explosive.
5. The recent after-developments of the situation seem to add confirmation to
the belief that the whole crisis through which the Chinese Government have
been passing is emotional rather than logical and that it is less concerned with
substraction [abstract?] rights and obligations (which are only vaguely
understood by any but the exceptionally keen minds among them who for the
most part understand also the reasons for abnormal state of things in China)
than with appearances and amenities of intercourse.
6. There is of course a development here which, whatever the crudities of its
manifestations, is real and must be met. But it is accompanied by much
plausible assumption which has no basis whatever in fact. Idealistic though
term of about the [apparently garbled groups] possibilities of the Chinese
people and sympathetic towards their somewhat elementary yearnings
towards nationality, it is a case [sic] nevertheless incumbent upon those who
deal with China today to keep in mind that in relation to the present problem
China consists of two elements: first, the faction recognized as the
government which is in control in Peking and which only wants money to go
on with, and second, the articulate element of China’s population which,
most of it, holds the so-called government in contempt but is momentarily
willing to array itself behind that effigy or [of] sovereignty for the sake of
gaining “face” for the ethnic group which calls itself the Chinese nation as
opposed to the foreigner. It behoves us therefore to be on our guard against
the assumption that a concession to be [the?] government is ipso facto
concession to that growing national sentiment with whose healthy
development we would be disposed to sympathize. It is in fact quite possible
that any concrete concession enabling the present governing faction to
consolidate its power over the country would incur the active resentment of
the very elements which are urging in the abstract the necessity for such
concessions. I venture this observation in view of the considerable amount of
American comment reprinted here which advances upon the facile
assumption that the problem is to decide whether or not we are prepared to
satisfy the legitimate aspirations of the Chinese people.
7. Repeated by mail to Tokyo.
