have representatives attend a conference which would contemplate
commitments opposed to the freedom of action we desire to maintain
unimpaired with respect to our purely domestic policies.
INTERNATIONAL LAW
Our country should also support efforts which are being made toward the
codification of international law. We can look more hopefully, in the first
instance, for research and studies that are likely to be productive of results,
to a cooperation among representatives of the bar and members of
international law institutes and societies, than to a conference of those who
are technically representative of their respective governments, although,
when projects have been developed, they must go to the governments for
their approval. These expert professional studies are going on in certain
quarters and should have our constant encouragement and approval.
OUTLAW OF WAR
Much interest has of late been manifested in this country in the discussion
of various proposals to outlaw aggressive war. I look with great sympathy
upon the examination of this subject. It is in harmony with the traditional
policy of our country, which is against aggressive war and for the
maintenance of permanent and honorable peace. While, as I have said, we
must safeguard our liberty to deal according to our own judgment with our
domestic policies, we can not fail to view with sympathetic interest all
progress to this desired end or carefully to study the measures that may be
proposed to attain it.
LATIN AMERICA
While we are desirous of promoting peace in every quarter of the globe, we
have a special interest in the peace of this hemisphere. It is our constant
desire that all causes of dispute in this area may be tranquilly and
satisfactorily adjusted. Along with our desire for peace is the earnest hope
for the increased prosperity of our sister republics of Latin America, and our
constant purpose to promote cooperation with them which may be mutually
beneficial and always inspired by the most cordial friendships.
