Afghanistan outlook is for a prolonged period of inconclusive fighting for control of territory, population centers, and main roads. The beleaguered Taraki regime’s survival has come to depend increasingly, as the insurgency has spread, on Soviet political, military, economic, and technical support. Taraki’s nearly total dependence on Moscow has given the Soviets far more say in the Afghan Government’s day-to-day decisionmaking process than they have ever had, but Taraki still appears to be setting the main lines of policy. Kabul has closely associated itself politically with Moscow and has adopted foreign policy positions that are virtually indistinguishable from those of the Soviet Union. In part because it has accorded the Soviet Union patron state status, Afghanistan shows no interest in improving frayed relations with the United States and other Western powers. Relations with its neighbors Pakistan and Iran are poor and could deteriorate further if Kabul comes to believe Tehran and, in particular, Islamabad are giving substantial backing to Afghan insurgents. The regime does not yet face a security situation that might prompt a request to Moscow for the direct intervention of Soviet forces, but such an appeal is conceivable over the next 12 months. The Soviets have an important stake in Afghanistan. They will go to some lengths to protect it, but probably not to the extent of intervening militarily. The Soviets would be deterred by the possibility that their forces would be bogged down indefinitely trying to shore up a discredited regime. Soviet leaders also would have to weigh the regional and international political costs of direct intervention. The USSR might consider other options short of dispatching combat units to protect its interests in specific contingencies. Moscow, for example, might permit more open use of Soviet advisers in ground combat roles to defend Soviet personnel or equipment. If serious fighting broke out in areas adjoining the Soviet border, Soviet leaders might decide to provide increased numbers of tactical ground support aircraft, helicopter gunships, pilots, and advisers on the ground to assist Kabul. [1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified] [Omitted here is the body of the paper.]
