570 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 114. Editorial Note On March 5, 1979, White House Press Secretary Jody Powell announced that Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin had invited President Jimmy Carter to Egypt and Israel, respectively, to discuss the “peace process, regional security, and bilateral issues.” Powell indicated that the President would depart Washington for Egypt on March 7 and would then proceed to Israel on March 10. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, page 383) In remarks prior to his departure, the President asserted: “So, it is with hope that I depart, hope tempered by sober realism. As a friend of Egypt and a friend of Israel, we will do our best to help them achieve the peace that they have paid for in blood many times over. “In doing this, in seeking to lay the basis for a stable and a peaceful Middle East, we will also be serving our own deepest national interests and the interests of all the people of the world.” (ibid., page 395) The President arrived in Cairo on March 8. For Sadat’s and the President’s comments at a welcoming ceremony held at Qubba Palace, see ibid., page 405. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the President met with Sadat that evening at Tahra Palace from 7:10 to 8:54 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) On the morning of March 9, Carter, Sadat, and the Presidential party boarded a train for Alexandria. En route, Carter and Sadat took part in an interview conducted by U.S. news correspondents Walter Cronkite (CBS News), John Chancellor (NBC News), and Peter Jennings (ABC News). For the transcript of this interview, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, pages 407–410. Later that evening, Carter and Sadat met at Mamoura Palace in Alexandria. On the morning of March 10, the Presidential party departed Alexandria for Cairo via helicopter. At 1 p.m., the President addressed the People’s Assembly of Egypt, which had convened in the Assembly Chamber of the People’s Assembly Building. Following his introductory remarks, the President turned to the efforts made the previous fall: “Last September, the course of negotiations took the President of Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel to Camp David, in the wooded mountains near the Capital of the United States of America. “Out of our discussion there came two agreements: A framework within which peace between Israel and all her neighbors might be achieved, and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people realized— and also an outline for a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, in the context of a comprehensive peace for the Middle East. “Those agreements were rooted in United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, which established the basic equation between
