270
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Following a period of sensory deprivation, the released hostages were
subjected to intense propaganda just prior to their release. All of these
factors result in the captors’ ability to heavily influence the thinking
of the hostages. (Although “brainwashing” has been used to describe
this process, this term is subject to misuse and probably best not be
used. There is not at this time enough hard data to conclude that the
hostages are being subjected to the treatment suffered by a number of
former prisoners of war. At any rate, many of the effects herein
described would occur without any systematic treatment.)
6. The effects of being held hostage vary from individual to individ-
ual and will vary in one individual over time. In a large group one
might witness everything from complete rejection of the hostage taker
to total sympathy with him. In general, however, one should expect
to hear favorable statements made about the captors, particularly with
respect to treatment. In most cases the hostage and/or the released
hostage will say that he was well treated. Upon release, each of the 50
hostages must be treated as an individual case and evaluated with
respect to his psychological condition. A reasonable period of time
(possibly several days) should be provided to a released hostage prior
to any media exposure.
7. In considering official responses to statements that may be made
by some of the individuals currently in captivity, two conditions must
be considered. The first involves statements made during captivity,
including those that may be made during a “trial”. These should be
discounted with words to the effect that statements made under coer-
cion need to be analyzed for distortion. The second condition is that
of the released hostage. Responses to statements made by released
hostages should be to the effect that anyone held in captivity is bound
to be heavily influenced by his captors, and any statements should be
interpreted in that context.
8. It should be emphasized that despite comments that may be
made by released hostages, one should not jump to conclusions and
question their loyalty. In spite of the heavy influence brought to bear
on them as well as their natural inclination to sympathize with their
captors, there are few, if any, cases in which a hostage becomes a
defector or traitor. In general, one should avoid extreme comments on
how the hostages have been treated. Although psychiatric effects can
be expected to occur following captivity, the effects of such trauma
will vary in duration, and some released hostages may do quite well;
thus, general statements predicting psychological damage should be
avoided.
