Options Identified A. Diplomatic: We can progressively restrict Iranian diplomatic and consular activity in the U.S.3 through closing some or all of the consulates, concluding by breaking relations. The continued Iranian diplomatic presence in the U.S. has two major roles: to provide assistance to Iranian students in the U.S.; and to communicate public and private views and messages both to Iranian officials and to the hostages. While closing the consulates and/or severing diplomatic ties may effectively signal our growing impatience to Iranian moderates and to Khomeini, breaking relations also could cut off one communication channel, could aggravate the student captors and could undermine the efforts of Iranian moderates.4 A break in diplomatic relations could be important symbolically. We might want to use it later, however, if there is a worsening of the hostages’ situation and at a time when we may want other governments to intensify their pressure through a parallel severing of diplomatic ties. Severing diplomatic ties now or in the immediate future could also deprive Iran of one element of a face-saver in the final resolution of the crisis. At this point in the stalemate we may instead want to advise Agah to look for a protecting power, without giving him a deadline. This move would underscore our growing impatience without incurring the costs of an actual break in relations. We could send a visible emissary to Iraq to consult on regional developments. This may serve to increase Iran’s concern about its own security and feed the reservations of those in the Revolutionary Council and around Khomeini as to the impact on Iran and on the revolution of Khomeini’s policies. Our interests would in any event be served by a further effort to strengthen our dialogue with Iraq, even if this does not lead to normalization of relations. B. Economic: Beyond the economic measures we are now taking with our allies, and beyond limited UN sanctions, we could: 1. Move to intensify pressure on Iranians in the U.S. by eliminating the present assets freeze exemption for students. This might be welcomed by the public but may also be open to challenge in the courts. Indigent students might be forced to stay in the U.S. and fall back on local 3 On December 29, Carter sent a handwritten note to “Cy and/or Warren” that reads: “Push to legal limits the immediate expulsion of Iranian diplomats in accordance with my previous directions. J.C.” Copies were sent to Powell and Brzezinski. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran
