124 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Taken as a whole, PRM/NSC–10 made us pause and take a look at where we are and where we ought to consider going. It also makes clear that much remains to be done. The study was broad in scope; some of its limitations are a result of that. In particular, no single study can substitute for the detailed analyses that implement our particular policies. Thus, PRM/NSC–10 should be understood as a point of departure for thinking about how we should develop and use military forces and capabilities over an uncertain, complex future. (TS) Net Assessment This portion of PRM/NSC–10 focused on the trends in the long-­ term military, economic, and political competition with the Soviet Union. It is very useful in thinking about the broad, global issues. Its view of the current military balance in Europe seems to me to be too optimistic, although I think our NATO initiatives could improve this situation substantially over the next few years. I agree with the study’s general thrust that the Soviets are effective competitors only in the military dimension, and that we need to think carefully about how to deal with this fact. Further, I strongly agree that, in developing a national strategy, we should exploit those areas where we have a competitive advantage, while limiting our competitor’s ability to take advantage of our vulnerabilities. In particular, we need to try to exploit our potential technological advantages in both conventional and strategic forces. (TS) Strategy and Force Posture Study This study has focused attention on the value of developing a strategy to guide the evolution of our military forces for the next decade and has raised a number of key military strategy issues. I see the study as the first step in a process of refining our strategic choices and of eliciting initial policy guidance from you on key issues of military strategy. The study underlines the critical role of our Allies in implementing alternative US military strategies as well as potential Allied reactions to changes in US policies. This is particularly true in Europe where ours must be an alliance military strategy. It emphasizes the importance of concentrating not only on the early stages of conflict in Europe, but also on how long we fight and those crucial days of conflict termination. Explicit recognition is given to the possibility of a divergence in NATO and US military strategies, given the realities of NATO defense spending and the fact that NATO can currently sustain a conventional battle at projected consumption rates for less than 30 days. The study raises the question of operations outside Europe in a US–USSR conflict and highlights the peacetime functions of military forces in crisis management and local wars. The analysis of strategic
