Chemical and Biological Weapons 279 130. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, July 10, 1980 SUBJECT BW: The Sverdlovsk Incident PARTICIPANTS US USSR The Acting Secretary Ambassador Anatoliy Dobrynin PM—Reginald Bartholomew S/MS—Marshall Shulman Toward the end of a discussion on TNF, the Acting Secretary mentioned that he had one other matter to raise. This concerned the outbreak of anthrax in Sverdlovsk last spring.2 The Acting Secretary said that we felt that we hadn’t been able to engage the Soviet Government on this matter to the extent its seriousness warranted. He noted that Ambassador Earle would meet with Dobrynin to discuss this issue in some detail.3 Dobrynin responded by questioning what it was the US wanted, since this was not clear. He noted that the Soviets have already given us an explanation of this incident.4 The Acting Secretary again stressed the seriousness we attach to engaging in bilateral consultations so we could satisfy ourselves on this issue, and not permit this question to undermine the BW Convention or damage prospects for arms control generally. Dobrynin reiterated that they have given us what they have on this matter, and that the Soviets have not seen anything from us that would contradict their explanation. He said that our goal should be preserving the Convention and prospects for arms control. Dobrynin again stressed that what they have heard was based on hearsay, and that if we have anything else more to say in terms of evidence or proof would we please tell them. The Acting Secretary replied by stressing that Ambassador Earle will provide information that will underline the seriousness of our concerns. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office Institutional File, Box 42, INT Documents: #4200s: 7/80. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Bartholomew. In the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum, Brzezinski wrote, “M[arshall] B[rement], Next step? ZB.” 2 See Document 114. 3 See Document 131. 4 See Document 116.
