300  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
have to remove $3B, while adding back many of the expensive “gold-
watched” programs. We can expect some tough infighting that is likely 
to spill out into public view—­with a possible adverse effect on the 
image we want to create in Defense for SALT (see item one).
3. National Security Affairs Calendar (See Tab A)2
2 Attached but not printed is a calendar for national security affairs in August and 
September.
69.	
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, July 31, 1978
SUBJECT
The Diminishing U.S. Lead in Total Number of Strategic Warheads
These are some thoughts to bear in mind as we think about the 
future strategic balance and about the importance of SALT limits on RV 
fractionation.
Our projected lead throughout the 1980s in total numbers of strate-
gic warheads is based on intelligence estimates that assume very little 
increased fractionation by the Soviets. You should realize that there are 
few data to support that assumption. In the absence of SALT fraction-
ation limits, it is quite possible the Soviets may deploy, or at least test, 
modifications of ICBMs and SLBMs with much higher payload frac-
tionations than those of current systems. Even with SALT limits they 
can make considerable progress in this direction. They might do so (1) 
in order to eliminate our lead in the perceptually important number 
of warheads, (2) because of a “technological imperative” to go beyond 
what they have now, or (3) to make MAP less attractive by forcing it 
to absorb more attackers—­or for a combination of these. Looking at 
past estimates, one sees that until testing began the intelligence com-
munity projected the number of RVs on follow-­on ICBMs (those we 
now call SS–17, SS–18, and SS–19) to be generally lower than now 
1 Source: National Archives, RG 218, Official Records of the Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Jones, Box 60, SecDef Memo Jul 78. Top Secret. Copies were sent to Vance, 
Brzezinski, Brown, Seignious, and Turner.
