March 27–December 31, 1979 887 I stressed that we have ahead of us, in fact, over six years during which time the problem of sovereignty is left open. At the end of that transition period we shall claim our right (as I have made clear time and again). But, I added, also under Israeli sovereignty the Palestinian Arabs should continue to enjoy autonomy in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District. With reference to Jerusalem I said to President Sadat that we must distinguish between any matter which carries with it material gain and those questions which relate to spiritual, historic and moral values. Therefore, I added, let us speak separately of a proposed water pipeline from the Nile to the Negev and the question of Jerusalem. President Sadat interjected saying: “I did not mean the water pipeline as a prize. I only made this suggestion because it is important.” I willingly acknowledged this remark. I read to him my letter to you, Mr. President, written in Camp David, on Jerusalem.7 I also read to President Sadat the two articles of the Israeli law concerning the Holy Places which I hereby attach.8 President Sadat spoke about Lebanon. He said he cannot agree to any kind of partition of Lebanon, referring specifically to the southern part of the country. He informed me that he was going to say this at the joint press conference we were about to hold. I told him that I agree unequivocally that the territorial integrity of Lebanon should be preserved. Israel has a grave problem of security there and what we do is a matter of the defence of our people against repeated planned attacks. President Sadat said that he will, as he put it, “condemn the settlements” at the press conference. I asked him to state that on this issue “we differ”. This was, indeed, the term he used in his statement to the press and I, on my part, confirmed that on this issue “we agreed to differ”. One of the most important statements President Sadat made to me was that we must continue the normalization process, that there will be “love between Egypt and Israel”, and that the peace between our countries will endure. We agreed that our colleagues should continue with the negotiations in the working groups which Ambassador Strauss helped, with his initiative, to form. Finally, we wound up our conversation with my extending to the President an invitation to visit Haifa. He told me he would come by sea 7 Reference is to Begin’s September 17, 1978, letter to Carter, which was attached to the Camp David Accords, informing him of Jerusalem’s legal status as “one city indivisible” and the “Capital of the State of Israel,” in line with the Knesset’s June 28, 1967, passage of a law empowering the Israeli Government to apply the law of the State of Israel to any part of Eretz Israel. See Document 57. 8 The two articles were not found attached.
