[Document 1]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[Paraphrase]

24. The Department’s telegram No. 25 will transmit to you the text of a

memorandum which you are desired to present on Thursday, February 10,

to the Government of France. It is also to be presented to the Governments

of Great Britain, Italy, and Japan. The Department will also transmit, in its

telegram No. 26, the text of a message which President Coolidge proposes

addressing to Congress at noon, Eastern Standard Time, on Thursday,

February 10. Since the Department will make public the full text

immediately after the message has been delivered to Congress, it is

important for advance arrangements to be made by you to deliver to the

Foreign Office this memorandum either at 4 o’clock or as close to that hour

as possible. It is hoped that you will be able to give both this message and

the memorandum the widest publicity. Prior to the delivery of the message,

however, there should be no communication to any press representative.

KELLOGG

[Document 2]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

25. Following is text of memorandum to be handed by you to the French

government in accordance with Department’s telegraphic instructions, Nos.

The American Government has followed with close attention the

proceedings of the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament

Conference, and, after the most careful deliberation, has

concluded that it can helpfully make certain observations at this

time which, it hopes, may contribute materially to the success of

that Commission—a success earnestly desired by the Government

and people of the United States.

The conviction that the competitive augmentation of national

armaments has been one of the principal causes of international

suspicion and ill-will, leading to war, is firmly held by the

American Government and people. Hence, the American

Government has neglected no opportunity to lend its sympathy

and support to international efforts to reduce and limit armaments.

The success of the Washington Conference of 1921–22

demonstrated that other Powers were animated with a similar

desire to do away with this dangerous source of international

discord. The Washington Conference made a beginning, however,

and it has been the continued hope of the American Government,

since 1922, that the task, undertaken at Washington by the group

of Naval Powers could be resumed and completed.

For this reason, the American Government was happy to observe

that the efforts looking towards the holding of a general

international conference for the limitation of armament, which

had been in progress for several years under the auspices of the

League of Nations, had reached, in December, 1925, a stage

sufficiently advanced, in the opinion of the Council of the League

of Nations, to warrant the establishment of the Preparatory

Commission, to meet in 1926, to prepare the ground for an

international conference at an early date. The American

Government, pursuant to its policy of cooperation with all efforts

calculated to bring about an actual limitation of armament,

accepted the invitation of the Council to be represented on the

Preparatory Commission. The American representatives on that

Commission have endeavored to play a helpful part in its

discussions, and they will continue to be guided by that policy.

The American Government believes that the discussions of the

Commission have been most valuable in making clear the views

of the various governments as to the problems presented, and in

demonstrating the complexity and diversity of the obstacles to be

overcome in the preparation and conclusion of a general

agreement for the limitation of all armament.

At the same time, these very complexities and difficulties, as

brought out in the Preparatory Commission, have clearly pointed

out that a final solution for the problem of armament may not be

immediately practicable. Indeed, at the latest meeting of the

Council of the League of Nations, several distinguished

statesmen, leaders in the movement for the limitation of

armament, sounded a note of warning against too great optimism

of immediate success.

The American Government is most anxious that concrete results

in the limitation of armament may be achieved. The discussions

of the Preparatory Commission have emphasized the fact that a

number of governments consider that one of the chief present

obstacles to the general reduction and limitation of armaments

lies in the interdependence of land, sea, and air armaments, and in

the consequent impossibility of reducing or limiting one of these

categories without dealing simultaneously with the others. On the

other hand, the discussions have demonstrated even more

emphatically that, should all effort to bring about the reduction or

limitation of armament be conditioned upon the acceptance by all

the world of a comprehensive plan covering all classes and types

of armament, there would be little, if any, prospect of actual

progress towards arms limitation in the near future.

The above difficulties must be frankly recognized. The American

Government believes that they can be overcome and that they

must be overcome, since the consequences of a failure to

overcome them, and to make some definite, if only partial,

agreement for the limitation of armament, would constitute a

setback to the cause of international peace too great to deserve

serious contemplation as a possibility.

Admitting reluctantly that the existing political situations in

certain parts of the world may render the problem of universal

limitation incapable of immediate solution as a whole, the

American Government believes that it is entirely practicable for

the nations of the world to proceed at once to the isolation and

separate solution of such problems as may appear susceptible of

such treatment, meanwhile continuing to give sympathetic

consideration and discussion to comprehensive proposals aimed

at the simultaneous limitation of land, sea, and air armaments by a

general agreement when such an agreement may be warranted by

existing world conditions. The American Government believes

that the adoption of such a course is the duty of the governments

represented on the Preparatory Commission, and that by so doing,

they will ensure the achievement by the Commission and by the

general conference of concrete, even though perhaps only partial

results, thus facilitating progress towards the final solution of the

general problem.

The American Government, as its representatives on the

Preparatory Commission have repeatedly stated, feels that land

and air armaments constitute essentially regional problems to be

solved primarily by regional agreements. The American army and

air force are at minimum strength. Agreement for land and air

limitation in other regions of the world would not be dependent

upon the reduction or limitation of American land and air forces.

Therefore, the American Government does not feel that it can

appropriately offer definite suggestions to other powers in regard

to the limitation of these categories of armament.

The problem of the limitation of naval armament, while not

regional in character, can be dealt with as a practical matter by

measures affecting the navies of a limited group of Powers. This

has been clearly established by the success of the Washington

Treaty Limiting Naval Armament. The United States, as the

initiator of the Washington Conference, and as one of the

principal Naval Powers, has a direct interest in this question, and,

being both ready and willing to enter into an agreement further

limiting naval armament, feels itself privileged to indicate a

course of procedure which will, in its opinion, lead to such an

agreement.

The discussions over a period of six months in Geneva have been

most useful in the opportunity afforded for an exchange of views

as to the general problem of naval limitation and on the basis of

these discussions it is felt that there is a possibility of reconciling

many of the divergent views which have been expressed, in such

a manner as to meet the requirements of the Naval Powers and

enable them to decide upon acceptable measures of limitation.

In order to advance definitely towards a limitation agreement, the

Government of the United States takes this method of addressing

an inquiry to the Governments Signatories of the Washington

Treaty Limiting Naval Armament as to whether they are disposed

to empower their representatives at the forthcoming meeting of

the Preparatory Commission to initiate negotiations looking

towards an agreement providing for limitation in the classes of

Naval vessels not covered by the Washington Treaty.

The American Government is not unmindful of the fact that the

Preparatory Commission is not specifically charged with the duty

of concluding international agreements, and that its task is

primarily that of preparing the agenda for a conference to be

called at a later date. Nevertheless, being sincerely desirous of the

success

of

the Preparatory Commission, the American

Government makes this suggestion in the firm belief that the

conclusion at Geneva, as soon as possible, among the Powers

Signatories of the Washington Treaty, of an agreement for further

naval limitation, far from interfering with or detracting from the

success of the Preparatory Commission’s aims, would constitute a

valuable contribution to the sum of achievement attributable to

that Commission and would facilitate the task of the final

Conference in dealing with the particularly complex problems of

land and air armament, perhaps capable of solution for the present

only by regional limitation agreements.

It seems probable that, under any circumstances, the final

Conference will not be able to meet during this calendar year. The

coming into effect of agreements reached by it might be delayed

for a considerable period, for a multitude of causes. Therefore, the

American Government believes that those Powers which may be

able to arrive at an agreement for further naval limitation at an

earlier date would not be justified in consciously postponing that

agreement, and thereby opening the way for a recrudescence of a

spirit of competitive naval building—a development greatly to be

deplored by all governments and peoples.

The American Government feels that the general principles of the

Washington Treaty offer a suitable basis for further discussion

among its signatories.

Although hesitating at this time to put forward rigid proposals as

regards the ratios of naval strength to be maintained by the

different Powers, the American Government, for its part, is

disposed to accept, in regard to those classes of vessels not

ratio as regards the United States, Great Britain and Japan, and to

leave to discussion at Geneva the ratios of France and Italy,

taking into full account their special conditions and requirements

in regard to the types of vessels in question. Ratios for capital

ships and aircraft carriers were established by that Treaty which

would not be affected in any way by an agreement covering other

classes of ships.

The American representatives at the forthcoming meeting at

Geneva will, of course, participate fully in the discussions looking

to the preparation of an agenda for a final general conference for

the limitation of armament. In addition, they will have full powers

to negotiate definitely regarding measures for further naval

limitation, and, if they are able to reach agreement with the

representatives of the other signatories of the Washington Treaty,

to conclude a convention embodying such agreement, in tentative

or final form, as may be found practicable.

The American Government earnestly hopes that the institution of

such negotiations at Geneva may be agreeable to the

Governments of the British Empire, France, Italy and Japan, and

that comprehensive limitation of all types of naval armament may

be brought into effect among the principal naval powers without

delay.

Repeat text of memorandum only to London as Dept’s. No. 21, to Rome as

No. 8.

KELLOGG

[Document 3]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh)

[Paraphrase]

memorandum to the Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs, that you orally

point out to him that the plan is believed to be in thorough accord with the

Japanese Government’s desire for further limitation of naval armament, that

already there exists between the two Governments a substantial agreement

in essentials, that even in minor matters between the United States and

Japan there appears to be no conflict of opinion or interest, and that any

minor differences can readily be adjusted.

The United States Government has avoided proposing in this memorandum

any detailed plan because of the belief that representatives of the interested

Governments can find an acceptable solution of their naval problems the

more easily if they remain at liberty to explore as fully as possible and are

not limited by rigid instructions from which receding would be difficult.

Acceptance by the Japanese Government of this proposal would particularly

gratify the United States Government.

You should add that this Government believes the negotiations

contemplated by its memorandum, while not necessarily beginning on the

date of the Preparatory Commission’s convening, should be commenced as

soon thereafter as may be generally agreeable to the five interested

Governments.

You should say further that President Coolidge for some time has

considered this matter to be urgent, but, since he did not wish to draw the

Japanese Government’s attention to so important a question prior to the

impending funeral ceremonies of the late Emperor, he withheld action, both

in Tokyo and other capitals, until the conclusion of the funeral ceremonies.

KELLOGG

[Document 4]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

26. Following is text of President’s proposed message, action in regard to

To the Congress of the United States: Pursuant to my instructions

the American Ambassadors at London, Paris, Rome, and Tokyo,

will today present to the Governments of Great Britain, France,

Italy, and Japan, a Memorandum suggesting that they empower

their delegates at the forthcoming meeting of the Preparatory

Commission for the Disarmament Conference at Geneva to

negotiate and conclude at an early date an agreement further

limiting naval armament, supplementing the Washington Treaty

on that subject, and covering the classes of vessels not covered by

that Treaty. I transmit herewith, for the information of the

Congress, a copy of this Memorandum.

I wish to inform the Congress of the considerations which have

moved me to take this action.

The support of all measures looking to the preservation of the

peace of the world has been long established as a fundamental

policy of this Government. The American Government and

people are convinced that competitive armaments constitute one

of the most dangerous contributing causes of international

suspicion and discord and are calculated eventually to lead to war.

A recognition of this fact and a desire as far as possible to remove

this danger led the American Government in 1921 to call the

Washington Conference.

At that time we were engaged in a great building program which,

upon its completion, would have given us first place on the sea.

We felt then, however, and feel now, that the policy we then

advocated—that of deliberate self-denial and limitation of naval

armament by the Great Naval Powers—promised the attainment

of at least one guarantee of peace, an end worthy of mutual

adjustment and concession.

At the Washington Conference we found the other nations

animated with the same desire as ourselves to remove naval

competition from the list of possible causes of international

discord. Unfortunately, however, it was not possible to reach

agreements at Washington covering all classes of naval ships. The

Washington Treaty provided a specific tonnage limitation upon

capital ships and aircraft carriers, with certain restrictions as to

size and maximum caliber of guns for other vessels. Every nation

has been at complete liberty to build any number of cruisers,

destroyers and submarines. Only size and armament of cruisers

were limited. The Signatories of the Washington Treaty have

fulfilled their obligations faithfully and there can be no doubt that

that Treaty constitutes an outstanding success in its operation.

It has been the hope of the American Government, constantly

expressed by the Congress since the Washington Conference, that

a favorable opportunity might present itself to complete the work

begun here by the conclusion of further agreements covering

cruisers, destroyers, and submarines. The desirability of such an

agreement has been apparent, since it was only to be expected

that the spirit of competition, stifled as regards capital ships and

aircraft carriers by the Washington Treaty, would, sooner or later,

show itself with regard to the other vessels not limited under the

Treaty. Actually, I do not believe that competitive building of

these classes of ships has begun. Nevertheless, far-reaching

building programs have been laid down by certain Powers and

there has appeared in our own country, as well as abroad, a

sentiment urging naval construction on the ground that such

construction is taking place elsewhere. In such sentiments lies the

germ of renewed naval competition. I am sure that all

governments and all peoples would choose a system of naval

limitation in preference to consciously reverting to competitive

building. Therefore, in the hope of bringing about an opportunity

for discussion among the principal naval Powers to ascertain

whether further limitation is practicable, I have suggested to them

that negotiations on this subject should begin as soon as possible.

The moment seems particularly opportune to try to secure further

limitation of armament in accordance with the expressed will of

the Congress. The earnest desire of the nations of the world to

relieve themselves in as great a measure as possible of the burden

of armaments and to avoid the dangers of competition has been

shown by the establishment of the Preparatory Commission for

the Disarmament Conference, which met in Geneva last May, and

which is continuing its work with a view to preparing the agenda

for a final general conference. For more than six months,

representatives of a score or more of nations have examined from

all points of view the problem of the reduction and limitation of

armaments. In these discussions it was brought out very clearly

that a number of nations felt that land, sea, and air armaments

were interdependent and that it would be difficult, if not

impossible, to agree upon the limitation of one type of armament

without simultaneously limiting the other types. The consequence

to be feared is that a deadlock will be reached, should even partial

progress in the reduction of armaments be conditioned upon the

acceptance of some universal plan covering land, sea, and air

forces together. If the prospective deadlock cannot be broken, it is

probable that little progress will be made for the time being. It

appears to me to be the duty of this Government, which has

always advocated limitation of armaments, to endeavor to suggest

some avenue by which concrete results may be achieved even

though such results may be short of an ultimate ideal solution for

the threefold problem of land, sea, and air armament.

Our delegates at Geneva have consistently expressed the view

that under conditions as they exist in the world today the

problems of land and air armaments are most susceptible of

solution by regional agreements covering regions within which

the land or air armaments of one country could constitute a

potential threat to another country. Geographical continents have

been suggested as regions appropriate for land and air limitation

agreements.

The American land and air force constitute a threat to no one.

They are at minimum strength; their reduction has been suggested

by no one as a necessary condition precedent to general arms

limitation. This reduction of our land forces has been rendered

possible by our favored geographical position. I realize that the

problems of armaments on land and in the air in Europe are beset

with difficulties which in all justice we must recognize and,

although this Government will always be ready to lend its

assistance in any appropriate way to efforts on the part of

European or other Governments to arrive at regional agreements

limiting land and air forces, it would hesitate to make specific

proposals on this subject to European nations.

The problem of the limitation of naval armament, while not

regional in character or susceptible of regional treatment, has

been successfully treated, in part, by an agreement among the five

leading Naval Powers, and, in my opinion, can be definitely dealt

with by further agreements among those Powers.

It will be a contribution to the success of the preliminary work

now going on at Geneva should the Great Naval Powers there

agree upon a further definite limitation of naval armament.

It is my intention that the American representatives at Geneva

should continue to discuss with the representatives of the other

nations there the program for a general limitation of armaments

conference. If such a conference should be possible in the future,

on a basis generally acceptable, this Government would, of

course, be highly gratified. Pending the formulation of the plan

for such a general conference, however, I believe that we should

make an immediate and sincere effort to solve the problem of

[Document 5]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

[Paraphrase]

27. Referring to Department’s telegram 25. The Department desires that, in

presenting its memorandum to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, you

impress on him that this Government has tried to formulate its proposals in

such a way as to make them acceptable to the Government of France. You

should point out especially that the United States Government has avoided

proposing any detailed plan in the memorandum, because it does not wish

to preclude free discussion later of any such detailed plans which the

French Government might be inclined to bring forward in its own interest.

The French Government’s often-expressed desire to bring about an early

limitation of armament has impressed the United States Government by its

sincerity. The difficulties of treating with three categories of armament

simultaneously are, on the other hand, so great as to cause serious

apprehension lest a deadlock prevent any real progress in the direction of

the common goal. These proposals have been made by the United States

Government in the hope that such an unfortunate conclusion of the

Preparatory Commission’s labors may be avoided. The earnest hope of the

United States Government should be expressed to the Foreign Minister that

his Government will agree respecting the desirability of a special effort

being made to accomplish at least one type of limitation, thereby

contributing to the Preparatory Commission’s work and facilitating the task

of the final Conference, in the calling of which the Government of France

has taken the lead. As your personal opinion, you may have the chance to

point out that the French Government’s unconditional acceptance of this

American proposal would very happily affect public opinion in this country.

You should add that the United States Government believes the negotiations

contemplated by its memorandum, while not necessarily beginning on the

date of the Preparatory Commission’s convening, should be started at the

earliest possible date thereafter as generally agreeable to the five interested

Governments.

KELLOGG

[Document 6]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[Paraphrase]

5. A memorandum to be presented by the Ambassadors in France, Great

Britain, Italy, and Japan on Thursday, February 10, making certain

suggestions regarding naval limitation, is given below. You are desired to

present a copy thereof to the Minister for Foreign Affairs not earlier than

noon, Eastern Standard Time, on Thursday.

[Document 7]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

66. Briand has just handed me the French reply to your memorandum of

which the following is a translation:

“The American Government has been good enough to address to

the signatories of the naval convention of Washington of 1922

and, as one of them, to the French Government, a memorandum

proposing to negotiate at Geneva between the five powers,

without disinteresting themselves from the general work of the

reduction of armaments carried on for the last 10 months by the

Preparatory Commission on Disarmament, an agreement with a

view to limiting from now on naval armament for the categories

of vessels which are not included in the treaty of Washington.

The French Government wishes first of all to say how much it

appreciates the lofty aim of the American note. The generous

idealism which inspires it is in accordance with its own views. No

power could be more appreciative of the noble initiative of

President Coolidge than France which never ceases to give proofs

of her resolutely pacific will.

It desires equally to show how much it has appreciated the

friendly attention of the Federal Government in leaving its

proposals flexible in an endeavor to take into account the special

conditions and requirements of the continental powers. The

American Government has thus shown that it is quite aware of the

very clear position taken by the French Government in the

question of naval disarmament. It will therefore not be astonished

to see French opinion preoccupied with its duties as a member of

the League of Nations and with its moral obligations towards all

the powers which form part of it.

On its part the Government of the Republic would have been

happy to be able to adhere to these proposals without reserve and

the entire French nation would have congratulated itself on seeing

the two countries again associated in an enterprise so consistent

with their common traditions. But an attentive study of the

American proposals has convinced the Government of the

Republic that in their present form they risk compromising the

success of the task already commenced at Geneva with the active

help of the representatives of the American Government.

Article 8 of the Covenant of the League of Nations has made the

general limitation of armaments one of the essential duties of the

League. Without doubt in 1921 the powers to whom the United

States are today appealing already united their efforts to realize by

themselves a limitation of naval armaments. At the time it took

place the calling of the Washington Conference was fully

justified, but circumstances today are different. The League of

Nations has begun its task: the conclusion of an arms traffic

convention, the elaboration of a convention on the private

manufacture of war materials, the convocation, finally, of a

Preparatory Commission with a view to the meeting of a

Conference for the General Limitation of Armaments, a

commission to which all the countries of the world have been

invited and in which the greater part of them participate, mark so

many decisive stages towards the aim fixed by the Covenant.

Without doubt the American Government is not thinking of

withdrawing from the task undertaken the efficient collaboration

which for nearly a year its delegates have contributed; it

promises, on the contrary, to continue it. But its proposal has

nevertheless for practical result to divest the Preparatory

Commission of an essential question which figures on its

program; to constitute, on the side, a special Conference in which

only a few powers should participate and whose decisions, under

penalty of being vain, must at least in their principles be later

recognized as valid by powers which would not have been

admitted to discuss them.

To decide today, without consulting the League of Nations, [a

change of] method and to seek a partial solution of the problem,

in preoccupying one’s self with maintaining the actual existing

situation [rather] than in determining the conditions proper to

ensure the security of each one, to limit communicating,

[besides,] this effort to a few powers, would be both to weaken

the authority of the League of Nations so essential to the peace of

the world and to injure the principle of the equality of States

which is at the very base of the Covenant of Geneva and to which

on its part the French Government remains firmly attached.

The principle of the equality of the powers, great or small, is one

of the recognized rules of the League of Nations. Technical

committees have met; all the maritime powers have participated

in their labors; they have pointed out the necessities for their

defense. How could one admit that at the moment when the

Preparatory Commission is called upon to formulate the

conclusion of its discussions the five most important maritime

powers should take cognizance of the question and as far as it

concerns them give it a definitive solution of a nature to prejudice

the final decisions for the entire naval problems?

In fact, besides, the categories to which the new limitation should

apply are those which for the majority of powers present the

greatest interest. An agreement limited to a few navies could be

explained for battleships; practically, they are the only ones to

possess any. It is otherwise when the question of light vessels is

considered. All the navies of the world have an interest in being

associated with the deliberations on this important problem.

As for the French Government, which in the question of

limitation of armaments is only interested from the defensive

point of view, as Mr. Briand declared to Mr. Hughes on December

18, 1921, and which in this respect must interest itself both in

the protection of its coasts and in the safety of its maritime

communications, its delegates at Geneva have defended and

caused to prevail in the technical commissions two general

principles: On the one hand, that one cannot undertake to limit

naval armaments without taking into consideration the solutions

proposed for land and air armaments; on the other hand,

especially from the naval point of view, that the limitation of

armaments can only result from the attribution to any one [each]

power of a global tonnage that it remains free to divide according

to the sense of [sic] its necessities.

The American proposal sets aside immediately these two

principles which would have for consequence that the French

Government, which has taken its stand before all the nations

represented at Geneva, could only adopt it by abandonment its

point of view. It would thus contradict itself while publicly

recanting.

The method proposed: Would it be at least of a kind to obtain the

looked-for result? The precedent of the Rome Conference in 1924

does not permit of hoping so. This Conference in fact did not

succeed in having adopted by the powers not represented at

Washington the principles which there had been established for

battleships, still less in having them extended to the other

categories of vessels. These powers would not be less mindful of

their own interests the day that they were asked again to accept

principles resulting from decisions which would have been

decided upon without them.

This last objection has without doubt been considered by the

American Government and if it has thought necessary to set it

aside it is by reason of its opinion that if the problems of

disarmament are not disassociated there is no hope for a practical

result in the near future. The French Government thinks on the

contrary that in the present state of the surveys with which the

Preparatory Commission is charged the latter can, at its next

session and on condition that the nations represented bring like

itself a firm resolve to succeed, make the decisions which would

[Document 8]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State

MEMORANDUM

The Japanese Government have given careful consideration to the

Memorandum of the American Embassy at Tokyo, dated February 10,

1927, defining the attitude of the United States on the general problem of

disarmament, and suggesting that the representatives of the five Powers

Signatories of the Washington Naval Treaty, about to participate in the

forthcoming session of the Preparatory Commission for the Disarmament

Conference at Geneva, shall be empowered to negotiate and to conclude an

agreement among those five Powers for the limitation of armament in the

classes of naval vessels not covered by the Washington Treaty.

The Japanese Government fully share with the American Government the

views expressed in that Memorandum on the desirability of an agreement

calculated to complete the work of the Washington Conference. They

cordially welcome the initiative taken by the American Government for the

institution among the five Powers of negotiations looking to such desirable

end. They will be happy to take part in those negotiations through their

representatives invested with full powers to negotiate and to conclude an

agreement on the subject.

In view, however, of the supreme importance of the problem to be discussed

and determined, the Japanese Government find it essential that at least a

part of the Japanese Delegation shall be specially sent from Tokyo.

Considering the length of time required for the necessary preparations, as

well as for the journey from Tokyo to Geneva, it will obviously be

impossible for the Japanese representatives to assist at the negotiations,

should that meeting be held simultaneously with or immediately after the

forthcoming session of the Preparatory Disarmament Commission, which is

scheduled to be opened on March 21 next. Accordingly, the Japanese

Government desire that the meeting of the Powers Signatories of the

Washington Naval Treaty, now suggested, shall take place on a date not

earlier than June 1.

The Japanese Government are further gratified to learn that it is not the

intention of the American Government at this time to put forward rigid

proposals on the ratios of naval strength to be maintained by the several

Powers in the classes of vessels not covered by the Washington Treaty.

In order to ensure the success of the proposed negotiations, it seems highly

important that in the matter of these conditions of the limitation of

armament, all parties to the negotiations should approach the subject with

an open mind, being always guided by the spirit of mutual accommodation

and helpfulness consistently with the defensive requirements of each nation.

The Japanese Government confidently hope that an adjustment will be

reached in a manner fair and satisfactory to each of the participating Powers

and conducive to the general peace and security of the world.

[ WASHINGTON ,] February 19, 1927.

[Document 9]

The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

24. At noon today reply of Italian Government, stating that to its regret it

cannot accede to proposal contained in our memorandum of February 10,

was handed to me. Text will be given press here 10 p.m. today. Italian

Ambassador in Washington has been instructed to give verbal explanation

of reasons which underlie Italy’s action.

I was told that if the President could arrange to have the great powers agree

in advance that French-Italian parity established at Washington Conference

on Limitation of Armament should be accepted and if provision were made

that the minor Mediterranean powers and Russia should not disturb balance

of naval power in Mediterranean, Italy would be disposed to reconsider her

decision and to agree to attend Conference. I understand that the

Ambassador is being instructed to explain this suggestion also.

FLETCHER

[Document 10]

The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

[Received 6 p.m.]

25. The following is a translation of the reply of the Italian Government to

my memorandum of February 10th:

“The Italian Government has submitted to serious examination

the memorandum handed on February 10th instant by the

Ambassador of the United States of America to the Prime

Minister, Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The said memorandum explains the principles which have

inspired the Washington Government in proposing that, before the

contemplated International Conference for the Reduction and the

Limitation of Armaments, negotiations be initiated between the

five powers signatory to the treaty of Washington of 1922 for the

purpose of studying the limitation of certain categories of naval

armaments not covered by said treaty.

The Italian Government appreciates fully the high spirit which

has guided the President of the United States of America in

addressing his message to Congress on the same day in which the

memorandum of the American Government was handed to the

Governments of the great powers interested. The appreciation of

the Italian Government has all the greater value since Italy has

always associated herself with every international activity tending

to establish upon a solid base the tranquillity and peace of the

world.

That spirit which has guided Mr. Coolidge is, so to say, the

heritage of the Italian Government and people.

Italy in fact has not only adhered to the Washington Conference

but has concluded during the past 5 years more treaties of

friendship and arbitration than those stipulated by any other

European state. Pier actual military expenses and, above all, her

naval budget in which there is appropriated 300 million lire

annually equal to about 13 millions of dollars for new naval

construction, demonstrate clearly that the ‘far-reaching building

programs’ alleged in the message certainly cannot refer to Italy.

The American Government proposes in its memorandum that the

Italian Government empower its representative on the Preparatory

Disarmament Commission to initiate negotiations at Geneva with

a view to concluding agreements which, in anticipation of a

global limitation of naval, land and air armaments, shall regulate

naval armaments, by limiting the construction of those lesser

vessels which were not contemplated in the accords of 1922.

As regards such a proposal the Government of His Majesty must

above all state that, in principle and as far as concerns the

continent of Europe, its point of view is that there exists an

undeniable interdependence of every type of armament of every

single power, and furthermore that it is not possible to adopt

partial measures between only the five large naval powers.

The Italian Government thinks that the limitation of armaments,

to be efficacious to the ends referred to by Mr. Coolidge, should

be universal and recalls in this connection that the example of

Washington was not accepted by the minor naval powers and that

the Conference held at Rome in February 1924 for the extension

of the principles of the Washington treaty to the powers not

signatory thereto was a failure.

Then, as concerns Italy more specifically, the Italian Government

believes it can invoke the same geographical reasons referred to

in the message of President Coolidge. If the United States, by

reason of their geographical position (‘our favored geographical

position’) has been able to reduce land armament to the

minimum, Italy by reason of its unfavorable geographical position

cannot expose itself without grave risks to a binding limitation of

its maritime armaments, which are already insufficient to the

needs of its defense.

Italy has, in fact, only three lines of communication with the rest

of the world, three obligatory routes, through Suez, Gibraltar, and

the Dardanelles, for provisioning itself.

Italy has an enormous coast development with populous cities and

vital centers on the coast or a short distance from it, with two

large islands, besides the Dodecanese, all of which are linked to

the peninsula by lines of vital traffic.

Italy has four important colonies to protect, two of which are

beyond the Suez Canal.

In fact, Italy must also consider the other nations which face on or

can appear in the Mediterranean, particularly favored by their

geographical position amid essential lines of communication, and

which have under construction many units of various types or are

elaborating naval programs of great strength.

For the reasons above stated the Government of His Majesty feels

confident that the Government of the United States will take into

account the reason why Italy cannot, to its regret, accede to the

proposal contained in the memorandum of February 10th.”

FLETCHER

[Document 11]

The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 11: p.m.]

speaking for Mussolini, Under Secretary Grandi sought to impress upon me

that Italo-French relations are extremely delicate. This was also referred to

by Mussolini when I presented our memorandum, as I telegraphed. Unless

and until Italo-French relations improve, it is evident that no effective steps

can be taken in the Mediterranean toward limiting naval armaments.

[Document 12]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

39. The following telegram has just been received from Rome:

Sir Esme Howard advised the Department today that British reply would be

delayed several days by reason of necessity of consulting Dominions, but

that our proposal was being given most sympathetic consideration.

The press reports from London indicate that both Baldwin and

Chamberlain13 favor acceptance but that Bridgeman14 favors a flat

rejection. If through any misunderstanding the British Government should

decline to participate in the suggested discussions, it would be most

unfortunate. Only reason for a British refusal would appear to be fear that

this Government would fail, in the forthcoming discussions, to take into full

consideration special position of British Navy in regard to the French and

Italian naval building programs. Unless you deem the action unwise, I

should like you to find immediate opportunity to talk matter over with

Chamberlain personally. If you do, you should point out to the Foreign

Secretary that the President has no idea of making rigid proposals or of

failing to take into consideration special interests of any country. Primary

object of his suggestion is to endeavor in consultation with other great naval

powers to find some means for removing danger of competitive naval

building. You will recall that there was no reference to reduction of naval

armament in either the memorandum or the President’s message to

Congress. Limitation is what is sought. Should reductions in any dass prove

to be possible they would be welcome, but reduction would not be essential

to success of type of agreement which President hopes can be formulated

after full discussions among the representatives of the naval powers.

GREW

[Document 13]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European

Affairs (Castle)

[WASHINGTON,] February 22, 1927.

THE SECRETARY: The Italian Ambassador came to my house this afternoon to read

me two telegrams from Mussolini with regard to the Italian answer to the

Memorandum on naval limitation. In these telegrams Mussolini instructed

the Ambassador to see to it that the Italian answer did not create any talk in

this country as to Italian militarism. He said that the whole world should

understand that Italy was the most peaceful and peace-loving of nations. He

said that the only reason that it was impossible to give an affirmative

answer was that, although the situation between France and Italy was better

than it had been it was still delicate and that Italy feared the bad feeling

which might be aroused by a discussion between the two countries on the

question of a parity between the two navies. Mussolini wanted us to

understand, therefore, that if Italy could be assured in advance that this

question would not be discussed, that the parity established at the

Washington Conference would certainly be extended to the smaller ships,

he would be very glad to re-examine the invitation of the United States in a

most friendly spirit.

I told the Ambassador that it seemed to me that it was exactly this kind of

question that must be examined by the Conference, that the United States

alone could not determine it any more than we could say that the other

ratios of the Washington Conference must be considered final when applied

to a smaller type of vessel. I said that you perfectly understood that

particular nations had particular necessities and that for this very reason the

invitation had been made very general. I told him that the insistence of Italy

in the note that she, at least, had no extensive naval program was naturally

accepted but that the later statement that other nations had such programs

was the best reason in the world why Italy should have accepted the

invitation. The Ambassador said that the reference was to France and

Jugoslavia. I answered that I took this for granted, that the conference

would have restrained any too great zeal on the part of France, in that it

would have put an end to competition; that so far as Jugoslavia was

concerned I did not think the country was in any condition financially to

proceed with any large naval program but that there would certainly be no

incentive to push such a program if Italy had obligated itself to build no

gigantic fleet. He said that this was possible but that if, in spite of an

agreement between Italy and France and the others the Jugoslavs still

persisted it would be very disagreeable. I told him that we knew as well as

anyone that circumstances change with the years and that no agreement was

so fixed that the powers making it could not get together again for

reconsideration, that in the meantime the result would certainly be the

cessation of a silly and costly competition.

It is perfectly clear to me that the Ambassador agrees with us and not with

his Government. He took notes of what I said and will cable Rome. He said

the papers today had been inclined to blame the Italian stand and agreed

with me that this was to have been expected. He said as he left that he

hoped our answer might enable Rome to reconsider the question.

W[ILLIAM] R. C[ASTLE]

[Document 14]

The Chargé in Argentina (Cable) to the Secretary of State

[Received 7 p.m.]

Government received this morning reads as follows:

“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs has considered with the greatest

interest the memorandum transmitted on the 9th instant by the

Embassy of the United States and in reply it begs to state that the

Argentine Government considers it preferable to await the

resolution of the Commission that is studying the disarmament

question in the League of Nations in whose preparatory

deliberations it has collaborated and continues to collaborate by

means of diplomatic delegates and of experts.

In case the said initiative should fail, the moment will then have

arrived to consider whether it be convenient to study a solution of

a less general character which might perhaps prove of easier

realization.

On the other hand the present armaments of the Argentine

Republic are of small importance and the renovations being made

will not notably augment its military and naval power since it is

only a matter of modernization destined [to] replace the

antiquated material that has become obsolete. The expenditure

needed for this modernization is moderate in comparison with the

general resources of the country and the necessary funds have

already been set apart for the purpose so that it does not constitute

an excessive outlay or a preparation for the Argentine

Government.

At the Fifth Pan American Conference at Santiago, Argentina

insistently expressed her desire to celebrate agreements which

would limit bellicose acquisitions in order to avert the danger of

an armament contest in South America in a manner such as was

achieved by the pacts of May of the year 1902 celebrated between

the Argentine Republic and Chile.

Although no favorable results were attained in practice either at

the Conference of Santiago or by steps taken subsequently by the

Argentine Government, the latter maintain the same favorable

disposition to consider any reasonable limitation in military

expenditure provided that it be compatible with the requirements

of its internal and external security as by this means it will be able

to dedicate a larger part of its resources to the development of the

country without forgetting at the same time that the development

of these resources and the great interests which they even now

signify demand in their turn adequate protection.”

CABLE

[Document 15]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile

(Collier)16a

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, February 24, 1927—noon.

received with surprise a “reply” from the Government of Argentina

regarding the memorandum which the American Chargé delivered to it on

February 10. The purpose of furnishing copies to the Governments of

Argentina, Brazil, and Chile was, as you know, merely to keep them

informed of events as a courtesy and no replies were expected.

If you deem it expedient and if a suitable occasion should present itself, you

may advise the Minister for Foreign Affairs that Argentine reply appears to

have been occasioned by some misunderstanding either on part of

American Embassy or of Government of Argentina, and that the

Government of the United States is not expecting replies from the

Governments of either Brazil or Chile unless these Governments

particularly wish to make comments.

You will not discuss this matter with any representatives of the press.

GREW

16a Sent also, mutatis mutandis, to the Embassy in Brazil as Department’s

No. 7. The Embassy in Argentina was informed to the same effect by

[Document 16]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

meet Bridgeman and told him that the American press, in part at least, had

stated that he was against acceptance of our invitation to Naval Conference.

He replied that it was a “damned lie” and hoped that I would take occasion

to have that fact known at home. He then went on to say that he had all

along been in favor of a conference; in fact, if the President had not called

one, he, Bridgeman, was preparing to have one called.

He asked me if I thought that the President had in mind a conference open

for free discussion and I replied that that was my belief. He then said that it

was essential. He concluded our talk by saying that I must be aware that the

delay in the British reply arose from the necessity of consulting the

Dominions; while he did not commit himself he indicated that a favorable

reply was assured.

HOUGHTON

[Document 17]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)

[WASHINGTON,] February 24, 1927.

The Italian Ambassador referred to the Italian note17 declining to accept our

proposal for a discussion at Geneva of naval armament limitation and read

to me portions of two telegrams which he had received from Mussolini to

the effect that if this Government would agree to “appuyer” the thesis of

parity between Italy and France he, Mussolini, would re-examine our

proposal. I said to the Ambassador that it was obviously out of the question

for us to do anything of this kind, as we had very carefully abstained in our

note from making any concrete suggestions concerning the relative

positions of Italy and France which might give offense to one or the other

and for that very reason we had left the matter entirely open and

unprejudiced for discussion at the conference table, I said that we

recognized Italy’s particular geographic situation and that this was another

reason for our avoiding any concrete proposals which might prejudice the

case in advance. The Ambassador then asked me to comment on the phrase

“far-reaching building programs” and asserted that this could not be taken

to apply to Italy which had embarked on no such program. I replied that the

phrase was not intended to apply to any individual country, but was used in

a general sense. The Ambassador then said that he had been instructed by

Mussolini to endeavor to avoid any comment in the American press

concerning Italian militarism and he asked me if I could not say a word to

the press correspondents to the effect that Italy was not a militaristic nation.

I replied that I thought that any statement of this kind would come better

from the Ambassador than from the Department. The Ambassador then

asked me if I had any comment to make in connection with Mussolini’s

statement to Mr. Fletcher when he handed him the note. I said that I had no

comment to make as it appeared to be similar to the instructions received by

the Ambassador.

J[OSEPH] C. G[REW]

[Document 18]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

instructions I saw Chamberlain this afternoon and repeated the substance of

your message to him. He then asked whether I would object to asking him if

the British reply were ready. I said that I would not and made the inquiry.

He then handed me the draft of the British reply, as follows:18

“His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain received with cordial

sympathy the invitation of the Government of the United States of

America to take part in a conversation at Geneva on the further

limitation of naval armament.

The view of His Majesty’s Government upon the special

geographical position of the British Empire, the length of

interimperial communications, and the necessity for the

protection of its food supplies are well known and together with

the special conditions and requirements of the other countries

invited to participate in the conversation must be taken into

account.

His Majesty’s Government are nevertheless prepared to consider

to what extent the principles adopted at Washington can be

carried further either as regards the ratio in different classes of

ships between the various powers or in other important ways.

They therefore accept the invitation of the Government of the

United States of America and will do their best to further the

success of the proposed conversation.

They would, however, observe that the relationship of such a

conversation to the proceedings of the Preparatory Commission at

Geneva would require careful adjustment.”

Chamberlain then said that this reply could not be made public here until

February 28, 4 p.m. The delay was occasioned by delay in receiving

answers from two of the Dominions, which, however, would be favorable.

He wishes, therefore, that the reply be withheld from publication until the

above-mentioned date. I assured him that his wishes in that regard would be

strictly respected.

He then remarked that he had received communications from the British

Ambassador at Washington to the effect that Italy’s reply might be subject

to reconsideration. It was Chamberlain’s opinion that the Italian

Government would not like to permit a great conference of the sort

proposed to be carried on without having Italy represented on it, provided

that special consideration of Italy’s geographical position was assured. He

thinks that if this point were emphasized it might be possible again to

approach the Italian Government and to obtain favorable reply, at least to

extent of having an observer at the Conference. He said that it was in this

way that Italy gradually pushed her way in at Locarno, and that it was only

after the treaties were definitely framed that Italy desired to become a

party. He thinks that in present instance a similar result might follow.

HOUGHTON

[Document 19]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)

[WASHINGTON,] March 5, 1927.

The British and Japanese Ambassadors called separately at my request and I

said to them, after discussing the matter with the President, that in spite of

the refusal of France and Italy to take part in the proposed naval limitation

discussions at Geneva we hoped that these conversations could at least be

held by Great Britain, Japan and the United States and I inquired whether

this procedure was satisfactory to their respective Governments. Both

Ambassadors intimated that in their private opinion such procedure would

be agreeable to their Governments, but that they would telegraph to

ascertain and would let me know in due course. I said that we proposed to

reply to the French and Italian notes expressing regrets that they had found

it impossible to participate and expressing also the hope that they might

find it possible at least to be represented by observers at the proposed

conference. Both Ambassadors thought well of this procedure. Mr.

Matsudaira asked me whether we had any reason to believe that either

France or Italy would reconsider its refusal. I said that we have no official

grounds for such a belief, but as the subject was one of vital importance I

hoped that those two Powers would at least find it desirable to send

observers to follow the discussions.

In informal conversation I spoke of Italy’s desire for some concrete

assurances in advance of the conference that Franco-Italian parity would be

maintained and that also that some of the smaller naval Powers, such as

Jugoslavia, Greece, et cetera, would be included in the conference. I said it

was obviously impossible for us to say in advance that we would support

any particular thesis in the conference and that our whole purpose has been

to leave the matter absolutely open and unprejudiced for free and friendly

discussion at the conference table. As regards the smaller Powers it seems

to me that if the larger Powers should agree to limitation, the international

fear which was the basis of all naval building would be obviated and that

there would then be no purpose for the smaller powers to proceed with

extensive building. If they should do so, the greater Powers would then be

in a far stronger position to protest. Sir Esme Howard and Mr. Matsudaira

both concurred in these views.

J[OSEPH] C. G[REW]

[Document 20]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy

(Fletcher)

[Paraphrase]

17. On March 2, in conversation with the Chief of the Division of Western

European Affairs, the Japanese Ambassador expressed opinion that

conversations between the Governments of the United States, Great Britain,

and Japan would result in real accomplishment if it were to be understood

in advance that any agreement reached should be flexible and subject to

revision. The Ambassador said that his Government would be relieved to

know that idea of Three-Power Conference had not been wholly given up as

press reports seemed to indicate. He agreed that if three-power

conversations were initiated and if France and Italy were invited to be

represented in any way they found suitable (e. g., by observers) both nations

might finally be brought into actual participation.

Also on March 2, the Italian Ambassador informed the Department orally

that he had received a cable message from Mussolini who had noted with

pleasure that there was nothing in the President’s proposal to prevent Italo-

French naval parity, which, he stated is a sine qua non for Italy. Mussolini

stated further that Italy could not be limited in any class of ship, by reason

of possibility that Greece, Russia, and Yugoslavia might build large fleets.

He was in agreement, therefore, with his technical experts that account must

be taken of “global tonnage.” The Ambassador felt that Mussolini

personally wished to accept the President’s proposal but that his technical

advisers had forced him to refuse.

The Ambassador mentioned the interdependence existing between naval,

land, and air armament, and was told that no reason was apparent why such

an interdependence should prevent taking up different categories singly, as

limitation in any one class should simplify problem of limitation in other

classes instead of making it more difficult. Regarding building programs of

other nations, the Ambassador had it pointed out to him that whatever

arrangements were reached, signatory nations would, obviously, have to

consult frequently, and that therefore … no particular crisis would be likely

to arise. Self-imposed limitation should have, moreover, a calming effect;

Italy’s neighbors and others would be much less likely to go in for extensive

building if they were relieved of fear of sudden Italian building programs.

Main purpose of program of the suggested Conference was to increase

mutual trust and to do away with senseless competition. The Ambassador

agreed, and said he would transmit these ideas to his Government.

On March 4 the Italian Ambassador again discussed question at

Department, stating that he had received impression that Japanese

Government would not approve of three-power conversations and that he

was glad to learn that was a mistake. He stated as his belief that there was

much desire in Rome to get into the Conference and that the stumbling

block was difficulty of obtaining assurances in advance in regard to parity

between Italy and France. Impossibility of deciding such a question in

advance of Conference was once more pointed out to him. He again

expressed fear that smaller Mediterranean powers might suddenly start a

building program which would be dangerous to Italy. In reply it was stated

that the arrangements which might be made would be subject to revision

under a contingency of that nature, and that in such a circumstance the

blame for increase of armaments would, in world opinion, not lie with the

great powers thereby forced to reconsider the agreement but instead would

rest on the small nation which had made the reconsideration imperative.

The Ambassador felt that this was a very strong point which had not been

taken into consideration, and he expressed the hope that he might be able to

persuade the Italian Government to reconsider its answer; he personally, he

said, was now entirely in favor of the proposed Conference.

In talking with the British and Japanese Ambassadors today I said that the

United States desired to proceed to hold proposed conversations on naval

limitation at Geneva on three-power basis in spite of refusal of French and

Italian Governments to take part therein and I requested them to ascertain if

this procedure would be agreeable to the British and Japanese Governments

respectively. I said also that if replies were favorable we would then reply to

French and Italian notes and express hope that those two Governments

might see their way to be represented at Conference at least by observers.

GREW

No. 47, and to Japan as No. 19.

[Document 21]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

49. Department has received reports from the Embassy at Tokyo21 which

indicate that the Japanese Government wishes to obtain some idea of British

attitude towards proposal for Three-Power Naval Armament Conference

before replying in regard to it. Department believes that if Japanese

Government were informed of views the British hold on this subject, they

would be inclined to reply favorably. You may intimate to Chamberlain,

informally, that it would be most helpful were he to cause indication of

above-mentioned views to be given Japanese.

GREW

[Document 22]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

Tyrrell, who showed me a copy of cable sent yesterday to British

Embassy at Washington; he said a copy had been forwarded to Tokyo and

would in all probability remove any doubts there in regard to British

acceptance.

HOUGHTON

[Document 23]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Grew)

[WASHINGTON,] March 10, 1927.

The British Ambassador called and read to me the reply of his Government

to the President’s proposal for a three-Power naval limitation conference in

Geneva, as follows:

“If other Powers represented at Washington Conference are

unwilling to take part in new conference suggested by the

President, we are still ready to join in a conference of three

Powers as soon as convenient to the United States and Japanese

Governments. But His Majesty’s Government would welcome

inclusion of France and Italy if it were still found possible.

“In the meantime discussions of Preparatory Committee must

continue in order that we may see in what way we can usefully

arrange conference proposed by President and how if possible

that conference can be fitted in to larger questions of

disarmament.”

The Ambassador said that he gathered from this message that it was merely

an informal reply to our informal proposal and that his Government would

probably expect a formal note from us in due course conveying the proposal

officially. The Ambassador said in reply to my inquiry that he thought the

normal procedure, as long as the conversations had been carried on here,

would be for us to address our note to him. I said that we should have to

consider whether it would not be well to await the Japanese reply to our

informal proposal before addressing formal notes to both Governments. The

Ambassador said he fully understood this and he thought that no further

step was necessary until we should have heard from Japan. I then asked the

Ambassador whether he thought it would be desirable to give publicity to

the British reply at once. He answered in the affirmative and said he thought

it would be well to say to the press that in view of the apparent failure of the

five-Power proposal the British Government was now ready to join in a

conference of three Powers as soon as convenient to the United States and

Japan.

J[OSEPH] C. G[REW]

[Document 24]

The Japanese Embassy to the Department of State

MEMORANDUM

The Japanese Government gladly accept the invitation of the American

Government to hold a discussion at Geneva among the United States, the

British Empire and Japan on the question of the limitation of naval

armament. They feel that the definite adjustment of the question would be

greatly facilitated, if the willing and active cooperation of France and Italy

could be secured. Should it, however, be found impossible to count on such

cooperation, the Japanese Government will nevertheless be ready to take

part in the proposed discussion among the three Powers, and to assist in the

endeavours for the furtherance of the desired end.

[ WASHINGTON ,] March 11, 1927.

[Document 25]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Japanese Ambassador

(Matsudaira)

WASHINGTON, March 11, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: With reference to the Memorandum handed by the American

Ambassador to the Imperial Japanese Minister for Foreign Affairs, February

10, 1927, regarding the possibility of the initiation of negotiations at

Geneva concerning the limitation of naval armament between the

representatives of the Powers Signatories of the Washington Treaty of 1922,

my Government is pleased to learn as the result of informal conversations

that the Imperial Japanese Government is willing to participate in

negotiations with the United States and Great Britain.

The American Government regrets that France and Italy should have

formally refused the President’s invitation and shares the opinion of the

Imperial Japanese Government that their presence would be most welcome

at such a conference. This Government sincerely hopes, therefore, that they

may decide to be represented at least in some informal manner at the

conversation contemplated.

These conversations, it now appears, could most advantageously and

conveniently begin at Geneva on the first day of June, or soon thereafter.

Accept [etc.]

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 26]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France

(Herrick)

72. Please deliver as soon as possible the following memorandum

concerning the proposed conference for the limitation of naval armament to

the Minister of Foreign Affairs, at the same time personally urging

Department’s point of view:

“With reference to the Memorandum of the French Government

of February 15, 1927, in reply to that of the American

Government, of February 10, inquiring whether the French

Government was disposed to empower its representatives at the

forthcoming meeting at Geneva of the Preparatory Commission

for the Disarmament Conference to enter into negotiations

looking toward an agreement providing for limitation in the

classes of naval vessels not covered by the Treaty of Washington

of 1922, the Government of the United States has noted with

pleasure that the French Government is animated by the same

spirit that prompted the President of the United States upon the

occasion of his Message to Congress, on the day on which the

above-mentioned Memorandum of the American Government

was handed to the Governments of the Powers signatory to the

Washington Treaty.

With regard to the fear expressed by the French Government that

such negotiations would risk compromising the success of the

work of the Preparatory Commission at Geneva, the Government

of the United States is of the opinion that all appropriate measures

taken by the large naval Powers cannot but contribute towards

facilitating the task of the Commission.

In the last paragraph of the Memorandum of the French

Government the view is set forth that it is at Geneva and by the

Preparatory Commission itself that the proposal of the American

Government can be effectually examined. The Government of the

United States desires to emphasize the fact that it proposed the

initiation at Geneva of negotiations by representatives of certain

powers at the forthcoming meeting of the Preparatory

Commission, and is therefore of the opinion that far from

undermining the authority of the League of Nations such

conversations as those proposed would be of great service to that

body in an advance towards the solution of a difficult problem.

The Governments of Great Britain and Japan have now acceded

to the proposal of the American Government which has,

therefore, decided to enter into conversations with these powers

and sincerely hopes that the French Government will see its way

clear to be represented in some manner in these conversations in

order that it may be fully cognizant of the course of negotiations

and of the agreements which may be reached.

As the French Government already knows, the American

Government has no preconceived ideas regarding any definite

ratio for the limitation of French tonnage. It does not desire to

open up questions already settled by Treaty but wishes to point

out that all other questions relative to limitation of naval

armament are open and that in the projected conversations each

power would have the privilege of taking any position it thought

best for its own protection as a basis for negotiation.

The Government of the United States would be especially

gratified by the presence of representatives of a nation holding the

ideals set forth in the Memorandum of the French Government, a

nation which has, in the past, been associated with the United

States in efforts to further the cause of World Peace.”

Inform Department promptly when this memorandum is delivered as we

wish then to hand copies of the Memorandum to the British and Japanese

Ambassadors here.

Repeat text of Memorandum to London and American Mission at Geneva

and mail cipher text to Rome.

GREW

[Document 27]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Italy

(Fletcher)

18. Please deliver as soon as possible the following memorandum

concerning the proposed conference for the limitation of naval armament to

the Minister of Foreign Affairs, at the same time personally urging

Department’s point of view:

“With reference to the memorandum of the Italian Government of

February 21, 1927, in reply to that of the American Government,

of February 10, inquiring whether the Italian Government was

disposed to empower its representatives at the forthcoming

meeting at Geneva of the Preparatory Commission for the

Disarmament Conference to enter into negotiations looking

toward an agreement providing for limitation in the classes of

naval vessels not covered by the Treaty of Washington of 1922,

the Government of the United States has noted with pleasure that

the Italian Government is animated by the same spirit that

prompted the President of the United States upon the occasion of

his Message to Congress, on the day on which the above-

mentioned Memorandum of the American Government was

handed to the Governments of the Powers signatory to the

Washington Treaty.

With regard to the assertion of the Italian Government that there

exists an interdependence of every type of armament, the

American Government is nevertheless of the opinion that all

appropriate measures taken by the large naval Powers in

limitation of the naval branch of armament must greatly

contribute in advancing the solution of the problem as a whole.

As for the statement in the Memorandum of the Italian

Government that owing to geographical position and strategic

considerations Italy could not expose itself without grave risks to

a binding limitation of its maritime armaments, it is feared that

there may exist some misapprehension regarding the terms of the

proposal of the President of the United States, The American

Government has no preconceived ideas regarding any definite

ratio for the limitation of Italian tonnage in the classes referred to,

but regards this question as one to be determined during the

proposed conversations. While the American Government does

not desire to open up questions already settled by treaty all other

questions relative to limitation of naval armament are open and

each power would have the privilege of taking any position it

thought best for its own protection as a basis for negotiation. The

American Government is also of the opinion that an agreement

for partial limitation of armaments could expose no power to

danger from the navies of the powers not included in such an

understanding, since no agreement is contemplated which would

not be subject to reconsideration or revision should the security of

any party to it be menaced by the naval program of a nation not

included in the understanding.

The Governments of Great Britain and Japan have now acceded

to the proposal of the American Government, which has,

therefore, decided to enter into conversations with these powers

and sincerely hopes that the Italian Government will see its way

clear to be represented in some manner at these conversations, in

order that it may be fully cognizant of the course of negotiations

and of the agreements which may be reached. The Government of

the United States would, moreover, be especially gratified by the

presence of the representatives of a nation holding the high ideals

set forth in the Memorandum of the Italian Government, a nation

which has, in the past, been associated with the United States in

efforts to further the cause of World Peace.”

Inform Department promptly when this is done as we wish to hand a copy

of the Memorandum to the British and Japanese Ambassadors as soon as

we know that it has been delivered in Borne.

Repeat text of Memorandum to London and American Mission at Geneva

and mail cipher text to Paris.

GREW

[Document 28]

The Ambassador in France (Herrick) to the Secretary of State

152. The Foreign Office sent me last evening the following note verbale

dated April 2nd:

“By its memorandum March 14th, 1927, the American Embassy

was good enough to inform the French Government of the

decision taken by its Government as a result of the adherence of

Great Britain and Japan to the proposals contained in the

American memorandum of February 10, last, to engage in

conversation with these powers.

On this occasion the American Government expresses the hope

that the Government of the Republic ‘will see its way clear to be

represented in some manner in these conversations in order that it

may be fully cognizant of the course of the negotiations and of

the agreements which may be reached.’ It is good enough at the

same time to show the paramount value that it would attach to the

presence of French delegation.

The American Government specifies on the other hand that it has

no preconceived idea as to the formula that it would be proper to

consider in regard to a limitation of French naval tonnage and it

points out that in the proposed conversations each power will

have the privilege of adopting as basis of negotiation the attitude

that it judges the best for the defense of its interests.

The French Government pointed out on February 15, in its reply

to the first American note, the decisive reasons for which it could

not participate in the Conference proposed by the American

Government for a new limitation of naval armaments.

It cannot allow either the weakening of the authority of the

League of Nations, already invested with the problem of

disarmament, in which naval armaments cannot be separated from

land and aerial armaments, or injury to the principle of the

equality of the powers to which France remains firmly attached,

or the exclusion from the discussion of an essential problem of

the states without whose collaboration no result can be obtained,

or the abandonment of the technical principles on which alone, as

the French delegates have had admitted during the preparatory

discussions, it is possible to base a general limitation of

armaments.

In spite of the assurances that the American Government is good

enough to give [of the thought and care] which have inspired its

initiative and as to the principles by which it intends to be guided,

the Government of the Republic cannot see its way to modify its

views towards the proposal which has been put before it. It

persists in thinking that a positive participation of France in the

proposed conference between the United States, Great Britain and

Japan, cannot be considered.

Since the delivery of the American memorandum a new element,

which imposes itself on us, has intervened: The Preparatory

Commission of the Disarmament Conference has met at Geneva.

From the beginning the French delegation has affirmed its thesis

and presented a draft convention based on the principle of global

disarmament. A large part of the Commission has shown itself

favorable to it and the debates which have ensued permit of

thinking that it will be largely taken into consideration in the

conclusions of the Commission.

Ever since then the French Government is bound to great reserve

as concerns the request of the American Government to be

represented in other discussions whose promoters are inspired by

entirely different principles. It is for us a question of honesty

[Document 29]

The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State

No. 229

His Britannic Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the

Secretary of State, and with reference to the conversation this morning

between Mr. Kellogg and Mr. Chilton of this Embassy, has the honour to

state that he is in receipt of information from His Majesty’s Government to

the effect that it is their understanding that the United States Government

originally intended that conversations rather than a formal conference on

the subject of naval disarmament should take place at Geneva between the

representatives of the Powers who are now taking part in the Disarmament

Preparatory Commission in that city, and that, in the event of these

conversations proving fruitful of positive results, a formal conference

would then take place between duly accredited representatives of the

Powers concerned.

Now that any meeting has been postponed until June, however, His

Majesty’s Government assume that the United States Government have

abandoned the proposal to conduct preliminary conversations and that

proceedings will from the outset take the form of a regular conference. In

this event, His Majesty’s Government contemplate asking Mr. Bridgeman,

the First Lord of the Admiralty, Viscount Cecil of Chelwood, and Admiral

Field to act as their Plenipotentiaries at the conference.

WASHINGTON , April 6, 1927.

[Document 30]

The Japanese Ambassador (Matsudaira) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, April 6, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated March

11, 1927, in regard to the proposed conversations at Geneva concerning the

limitation of naval armament, among the representatives of the United

States, Great Britain, and Japan.

It was added that these conversations could most advantageously and

conveniently begin at Geneva on the 1st day of June or soon thereafter. In

this connection I have just received a telegram from my Government to the

effect that the Japanese Delegation will leave Japan about the 24th of this

month and are expected to arrive at Geneva by way of the Indian Ocean

about the 8th June next.

In these circumstances the Japanese Government would like to have these

conversations opened after the 11th of that month. I beg leave therefore to

request pursuant to instructions from Tokio that you will be good enough to

take steps so that the wishes of my Government in this respect may

conveniently be met by all the parties concerned.

I beg to add that the names of the Japanese delegates will be communicated

to you as soon as they are officially appointed.

Accept [etc.]

T. MATSUDAIRA

[Document 31]

The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State

TOKYO, April 6, 1927—noon.

Minister for Foreign Affairs has informed me that in addition to Saito,27

Viscount Ishii, Japanese Ambassador to France, has accepted position on

delegation. These two will be principal delegates, accompanied by Saburi

as political expert and secretary to delegation, with Vice Admiral

Kobayashi and Bear Admiral Hara as naval experts.

While plans not definitely settled it seems probable that delegates will leave

Japan April 25th, proceeding via Suez and due Geneva early June. Full

biographical data members delegation goes forward first pouch.

MACVEAGH

[Document 32]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

116. Reported in press that Three-Power Conference will meet June 20,

1927. Department’s latest advice from Great Britain and Japan was that

Conference would be held as early as possible after June 11; we had

assumed that would mean June 12. If definite date has been arranged please

cable.

The President and I have conferred with Mr. Hughes, but do not believe

that he can attend Conference and in that event do not know of anyone else

to invite. Our thought was that if Mr. Hughes was able to go, his

international reputation might be of assistance to you and contribute to

arriving at favorable result.

I discussed with the President and Mr. Hughes the advisability of sending

over some good lawyer to help you in drafting the treaty. We thought that

we might get Allen Dulles, who, as you are aware, is thoroughly conversant

with all the background.

We should like to have your views. The Navy will send Admiral Schofield

and some other assistants; further information on that will be sent you. We

are very anxious, of course, for success of this Three-Power Conference.

Great Britain has notified us that her delegates will be the Rt. Hon. W. C.

Bridgeman, First Lord of the Admiralty, and Viscount Cecil of Chelwood,

Admiral Field, Chief of the Naval Staff, and other naval experts. Japan has

notified us that her representation will be as follows: Admiral Viscount

Saito, Governor General of Korea, and Viscount Ishii, at present Japanese

Ambassador to France; Vice Admiral Kobayashi and Bear Admiral Hara,

naval experts; and Mr. Sadao Saburi, Chief of the Treaty Section of the

Foreign Office, Secretary.

KELLOGG

[Document 33]

The Chief of the American Delegation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 11: p.m.]

241. Until it should be possible to arrive at some idea of developments here

I have postponed request for Department’s instructions concerning

arrangements for Naval Limitation Conference. The Preparatory

Commission will in all likelihood adjourn towards the end of the month, see

my No. 239, and will not resume its sessions until after the Assembly

meeting in September. There will therefore be no conflict in time between

the Three-Power Conference and the Preparatory Commission.

It would seem to me inadvisable to approach Sir Eric Drummond32 before

the receipt of instructions from you and before further developments could

be more clearly estimated. My information is, however, that Drummond

would, if requested, be happy to grant us the facilities of the Secretariat’s

machinery as he is eager to have the pourparlers take place in Geneva.

Bridgeman, in conversation with me in London, made no secret of the fact

that he was opposed to Geneva as a meeting place and that his preference

lay in the direction of Brussels or The Hague because they were more

accessible to London and were free from the atmosphere of Geneva. He

attached some weight to this in the event that the negotiations should be

protracted and that his presence in London should, from time to time, be

required. I replied that the President had particularly suggested Geneva

since he wished it made clear that the conversations were in no manner of

means in rivalry with the work of the Preparatory Commission but were, on

the contrary, closely connected therewith. I therefore gave it as my assured

opinion that we would not be willing to initiate any change in this regard. It

[Document 34]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

Preparatory Commission that the President invited the five powers to confer

in Geneva on the limitation of naval armaments, he feels that if the United

States were to take initiative in holding Conference elsewhere this would

place us in embarrassing position and provide France and Italy with

opportunity to allege that we were attempting to disrupt Geneva

Conference. Were the other two powers, Great Britain and Japan, to make

clear their desire to have Conference meet at some other place, preferably in

Belgium, I do not think that we should oppose it. If the League of Nations

would be embarrassed by having these negotiations at Geneva or if the

League is not prepared to provide the necessary facilities, for which, of

course, we should be willing to pay, we should then have no objection to

holding Conference at some other place. You may, if you think wise,

approach Sir Eric Drummond on the subject.

I should like to have your opinion in regard to distribution of personnel on

termination of the Preparatory Commission. Are you and Admiral Jones of

opinion that he should return here for consultation?33 We think that, if there

is time, both the General Board of the Navy and the Department would be

glad to have opportunity to consult with Admiral Jones, but wish to leave

decision in matter to him.

KELLOGG

[Document 35]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, April 27, 1927—noon.

84. Bridgeman saw Admiral Jones when latter was in London on way to

Geneva and raised possibility of moving Conference to some other place.

British Naval delegate on Preparatory Commission likewise suggested to

Gibson possibility of Brussels. No suggestion of this sort has ever come

from anyone in British Foreign Office or from the Japanese.

Gibson has informed Department that Drummond has stated that, in regard

to use of League facilities by Conference in Geneva, he preferred requests

for this use to come from states members of League, that is to say, from

Great Britain and Japan.

As this Conference at Geneva was called by President in connection with

work of Preparatory Commission, the United States would not care to

change location of Conference except on formal request of Great Britain

and Japan, who are members of the League, in which event this

Government would willingly consent to change to Brussels. There is no

doubt that British and Japanese would be willing to request use of necessary

League facilities if it be definitely decided to hold Conference at Geneva.

All the above considerations were discussed yesterday with Mr. Chilton of

the British Embassy, the Ambassador being absent, and with. Japanese

Ambassador, who promised to communicate with their respective

Governments. You should find occasion to explain situation to Chamberlain

and to urge early decision.

KELLOGG

[Document 36]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

Government prefer Geneva for Conference and that they have so notified

Japan. They are also taking the necessary steps in regard to League

facilities.

HOUGHTON

[Document 37]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

WASHINGTON, May 5, 1927—noon.

93. Please bring following to the attention of Chamberlain: This

Government assumes that the British Delegation at the forthcoming Three

Power Conference will either include fully empowered Dominion

representatives as at the Washington Conference or will itself be

empowered by Dominion Governments.

KELLOGG

[Document 38]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

at the forthcoming Three-Power Conference will include fully empowered

Dominion representatives.

HOUGHTON

[Document 39]

The Chargé in Japan (Armour) to the Secretary of State

77. At an interview with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, he emphasized to

me that the new Government34 goes even further than late Government in

desiring to see limitation of naval armament effected at Geneva. Referring

to China he said that Japanese Government is against intervention of any

kind except to protect nationals. He emphasized importance he places on

cooperation between the powers in regard to China, notably United States,

Great Britain, and Japan.

ARMOUR

[Document 40]

The Ambassador in Italy (Fletcher) to the Secretary of State

66. I have just received a memorandum from the Foreign Office in reply to

our memorandum of March 14th35 which, after referring to the antecedents,

states:

“The Royal Government deeply appreciates this attention of the

American Government and, while thanking it, has to state that the

negotiations at Geneva will be followed with the greatest

attention by the Italian Government and public opinion even if an

official ‘observer’ shall not be sent to participate in the

Conference.

Nevertheless, the Royal Government, depending upon the

development of the negotiations and the probable results thereof,

reserves the right to send one or more naval experts to follow

closely these negotiations, not excluding that these experts may,

at a given moment, assume the specific character of ‘observers’ at

the Conference itself.”

FLETCHER

[Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 27].

telegraphed the Department that Under Secretary Grandi had informed him

that the Italian Government had appointed Commander Prince Favrizio

Ruspoli and Lieutenant Commander Marquis Cugia di Sant’Orsola as

A French Mission d’Information also attended the plenary sessions of the

[Document 41]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)

WASHINGTON, May 23, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: In accordance with informal conversations on this subject, I now

have the honor to confirm the arrangement that the Three Power Naval

Conference at Geneva will open at four o’clock on Monday, June 20, 1927.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 42]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, May 27, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: First. I have given a great deal of thought to the question

of the make-up of our delegation to Geneva. As you know, we have been

faced by the alternatives of going through with the same type of

representation we had at the preliminary conference, or of framing up a

delegation somewhat along the lines of that at the Washington Conference

in 1923. It appears that England is sending her First Lord of the Admiralty

and Lord Cecil, who is a Cabinet Member without portfolio. Japan has

made up a rather distinguished delegation, all of whom are naval officers or

ex-naval officers. Saito, the head of the Delegation, was at one time

Minister of Marines. So far as Japan is concerned, there is ample reason for

sending men who can speak with final authority and make decisions on the

ground. Her representatives would be so far away from the home base that

they could hardly be expected to refer questions back to Tokyo as they arise

from day to day. With us and with England it is, of course, otherwise. It

goes without saying that in our case every important move in the course of

the proceedings will be either dictated from or approved here.

I think we have all felt that Mr. Hughes has unique qualifications for the

task. As a dominant figure in the Washington Conference, his appearance

on this occasion might add considerably to the effectiveness of any

proposals that we may make. However, we know he cannot go.

In these circumstances, without attempting to rehearse the arguments pro

and con, I have concluded to recommend to you that we go ahead in the

normal, businesslike way, refraining from any effort to produce an artificial

impression by the selection of outstanding personalities. This would, of

course, mean that Gibson head the delegation and the Navy would send

very strong representatives including Admirals Jones, Long and Schofield,

with assistants from the Navy, including Captain Andrews. Allen Dulles,

formerly of the Department, will go as legal adviser. If you approve of this

course, I think very soon the complete delegation should be announced by

you.

Second. I have, of course, considered carefully the suggestion you made

about Mr. Mellon, Senator Swanson and myself. I am a little afraid it would

look like overloading the delegation and make it appear to the other

countries that we were overanxious to have an agreement. We are anxious

to have an agreement and I think it is important to us that we should, if we

can get one, but we are in a rather independent position owing to the fact

that we can accept as low a basis as any other country. I will not discuss the

various questions as I wish to present to you the complete program which

we expect to finish this week. So far as I am concerned personally, I am

entirely at your disposal. If I thought it would really do any good by tending

to assure the ultimate success of the Conference, I should not hesitate to

advise you to instruct me to go. My only anxiety in this matter is for you to

get an agreement, which I believe will redound very greatly to the credit of

your Administration. Naturally the proceedings may develop at Geneva in

such a way as to render it advisable for the Secretary of State to appear later

on. If an emergency should arise in which my attendance would clear up a

sudden complication and save the conference from failure, I should say by

all means that the step would clearly be justified.

Third. The third alternative is that someone be sent with Mr. Gibson. I have

no doubt you have explored this situation thoroughly. On this I make the

following suggestions: (a) if it was deemed wise to give Admiral Jones

additional prestige, he could be made a co-delegate with Mr. Gibson. He is

a level-headed man and I think very liberal and is anxious to have an

agreement; (b) if any civilian is selected outside of the Senate, the only

recommendations I can think of are ex-Senator Underwood and Honorable

John W. Davis; (c) if Senators are selected, the natural thing would be to

send two—a Republican and a Democrat—and they would ordinarily be the

Chairman and ranking member of the Foreign Relations Committee or the

Chairman and ranking member of the Naval Committee or the Republican

and Democratic leaders in the Senate. You know this situation better than I

do so I do not think I need to discuss it.

Some of the Navy officials and Mr. Gibson will sail a week from tomorrow,

June fourth, in order to be over there quite a while in advance to discuss the

preliminary organization and program with the other delegates. Anybody

else whom you desire to send would have ample time by leaving two weeks

from tomorrow.

Faithfully yours,

FRANK B. KELLOGG

P. S. I have not, of course, talked with Borah and Swanson38 on this subject,

the only men who are available. If you consider taking any Senator, of

course I believe it would be a very good plan to talk with them.

[Document 43]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Western European

Affairs (Marriner)

[WASHINGTON,] June 1, 1927.

At a conference with the President this morning at 9: there were present

the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Navy, the Honorable Hugh S.

Gibson, Ambassador to Belgium, Admiral Hilary P. Jones, Admiral F. H.

Schofield, Mr. A. W. Dulles, Legal Adviser to the Delegation, and Mr.

Marriner, Chief of the Western European Division of the State Department.

The proposal of the Navy to be laid before the Conference, prepared by the

General Board as a result of the conferences in the State Department and

proposals for the Geneva Conference, was discussed throughout and

approved by the President, who stressed the importance of the adoption of

the plan of combining cruiser and destroyer tonnage during the transition

until the attainment of the allowed tonnages in each class in order to avoid

immediate scrapping of ships under the age limit.

The President likewise inquired whether or not the Navy approved the plan

as laid down and asked each of the naval members present personally

whether they felt that the Navy would back a treaty arising from such a plan

whole-heartedly. The replies were all in the affirmative.

In connection with a possible British proposal to reduce the size of cruisers,

the President said of course that the United States could not be satisfied

with a lesser number of cruisers of 10,000 tons than Great Britain but

agreed that a combination limitation by tonnage and numbers could

possibly be worked out which would be satisfactory in all probability to

both Powers as it would give Britain the scope she desired for building

smaller cruisers.

The question of possible discussion of the abolition of the submarine was

also raised and the President agreed with those present that in view of the

fact that only three nations were present the question would not be a

practical one but that of course we could initiate or support any resolutions

indicating our willingness to abolish the submarine when it was universally

abolished.

J. [THEODORE] M[ARRINER]

[Document 44]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

WASHINGTON, June 2, 1927.

No. 1

SIR: The President has instructed me to inform you of your appointment as

Chairman of the American Delegation to the Conference on the Limitation

of Naval Armaments, which is to meet at Geneva on June 20th.

Rear Admiral Hilary P. Jones, of the General Board of the Navy, is likewise

being instructed to attend the Conference with the rank of Delegate.

The following persons have been designated to assist you at this

Conference:

For the Department of State:

Frederic R. Dolbeare, Counselor of Legation at Berne,

George A. Gordon, Secretary of Legation at Budapest,

S. Pinkney Tuck, Consul at Geneva,

Allen W. Dulles, Legal Adviser.

For the Navy Department:

Rear Admiral Andrew T. Long,

Rear Admiral Frank H. Schofield,

Captain J. M. Reeves,

Captain Arthur J. Hepburn,

Captain Adolphus Andrews,

Captain W. W. Smyth,

Commander H. C. Train,

Lieutenant Commander H. H. Frost.

The Honorable Hugh R. Wilson, American Minister to Switzerland, will act

as Secretary General of the Conference, and Frederic R. Dolbeare,

Counselor of Legation, as Secretary of the American Delegation. You will

be appropriately empowered to negotiate and, subject to the approval of the

President,

to

conclude

an

agreement

with

the

Plenipotentiary

representatives of Great Britain and Japan for the limitation of naval

armaments in classes of vessels not limited by the terms of the Treaty

signed at Washington on February 6, 1922.

The President, in his message to Congress of February 10th, indicated the

reasons which made further naval limitation desirable, and it is upon the

considerations therein set forth that your conduct of the forthcoming

negotiations should rest. In this respect, the President re-affirmed, as a

fundamental policy of the American Government, its support of measures

for the further limitation of armament in the interest of peace and

international understanding. It was with a view to making possible a

definite step for the further limitation of armaments and to complete the

work begun at the Washington Conference that the President proposed the

present Conference.

The primary object of the Conference, the removal of the danger incident to

the competitive building of vessels of war not limited by the Washington

Treaty will, it is believed, best be achieved by the extension of the

principles and of the ratios of the Washington Treaty as between Great

Britain, Japan and the United States. As the President of the United States

assumed the initiative in calling the Conference, it is considered that it

would be entirely appropriate for you to submit to the Conference concrete

proposals as to the tonnage allocations in the various categories of vessels

which would be acceptable to the United States and of corresponding

tonnages for Great Britain and Japan. Such a statement is therefore

submitted herewith, together with an introductory memorandum outlining

the reasons which prompt this Government to make the proposals in

question. The various problems which may arise for discussion at Geneva

have been fully considered in your conferences with the President and with

me, and the written and oral instructions which you have heretofore

received will be supplemented from time to time by telegraphic instructions

in reply to any specific questions which you may present to the Department.

To supplement your written and oral instructions, I desire to impress upon

you that in the opinion of this Government, the possibilities of success of

the Conference will be greatly enhanced if the deliberations of the

Conference are restricted to the immediate problem before it, namely, the

extension of the principles and ratios of the Washington Treaty to auxiliary

vessels. It would be unwise for the Conference to take under advisement

any modification of the Washington Treaty, since two of the Powers party to

this Treaty are not represented at Geneva. Further, any discussion of the

Washington Treaty may properly be postponed pending the Conference to

be held in 1931, pursuant to the terms of that Treaty, since it is only after

November 1931, that the questions of the future building programs of the

five Powers will be presented. I would consider it particularly undesirable

for the Conference to take up the question of naval bases, regulated by

Article XIX of the Washington Treaty, or to link this question with that of

the further limitation of naval vessels.

Subject to the foregoing, I desire to leave to your discretion the method and

the manner in which you will support the principles and the policies of this

Government with respect to the further limitation of naval armament as set

forth in this instruction and in the memorandum and detailed proposals

submitted herewith.

It is impossible to give you at this time detailed instructions as to the

various matters which may arise during the Conference. It will be necessary

for you to deal with such matters as they are presented, seeking the

Department’s instructions on specific points if and when such a course is

desirable and possible. You are fully conversant with the President’s views

[Document 45]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

46. The Department today was notified through a note from the British

Embassy in Washington and in separate notes from the Irish Free State

Legation and the Canadian Legation, that the following delegates would

attend the forthcoming Conference on the Limitation of Naval Armaments

at Geneva:

Great Britain:

The, Rt. Hon. W. C. Bridgeman, M. P., First Lord of the

Admiralty, Viscount Cecil of Chelwood, Chancellor of

the Duchy of Lancaster, Vice Admiral Sir F. L. Field, K.

C. B., K. C. M. G., Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff.

Australia:

The Rt. Hon. Sir J. Cook, G. C. M. G., High

Commissioner in London.

New Zealand:

Sir J. Parr, K. C. M. G., High Commissioner in London.

Admiral of the Fleet Earl Jellicoe of Scapa, G. C. B., O.

M., G. C. V. O. India:

The Rt. Hon. W. C. Bridgeman.

South Africa:

Mr. J. S. Smit, High Commissioner in London.

[Document 46]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Received 11: a.m.]

11. Following is text of press release described last paragraph my 9, June

as text opening statement and American proposal.

“If the plan outlined in the American proposal were adopted on

the basis of 300,000 tons of the cruiser class for the United States

and the British Empire and 180,000 tons for Japan, and 250,000

in the destroyer class for the United States and the British Empire

and 150,000 tons for Japan, the following is an approximate

estimate of the tonnage that would have to be scrapped provided

existing programs of construction were brought to completion:

The United States would have to scrap immediately about 60,000

tons of auxiliary combatant surface vessels and 80,000 additional

tons of such vessels upon the completion of the present building

program; the British Empire would have to scrap about 60,000

tons of auxiliary combatant surface vessels upon completion of

the present building program; Japan would have to scrap about

40,000 tons of auxiliary combatant surface vessels upon the

completion of her present building program.

If the plan outlined in the American proposal were adopted on the

basis of 90,000 tons of submarines for the United States and the

British Empire and 54,000 tons of submarines for Japan, no

scrapping of submarines would be necessary until present

building programs are brought to completion.

[Document 47]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

12. For the President.

“In my capacity as secretary general of the Conference for the Limitation of

Naval Armament, I am requested by the delegates to transmit the following

message to you: ‘Profoundly and cordially appreciating the humane and

wise initiative of the President of the United States in convening the present

Conference with a view to the further reduction of the burden and danger of

naval armaments, the delegates assembled desire to tender to him this

expression of their highest respect and of their strong hopes of a most

satisfactory result.’ (Signed) Wilson.”

GIBSON

[Document 48]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

15. Conference opened this afternoon at 3 o’clock with brief statement by

me to the effect that as chairman of the delegation of the power which had

suggested the holding of the Conference, I was calling the meeting to order

for the purpose of organization. I was thereupon nominated by Bridgeman

and seconded by Saito as president of the Conference. Hugh Wilson named

secretary general and the secretaries of the respective delegations named.

Thereupon rules of procedure were adopted; and the Conference on my

motion decided to form an executive committee to be composed of the chief

delegates of the three powers with appropriate assistants to determine on

further methods of procedure, and credentials committee was named to

examine full powers. Executive committee meets Tuesday at 11 a.m. and

credentials committee at 3 p.m.

Viscount Saito thereupon proposed that the delegates send a message to

Bridgeman cordially supported Saito’s proposal. Thereupon I made

p.m. First plenary session thereupon adjourned; no definite date was fixed

for next public meeting, it having been previously agreed between

Bridgeman, Saito and myself that date of meeting would be fixed as soon as

executive committee considered that we were prepared for further public

discussion.

After meeting, Admiral Jones and I had conference with the press and gave

GIBSON

[Document 49]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

16. At the first meeting of the executive committee held at 11 a.m. on June

21st, the committee adopted the following resolution:

“With a view to the proper consideration of the proposals

submitted by the Governments of the United States, of the British

Empire and of Japan on June 20th, it is suggested that a technical

committee be formed to exchange agreed statistics of the present

cruiser, destroyer, and submarine tonnage of each of the three

powers and of the designed tonnage of ships of these classes

comprised in programs now authorized and appropriated for, and

any other information tending to clarify the proposals of the three

Governments. In this manner the Conference will be in position to

start its deliberations on an agreed basis of fact.”

GIBSON

[Document 50]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 5: p.m.]

22. Dulles and I visited Ishii and Saito this morning with a view to learning

what the Japanese thought of the British proposals46 relative to the

Washington Naval Treaty. My hope was that they would share the American

view that the present Conference should not take up these questions; but

Ishii said that while they were limited by their instructions to a

consideration of the extension to auxiliary vessels of the Washington

principles, yet they could consider any matters in regard to naval

armaments by virtue of their full powers. They had, however, requested

instructions from their Government, since they were uncertain as to whether

the latter desired a consideration of modifications in the Washington treaty

as suggested by the British. Viscount Ishii, in view of his superior

knowledge of English, was the chief spokesman, and gave it as his opinion

that, while he was unable to predict his Government’s attitude in the

premises, the economy effected if the British proposals were adopted

seemed rather desirable.

To this I remarked that it was not wise to consider the British proposals at

the present time, however meritorious they might be, and that the subjects

covered by them would, under the stipulations of the Washington treaty, be

considered in 1931, at which time France and Italy were bound to

participate. Moreover, I pointed out that any agreements that might be made

now would be largely academic, and might have to be changed in 1931, and

that anyhow no replacements would take place until that year or even later;

it therefore appeared desirable to postpone discussion of the Washington

treaty until 1931, and to bend our entire efforts to the application of the

established Washington treaty principles to auxiliary craft.

In reply, Viscount Ishii stated that apart from the question of economy, it

should be remembered that the Conference in 1931 would not be held until

August, and that since the Japanese Diet would not convene until the close

of the year, any agreements made at the Conference would not be

immediately put into effect. This would embarrass the Government by

forcing it either to lose a certain amount of time after the Conference before

making its estimates, or making appropriations from the former session of

the Diet; that clear estimates for the earlier session were difficult of

preparation, since appropriations would have to be asked for vessels of

maximum size should no further limitation be arrived at, while, on the other

hand, were the duration of capital ships to be extended, the only

appropriations necessary would be for making repairs, etc. These were

considerations which he thought justified to some extent the British

proposals. Upon receipt of instructions from Tokyo, he will again discuss

these questions with me.

A clear definition of our position will have to be made should the Japanese

delegation be directed to support the British proposal, and I am accordingly

submitting to you separately a draft statement47 which might, without

weakening our fundamental stand, surmount the difficulty indicated by the

Japanese delegate.

GIBSON

[Document 51]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 9 p.m.]

23. During the conversation which was the subject of my telegram No. 22,

June 22, 5 p.m., Ishii said that he desired to discuss in all frankness the

difficulty with which his Government was faced, and to find out what our

attitude would be in regard thereto. Whether justified or not, there existed in

Japan a widespread feeling that the ratio of the Washington treaty imposed a

position of inferiority upon that country, and that if the figure could be

preferred, it would be of the greatest value.

In reply, I gave it as my understanding that the ratios were not arbitrary, but

were the result of translating into proportions the naval requirements of the

signatory powers, and that these figures were arrived at by agreement

among the parties. He countered by stating that at the present time Japan

was faced with delicate situations in regard to Soviet Russia and to China. I

thereupon made the suggestion that Admiral Jones should confer with

Admiral Saito and that he would demonstrate the grounds which we had for

our belief that Japan was not placed in a position of inferiority by the

present proportion.

GIBSON

[Document 52]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 10: p.m.]

25. With reference to the proposals for the modification of the Washington

treaty which have been brought forward by the British and the receptive

attitude which the Japanese have shown thereto, see my telegram No. 22,

June 22.

It is my opinion that the most advisable attitude for us to take towards the

British proposals is that they should not be considered at the present time by

the three powers, but in 1931 when the five signatories of the treaty would

be present.

If you deem it appropriate, we could suggest to the British that we are ready

to sustain the adoption by the Conference of a decision somewhat as

follows:48

“In view of the fact that the Washington treaty provides for a

Conference in 1931 of the five powers parties to that treaty and in

view of possible developments during the next four years which

might have an important bearing upon the consideration of future

policy with respect to the construction and armament of capital

ships and of aircraft carriers, the Conference deems it wise that

the British proposals relating to these subjects should be taken up

for consideration at the Conference provided under that treaty for

1931 at the time when the first capital ship replacement tonnage

may be laid down by the three powers.”

Instructions are requested.

Gisson

[Document 53]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

26. This morning during a conversation with Cecil and Bridgeman, I

explained with great care our objections to discussing the subjects covered

by the Washington treaty at the present Conference. Cecil and Bridgeman

were inclined to insist most vigorously that it would be necessary to have

some definite decision for the construction of capital ships before 1931; that

it would mean a great saving in the naval budgets of the various countries if

the British ideas were carried out, as they believed that the decision of the

three powers to refrain from building maximum size ships would have great

weight in causing Italy and France to do likewise, and so forth and so forth.

Bridgeman asked whether the United States actually insisted upon parity in

each class of vessel and made the suggestion that we might not care to

construct up to the limits which the British considered were their actual

requirements. In replying, I stated that these were matters which we would

have to determine when we decided upon our building programs; that, of

course, the right of parity was fundamental.

Cecil and Bridgeman did not indicate any definite views regarding the total

tonnage limitations in the various classes of vessels, but they both were

insistent upon the importance of placing limits on the maximum size of

cruisers, destroyers, and submarines. The desirability of two classes of

cruisers, one of which would be considerably under 10,000 tons, was

particularly emphasized by them.

No satisfactory common ground for discussing the specific questions before

us has been supplied either by our conversations with the British or by their

various proposals. Tomorrow there will be another meeting of the executive

committee when, with the idea of getting the work started along definite

lines, we will suggest the formation of technical committees to study

various matters.

GIBSON

[Document 54]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

27. The British naval delegates and Bridgeman have expressed the view

repeatedly that the best way in which to have work initiated on a sound

basis is for the delegations of the United States, Japan, and England to make

a frank and full public statement of the needs of their respective navies with

an explanation justifying the figures claimed. Bridgeman seems anxious to

have a plenary meeting called soon and we assume that it is for this very

purpose. We think that he will discuss later the burdens, etc., resting on the

English Navy because of England’s island position and her consequent

vulnerability. At the same time he will, we expect, dwell upon England’s

entire dependence upon food supplies from overseas; the necessity that

England police individual scattered units of the British Empire and trade

routes; the lengthy coast lines of the various dominions and numerous

colonies, etc. This is in accord with the British idea to get away from a strict

application of the ratio fixed by the Washington Conference and endeavors

to prove the necessity for a preponderant British strength. It seems obvious

that the demands of the British will be very high, judging from Jellicoe’s

indication to Admiral Jones last evening that England would require

500,000 tons of cruisers and considering Bridgeman’s remarks to me this

morning that the United States would not need as much in the line of

cruisers as would Great Britain. The idea of such a public statement is

apparently to lead the United States and the Japanese to make a statement of

a similar character as to their respective needs which the British can then

comment on and criticize so as to obscure the issue. I feel that if we were to

follow tactics similar to those of the British we would be led into an

inconclusive argument as a result of which the British could readily distort

our statements and we would then never succeed in clarifying the issue. To

me it appears that the only way clearly to maintain the simplicity and clarity

of our proposals is for us strictly to adhere to the principles of a

fundamental nature which were laid down in the Washington treaty. I think

that by adhering closely to those principles there will not be any danger of

their distortion and we shall also be on safe ground. Thus should the

statement to be made by Bridgeman be of such a nature as we anticipate, I

desire in the most simple terms to reiterate the proposition that naval

requirements depend upon the vital strength of other powers and are thus

purely relative; that the American proposals are clear and comprehensive

and demonstrate our willingness to adapt our tonnage figures to the

minimum amount as regards auxiliary craft which the other members of this

Conference can accept; that our faith in the practicability of the theory of

relative requirements is thus plainly evidenced and that our suggestions in

regard thereto remain open; conversely, that if a figure higher than that

proposed by us is felt to be necessary by the other powers for their needs,

our own requirements would have to be increased proportionately and

would be on an equality with the higher figure. This appears to us to bring

out in bold relief our willingness not only for real limitation but for

reduction as well, so that should the tonnage levels be scaled upwards, it is

my understanding that the power contending for the greatest tonnage would

bear the responsibility therefor. An objective and clear indication of this in

our statement may be necessary.

GIBSON

[Document 55]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

accord with your instructions. I approve your supporting adoption of

decision by Conference along lines set forth.

KELLOGG

[Document 56]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

31. Bridgeman stated at this morning’s session of the executive committee

that he was eager that an early plenary session be held for the purpose of

debating the British suggestions regarding battleships and aircraft carriers

and asked at what time the other delegates would be prepared to enter upon

such debate. In reply I informed him that our instructions did not cover such

proposals and were further definitely against any reopening of matters

which the Washington treaty had already settled. I added, however, that I

had reported fully to my Government which would doubtless instruct me in

the premises. Viscount Ishii declared that the position of the Japanese

delegates was similar to ours and they were prevented by their instructions

from undertaking conversations regarding any revision of the Washington

treaty, but that he himself thought certain features of the British suggestions

desirable. He had telegraphed to Tokyo accordingly but did not expect a

reply within less than a week and until then could not take any stand in the

matter. It was proposed by Bridgeman to state in a communication to the

press that discussion had been postponed pending receipt of instructions

from these Governments but he withdrew the suggestion when opposition

thereto developed.

Bridgeman expressed the hope to me, after the meeting, that although he

realized that no replacement would occur before 1931, we could yet come

to an agreement as regards capital ships, since he thought that public

opinion would be very favorably influenced if a diminution in maximum

tonnages, even if it should only take effect in 1931, were agreed to at this

time. He admitted that such a step presented some difficulties and pointed

to the fact that the British Navy included two new vessels which

considerably surpassed the maximum tonnage which they desired us to

accept, but that the possibility of other countries constructing the larger

ships had to be reckoned with. He promised to submit to me a proposal

which he was engaged in drafting and which he trusted might be acceptable

to all concerned.

Dulles and Cecil were discussing this matter almost simultaneously. The

former felt that it would be unfortunate to engage in a public discussion of

the question, inasmuch as we would be forced to give publicity to the fact

that under the Washington treaty the British Navy pending replacements

had a tonnage considerably superior to the 5–5 ratio and also had more

modern battleships and, further, that were their proposals to be adopted this

inequality would be continued beyond the space of time stipulated in the

treaty. While the British apparently desire to gain public approbation for

having advocated this kind of proposition and wish to make us bear the

responsibility for blocking measures they have heralded as being prime

requisites to economy and peace, they will probably be satisfied with this

move and will not insist rigidly on favorable action on their proposals. We

think that, subject to your instructions, this question should be treated in

that it is highly important to avoid any move at this time which might

pledge us in advance to favorable consideration in 1931 of the British

proposition.

It will take several days for Tokyo to consider the British proposals,

according to Ishii; but you may concur with me that the decision of the

Japanese Government might be considerably influenced if the possibility of

serious consequences arising from reopening the Washington treaty were

impressed upon Matsudaira.

GIBSON

[Document 57]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

Conference, and proposals circulated with it, set forth in their minimum

figures this country’s lowest naval necessities; any revision upward of

these figures is due to fact that our needs are relative to sea force which

Great Britain and Japan desire to build. Any contention by British that they

need large number of cruisers for the protection of their long trade routes

carries the implication that they must protect them against some other

nation. As the United States and Japan are the only two nations with navies

large enough to be a threat to Great Britain, there does not seem to be any

logical excuse for excessive tonnage demands.

Should the British insist on making an elaborate defense of demand for a

high cruiser tonnage, you might, I think, content yourself with making a

reiteration in accordance with the suggestion in your telegram. I am further

convinced that insistence upon this point would not be misjudged in view of

support which the parity with Great Britain has received in this country. The

high limit suggested by Jellicoe was, possibly, merely a covert attempt to

ascertain whether or not we were sincere on the subject of parity. On that

point there can be no question; but it is certain, as well, that we should not

care to sign a treaty increasing British cruiser tonnage by about 75 percent

and requiring us to triple our effective cruiser strength. Should the British

put forward such claims seriously, I think that the public analysis of them

would more than justify failure to conclude a treaty, and might even have

effect of stimulating zeal of Congress for competitive building.

You may in conversation with the British discreetly use any of the

foregoing.

KELLOGG

[Document 58]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling)

[Paraphrase]

9 p.m., from Geneva:

[Here follows the text of the telegram printed on page 52 [Pg. 52 includes

portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54].]

Gibson.

Having in mind the repeated assurances of the British, both at time of

Washington Conference on Limitation of Armament and since that time,

that Great Britain would accept idea of parity with this country in all classes

of naval vessels, the Government of the United States is surprised at attitude

of British delegates at Geneva as this attitude is outlined in Gibson’s

telegram under reference. See Chamberlain and inform him that in view of

continuous absence of both Sir Esme Howard and Mr. Chilton from

Washington there is no way to bring up these views informally here, and

you have been requested, therefore, to draw their tenor to his attention in

friendly spirit.

KELLOGG

[Document 59]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 11: p.m.]

32. There is, in my opinion, no reason for being disheartened even though

no specific accord has been reached on any question during the first week.

The obstacles with which we are faced can, I believe, be overcome,

although they are serious. The two most difficult ones are the elaboration of

a formula which, while satisfying Japanese amourpropre, will yet maintain

the Washington treaty ratio; and the even more serious wish of Great Britain

to have no limitation placed upon the number of small cruisers.

Judging from the discussions of the past week, I feel quite certain that there

will be no insistence on the part of the British upon the taking up of their

suggestions in regard to capital ships. It will ultimately be necessary in this

regard to arrive at a satisfactory formula providing for postponement of this

matter until 1930 [1931?], reserving at that time complete liberty of action.

Subject to the question of ratio, I am of the opinion that technical agreement

with Japan, covering submarines and possibly destroyers, can be reached.

At the present time, however, there is considerable divergence between us

as regards maximum size of destroyers. The matter upon which there are

the greatest differences is that of cruisers, and considerable maneuvering

with regard to the order of taking up the various questions is being indulged

in. In order to make a rupture on the subject of cruisers alone seem

unjustifiable should that question be the only one disputed, the British

desire to arrive at a speedy agreement with us in respect of submarines,

hoping to get concessions in this class at least. Our position that agreements

with regard to the various categories of vessels should be interdependent

and that all questions of a technical nature should be examined together is

being vigorously maintained.

We are, furthermore, endeavoring to dispose, as soon as possible, of the

British suggestions concerning the Washington treaty. A satisfactory

explanation of their having been propounded is difficult to find unless the

British desired to justify their possible refusal to agree to limitation of small

cruisers by our refusal of their above-mentioned proposals. They certainly

must have known how unacceptable we would find these proposals. It is my

hope that all questions bearing upon a change of the Washington treaty will

be out of the way before the end of the discussion upon cruisers.

The disposition on the part of the American press representatives here to

support unflinchingly our position without regard to the political color of

their papers has been extremely helpful. It is, in my opinion, producing a

distinct effect on the British delegation, who appear, judging from their

conversations with American newspapermen, to have taken to heart the

outspoken criticism of their proposals which has been published in the

American press.

GIBSON

[Document 60]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

33. Each delegation at the Conference has supplied the others with tonnage

figures on the basis of the Washington standard ton, so that all three

delegations might be able to begin their studies with the same statistical

data concerning authorized programs and the tonnages of existing vessels.

The American delegation were rather surprised when considering the

British figures to find that the tonnage of the 18 capital ships exceeding the

Nelson and the Rodney in age aggregated 49,000 tons more than the figures

contained in the tables of the Washington treaty, this being due to the fact

that they were based on the tonnage basis theretofore used by the British

Navy, and not on the Washington standard-ton basis. The belief was

generally held that figures based on Washington standard tonnage would

prove less than the figures previously published, and such has proved to be

the case as concerns the American figures, but the figures previously

published by the British proved to be less than the figures based on

Washington standard tonnage. Standard-tonnage figures have not yet been

received from the Japanese for their capital ships, but based on the

Washington standard ton their figures for destroyers and cruisers aggregate

approximately less than previously published figures by 8 percent.

After the accession of the Rodney and the Nelson and the inclusion of

18,000 tons for the modernization of six American battleships, the

difference in the total standard tonnage between American and British

capital ships is about 96,000 tons instead of the 33,000 tons which appear in

the tables attached to the Washington treaty. It would thus be 1953 instead

of 1942, as agreed upon, before parity in battleships would be reached if the

British proposals were put into effect. Also for the period 1934 to 1945, it

would give the British an average advantage of 14,000 tons above that

under the replacement scheme contemplated by the Washington treaty and

The above information is being telegraphed for the information of the State

Department and the Navy Department to be used in connection with their

comments to the press, and in order to give more force to the views

previously expressed that nothing should be done by us to increase the

advantage to be gained by the British by postponing replacements, which is

suggested in their plan for the modification of the Washington treaty, and is

not intended for publicity purposes nor as a criticism of the British tonnage

figures previously published.

GIBSON

[Document 61]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 9: p.m.]

35. There are indications that British delegation is not wholly satisfied over

reception accorded its proposals in regard to modification of the treaty of

Washington, and our delegation feels that British might be helped to

withdraw from untenable position if, before you leave Washington, you

could reinforce our statements here in a frank talk with either Howard or

Chilton. In such a conversation we feel that there are certain points which it

would be particularly helpful if you could touch upon.

1. Revision of the treaty of Washington. Though the American

position has been stated in full it would be well to reiterate our

statements explaining that such a revision is not a subject of

discussion; that, should the British delegation find some way of

not insisting on its proposals, an agreement would be far more

easily reached, as the American delegation is not working with

any thought of a concession; that while no revision of the treaty

will take place at the present Conference, and they may as well

recognize that fact now, they may be assured that it is our desire

to make a recession from their position as easy as possible.

2. Equality. It seems incomprehensible that any doubt should now

exist in regard to our having full parity, for this point has been

explained to the proper British authorities for some time past; it

would expedite matters if the British delegation would accept the

fact that the United States, under an agreement or without it, will

insist on its right to parity with the British Empire; and parity

reached through a just agreement will be clearly advantageous to

them. Should you deem it appropriate you might refer to the fact

that I had told you of my reply to Bridgeman’s doubts concerning

the necessity for us of parity to the effect that, should I accept a

position of inferiority I should be forced to reside abroad

permanently, and that you wholly agreed therewith.

3. It is clear that the British delegation consider the 1927

congressional building program a play to the gallery to back up

the President in summoning the Conference and doubt its

genuineness. It might be well to impress upon Howard that with

his knowledge of the situation in the United States, he could not

entertain such an idea; only by suggesting the Conference could

the President curtail a building program of considerable size.

Should no conclusion be reached at Geneva, probably a greater

building program will be considered in the next congressional

session; failure in our present task would create competitive

building in both countries which could but be most detrimental to

our relations, whereas an amicable agreement at this time would

not fail gradually to bring about a satisfactory adjustment of naval

strength.

as you may care to confirm to Howard, a just agreement should

be possible, based upon acknowledgment of our naval

requirements, which are relative.

This outline is not detailed and is merely intended to set forth certain views

which we have endeavored to emphasize here. It is obvious that should

these same views reach the British Government and their delegation here

through you, our position will be appreciably strengthened.

GIBSON

[Document 62]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

36. In a conversation this afternoon, Viscount Ishii informed me that the

Japanese Government had changed the instructions originally given its

delegation, opposing the reconsideration of the Washington treaty, to the

extent that it would not offer any opposition to the British proposals for a

further discussion concerning capital ships. However, he said they did not

consider this subject should be discussed until an agreement relating to the

limitation of auxiliary craft had been reached.

I replied in a frank manner that I regretted very much their decision to

acquiesce in reconsidering any portion of the Washington treaty; that should

any portion be changed, it might cause complications to arise, as the treaty

was a very delicately adjusted mechanism, but I assured him that I

appreciated very much his courtesy in giving me the above information. I

further added that as he had been so kind as to inform me of his

instructions, I felt that I should be equally frank in communicating mine to

him. Accordingly, I read to him those portions of our instructions which I

considered most pertinent, and stated that these instructions had only been

strengthened by those comments on the British proposals which had been

received from Washington; that I felt I was so placed that I could tell him

quite frankly that the American delegation was not maneuvering with any

intention of eventually making concessions of any kind; that the

Washington treaty was brought into force by five signatory powers and that

the treaty could not be reopened if any one of them was opposed to such

action. Further, that there was always the danger that efforts might be made

to revise other provisions if any portion of the treaty was changed; that

quite a number of people in the United States were of the opinion that our

Government had made too many concessions with regard to our naval bases

in Guam and the Philippines, and that if the treaty was again being

considered, it was very possible that agitation would arise for a

reconsideration of these questions; that on principle we were opposed to the

revision of any item of the treaty and that we considered that the only wise

course to pursue would be to hold the treaty intact until 1931 before

considering a revision. Any attempt to reopen the treaty would fail, I said,

as we are not willing to consent to such action. Therefore, it would be to no

advantage for any of us; and this being so, it would seem better to avoid

such a situation. Before departing, Ishii thanked me for the information I

had given him, and said he had come to inform me of the instructions

received from his Government before telling Bridgeman of them.

Altogether our conversation was most frank and cordial.

GIBSON

[Document 63]

The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State

MANCHESTER, MASS., June 27, 1927.

[Received June 28.]

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have been requested by Sir Austen Chamberlain to give

you the following information as to the aims of His Majesty’s Government

in bringing up at the Geneva Conference the question of reducing the size

of capital ships and of their guns in case these aims are not fully appreciated

over here.

I understand that at the meeting of the Executive Committee of the Geneva

Naval Conference on June 24th, Mr. Bridgeman, the First Lord of the

Admiralty, in bringing up this matter explained that it was one to which the

British Empire attached the greatest importance and that it would be

impossible to avoid a public discussion on the subject in which arguments

on both sides would no doubt be developed. The American and Japanese

delegates then stated that this proposal had come as a surprise to them and

that they must telegraph for the views of their respective Governments

which it might take some days to get.

It is for this reason that His Majesty’s Government desire that it should be

made clear to the United States Government why the question of reducing

capital ships was included in the British proposals. The reasons were as

follows:

1st. Desire to carry the principle embodied in Washington Treaty

a stage further,

2nd. Desire to help the Preparatory Committee of the League of

Nations to achieve better results than heretofore when it resumes

its sittings in November by giving it the opportunity of following

the example set by the three Naval Powers which should be

reflected in the results registered by the Committee,

3rd. Desire to reduce the burden of expenditure which is one of

the objects of the reduction of armaments, since it is in battleships

that the greatest saving can be effected. In the view of His

Majesty’s Government this proposal in no way contravenes the

letter or the spirit of the Treaty of Washington but is on the

contrary an effective furtherance of the spirit of that Treaty since

the Five Powers, parties to the Treaty, only bound themselves not

to build battleships above a certain size. If therefore before the

expiry of that Treaty three of those Powers are willing to reduce

the size of their capital ships below the treaty limit, there can not

only be no violation of the letter of the Treaty but rather, as

already remarked above, an effective furtherance of its spirit.

Sir Austen Chamberlain hopes that the competent authorities of the United

States Government will, after these explanations, not misunderstand the

spirit that has actuated His Majesty’s Government in putting forward these

proposals, which seemed to them to be in accordance with the views of the

President of the United States in inviting the signatories of the Washington

Treaty to discuss the possibility of a further reduction of naval armaments

in the spirit of that Treaty. He also hopes that the United States Government

will not be under any misapprehension as to the sentiments of His Majesty’s

Government in regard to this question if they are obliged to give similar

explanations to the public in the event of discussions, which may take place

later on this subject.

I should be very grateful if you would take an early opportunity of bringing

the above to the knowledge of the President.

Yours very truly,

ESME HOWARD

[Document 64]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, June 28, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I enclose you a copy of a letter I have received from Sir

Esme Howard. There is I believe a complete answer to the British claim

for the revision of the Washington Treaty at this Conference. None of the

Powers can lay down any new ships until 1931 so that there is no object at

this time in entering into an agreement for the reduction of the size or the

extension of the life of battleships. No ships can be built except for

renewals and the first ones to be built can be laid down in 1931, completed

in 1934. The Washington Treaty provides for a revision in 1931 at which

Conference all the five Powers would be represented. So it seems

inadvisable to revise the Treaty four years before any ships can even be laid

down, especially as two of the Signatories are not present at Geneva. The

plea, therefore, which the British Government is making to the public that

this is a matter of economy is without any merit at this time. Parenthetically,

I should say that the substance of Sir Esme Howard’s letter was given to the

press yesterday but I am bringing it to your attention in accordance with his

request.

Quite likely there is another reason why the British are very anxious to have

an agreement at this time for the prolongation of the life and a reduction in

the size of battleships upon renewals. The United States has no capital ships

exceeding in size 32,600 tons. The British have two new ships—the Rodney

and the Nelson—about completed which are about 35,000 tons, the most

powerful battleships ever built. It would be to Great Britain’s advantage, of

course, that all renewals should not exceed 30,000 tons or 25,000 tons,

whichever is agreed upon, because she already has these two new ships and

the United States would be prohibited from building to match them.

Personally I think we could afford to cut the size of battleships to 30,000

tons, perhaps less provided in building additional ships Great Britain would

agree that we could be compensated by reductions on her part but at present

this could not well be done without the consent of France and Italy. In any

event, it seemed to the Navy that it would be best not to open up a revision

of the Washington Treaty at this time as no one would know to where it

would lead. Of course, the Navy claims that we need larger battleships

because of their wider range for cruising, we having but few naval bases

throughout the world. I do not know how much there is to this but I cannot

see that we would need battleships except for defense and in our Philippine

possessions.

We are sending you the important telegrams so that you may keep posted.

Faithfully yours,

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 65]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, June 28, 1927—noon.

Ambassador nor Chargé in Washington. Entire force has moved to the

North Shore, leaving only a third secretary at the Embassy who knows

nothing about the matter under discussion. There is no use in trying to do

any business through Embassy here, as I have informed Sterling who

undoubtedly communicated the information to British Government.

American Embassy in London has also been furnished with copies of your

With the latter we included the following instruction:

[Here follows the final paragraph of the Department’s telegram No. 138,

We have not yet heard from Sterling in reply. I shall communicate further

with him along lines of your No. 35.

I should prefer not to leave Washington if there is any possibility that my

absence would delay or embarrass proceedings at Geneva.

Please advise in this respect.

KELLOGG

[Document 66]

President Coolidge to the Secretary of State

RAPID CITY, S. DAK., June 30, 1927.

[Received July 5.]

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have your letter of the 28th, with the enclosure from the

British Ambassador, both of which I have read with care. Your position

seems to me correct and satisfactory.

Very truly yours,

CALVIN COOLIDGE

[Document 67]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

44. [Paraphrase.] Last night Bridgeman sent for Sharkey of the Associated

Press and drafted with him the following authorized interview, text of

which I deem it wise to cable to Department for its records: [End

paraphrase.]

“Great Britain has no intention of contesting the principle of

parity between the naval strength of the United States and Great

Britain, Mr. Bridgeman, the First Lord of the British Admiralty,

said tonight in an exclusive statement to the Associated Press. Mr.

Bridgeman added that he was surprised to see that an impression

seemed to prevail in some quarters that Great Britain was asking

for supremacy. He said that he was not aware of anything that had

been said by any of the British delegates that could convey that

idea. He continued: ‘Our policy has been to state frankly what are

the British requirements but we never disputed the American

claim for parity as established by the Washington treaty. It is true

that we think our special needs demand higher number in certain

types of vessels but we do not deny the right of the United States

to build up to an equal figure in any type of warship if she

thought it necessary. As regards battleships I have seen statements

that the possession by Great Britain of the new ships, the Rodney

and the Nelson, would give Great Britain some superiority if her

proposals to limit the future size of battleships to 30,000 were

adopted but I am sure that a continuance of parity arrived at in

Washington in battleships could be secured by a reasonable

adjustment of replacement tables.’ ”

Gisson

[Document 68]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 4: p.m.]

45. There are summarized below certain changes in the situation which are

considered most favorable to us:

1. After apparently planning to justify their claim to superiority in

naval strength, the British have weighed the matter and changed

their minds. The idea of absolute parity between the United States

and Great Britain has been unequivocally admitted by Bridgeman.

concerning this.) Bridgeman has told me that he considers it to be

preferable for us to postpone public sessions at this time and he

has put an end to the insistence for public debate on the naval

needs of Great Britain and the United States. It is felt that your

well-timed inquiry through our Chargé at London in regard to this

matter was most beneficial to us.

2. It is believed that the British are conscious that they cannot

force revision of the Washington treaty by using any rush tactics

upon us. The original statement made by Bridgeman has now

been publicly qualified by his announcing that the possession by

the British Empire of three ships of greater tonnage than those

possessed by the United States will necessitate numerous

technical adjustments before any arrangement for the reduction of

maximum tonnage of capital ships can be reached.

3. A reasonable and sensible spirit has been exhibited in the work

thus far done by the technical committees. Although we are

conscious that the cruiser problem is one of great difficulty, it is

felt that there is a growing desire to reach an agreement and that

the United States’ position is such that we have no grounds for

fears on this score. In regard to the points, tentative agreement has

been reached with great ease.

GIBSON

[Document 69]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

53. On the afternoon of July 1, Admiral Hara and Captain Toyoda of the

Japanese delegation accompanied Captain Egerton of the British delegation

to call on Admiral Schofield for the purpose of informally discussing the

problem of cruisers. The conversation was opened by Admiral Schofield,

who said that the British claim of 75 cruisers as a necessity for them was so

large that it appeared to constitute no limitation whatever. Upon being asked

for figures upon which British minimum requirements for total tonnage

could be based, Egerton said that an irreducible minimum was 75 cruisers

and that the minimum type would displace 7,500 tons. This would therefore

total 598,200 tons for cruisers of all classes. It was further stated by Egerton

that if the smaller type of cruiser were unacceptable to us the British figure

would be increased as, in that event, Britain would require 75 cruisers of

10,000 tons displacement, or 750,000 tons in all. Schofield replied that,

since this would in reality constitute no limitation, we could perceive no

purpose in entering into a treaty for limitation of naval armaments on such a

basis. In support of the British demand, Egerton advanced the explanation

that the cruisers above-mentioned would serve the purely defensive purpose

of securing and linking up the Empire’s trade routes, preventing the

interruption of the supply of food to the British Isles, etc.; the pressure for

cruisers was very strong in the Dominions he stated and added that there

could be no reduction in the number given, which had been reached as the

result of careful and thorough study.

In reply the opinion was expressed by Schofield that the publication of such

a figure would be very unfortunate since, should an agreement not be

reached, the press in each country would be given to unfavorable and

mutual criticism which might gravely impair those cordial relations the

promotion of which was our fundamental principle. Egerton said that he

was fully aware of this but that “they were welcome to criticize until they

were blue in the face so far as Great Britain was concerned.” The

difficulties of the problem were recognized by Captain Toyoda, who said

that the two theses appeared so widely separated as to be irreconcilable.

During the discussion Toyoda took the attitude of a listener rather than that

of a participant.

It was suggested by Schofield that an agreement might perhaps be reached

covering the particular period of the treaty proposed and he also suggested

that by considering building and scrapping programs it might be possible to

find a formula for agreement. To this Egerton replied by saying that this

was an entirely new idea which had not as yet been studied; that he felt that

it had some promise; he expressed gratefulness to Schofield for advancing

it; that it appeared to offer a means of escaping from a dilemma of a serious

nature, but that in spite of all this he would have to consult with Bridgeman

on this point before he would be ready for any further informal

conversations.

Egerton today said that he had spoken to Bridgeman and that Bridgeman

had instructed him to state that the delegation of Great Britain would be

willing to consider Schofield’s idea provided however that we “in advance

wholeheartedly” agreed to aspects of the following principles:

(1) Age limit to be as high as possible;

(2) The armament for the new type of light cruiser to be of 6-inch

caliber;

(3) 7,500 tons to be the displacement of the new type of light

cruiser;

(4) The number of total tonnage of 8-inch-gun cruisers to be fixed

by agreement.

He said that, subject to our agreement on these points, the British would be

able to say that their total tonnage arrived at in 1936 would be 462,000 tons.

Schofield then asked whether after arriving at that total tonnage the British

would agree to refrain from increasing it in subsequent years. Egerton

answered that this was an arrangement which was to run only to 1936 and

that as the British replaced their 6-inch-gun cruisers they would increase

tonnage gradually to a maximum of approximately 562,000 tons. As he

understood it, he said, this was simply postponing until 1936 what at

present seemed to be a serious difference between the American and British

delegations. Schofield then pointed out that the original 1936 proposal was

505,996 tons and that this new proposal came within 40,000 tons, the

equivalent of four cruisers, of that total. In conclusion, Egerton said that

Bridgeman had stated to Kim that if the American delegation did not agree

to the four above-mentioned points, it was “quite useless for him to waste

his time in making studies.”

Admiral Jones and I concurred that an answer ought to be made to Captain

Egerton to the effect that the United States was not prepared to make

promises of a blind character with regard to the acceptance of the four

above-mentioned points in exchange for a promise to consider what is a

reasonable suggestion, and that, therefore, the question had better be sent

back to the technical committee.

I was told today by Saburi that the Japanese delegation was “shocked” by

the figures of the British and that it was felt by the Japanese delegation that

it would probably be necessary within a few days for the American and

Japanese delegates to discuss the matter seriously with Bridgeman urging

him to lower the British figures to reasonable proportions which would

constitute a general limitation. Saburi stated that the delegation of Japan

was anxious for real limitation and he added that he believed that the entire

world would be shocked at the proportions of the figures of the British.

I am inclined to doubt that much pressure is being brought to bear on the

British by the Dominions so far as the building of cruisers is concerned, as

some of the delegations from the Dominions have expressed their entire

indifference with regard to this subject and they have said that they were

[Document 70]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

No proposition by British delegation which sets total cruiser tonnage figure

to be arrived at before 1936 at a higher figure than 400,000 tons, a figure

which itself this Government considers excessive, would make conclusion

of an agreement worth while at present time. You may either formally or

informally inform British delegation of this view whenever you deem

expedient. Unless I receive your advice to the contrary, I intend to consult

the Canadian and the Irish Legations to ascertain whether either of these

Governments has demanded extensive increases in tonnage; you may, in

your discretion, so inform the British delegation. I should like to know if

you wish me to take up the matter with the Japanese Ambassador also.

OLDS

[Document 71]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

GENEVA, July 4, 1927—noon.

[Received July 4—10 a.m.]

informed by us already that we do not consider that the figures which they

suggested constitute any real limitation and that unless they are willing to

consider more reasonable figures we would be averse to concluding any

agreement.

Concerning the demands for increased tonnage by the Canadian and Irish

Governments, we would advise against asking their representatives in

Washington for this information, as both Ministers very likely would feel

that they should support any measure emanating from the British

Government; we are obtaining this material here in a most casual manner

and it is believed that our inquiries will be fruitful of more accurate figures

than if formal inquiries were made by the Department in Washington.

While no objection is perceived to discussing the situation with the

Japanese Ambassador in Washington, we cannot see where any particular

advantage would be gained by such a course, as we are working here with

the Japanese delegation on a basis of full and frank agreement.

GIBSON

[Document 72]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling)

[Paraphrase]

portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69].]

Tonnage figures suggested by Captain Egerton are considered by

Department to be so excessive as to be beyond consideration by this

Government. Better attempt no limitation at all than to go before the world

with a proposition which almost doubles present British cruiser tonnage

which, built and building, is 387,000 tons, of which approximately 60,000

approaches the age limit. Would British budget stand such a building

program? If you think that any useful purpose would be served, I should be

glad to have you express our views to Baldwin on account of apparent

contradictions in British Government’s attitude; or, if you are unable to see

him, discuss matter with Chamberlain.

KELLOGG

[Document 73]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Received 6: p.m.]

60. At a meeting of the technical committee this morning the Japanese

delegation announced that they had received instructions authorizing them

to withdraw their proposal that submarines of less than 700 tons be exempt

from limitation but would request special consideration for allocation of

submarine tonnage.

Upon reopening the question of cruisers and upon request of British

delegation, Admiral Jones read the following statement as the American

suggestion of a method of eventually reconciling the British proposal based

on numbers with the American proposal based on total tonnage:

“The position of the United States delegation is that we cannot

discuss cruiser tonnages in excess of 400,000 tons for the period

ending December 31st, 1936.

That during that period we would require full liberty of action to

build 10,000-ton cruisers up to a total of 250,000 tons,

recognizing at the same time the full rights of other powers to

build cruisers of similar characteristics up to tonnages in

accordance with the principles of the Washington treaty.

That we have no intention or desire to replace the ten cruisers of

the Omaha class carrying 6-inch guns during the period, except in

the case of loss of one or more of those units.

That, in an effort to meet the British viewpoint regarding a

limitation in the number of large cruisers, we are willing for this

period and without prejudice to future action to limit our further

construction without a total tonnage limitation of 400,000 to

vessels of a smaller tonnage to be agreed upon.

We do not see any reason for limiting the caliber of guns at [in

the?] smaller class of cruisers to anything different from that in

the larger class.

We believe that each power should have full liberty at design and

armament of a smaller class of cruisers should such a class be

adopted for the period in question.

This statement of American policy should be construed as our

maximum effort to meet the British viewpoint.

We greatly prefer that within a total tonnage limitation and within

the characteristic cruisers provided for in the Washington treaty

that each power enjoy full liberty of action.

We invite attention to the fact that our original proposal was for a

total tonnage limitation in the cruiser class of between 250,000

and 300,000 tons. We still ardently desire that the total tonnage

limitation of cruisers to be agreed upon shall be very much lower

than 400,000 tons as we believe that an agreement on such a

figure would be an extremely useful service to the cause of

limitation. If it is found possible to agree upon a figure materially

lower than 400,000 tons, the American requirements regarding

cruisers of the larger class could be revised downward.

Any limitation on the basis of a cruiser tonnage in excess of

400,000 tons we regard as so ineffective a limitation as not to

justify the conclusion of treaty at this time.”

The meeting then adjourned to afford opportunity for study and consultation

regarding cruiser limitation.

GIBSON

[Document 74]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 7: p.m.]

61. In an endeavor to settle the cruiser problem, I requested Saburi to come

over this morning to discuss with me just what steps we might take now in

that direction.

Saburi informed me that the Japanese delegation were of the opinion that

the building of 400,000 tons of cruisers by Great Britain and the United

States would necessitate more naval construction by their Government than

it wished to undertake; and that, sooner than agree to any such tonnage

figures, the Japanese delegation would return to Japan without a treaty. He

suggested, as he had in previous conversations, that the American and

Japanese delegations have a conference with Bridgeman and urge upon him

the absolute necessity of cutting down the British figures. The American

views, I informed him, had already been given emphatically to the British

delegation and I was of the opinion that the greatest effect would be

obtained if Saito took the initiative and impressed upon the British the

absolute necessity for a material revision downward in their figures. If such

action were taken by Saito, I told him, he would have the strong support of

the American delegation. Saburi said that he considered this a good policy

to pursue, and it was agreed that the American and Japanese delegations

should have a preliminary conference tomorrow (Viscount Ishii being

absent from Geneva today) after which we will be prepared to make an

appointment with Bridgeman to discuss the matter. In the hope that

Bridgeman will be influenced by the newspaper comment regarding the

desirability of lower cruiser figures, it seems best for us to permit a day or

two to pass before interviewing Bridgeman. Saburi was assured by me that

the American delegation would welcome the Japanese delegation’s demand

that the British revise their cruiser figures downward and that we would use

all our influence to support them.

GIBSON

[Document 75]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

27. In the course of a conversation this morning with the British

Ambassador he said he had been authorized to state that his Government

had no intention of disputing our right to parity with Great Britain. The

Ambassador further stated that he received instructions to raise question of

reduction in size and extension of life of battleships, as his Government felt

that a change in the Washington agreement would not be constituted

thereby.

In reply I stated that we did not expect to take up question of Washington

agreement at this time and that question of economy in connection with

British suggestions did not come up, in reality, until 1931, at which time all

the parties would have to meet. I replied to his objections that plans for

laying down vessels would have to be made before 1931, by stating that

date of Conference could be advanced, by agreement among the parties, to

January 1931.

I informed the Ambassador that the Japanese Ambassador had told me that

Japanese delegation had been instructed to discuss subject of reduction in

size and extension of life of battleships to become effective after 1931, but

only to enter upon this discussion after agreement had been reached

respecting other classes of vessels and not with view to revising

Washington agreement at this time. I said I thought there would be no

objection to such a discussion.

I took occasion to point out to the Ambassador that any extension in life of

battleships would still further put off time when we could arrive at equality

with British Navy. He thought I was mistaken and said he would send me a

memorandum on the subject.

I then stated, as my belief, that the Conference was in somewhat critical

position owing to very large tonnage demands which the British delegation

had made, and I said that a limitation agreement which would have effect of

almost doubling Great Britain’s cruiser tonnage would provoke open

ridicule and that the United States would never accept it. He remarked that

the best thing to do then would be to give up the whole Conference, to

which I replied that that might well be the case as we could not sign a treaty

embodying any such figures as the British had proposed. The Ambassador

said that it was his impression, gained from what the President had said,

that the object to be attained was a limitation and that the actual figures

were not important. I told him that the matter had been most carefully

considered by the President, by the Navy Department, and by the

Department of State and that I knew for a certainty that the President had no

idea that the British would demand a tonnage so excessive. I went on to ask

him against whom this enormous number of cruisers was needed, as only

this country and Japan now possessed first-class navies. He mentioned the

Mediterranean countries, and I reminded him that any treaty signed by the

three powers now in Conference at Geneva would contain a clause

empowering any one of parties to it to call for revision of the treaty; should

that party feel itself threatened by building program of any power not a

signatory.

Do you share with me the opinion that there would be no objection to

discussing informally, after agreement has been reached on auxiliary

vessels, the reduction in size and extension of life of capital ships on

understanding that such discussion should be merely of preparatory nature

to clear way for 1931 Conference?

KELLOGG

[Document 76]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

63. This morning, accompanied by Admiral Jones and Dulles, I saw

Bridgeman, who was most desirous for an interview. With Bridgeman were

Cecil and Admiral Field; and the cruiser question was debated at length,

somewhat tensely by the British delegation. In answer to Cecil’s heated

inquiry whether the statement delivered to the technical committee (my

telegram No. 60, July 5) was an ultimatum, I replied that our negotiations

were not carried on by ultimata but that Admiral Field had requested

Admiral Jones for his reaction to the British proposals during the debate on

the cruiser question in the technical committee.

Following this, Cecil reiterated the well-known arguments concerning the

British need for protection of food lines and Admiral Field outlined the

reaction of the British Navy to the American proposals. Stressing the

Empire’s vital necessity for numbers in the matter of cruisers, he interpreted

the American proposal of 400,000 tons to mean that Britain could only

construct fifteen 10,000-ton ships to our twenty-five and that the remainder

of their tonnage would be used in vessels too small to be of value, that is,

about sixty ships of about 7,800 tons each. This he said would make them

only equal to the Japanese in 10,000-ton cruisers and far below the United

States in combat strength, and any further decrease in larger cruisers to

permit more smaller vessels would actually leave the Japanese superior to

them in this regard.

We were then pointedly questioned as to our real aims in pressing for the

building of 10,000-ton 8-inch-gun cruisers, which they criticized as

constituting the large offensive type. It was our insistence upon this type of

cruiser, which they claimed they eventually wished to eliminate, that

compelled them to demand such high tonnage levels as were imputed to

them. In conclusion, we were closely interrogated as to our reasons for

mentioning this type of cruiser and they warned us that the result of our

suggestions would either be to give the United States an absolute

supremacy in offensive cruisers or compel the British to abandon

construction of the small defensive type, which in view of the Empire’s

needs were in their opinion essential.

They held that the reduction of the offensive power of fleets was the basic

object of the parley; and minimized the importance of reduction of total

tonnages as not going to fundamentals. Total tonnage thesis, they said,

would only inspire each country to construct the greatest number of

maximum-sized ships and increase fleet offensive power.

It is my desire in the foregoing to outline the views of the British and give

them in the tone in which they were rendered. The wisest course to pursue,

I thought, was to give the British the floor, and in answer to their questions

as to the need of 10,000-ton cruisers, Admiral Jones merely emphasized the

view of the United States Navy, with which you are entirely conversant.

As a compromise and to satisfy the necessity of the British for a great

number of cruisers, Admiral Field launched the idea of limiting only

cruisers under the age of 20 years and permitting the retention of all cruisers

exceeding 20 years.

We dispersed without a solution having been reached, but decided that we

should all review the entire question with great care. The meeting lasted an

hour and a half, towards the end of which the atmosphere had brightened

considerably and Bridgeman on leaving remarked in a friendly way that our

general attitude was clear to him and only time was needed to solve matters.

His demeanor, which throughout had been good-natured, formed a marked

contrast to Cecil’s.

On Friday, the executive committee will meet to hear the report of the

technical committee outlining tentative agreements reached in reference to

[Document 77]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 10: p.m.]

64. The British and American delegates, at the invitation of Viscount Saito,

met informally with the Japanese delegates at the Hotel Beau-Rivage, at

which time the memorandum given below was circulated by the Japanese

delegation. Viscount Ishii stated that the Japanese delegation desired to lay

their views informally before the other two delegations as they had not

given any intimation at the meeting of the technical committee regarding

the total tonnages which Japan considered adequate. The views expressed

by the Japanese at this informal meeting would be presented to the

executive committee in a more formal way at a later period, he said. (For an

outline of developments during the meeting of the technical committee, see

my telegram No. 65, July 6.)

Following is text of Japanese memorandum:54

“It will be remembered that in the statement made by the

Japanese delegation at the first plenary meeting emphasis was laid

upon the existing status which they proposed should form the

basis of any allocation of tonnages that might be decided upon at

the present Conference.

According to the basis of calculation as submitted by the Japanese

delegation the surface auxiliary strength of the British Empire

would be 472,000 tons.

[Document 78]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

said that it was gratifying to learn that the proposals made by the Japanese

called for low figures for surface craft falling generally within the tonnages

originally proposed by the American delegation and that we thought the

most careful consideration should be given them. Immediately Lord Cecil,

Bridgeman, and Admiral Field began an attack upon the proposals of the

Japanese, giving the impression that they deemed it impossible for Great

Britain to consider the tonnage advocated by the Japanese. It was pointed

out by them that a destroyer tonnage of 220,000 tons had been tentatively

agreed upon by the technical committee for the United States and Great

Britain and that under the Japanese proposals only 230,000 tons of cruisers

would be allowed them.

Viscount Ishii, in a most emphatic manner, said that the Japanese delegation

had come to Geneva to lower naval armaments, and not to increase them,

and that he trusted that the Japanese proposals would be accepted as a basis

for future discussion by the Conference.

As evidently being too remote from the cruiser requirements to merit

consideration, the British appeared to be unwilling to participate in any

discussion of the Japanese proposals. The idea of a possible treaty to define

and limit cruiser-building programs until 1936 was again brought forward

by them and it was also suggested by Bridgeman that the possibility of

permitting retention without limitation of cruisers exceeding 20 years in age

be made the subject of further study. It was agreed that these proposals

should be informally considered by experts, but the discussion was not

completely finished. The Japanese, both informally and formally, have

insisted upon tonnage levels which would represent genuine limitation; and

the American delegation is firmly convinced of their sincerity in this regard.

It is true their memorandum intimates a desire for an extension of the 5–3

ratio, but it is not far removed from that ratio and it is believed that their

figures might be scaled down through appropriate negotiation.

Through their fear as to their position in resisting the American and

Japanese proposals for low tonnage, the British are attempting to cloud the

issue by emphasizing that it is extremely difficult for them to reduce their

total tonnage levels when considering our demand for a large number of

cruisers of the 10,000-ton class. They endeavored, with some success,

several times during this afternoon’s conversation to obtain the Japanese

support to their opposition to continued construction of the bigger cruisers.

It is evident that the British have no intention of accepting anything along

the lines of the Japanese proposals, but it may be the means of making them

more reasonable to learn that they stand alone in their demands for a large

cruiser tonnage and, with this idea in view, I propose on Friday at the

meeting of the executive committee to make a statement that the American

delegation is entirely in agreement with the Japanese delegation concerning

the general lines to be followed if we expect to achieve any real naval

limitation at the present conference.

GIBSON

[Document 79]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

LONDON, July 7, 1927—noon.

time, in my opinion, by approaching either Baldwin or Chamberlain along

the lines indicated.

I do not know whether the figures given at Geneva do really disclose the

minimum demand of the British in cruisers, but I am convinced that once

that minimum is made known, no considerations of economy will be

permitted to interfere with carrying it into effect; in that respect Bridgeman

undoubtedly voices the policy of the Cabinet.

I doubt, moreover, if any pressure here will prove effective; but if you want

me to try I suggest that I emphasize following points in event that no

agreement is in sight: (1) American people will look upon the very material

sacrifices they made to achieve the Washington treaties as having been

made in vain; (2) they would assume with reason that the British, instead of

seeking limitation, were simply attempting to substitute multitude of small

naval units in place of fewer and larger units; (3) American interests, by

reason of our lack of naval bases, would be better served through use of

larger battle cruisers; (4) in all probability this means scrapping of the

Washington treaties in 1931; (5) extent of ill feeling aroused will be

incalculable and will no doubt have world-wide effect; (6) among other

results any possibility which now exists of debt settlement revision as far as

Great Britain is concerned would be definitely and finally ended. Of course

I should merely indicate such arguments as outlined and keep my interview

as personal as possible, and I should endeavor to give impression that

interview came about because of my personal anxiety over situation. If you

approve please advise.

As I have said, it is my own belief that the British are working towards a

well-matured plan which both Cabinet and Admiralty have already

approved and the essentials of which will not be modified. It seems to me

that under these circumstances we have but two alternatives: either accept

British proposal and content ourselves with insisting upon parity, or try to

postpone all action until 1931 when the entire question of naval armament

can once again be brought up. If first alternative be chosen I suppose the

larger the British demands are the more reasonable will our position appear

before the world.

I have no doubt that at present the British Government can put the matter

before their people in such a way as to obtain acceptance of their program.

If you wish, I shall repeat to Geneva.

HOUGHTON

[Document 80]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

to see either Baldwin or Chamberlain and discuss entire situation in

accordance with your six suggestions, except that I should deplore any

mention of the debt settlement as open to serious misinterpretation. It seems

to me that you also should add that public opinion in the United States is

unanimously opposed to idea conveyed by the very extensive British cruiser

program and that public opinion here is likely to see in that program a threat

to this country, as there can be no other power against whom Great Britain

would feel necessity of protecting herself to the extent she seeks, and as any

projected treaty would include safeguard clause which would make possible

examination of treaty for revision in the event of threatening building

programs by any other powers.

KELLOGG

[Document 81]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 11: p.m.]

68. Mr. Saburi, of the Japanese delegation, called on me this evening to

inform me that Viscount Saito intended to submit to the executive

committee meeting on Friday the Japanese proposals reported in my

telegram No. 64 of July 6. He wished to impress on me the fact that the

Japanese were entirely sincere in their desire to arrive at an agreement that

would approximate the lower figures for tonnage contained in the original

American proposals; that substantial increases from those figures would

necessitate large building programs, and that Saito, with the approval of his

Government, had decided to abandon the Conference rather than go back to

Japan with any agreement which would add to the burden of taxation. He

stated that the Japanese delegation would make this aspect of the situation

absolutely clear.

Should the Japanese delegation remain inflexible, I doubt very much that

the British would be willing to reduce their figures to a degree sufficient to

enable any agreement to be brought about.

GIBSON

[Document 82]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

GENEVA, July 7, 1927—midnight.

69. Should there be absolute inability to agree and consequent breaking up

of the Conference in spite of our sincere endeavors to arrive at an

agreement, it is important that we should not be unprepared to deal with the

situation thus created; and should this eventuality occur, we have, after

careful study, worked out the following line of action which we beg to

submit for your consideration:

Should the closing of the Conference become inevitable as a result of the

uncompromising stand of Great Britain in the matter of vastly increased

cruiser tonnage, we would suggest, in the first place, a private conversation

with the chief delegates in order to bring out strongly the fact that the

promotion of good understanding between Great Britain, Japan, and

ourselves constituted the basic object of the President in convening the

Conference; that such an understanding was to the highest interests of all of

us and that no other factors should permit us to forget this; that therefore a

public session be held to give out frankly and impartially the news of the

breaking up of the Conference; and that each delegation should be free to

set forth in any manner it pleased its own particular difficulties and the

reasons which rendered the agreement impossible.

Should this procedure be acceptable, I would, with your approval, repeat in

the strongest terms the basic wish of the United States to foster amity

between the three powers and our disinclination to permit our friendly

relations to be in any way diminished by the failure to reach an accord at

Geneva; that if our respective viewpoints were published in an amicable

way so that the questions could be studied in the coming four years by

public opinion which might assist in finding an answer thereto, the

Conference would not have been held in vain; that the opinion of our

delegation was that a basic divergence in our concept of maritime

armaments and not a mere difference of opinion as to technical matters was

the cause of our inability to agree; that we believe the naval necessities of

one country to be conditioned upon the strength of other nations, whereas

the British consider maritime requirements to be absolute and not

proportioned upon the armaments of other powers; that no Conference

would in our view be necessary should the British conception be correct,

since, according to it, each nation would decide upon its own absolute

requirements and no abatement or reconsideration of these needs could be

entertained; that our view, however, of relative naval requirements, in which

the Japanese concur, permits a mutual downward revision so far as possible

with proper regard to the fleets of those powers not party to the treaty and

that it was upon the cruiser tonnage level that our insistence lay. The

strength maintained by any one of the three powers concerned would

necessitate readjustments by the other powers in corresponding measure;

that viewed from this standpoint, the insistence of the British delegation

upon high levels of tonnage in cruisers would revise our needs

automatically upward to such an extent that no real limitation would be

achieved but, rather, should a treaty result, a program of naval expansion

would be legalized; that while the American delegation would be glad to

sign a treaty which could be defended as providing for limitation, it was our

opinion that it would be more honest to the American people and to the

world, and more likely to promote intelligent consideration of naval

questions, to dissolve the Conference without arriving at an accord rather

than to reach an agreement providing for a limitation which would not be

genuine.

We should be able in conclusion to evidence a proper appreciation of the

attitude maintained by the different delegates during the Conference and

could indicate the hope that those views which all of them had set forth

would in any event bring about the stimulation of our different nations to

view in a friendly manner each other’s problems and to work out some

equitable and sensible limitation or reduction of naval armaments before the

[Document 83]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

1. Department approves suggested conversation with the chief

delegates with view of impressing on them in every reasonable

way fact that disruption of Conference would be disastrous for all

parties and would inevitably be the beginning of a competitive

building program which would make any agreement in 1931 more

difficult to reach.

2. If you finally come to point where agreement seems

impossible, I think you should adjourn for a week at least and

give Department results of your final conferences together with

figures of limitation on which British insist, as the Department

would wish to submit entire matter to the President. A week of

adjournment might afford opportunity for mature consideration of

existing proposals as well as for sober reflection on part of all the

Governments concerned.

3. If Conference fails and public meeting is called for purpose of

permitting each delegation to state its position, or, should no

public meeting be called and each delegation is left to make its

position public, the Department believes you should make full

statement of position of this Government. General statement you

propose is well enough as far as it goes, but the Department

believes that you should emphasize point that the President called

Conference for purpose of limitation of armament, not to lay

foundation for worldwide naval expansion. It is all right to lay

emphasis on fact that a favorable outcome of Conference would

enhance good feeling among the three countries parties to it and

would create favorable impression throughout world, but I do not

think that this was fundamental purpose back of calling

Conference, which was, rather, to obtain a reasonable limitation

on naval construction and to prevent competition. If the only

powers which have considerable navies are willing to make

reasonable limitations, the United States is not able to understand

why the British Government finds it necessary to create so large a

sea force when the United States and Japan are the only countries

against which there is any necessity for building large navies.

Neither British safety, nor British trade routes, nor British foreign

possessions could possibly be endangered by navy of any other

power, and should any other power start a building program of

proportions to constitute a danger, the treaty would contain clause

protecting not only Great Britain but any other signatory power.

I suggest also that you consider wisdom of including in your statement

mention that the British accepted Secretary Hughes’ proposition at

Washington Conference in 1921 for limitation of 450,000 tons on both

cruisers and destroyers (Proceedings of Washington Conference on

Limitation of Armament, pp. 86 and 100). The Department is utterly unable

to understand why, five years later, there is any justification for a cruiser

tonnage which alone exceeds this combined figure. If result of Conference

cannot be fairly interpreted by world opinion as self-denying ordinance

entered into freely by the great naval powers, it then possesses no value

whatever and will do endless harm. If the three great naval powers are

unwilling to make concessions in order to stop competitive construction in

sea forces, what can be expected of the other countries? The example to the

lesser powers would certainly be very unfortunate.

Great stress is being laid by British press on view that Great Britain has

proposed great economies through reduction of size and extension of life of

battleships; but no mention is made of fact that no economy can result from

any agreement on that score before 1931. I offer suggestion that it might be

well to state that the United States had been willing to discuss with the

other two powers at this Conference a program of reduction in size and of

extension of life of battleships in 1931, but that as all the parties to the

Washington treaty are not present and as no country can build any new

battleships until after 1931, it would be useless to hold Conference for that

purpose at present. Certainly, the increased building program of cruisers

and the cost of their maintenance would more than offset any possible

economies in battleships. If regrettable position is reached that Conference

must be abandoned, careful consideration should be given to any statement

to be made and time allowed for its consideration at Department and by

President.

The foregoing is to assist you in preparing a statement to be submitted here

for approval.

KELLOGG

[Document 84]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

making it clear to him that I had come on my personal responsibility since I

believed that it was my duty to acquaint him with the unfavorable

impression created by the British naval proposals in the United States. I

stated that while the change of sentiment there could not be forecast, there

was a growing fear lest sacrifices made at Washington with regard to naval

bases and ships had been in vain; and said that the belief appeared to be

increasing that Great Britain was now endeavoring to return to her

dominant position, after having succeeded in limiting the size of battleships,

by constructing a quantity of small ships which were suited to her needs but

not to ours. I encountered a most sympathetic attitude on the part of

Chamberlain, who set forth the causes for the present position taken by

Great Britain and stated that the tonnage demanded was based upon careful

calculations which had been favorably passed upon by three succeeding

governments of different parties. In reply I indicated that while I recognized

their duty and right to provide for ships which might be necessary, I felt

nevertheless that since the German fleet had virtually disappeared and other

nations were unable financially to provide for extensive building programs,

it was difficult to see the necessity for so great an increase in British

tonnage at this time, especially since treaty stipulations would meet any

necessity which might arise by reason of an important building program on

the part of any other nation. I then asked Chamberlain whether, under any

conceivable circumstances, Great Britain could regard America as an

enemy and received a vehement answer in the negative, together with a

statement that any war between America and the British Empire would

inevitably lead to the disintegration of the latter. In the subsequent

discussion of a possible program Chamberlain made the complaint that

whenever an offer was advanced by the British to reduce total tonnage the

American representatives insisted that the United States would build only

cruisers of a large size. He said further that Great Britain had already

conceded equality in ratio but was unable to yield in the matter of

permitting superiority in large cruisers to be established by the United

States. In answering this objection I stated that, while I was unable to speak

authoritatively, the assumption that if a low enough total tonnage were

agreed upon the adjustment of classes of cruisers should not present any

insuperable difficulty seemed to me mere common sense. At the end of our

conversation Chamberlain expressed his thanks and indicated that the

gravity of the situation was fully appreciated by him and that, while not

hopeful, he would at once consult Baldwin and Lord Balfour.55a He added

that within a day or two he would see me again. Any further developments

will, of course, be fully reported to you.

By reason of my talk with Chamberlain, I am again impressed with the fact

that a very mature and carefully worked out plan is being followed by the

British delegates at Geneva. Nevertheless, I am certain that what I said

about the effect of British proposals on the people of the United States, as

well as on the other peoples of the world, did not fail to impress

Chamberlain. I believe that should it be possible to keep total tonnage under

400,000 tons it will be regarded in London, and should be regarded by us,

as a material concession to the American views. I venture to suggest that

our own representatives do nothing meanwhile to weaken the position taken

by me.

HOUGHTON

55a Arthur James, Lord Balfour, Lord President of the Council; Lord Balfour

was head of the British delegation at the Washington Conference on the

Limitation of Armament, 1921–1922.

[Document 85]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

158. Last evening I received the following communication from

Chamberlain:

“I immediately communicated to the Prime Minister and the

colleagues whom I named to you the substance of the

conversation of this morning, and this evening we met to discuss

it with the close attention which it required.

We are at this moment expecting further telegrams of great

importance from our delegation at Geneva which may have a very

important bearing on the points you and I discussed. We must,

therefore, await them before taking any decision. It is possible

that

they

may

require

personal

consultation

with

the

representatives and that we may, therefore, have to ask for a short

adjournment at Geneva, but I hope in any case to be in a position

to make a further communication to you on Monday.

We greatly appreciate the friendly feelings which inspired your

initiative. We, ourselves, are much concerned at the course which

the public discussion of these questions has taken and we shall,

you may be sure, do anything we can to find a solution on which

all can agree.”

HOUGHTON

[Document 86]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

MEMORANDUM

His Majesty’s Ambassador has been desired by His Majesty’s Principal

Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to make the following communication

to the Secretary of State in explanation of the attitude adopted by His

Majesty’s Government at the Three Power Naval Conference now

proceeding at Geneva. This communication is practically identical with that

which was made two days ago at Geneva by Mr. Bridgeman, First Lord of

the Admiralty, to the American Delegation.

His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain has always sympathized with

President Coolidge’s desire to carry out yet further work of naval

disarmament which was begun at Washington in 1921–1922 with such

happy results. Geneva Conference was therefore begun under fortunate

auspices and has, so far as His Majesty’s Government are able to judge,

been doing much valuable work. But they note with regret that in certain

quarters their policy has been misunderstood and in consequence

misrepresented.

The essential principles accepted at the Washington Conference referred

only to capital ships and aircraft carriers: and with regard to these it was

agreed between three leading naval Powers that they would accept for a

period of at least ten years certain limitations as to numbers, armament,

tonnage and replacement.

If the Washington policy is now to be extended it can only be in one or both

of two ways. The cost of capital ships may be still further reduced and

limitations may be devised in respect of vessels other than capital ships—i.

e., vessels about which the Treaty of Washington is silent. On both of these

possible lines of advance the British delegation was instructed to lay

suggestions before the Conference.

In regard to the first of them, however, they desire to say nothing at the

present moment. In deference to what they understand to be the desire of

the Conference they reserve their proposals until a later stage. His Majesty’s

Government do not think these proposals are likely to occasion any serious

difficulty, but it is clear it is under this head that the most important

economies may be anticipated. The questions raised by any proposal to

limit the number of cruisers are of a more complex character. The

suggestions of His Majesty’s Government are broadly as follows:

They propose to divide cruisers into two classes—heavy and light; and to

adopt for heavy class the same principles as those adopted at Washington in

the case of capital ships. They think, in other words, that their size and

armament might with advantage be limited and that the numbers permitted

to each treaty power should be in the Washington ratio.

This seems to His Majesty’s Government to be a reasonable application of

an accepted principle to the case of heavy cruisers. But when light cruisers

come to be considered wholly different conditions must be taken into

account.

It is of course true that a fleet of a given size requires auxiliary vessels of a

given number whatever may be the position of the country to which the

fleet belongs or seas in which it is required to operate. On this point there

need be no dispute. But in addition to these auxiliary vessels cruisers are

required by all maritime countries to perform duties quite unconnected with

organized fleets and by no country so much as by the British Empire.

Special position is of course due to a geographical subdivision which has no

parallel in history. In times of peace small difficulties and disorders wholly

without international significance which in states differently situated would

be dealt with by police or a frontier guard may often make it necessary to

send cruisers. In times of war the insular position of Great Britain and the

seas which divide it from its colonies and from self-governing communities

with which it is associated within the Empire present even greater

difficulties—difficulties not always present to the imagination of those who

live and think in terms of great continents. During the Washington

Conference this point was dealt with by Mr. Balfour in words which it may

be worth while to recall. “Most of my audience (he said) are citizens of

the United States. The United States stands solid, impregnable, self-

sufficient, all its essential lines of communication completely protected

from any conceivable hostile attack.

“It is not merely that you are a hundred and ten million population; it is not

merely that you are the wealthiest country in the world; it is that

configuration of your country is such that you are wholly immune from

particular perils to which from nature of the case the British Empire is

subject.

“Suppose for example that your Western States were suddenly removed ten

thousand miles across the sea. Suppose that the very heart of your Empire

was a small and crowded island depending upon overseas trade, not merely

for its luxuries, but for the raw material of those manufacturers [sic] by

which its superabundant population lives and for the food upon which they

subsist. Suppose that it was a familiar thought that there was never a

moment of the year when within the limits of your state there was more

than seven week’s food for its population and that food could only be

replenished by overseas communication. If you will draw this picture and if

you will realize all that it implies you will understand why it is that no

citizen of the British Empire, whether he be drawn from the far Dominions

of the Pacific or lives in a small island in the North Sea, can ever forget that

it is by sea communication that he lives and that without the sea

communication he and the Empire to which he belongs would perish

together.”

How can an Empire thus situated voluntarily surrender its right to live?

How can it abandon by formal treaty the possibility of cooperation in

mutual defence between communities which owe a common allegiance

though divided from each other by all oceans.

These are considerations which may surely appeal to all. Yet it has been

stated that the objection felt to surrender of the liberty to construct a fleet

required by the special conditions of the British Empire is due, not to

inevitable necessities of self-defence, but to an arrogant desire for maritime

superiority. Great Britain, it has been said, refuses “parity” to the United

States. The statement has already been formally contradicted. It is wholly

without foundation. What are the facts? The President of the United States

[Document 87]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

President yesterday. This morning the following telegram was received

from him:

“Tell Gibson what is needed is not excuse or soft words but clear

strong statement of American position. Let blame fall where it

may. Your plan approved.”

Do not construe this to mean that you should not give expression to

sentiments of friendly attitude and good feeling but our position should be

made perfectly plain when necessity arises. You are at liberty to use your

discretion in using any suggestions contained in my telegram No. 30, July

8, 2 P.M. at plenary session on Monday. Unless you see reason to the

contrary and the British Government makes their position clear, think you

should do the same.

KELLOGG

[Document 88]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

78. Bridgeman suggested to me that we have a private conversation to

discuss political and nontechnical phases of our work with a view to seeing

whether we could open any avenues for investigation by technical experts.

As I wished to explore every method of discussion I readily agreed; and,

accompanied by Dulles, I met privately today with Bridgeman and Cecil,

Saito and Ishii.

Cecil suggested as a possible way out of the impasse regarding cruisers that

we should study building programs between now and 1931 which would

control completed cruiser tonnage as over 1934. Bridgeman indicated that

they would be prepared to abandon their projected program of 10,000-ton

8-inch[gun?] vessels and perhaps stop work on one vessel just commenced

in the hope that no further vessels of this character would be constructed,

that of course we should be accorded the full liberty of constructing 10,000-

ton vessels up to the number which they might have completed under

present plans by 1934. As I interpret this suggestion the British would

complete seven vessels of the 10,000-ton Kent class and three or four

vessels of the London class and that their other 10,000-ton cruiser program

would be abandoned. Cecil and Bridgeman indicated that their building

program, including 1931, could be restricted within 400,000 tons and

foresaw the possibility that such a limit might be possible for a treaty which

would terminate in 1934. They emphasized that the 1931 Conference would

in any event deal with the whole subject and that if we now provided for

programs between now and 1931 we would have met the problem

particularly confronting us.

I indicated that while I was not in a position to pass on this suggestion our

naval experts would study it, and pointed out that in the last analysis

building programs must be translated into total tonnages and that we could

not profitably discuss anything over 400,000 tons.

Ishii indicated that they were planning eight 10,000-ton vessels but could

eliminate one of these vessels not yet laid down in the event that the United

States and Great Britain agreed within this period that they would not lay

down or complete more than the eleven contemplated by the British.

While the foregoing may offer a way out of the cruiser dilemma it will not

represent any very real limitation, although it may represent renunciation on

the part of Great Britain of the construction of further 10,000-ton 8-inch [-

gun?] vessels and give us freedom to build up to them in this class without

restriction as to the future. The British have not at any time indicated a

and ultimately to over 550,000 tons.

As I felt that Bridgeman in the Monday plenary session would probably try

to throw upon us the onus for impeding the work of the Conference by

insistence upon twenty-five 10,000-ton vessels, I told him that the number

of such vessels would be subject to negotiation provided that this would

render it possible for them to bring their total needs to figures which

constituted a real limitation. I emphasized that Great Britain was far in the

lead in the construction of 10,000-ton vessels and had set the pace and that

it was futile to talk of the reduction in the number of such vessels as long as

they either had or were about to acquire a large number of vessels of this

character.

I report the foregoing to show the efforts which are being made here to

fortify [sic] a way out of the cruiser impasse and I have not abandoned hope

that a solution may be reached. The Japanese delegates this afternoon gave

no indication as to whether they were prepared to revise upward their total

tonnage figures for cruisers so as to make negotiation between the British

and Japanese possible.

Captain Egerton of British delegation and Captain Toyoda of Japanese

delegation this evening called on Admiral Schofield for informal discussion

of cruiser problem. Captain Egerton proposed as a possible solution a

building program as to vessels laid down between now and 1931 for each of

the three powers as a means of escaping the present apparent impasse. Both

he and Captain Toyoda agreed that on the basis of total tonnage limitation

or limitation by numbers there was no possibility of reconciling the

Japanese and British theses or of reconciling our thesis with the British

inasmuch as the British requirements translated into total tonnage reach

combined destroyer and cruiser classes for themselves for the same period

is 310,000 tons. Both Captain Egerton and Captain Toyoda said that they

were stating their views but could not be considered as binding their

delegates.

GIBSON

[Document 89]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Received 4: p.m.]

80. Late last evening I received a letter from Mr. Bridgeman as follows:

“You and your colleagues will by this time have looked into the

question of an agreed program of cruiser construction as a basis

for arriving at a settlement sufficiently to form an idea whether or

not it gives a hopeful prospect of success.

Both you and Viscount Ishii expressed some doubts as to the

wisdom of having a plenary session tomorrow though you both

kindly gave way to my desire for an opportunity of explaining, as

I hope to be able to explain, the British position more fully.

But if your chief delegates and those of Japan are able to say that

you think the new scheme holds out real prospects of success I

should be willing to postpone my statement of the British case for

a day or two so as to admit of the possibility of being able to

come to the plenary conference with some agreed policy.

I called on Viscount Ishii this morning and he hoped to be able to

give me his reply this evening. Should you be able to do the same

and both answers were distinctly hopeful I would ask you to

postpone this plenary session if you think fit.”

For explanation of first paragraph of Bridgeman’s letter see my 78, July 9,

11 a.m.

[Paraphrase.] Previously, when Viscount Ishii and I objected to calling a

plenary session, stating that we considered it wisest to discuss our divergent

views in private session and then announce to the public our decision,

Bridgeman, you will recall, insisted upon a plenary session. Only upon his

statement that he desired that the British views be given at a plenary session

did Viscount Ishii and I agree to this. Under these circumstances, I

considered that the responsibility for calling off the meeting should be

placed upon Bridgeman and not upon the American or Japanese

delegations. Therefore, I sent the following reply to Mr. Bridgeman, after

consulting Saburi, who was entirely of my opinion: [End paraphrase.]

“I have just received your note of this evening in regard to the

desirability of deferring the plenary session called for tomorrow.

As I stated yesterday afternoon, I should be glad [to] explore any

possible method of meeting our present difficulty with regard to

the cruiser question. Frankly, as you will understand, there has not

been sufficient time to determine whether the methods discussed

yesterday afternoon, and also between our experts, will hold out a

substantial hope of settling our present problem. For that reason I

hesitate to hazard an opinion with regard to your suggestion of

delaying tomorrow’s meeting on this account.

If, however, you feel that it would be wiser to defer the public

meeting for the present I shall be glad to acquiesce in your

decision and I would only suggest that you send word this

evening to Hugh Wilson in order that he may know whether to

continue preparations for tomorrow or to cancel the orders which

have been given and notify the various delegates accordingly. As

I say, I shall readily abide by any decision you may reach.”

[Paraphrase.] While no reply was addressed to me last night by Bridgeman,

he intimated that he was desirous of consulting Cecil and the various

Dominion delegations this morning. … I understand that there was a

divergence of opinion among the British delegation and that postponement

of the meeting had been urged upon Bridgeman by his own associates. [End

paraphrase.]

The morning papers carry the news of the assassination in Dublin of Mr.

O’Higgins, Irish Minister of Foreign Affairs, their representative at this

Conference, who had only recently participated in our work here. I

therefore immediately sent word to Mr. Bridgeman that, in view of this

tragic event, I, as President of the Conference, suggested, if Mr. Bridgeman

approved, a postponement of the plenary session. Mr. Bridgeman replied by

letter as follows:

“My colleagues, representative of all parts of the British Empire,

join me in expressing to you our appreciation of your kind

thought in suggesting the postponement of the plenary meeting

today as a token of respect for our colleague, whose tragic death

we all so deeply deplore.”

The following communiqué has consequently been issued.

“The Secretary General of the Conference begs to announce that

on account of the tragic death of Mr. Kevin O’Higgins, the

Minister of Foreign Affairs for Ireland and former delegate to the

Conference [for] the Limitation of Naval Armament, the plenary

session scheduled for 3 p.m. today at the Hotel Des Bergues has

been indefinitely postponed.”

Mailed to London.

GIBSON

[Document 90]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

41. Article by Wythe Williams printed in today’s New York Times was made

subject of protest to the Department by the British Ambassador. He

particularly took exception to the following:58

“On the eve of what may turn out to be the break-up of the

Conference,

the

American

experts

have

planned

a

‘countersurprise’ which, if launched, is likely to produce a

tremendous sensation.”

The article went on to say that if British bring up question of capital ships

“the searchlight of publicity will be trained on the mass of

documents, lists and figures now in possession of the Intelligence

Depart[ment] of the United States Navy tending to prove that the

British Navy is actually overtonned in battleships on the basis of

the 5–5 ratio established between the British and American fleets

by the Washington treaty, and that it has, in fact, shot up to a 6–5

ratio or even higher.”

Williams then continued to discuss tonnage of the different ships with

obvious intention of proving that terms of Washington treaty have not been

kept by British.

Sir Esme Howard said it seemed clear that someone in American delegation

had been giving out alleged facts and that such an article could only result

in causing intense feeling in Great Britain to degree that might break up

Conference.

Howard was informed that undoubtedly writer of the article had knowledge

of naval matters which he interpreted as he pleased, and that it was most

improbable that anyone in the American delegation, in face of repeated

statements by officials of the Government of the United States that all

nations concerned had loyally fulfilled terms of the treaty of Washington,

would have made any of the alleged assertions.

Howard added that majority of articles published under Williams’ signature

were, in his opinion, provocative and many times written for purpose of

disrupting Conference.

The Ambassador was informed that statement of his protest would be

cabled you.

KELLOGG

[Document 91]

The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State

100. The Minister for Foreign Affairs called me into conference today and

asked me to transmit to Washington his earnest desire for a successful result

of Geneva Conference and his strong feeling that the situation had reached

the stage where the action of the delegates should be guided more by

political considerations and less by technical ideas. He was afraid that the

present outlook was more in the direction of expansion of armament than

limitation and if the Conference resulted in any such agreement he knew

that the people of Japan would not approve it and he believed it would not

be approved by the people either of the United States or Great Britain. He

said the people of Japan were strongly in favor of limitation of naval

armament, both because of their desire for peaceful relations with the

United States and other nations and also for economic reasons, as they

desired to limit their own expenditure on naval armaments as far as

consistent with safety. The Minister for Foreign Affairs therefore begged

me to ask the good offices of my Government in assisting the Japanese in

bringing about some agreement which will not call for material increases in

naval armaments. I stated that I would transmit his views to my

Government but would be glad to know whether the most effective means

for bringing about the desired result would not be to persuade the British to

act in the same direction and he agreed that this was so and thought that this

possibly could be done by a common attitude on the part of the United

States and Japan.

At the close of the conference he reiterated his desire that I should impress

upon my Government his feeling that this matter should now be taken up

from a political standpoint rather than a technical naval standpoint.

MACVEAGH

[Document 92]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

81. After postponement of plenary session I called this morning on

Viscount Ishii to discuss several matters. Among others I urged him to

indicate clearly both to us and to British how far the British would have to

come down to reach a level which would afford a profitable basis of

discussion to Japanese. Ishii stated that he had this morning informed

Bridgeman in definite terms that the Japanese were practically rigid on

figure of 450,000 tons for cruisers and destroyers combined for United

States and Great Britain. Ishii said that Japanese delegation felt very

strongly on subject; they were quite willing at present moment to return

home without an agreement, if necessary, but that they were not willing to

conclude agreement which would call for program of naval expansion.

Bridgeman called on me after lunch in a much more conciliatory mood than

he has shown heretofore. He said that he felt a plenary session on Thursday

was needed in order to state British position as he was under serious home

criticism on account of the general misrepresentation of the British attitude

abroad. Bridgeman assured me that he would confine himself to statement

of British case and would take no action which could be considered

provocative. He would ask no questions or he might ask certain general

questions which would not be embarrassing and which I could answer or

not as I chose. I said that I thought this was the preferable way when we

were endeavoring to arrive at a working agreement, but that if he set pace I

was quite ready for plain talking. I told him that I thought it was regrettable

that we should consume both our time and energy in trying to find a

common British-American basis of agreement if, after we reached it, it was

not acceptable to the Japanese, and that we ought to have clearly understood

what levels would prove acceptable to the Japanese; once there was

agreement between British and Japanese on tonnage levels it would

probably not be difficult for us to make agreement complete. Bridgeman

replied that Anglo-Japanese agreement would present no difficulty as the

Japanese would come up to the, British figures, only they would demand a

quid pro quo and he had not yet been able to ascertain from them what it

would be. I said that Viscount Ishii had stressed fact that Japanese would

rather have no agreement than to revise materially their figures but

Bridgeman said he did not regard that seriously.

Later on in day Saburi of the Japanese delegation came to see me. I asked

him if his delegation had fully impressed on the British the fact that

Japanese were in earnest about their tonnage levels figures. Saburi said that

they had, and he repeated that the Japanese would rather go home without

an agreement than materially to revise these figures upward. He then added

significant remark that if our delegation could reach agreement with British

on high tonnage level and cared to conclude a treaty with them, no

objection would be offered by Japan but that she should not care to become

a party to such a treaty.

Delegation feels that our efforts now should be directed to concentrating

attention on need for finding common ground for agreement between

Japanese and British, and emphasizing consistently our preference for

Japanese levels. Unless the two extreme positions can be reconciled, and

until they are reconciled, British-American negotiation is fruitless. At

present our delegation proposes to make a British-Japanese agreement our

objective, and we feel that you may wish to impress on both the other

parties to this Conference the necessity for their finding common ground for

discussion.

A copy of this telegram has been sent by mail to London.

GIBSON

[Document 93]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

on pure conjecture as we had no intention of referring to question of

overtonnage of capital ships in plenary session or anywhere else. As far as I

am aware we have no mass of documents on subject of capital ship tonnage,

though the British themselves circulated a confidential document containing

figures. Correspondents have discussed the figures referred to from time

Conference began. I now learn that they were published last January in

Gallic American by William Baldwin Shearer. I am able to say that the

members of the American delegation have been most scrupulous in not

revealing confidential information to press and in refusing to discuss

committee proceedings or proposals of other delegations.

Only statements that either Admiral Jones or I have made which could bear

in any way on this subject have been to effect that signatories of treaty of

Washington have scrupulously observed its provisions.

GIBSON

[Document 94]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, July 12, 1927—noon.

42. The press in this country has several times reported from English

sources statements similar to that which appeared Sunday, July 10, in New

York Times, as follows:59

“According to the reports received here (i. e. London) the official

American experts at Geneva have been strongly reinforced by

unofficial representatives of great concerns whose probable

interests lie in the direction of contracts for steel plants and other

indispensable concomitants of a big navy. Much of the

pugnacious spirit in which reports to the American press from

Geneva have been conceived is attributed here to the activities of

these unofficial propagandists.”

Does statement that representatives of steel plants or manufacturing

concerns are in Geneva or are interfering in any way with deliberations

contain any truth?

The New York Times also has an editorial based on British information that

the United States, Great Britain, and Japan would have been saved

$750,000,000 through British extension of age limit alone, and that

reduction on the size of cruisers would have been a great saving. The first

statement is, of course, absurd, and second is wholly inaccurate unless total

tonnage is reduced; cost of building small cruisers is more proportionately

than to build large ones, and they cost more to maintain. These points

should be borne in mind in event of statements at plenary session or at any

other time, in your judgment, when press statements are given out.

Kenioce

[Document 95]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

LONDON, July 12, 1927—noon.

[Received 1: p.m.]

at the House of Commons. He told me he had conferred with Baldwin,

Balfour and Beatty60 yesterday morning and again late yesterday afternoon.

Their reports from Geneva he said were not complete but he thought a

reasonable hope of agreement still existed.

Chamberlain then went on to explain the differences as he saw them

between the British and American demands and concluded by saying that

there seemed to be almost insuperable difficulties in a three-power

negotiation in getting an agreement on a ratio of total tonnage based on the

theoretical needs of each. As an effort to surmount this difficulty his

Government offered the following suggestion:

“Instead of endeavoring to fix maximum overhead tonnage for all

time, based on theoretical needs and embracing far larger

construction than any of powers now had in contemplation,

solution should be sought on lines of an agreement as to total in

each class beyond which each party would not go up to 1936, to

wit, date of expiration of Washington treaty at which time whole

subject must again be considered. If the United States

Government approve this suggestion and will issue [instructions

to] Mr. Gibson to seek solution on these lines British Government

will send similar instructions to Mr. Bridgeman.”

[Paraphrase]

Chamberlain made certain significant statements during the conversation

above-mentioned:

(1) That the American delegates in the Conference had not yet

stated that, owing to lack of naval stations, American ships

needed a larger cruising radius, and that therefore 10,000-ton

cruisers were necessary.

(2) That if we were willing to limit our own total to twelve

10,000-ton cruisers during this period Great Britain, although she

now has twelve such cruisers in addition to two building and one

laid down, is willing to scrap those now being constructed and to

limit herself to the same number as the United States.

(3) That the British Government will ask a short adjournment of

the Conference and order Bridgeman home for consultation if

agreement cannot be reached along the lines suggested above.

(4) That should you request it, Chamberlain is willing to meet you

in Geneva in case of absolute need.

In transmitting the above I desire to offer no comment except that, in my

opinion, the British Government will endeavor to reach a compromise since

it is now keenly aware of the importance of public sentiment developing

abroad and at home.

This telegram has been sent to Geneva for the information of our

delegation.

HOUGHTON

[Document 96]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

82. With a view to exploring every phase of cruiser difficulty from political

as well as from technical angle there has been set up by agreement between

the chief delegates an [omission] group to examine the question

untrammeled by instructions from the chief delegates. This committee

composed of Dulles and Smyth for us, Campbell and Egerton for the British

Empire, Saburi and Captain Hori for Japan, met last night. Following

discussion took place:

British indicated willingness to study cruiser-building programs and, as far

as [sic] 10,000-ton vessels, to take as a basis of construction prior to 1931

would scrap 3 on which work was just starting. We indicated we conceived

a limitation of building programs as one method of arriving at a definite

total tonnage during the life of the treaty and not as an end in itself and

asked British to explain how, on any of foregoing bases respecting 10,000-

ton vessels, they would come within 400,000 tons in 1936. British

explained that they had received new instructions from London to reduce

their number of cruisers from 75 to 66 and if necessary to fix a maximum of

6,000 tons for other than 10,000-ton vessels. On this basis and assuming

tonnage limitation of about 400,000 tons for 1936. If we desire a larger

number of 10,000-ton vessels the total tonnage would be correspondingly

raised or it would be necessary to have the treaty end in 1934.

We suggested that real difficulty in our discussions was caused by British

effort to force other navies to accept same standard of type as themselves

even though conditions vary and we felt that if we could get away from this

insistence on their part, rapid progress could be made. We felt that it was

most unlikely that any program of construction would be adopted by the

United States which Great Britain could consider as a menace even though

full liberty were given to the construction of 10,000-ton cruisers within a

reasonable total tonnage limitation. It was tentatively suggested that if the

British really feared such a contingency it might be possible to cover this by

an article contemplating the case of a building program of powers not party

to new treaty; such an article might provide that if at any time any of the

powers considered their safety threatened by the building programs in

10,000-ton vessels by any of the contracting parties a Conference should be

called and if agreement not reached reasonable provision be made for

termination of the treaty.

It was stated frankly to the British and Japanese that in our opinion we were

now in a position where we might be able to find basis of agreement with

either the British or the Japanese but that no one had yet suggested a basis

on which those two powers could get together; that naturally we preferred

the Japanese basis which corresponded closely to our own.

In the discussion between the British and Japanese which followed, the

British seemed surprised at the firm stand the Japanese took on a total

tonnage limitation for all surface craft of 450,000 for the United States and

Great Britain, and British again reiterated that this was entirely

unacceptable to them.

Conversations are being continued today.

Mailed to London.

GIBSON

[Document 97]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

Upon examination of Japanese tonnage in surface craft including tonnage

under construction or projected it was found that this would total

tons of cruisers and destroyers for the United States and the British Empire.

British representatives indicated that they felt that this total tonnage of

525,000 for the United States and Great Britain and 315,000 for Japan held

out some hope of offering a basis for negotiation and said that they would

investigate whether there were any conditions under which they could

accept it. This afternoon they produced the following draft:

“The British Empire to agree not to exceed 550,000 tons of

auxiliary surface combatant craft under the following ages:

cruisers 16 years, destroyers 12 years, subject to the following

conditions:

(a) The right to retain in addition 20 percent of this total

tonnage in vessels over the age limit referred to above.

(c) York, Hawkins, Frobisher, Effingham, Vindictive, 4

Furuhatas and 10 Omahas not to be retained beyond

the year 1945 or some other year to be agreed upon.

(d) Subject to the right to complete up to the agreed

number of 10,000-ton cruisers no auxiliary combatant

surface

vessels

to

be

constructed

of

greater

displacement than 6,000 tons (standard displacement)

or to mount a gun exceeding 6 inches in caliber.”

The Japanese when they saw that British had raised the figures tentatively

suggested in the morning said that proposals were unacceptable and

immediately reverted to the discussion of 450,000 tons for the United States

and Great Britain. Saburi added that Viscount Saito had said to him that of

course if Great Britain and the United States wish to reach an agreement

along the lines indicated Japan would be happy to see it but could not go to

any such tonnage figures as proposed.

As you will appreciate, the suggestion quoted above is highly unacceptable

to us in many particulars, particularly in fixing the limit of one class of

cruisers at 6,000 tons. Further, the scheme of retaining vessels over the low

age limits proposed by the Japanese while ingenious is really nothing more

than a disguised attempt to increase total tonnage. However, a slight

advance has been made in that the British even with unacceptable provisos

proposed to consider tonnage figures considerably below what they have

heretofore been discussing.

In all combined tonnage of surface craft we of course make it clear that it

would be necessary to separate cruiser and destroyer class in any treaty.

Discussions described in my July 12, 8 p.m., and in this telegram were

entirely informal and are not in any sense binding upon any of the

delegations. The results of these meetings will however shortly be

considered by the delegates to see whether they offer any possible way out

of the difficulty.

Mailed to London.

GIBSON

[Document 98]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

Chamberlain not to attempt to fix for all time maximum overhead tonnage

based on theoretical needs, but to limit agreement to total tonnage in each

class beyond which, up to the date on which Washington treaty can be

terminated, namely 1936, each party should not build. The whole subject

can be reconsidered in 1931, under the Washington treaty.

By each class, I assume that Chamberlain means cruisers, destroyers and

submarines. Our delegation already has instructions along these lines as

they are basis of our original proposal. I am sure that our delegation has not

failed to make clear in some way during Conference necessity for our

having 10,000-ton cruisers in view of long cruising radius which is

necessitated by lack of naval bases, a fact which affects capacity to carry

sufficient defensive armor and armament. The 7,500-ton cruiser is not the

most useful type to the United States for the reason that to obtain cruising

radius without naval bases, armor must be sacrificed and if equipped with

6-inch guns the smaller cruiser is approximately on parity with a converted

merchantman, a class of vessel of which the United States has relatively

few.

The United States does not object to smaller-size ships for Great Britain if

the latter deems them necessary to her needs, provided they come within

reasonable total tonnage limitation to be agreed on.

The Government of the United States is pleased at evident desire of British

Cabinet to endeavor to find some basis of agreement; their desire is

reciprocated here, and American Government feels that brief adjournment

at Geneva to allow for proper analysis of various schemes and for mature

consideration by Governments might serve a useful purpose. I have twice

suggested to Mr. Gibson the desirability of a brief recess of that kind. After

such recess as suggested, time might be ripe to decide further steps which

would be necessary in accordance with Chamberlain’s suggestions. The

wide divergence between the British and the Japanese demands is one of the

essential factors which the British Government and this Government should

keep in mind; I have every reason to believe that Japanese are very anxious

to have a low tonnage limitation. Substance of foregoing may be conveyed

to Chamberlain.

Copy sent to Geneva.

KELLOGG

[Document 99]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

your message to Chamberlain for following reasons: (1) As result

of conversation with Chamberlain, British Cabinet has

transmitted through me for you a definite proposal which I think

ought not to be either accepted or declined. I have no way of

knowing whether proposal possesses any merit, but on its face at

least it constitutes offer to modify original instructions to the

British delegation; (2) if I now tell Chamberlain that you think

brief recess advisable he will probably act on suggestion,

although you also say you have twice already made same

suggestion to Gibson who has not, apparently, felt it wise; (3) it is

my belief that if adjournment takes place and Bridgeman is called

home for consultation, Admiralty will again obtain command of

situation and we shall lose whatever gains we have made by

intervention in London. It is wholly within range of possibility

that the British will then take the position that as result of our

position any further Conference at this time is useless.”

Only definite proposition suggested by Chamberlain is to agree on

maximum tonnages each class of ships until 1936. No proposition regarding

tonnages of each class was made, so I am unable to understand what is

meant by “definite proposals”.

I have no desire whatever to take from the delegation the authority to decide

whether or not it is advisable to take short adjournment at this time. One

would certainly be preferable to having Conference break up in deadlock. I

have already apprised Sir Esme Howard of substance of my telegram to Mr.

Houghton. Howard asked me if he might say to Chamberlain that I had

suggested adjournment to you. I said he could, but that decision would

wholly rest with delegation. Please telegraph Houghton any suggestions

you have in mind to make about my message and on possible adjournment.

KELLOGG

[Document 100]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 5: p.m.]

follow. Chamberlain’s first proposal, as we understand it, is precisely what

we have consistently urged, to wit, the fixing for a period concurrent with

the life of the Washington treaty of a total tonnage for each class, reserving

to each of the signatories the right to construct in accordance with its

requirements. Chamberlain may, however, have intended to suggest a

limitation as to types of cruisers which would have the result of forcing

upon us certain kinds of vessels unsuited to our needs.

With respect to the four assertions made by Sir Austen, I desire to make the

following observations:

1. It is perfectly well understood by the British delegation that

because of the requirements for extensive cruising radius and the

greatest protection obtainable in conjunction therewith, the largest

sizes of cruisers are of the most value to us.

2. There can be no advantage in discussing the matter of

restricting the number of cruisers of maximum size until the

British shall have consented to a total figure for the whole cruiser

category. Although the matter has been kept open for subsequent

discussion, we cannot of course in the absence of definite

assurance of an embracing and real limitation, make any

commitment on this matter.

3. An adjournment of the Conference or the recall of Bridgeman

would not appear to be advisable in the event of Bridgeman’s

being instructed to arrive at an accord on a sensible tonnage

figure by classes. Whether a common meeting ground can be

found for the Japanese and the British is the real and relatively

simple point at issue. We ourselves occupy an advantageous

middle ground. The delegates appear to be in a better frame of

mind and the moment to urge a decision seems opportune. While

we should naturally not withhold consent to, we do not

recommend compliance [sic] with a British request for

adjournment, should such be made.

4. It is too early to venture an opinion concerning the advisability

of your meeting Chamberlain in Geneva until we know whether

any concessions will be consented to at this time by the British.

Unless unforeseen eventualities occur, we are of the opinion that

your influence can be of greatest value in Washington where it

has to date been extremely efficacious.

Copy sent to London.

GIBSON

[Document 101]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 8: p.m.]

87. This morning Bridgeman, Cecil, Ishii, and I consulted together

privately. Considering that disguised repetitions are the only proposals that

have been brought forward by the British thus far, I was ready to tell

Bridgeman that the United States had only one positive condition, i. e., that

the cruiser requirements of the British Empire should come within a total

tonnage that could be considered as actual naval limitation, but that up to

the present every British proposal had in effect asked us to sanction by an

international treaty their idea of a naval building program, which was

already a burden, and at the same time they had attempted to make the

United States use types and characteristics that were not at all suitable to

our requirements.

To my gratification, both Bridgeman and Cecil were in a most friendly

mood and while endeavoring in every possible way to overcome any real

reduction in their cruiser figures, gave me the impression that they were

becoming convinced that they must make a real effort to meet the American

viewpoint. In consequence, I refrained from following the plan I had in

mind. Bridgeman still insisted upon a plenary session for Thursday, but he

promised that he would send me before the meeting a copy of his

contemplated statement in which he would only attempt to make clear the

British position with the hope of reaching an agreement.

The following proposal was suggested by Ishii:64

“If the three powers retain the existing ships, complete the ships

under construction, and execute all of the authorized programs,

the displacement tonnage of auxiliary surface craft, in the near

future, will be represented by the following figures: For Great

Britain 691,000 tons, for the United States of America 648,000

tons, for Japan 442,000 tons.

If the three powers were successful in arriving at an agreement to

cut down approximately 30 percent respectively from the above

figures, it may be said that an effective limitation has been

realized.

In such an event the strength which will be allotted to the

respective powers will be as follows: For Great Britain about

484,000 tons, for the United States of America about 454,000

tons, for Japan about 310,000 tons.”

With reference to the above I would add that the Japanese, in discussing

their proposition, recognized the principle of parity between Great Britain

and the United States and the slight difference in the American and British

total tonnages would be adjusted on that basis in their opinion.

It was impossible, Bridgeman stated, to discuss by telegraph any such

extreme reductions. He assured us that he would have his experts make a

study of the entire question.

At the end of the conference, I stated most emphatically that until the

Japanese and British reached some common meeting ground, it was useless

to discuss secondary matters; that I considered this the prime and essential

problem now before us. This seemed to be realized by the British and as a

consequence the conversation was mainly between the Japanese and

themselves. They finally decided that the Japanese suggestion above quoted

should be given further consideration.

This telegram has been repeated to London for Embassy’s information.

GIBSON

[Document 102]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

GENEVA, July 14, 1927—noon.

[Received 2: p.m.]

British sources have been circulated here in regard to activities of

representatives of steel interests and others who are interested in the

building of a big navy. I have several times had questions asked me about

this by British press correspondents, but nobody has been able to point out

who these representatives of special interests are. We know of no one who

answers description. It is my own opinion the assertions made are effort by

British to explain attitude of American press. The aggressive spirit evinced

by American correspondents here comes not from any outside inspiration

but, so they tell me, wholly from their indignation at what they regard as

raw efforts of one of the other delegations to use them against interests of

their own country. This reaction among our correspondents has been

unanimous regardless of politics and to us it seems obvious that this is

correct explanation. The British have not handled press well throughout

Conference, and seem unable to understand that American journalists are

fundamentally self-respecting and patriotic. Repeated to London.

GIBSON

[Document 103]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

163. British Ambassador called on me this morning and read telegram

containing same suggestion quoted in your telegram No. 162, July 12, noon.

Ambassador is equally at loss to know precisely what Chamberlain means

by “class”, and whole confusion seems to arise on that point. I think it

would be best, nevertheless, if you would give Chamberlain an answer to

his suggestion in which you would make clear how his words are

understood here and by our delegation at Conference. This Government’s

original proposal was clear and definite and was not subject to

misunderstanding, and we should be especially careful that no confusion be

permitted to arise from use of same terms in different senses by the

American and the British Governments.

In regard to adjournment of Conference, I did not intend in my telegram to

you to overrule our delegation’s decision, but merely to suggest to Gibson

and his colleagues that we thought that if they came to an impasse or if the

British Government wished to consult with Bridgeman, then an

adjournment might serve a useful purpose; certainly if British Government

wanted an adjournment, we should not object. At present Gibson thinks

progress is being made, so there is no immediate necessity for adjournment.

KELLOGG

[Document 104]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

after giving a great deal of thought to the matter, decided that as a last resort

you might accept Chamberlain’s suggestion that you meet him in Geneva.

However, we are of the opinion that this suggestion may be a part of the

effort now being made by the British to postpone a decision in the hope that

the issue may be obscured thereby. The passing of time may be of great

assistance to them in achieving this point. Do you not think that you might

bring the British to some decision by stating to Chamberlain in a friendly

manner your idea that it would be useless for you to meet him in Geneva;

that no concessions have thus far been made by the British which would

bring them within what the Japanese consider an effective limitation; that

we have at Geneva a delegation to consider any reasonable proposal, if the

British are prepared to make concessions; that it is useless for you to travel

all the way from America merely to note the fact that they have no such

proposal to offer. Such a statement might be the means of causing them to

reach a quick decision as to whether they will accept responsibility for

breaking up the Conference or will consent to real naval limitation.

It may also be well to suggest to Chamberlain that it would scarcely be

appropriate for you to come to Geneva to endeavor to reach a solution for

the British in determining differences which are blocking all progress at the

present time.

With reference to the above, Admiral Jones and I have just received a visit

from Saito who told us definitely that the Japanese refuse even to discuss a

figure exceeding 315,000 tons in the combined destroyer and cruiser classes

for Japan. This point, he further said, was today being brought

unequivocally to the British delegation’s attention. Thus it will be up to

them to decide whether they will reduce their figures to approximately

500,000 tons for the combined cruiser and destroyer classes or accept

whatever consequences may result from their refusal.

GIBSON

[Document 105]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

explained to me that by class of ships Sir Austen Chamberlain meant the

different classes of cruisers rather than the categories of naval craft;

explanation renders his proposal valueless and of no significance to us.

KELLOGG

[Document 106]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

Geneva and telegraphed to Houghton at noon as follows, in accordance

with your suggestion:

“165. If any possible feeling on Chamberlain’s part that the

Secretary of State may be willing to enter Conference in last

moment attempt to effect settlement should cause him to delay

search for some real compromise, I think that you should make

plain to him in friendly way that I do not foresee any

circumstances which would make advisable my going to Geneva,

that I see no necessity for going, and that I do not intend to go.

Question is now reduced to simple proposition, it seems to me, as

to whether British can reduce their figures on total, cruiser

tonnage in order to enable the other two delegations to find

necessary basis for real limitation agreement which would be

acceptable in their countries. The American proposition was very

carefully considered and was worked out in conferences between

Navy Department and Department of State, and American

delegation has already expressed its willingness to agree to much

larger total tonnage than either the American or Japanese

Government believes essential. If Great Britain can, for her part,

make concessions, the American delegation has full authority to

act.

I have informed British Ambassador here that I am cabling you

along these lines.”

Ketoce

[Document 107]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

100. It would be helpful for my guidance if [in] such future statements as

may be necessary on short notice if I could have your criticisms of my

statement before [at] second plenary meeting, with indication of points

which should in future statements be omitted, modified or stressed. As the

situation arose on a few hours’ notice I had to act on my best judgment,

with full realization of the responsibility; but you will of course understand

that whenever time permits I shall submit full text of remarks for your

approval.

GIBSON

[Document 108]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

105. This morning Bridgeman, Cecil, Ishii, and Saito met with me privately.

The conversation was begun by Ishii by referring to previous informal talks

between Admiral Field of the British delegation and Admiral Kobayashi of

the Japanese delegation. He laid stress on the tentative nature of the

previous conversations and said that naturally no definite agreement had

been concluded but that the Japanese had cabled Tokyo a complete résumé

of what had taken place. Viscount Ishii then gave me a memorandum which

contained all the items of their conversation. After looking over the

Japanese memorandum, Mr. Bridgeman said that it was an exact résumé of

the discussions as he had understood them. Substance of the memorandum

follows:

1. Tonnage totals to be allocated to auxiliary fighting ships other

than undersea craft:

(a) Admiral Kobayashi of Japan made the following

suggestions: 484,000 tons for Great Britain, and

315,000 tons for the Japanese Empire.

(b) Admiral Field suggested the following figures:

Japan 325,000 tons, and Great Britain 500,000 tons.

2. One-fourth of the tonnage totals in obsolete vessels shall

likewise be retained.

3. There shall be a limitation in number fixed for cruisers of

10,000 tons: For America and Great Britain 12 each, and for the

Japanese Empire 8.

4. Ships mentioned below shall be retained:

By the British Empire: The York, and 4 of the Hawkins

type of cruiser;

By the United States: 10 Omaha-type cruisers;

By Japan: 4 of the Furutaka type.

5. Problem of building other cruisers mounting 8-inch guns: The

Japanese Empire does not intend to lay keels of any more 8-inch-

gun ships before January 1, 1937.

6. There shall be a maximum percentage agreed on to be allocated

to cruisers and to destroyers.

7. Concerning submarines:

(a) According to the statement of Admiral Kobayashi,

Japan would need approximately 70,000 tons of

submarines.

(b) The figure of 60,000 tons of undersea craft for each

of the three countries was proposed by Admiral Field.

This, you will observe, is almost identical with the report in my telegram

on the fact that the Japanese had reached the figure of 325,000 tons by

adding 10,000 to the former total beyond which they had declared

themselves resolved not to go, and by eliminating, on Admiral Field’s

suggestion, 10,000 tons of submarines. This change, he believed, would be

welcome to the Japanese Finance Ministry since the cost per ton of

submarines was far greater than for surface vessels.

I inquired, with reference to point 2, what the age limit of vessels was to be.

The American suggestion of 16 years for destroyers and 20 years for

cruisers was acceptable to Japan, Ishii replied. Bridgeman appeared

uncertain as to this point but Cecil stated that it was his idea that the

original Japanese proposal of 12 years for destroyers and 16 years for

cruisers had been adopted. (While the matter seems to have been left

unsettled it is evident that the British would prefer the Japanese suggestions

as to age limits to their own in view of their desire to retain a certain

number of ships having reached the age limit.)

The ships named in point 4, it is pointed out, would come within the total

limit of 500,000 tons. They were specially mentioned in order to indicate

that they would be kept despite their being above the 6,000–ton figure

desired by the British as the largest size below 10,000 tons. They would, of

course, not be numbered among vessels dealt with in point 3, displacing

10,000 tons.

I was assured that there was no intention to depart from the idea of a treaty

which should end in 1936. The Japanese delegation were asked by Cecil

whether they attached great importance to parity in submarines mentioned

in point 7 (b). Ishii unhesitatingly replied that Japan needed at least 60,000

tons but would raise no difficulty if the United States and Great Britain

desired for themselves a larger figure. (Ishii’s calm and lucid declaration

leads me to infer that, despite the fact that Admiral Field had suggested it,

Japan did not intend to stand out for equality in submarines.)

Concerning point 5, the American delegation stated that they would have

opinions to give upon this, as the Japanese situation was different from that

of the American in that on the basis of the proposals made the Americans

would have available tonnage for 8-inch-gun cruisers whereas the Japanese

would have no such tonnage. However, until we had had an opportunity to

study the entire memorandum, I thought it wisest to postpone discussion of

the question.

The communiqué which I quoted in my telegram No. 104, July 18, was

drawn up in agreement between us at the end of the Conference and an

arrangement was made for a meeting tomorrow morning for further

discussion.

[Document 109]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

necessitated preparation of your statement so as to conform to situation at

last moment; there was, I know, insufficient time for you to submit it to me.

I think it was a dignified, comprehensive, and moderate speech, and

American press agrees with me in this opinion. My general criticism of it

would be that there was tendency throughout to use general instead of

specific terms in those places where exact meaning of a reference could not

fail to be clear to hearers around the table but which might conceivably be

obscure to world at large for whose benefit it was that British had urged the

plenary session. That is to say, I see no reason why particular facts which

display British attitude should not be set forth; for example, reference to

fact that speedy, armed merchantmen are equivalents of cruisers with 6-inch

guns and that United States has comparatively small number of such

merchant vessels. I should also have laid stress on fact of British acceptance

of cruiser and destroyer tonnage which was agreed to at Washington

Conference on Limitation of Armament, at which no claim was made for

greater tonnage, and that world conditions since that Conference have

certainly not been more threatening than they were then and do not justify

the enormous tonnage increases demanded. At point where you suggested

that United States did not commence the building of 10,000-ton cruisers, I

should have made specific statement that Great Britain had four 9,750-ton

cruisers built between 1918 and 1925, of which two were built after

Washington Conference; that since then twelve have been built, that two are

now building and one laid down. These figures are taken from

Chamberlain’s statement to me. I should inquire what country would raid

British commerce; against whom could British Government require

increases in cruiser tonnage? Especial emphasis should be laid on question

of economy which British have been constantly bringing forward; it is

important to show as you did that there is no economy in reducing unit sizes

of battleships where the total tonnage remains the same, and the same

observation applies to cruisers.

Should another plenary session become necessary I believe that a downright

statement of facts to justify our conclusions is especially desirable; it is our

desire, of course, to be courteous, but the facts should be stated no matter

whom they hit.

Against the event that question of commerce raiders be again brought up in

public session it is possible that it might be well to have prepared a list of

the entire cruiser strength of all countries outside the three powers present

at the Conference in order to see from what quarter Great Britain might

have cause to fear that disturbances might come.

If Conference breaks up, then you should make a clear, specific statement

of our position, stressing the points on which disagreement exists, pointing

out particularly the enormous increase that Great Britain may demand; the

increase in original cost and maintenance; and that instead of decreasing or

limiting burdens of taxation Great Britain’s position would increase them.

Statement should be as brief as can be, and should cover salient points; time

should be taken for its preparation. It is difficult, I know, to frame such

statement now, as first you have to know exactly points on which

Conference might fail to arrive at agreement.

KELLOGG

[Document 110]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

106. A decision on certain specific matters will clearly be necessary if the

memorandum cited in my telegram No. 105 of July 18 is to be outlined as a

groundwork for further debate respecting surface vessels. These matters

which we ask you to consider and upon which we would like to have

instructions from you are: (1) The proportion allotted to Japan with relation

tonnage of the suggested smaller cruiser type.

suggested figure of 500,000 tons of surface craft for the United States and

Great Britain and 325,000 tons for the Japanese Empire. This ratio in the

opinion of the naval advisers concedes too much and might gravely

endanger the American western Pacific position. They believe that no

departure from the 5–3 ratio should be permitted and draw your attention to

the Navy General Board papers on the subject. A small advance over the 5–

3 ratio might possibly be made if one or several smaller vessels were named

or concession in destroyers were made but this is only proposed because the

Japanese would be offended by our intransigence on the subject of ratio,

which might frustrate further efforts to arrive at an agreement.

The proposed smaller category of cruiser and the nature of its armament is

the really crucial point involved in the question of the 8-inch gun.

Throughout the negotiations the British have been insistent that this

category should be limited to guns of 6 inches, while our Naval advisers all

agree that we must strictly maintain the right of placing 8-inch guns on the

smaller class. This entails the necessity of a maximum unit tonnage of at

least 8,300 tons. Since the Japanese would have no extra tonnage within

which to build this type of cruiser until 1936 we can scarcely expect them

to support our position to any great extent, although we believe them to be

in agreement with us in principle and think that they would have no

objection to the maximum displacement above-mentioned with respect to

the smaller type of cruiser. We desire to be instructed regarding the

maximum size of the lesser type of cruiser and as to the question of the 8-

inch gun. There can be no advantage in discussing any remaining questions

until a decision is reached on these two matters. It is, moreover, on these

very questions that the British might try to break up the Conference should

we be firm in standing on our position. While we interpret our instructions

as directing us strictly to maintain, in respect to all future cruisers, our class

of armament, your definite corroboration of this is desired.

With reference to the retention of obsolete vessels, the British suggestion is

clearly a camouflaged means of bringing total limitation to 625,000 tons,

which is, however, within a figure which can be discussed by us. Certain

factors such as quantity are susceptible of being changed, in order to render

the plan more agreeable to us until 1936, but until the points mentioned in

the preceding paragraph are settled it is idle to go into these features of the

situation and this also applies to the question of the number of 10,000-ton

vessels which each country might have.

It is seriously within the bounds of possibility that the Conference might be

wrecked on any one of these matters, and we accordingly seek your

instructions thereupon. While, of course, we are ready firmly to hold our

ground, we are of the opinion that the entire subject should be studied by

you both in its technical and its political aspects before we take up our final

position.

GIBSON

[Document 111]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

discussion that it may readily be reached provided that either:

1. The British were to renounce their demand for small-type

cruisers and their insistence upon restricting the 8-inch gun; or,

2. The Americans were to withdraw demand for liberty of

armament, which we do not believe you have any intention of

doing. It is our opinion that the British delegation in Geneva is so

influenced by Admiralty tenets that it is unable duly to consider

the broader suggestions which are not sponsored by some ulterior

motive. Therefore, it is thought you may care to consider

discussing this problem with the British Ambassador in a very

informal and personal way, pointing out to Sir Esme the

insistence of the British in thrusting upon the United States a class

of cruiser for which our country has practically no use in their

endeavor to abolish the 8-inch gun and the resentment that will be

engendered in the United States by such a maneuver; that due to

previous construction it is plainly to be seen that the British will

continue to have a superior strength in cruisers during the

existence of the treaty under discussion; that should the United

States consent to withdraw her demands concerning the 8-inch

gun the British superiority would be definitely increased by

reason of the fact that Great Britain has 49 merchant ships and

our inferiority would be most evidently accentuated by a strict

limitation as to ships concerned. Should the British Government

recognize freely our right to decide the type of armament required

by us, which in any case would be exercised only in regard to a

small part of the tonnage allocated to us, the British Ambassador

could judge for himself whether, under ordinary circumstances

and without irritation of an artificial nature, the United States

would be likely to build a sufficient number of 8-inch-gun

cruisers to give Great Britain any serious concern. The disruption

of the Conference over this issue, on the other hand, could not fail

to give rise to a popular demand for the building of cruisers

armed with 8-inch guns to such an extent as to be disagreeable to

us and to constitute the contrary of what the British seek to bring

about. We naturally could give no undertaking regarding the

future actions of Congress in case of agreement, but the British

Ambassador should realize that the most sensible manner of

dealing with us in the premises is to avoid raising any question as

to our freedom in matters of armament which would result only in

marked resentment accentuated by the knowledge that, since the

Japanese share our views, the British are alone in seeking to limit

us to 6-inch guns.

If you approve of this, the effect of such action might be increased if you

could telegraph Houghton the substance of the conversation for

confirmation to Chamberlain and to me so that I might inform Bridgeman

in the premises.

GIBSON

[Document 112]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

LONDON, July 19, 1927—noon.

had an interview with Chamberlain and gave him an outline of its contents.

He stated that he was fully of the opinion that nothing would be

accomplished by a meeting at Geneva between you both. Chamberlain

further said that he had only suggested this because he had been told

through informal sources in Washington that you had given consideration to

such a meeting.

He considered that it would be more advisable to allow the delegates at

Geneva to discuss any British concessions as regards the size of cruisers or

the total tonnage thereof.

This telegram has been transmitted to Geneva for delegation’s information.

HOUGHTON

106].

[Document 113]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

Secretary of the Navy and with the naval experts, our opinion is outlined as

follows:

in regard to slight concessions should exact ratio be impractical;

2 and 3. After reaching agreement on total cruiser tonnage, we

must retain right to construct number and type of cruisers up to

10,000 tons together with liberty to arm such cruisers up to 8-inch

guns, within total tonnage agreed upon, or as with new

construction our needs may require;

4. We do not understand Japanese delegation’s suggestion set

and additional figures. We fail to see how the 25 percent of the

total tonnage of old vessels would make it possible for us to use

destroyer tonnage until we should have built up in cruiser

tonnage. We should have to scrap these, apparently, and would be

unable to build any more. We do not understand, moreover, why

the British proposition has it that we build only twelve 10,000-ton

cruisers when the British themselves have larger number if their

9,750-ton cruisers are included.

5. We do not believe that the British actually intend to limit

tonnage of cruisers to extent which will be satisfactory, but have

in mind to break up Conference on matter of size of guns and

cruisers. It is our belief that British should first agree on total

cruiser tonnage not to exceed our 400,000 tons.

KELLOGG

[Document 114]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

108. Meeting this morning with Bridgeman, Cecil, Ishii and Saito to

pointed out that in my opinion the suggestion of 500,000 tons surface craft

and the retention in addition thereto of 25 percent over-age vessels was in

effect a camouflage method of increasing total tonnage to 625,000 tons; that

while latter figure was within range of figures we had reluctantly indicated

a willingness to discuss I felt that it might be more candid to give the total

tonnage including so-called over-age ships, particularly if the age limit

fixed was to be 16 years for cruisers and 12 for destroyers. I said that it

might be different if the age limits were 20 and 16 years. Bridgeman said

that their suggestion had been on the bases of 16 and 12 years respectively

but that these ages might be open to negotiation. Ishii stated that Japanese

delegation had felt that for ships constructed prior to Washington

Conference and which had gone through the war the figure of 16 and 12

years might be equitable but that for post-Washington ships they would

desire age limits to 20 and 16 years respectively. Ishii also indicated that the

idea of a separate class of over-age vessels would be convenient for them,

[that they?] could accept a reasonable ratio to 500,000 tons for the United

States and Great Britain but could not agree to a ratio to 625,000 tons.

(Apparently the camouflage facilitates Japanese position as it would not

require new construction on their part to reach approximately 300,000 tons

of surface craft other than the 10,000-ton cruisers contemplated.)

I pointed out that except for destroyers and certain decrepit armored

cruisers we would have nothing that would go into the over-age class but

that if we could reach agreement on other questions I would be prepared to

discuss a formula for retention of over-age ships but could not commit

myself to it at the present juncture.

I then stated that I wished to get down to the real question upon which our

whole discussion hinged, namely, the 8-inch gun; that if this question was

discussed solely from the technical point of view it was doubtful if a

solution could be realized; that the only possible way to reach a solution

was through discussing the problem from the point of view of its practical

application to the relations of the two countries; that it was nothing more

than the question of how we were likely to use a part of our cruiser tonnage

and that I wished to present to them the broad political aspects of this

question rather than its technicalities.

I made it clear that on the basis of 300,000 tons of cruisers and assuming

twelve or more 10,000-ton cruisers were constructed and with retention of

Omahas we would have available only 100,000 tons or less for other cruiser

construction and that as a practical matter during the life of the treaty it was

in my personal opinion problematical whether we would avail ourselves of

all of this tonnage in 8-inch-gun cruisers in addition to the construction of a

given number of 10,000-ton cruisers.

In view of Japanese situation which on the basis under discussion would

permit no new construction of vessels other than specified 10,000-ton

vessels the issue was clearly one between the United States and Great

Britain and I asked the British delegates to clearly consider our probable

course of action in the way of construction of 8-inch [-gun] vessels; first, if

we reached friendly agreement and had a treaty; and second, if our

negotiations broke down because of British attempt to impose on us a type

of vessel which is unsuitable for us.

I said that in my opinion if an attempt were made to deny our liberty of

armament within tonnage limitation there was danger they would find they

had driven us into an extensive building program.

I made it quite clear that in my opinion treaty which deprived us of our

liberty of action with respect to arming the proposed second class of

cruisers as we saw fit would not be ratified; that Great Britain had assured

cruiser supremacy for many years to come, an overwhelming merchant fleet

which could be armed; that we could not be expected to accept restrictions

as to arming cruisers and that an attempt to deny us our liberty of action

would be the best method of arousing popular resentment and driving us

into a big building program.

Cecil seemed to be considerably impressed by this statement, Bridgeman

less so. Latter stated that our insistence upon right to build 8-inch [-gun]

cruisers would force them to readjust their tonnage levels upward; that they

had already made considerable concessions to get down to tonnage levels

which we could all discuss and that this had been conditioned upon

elimination of 8-inch gun except on specified number of 10,000-ton

cruisers.

I asked Bridgeman to look at this whole problem along the lines I had

indicated; that the crux of the whole problem was whether they thought we

were likely to dispose of 100,000 tons or less of cruisers tonnage in such a

way as to threaten the security of the British Empire. If so, we ought to

know it. If not, there should be no strong reason for contesting our right to

build as we like.

I then reemphasized that in my opinion British insistence was based on fear

of a situation which was not likely to arise, namely, a building program of

8-inch-gun vessels which would be source of apprehension to the British

Empire, and I again suggested the possibility of some political clause in the

treaty which would permit reexamination of the cruiser provision in the

event that our construction of 8-inch-gun vessels was a cause of

apprehension to either of the other contracting powers. Cecil took up this

suggestion and we had a brief discussion as to the form which such an

article might take and then adjourned until tomorrow when we will give the

matter further consideration.

[Paraphrase.] A stipulation of this nature may conceivably afford an escape

from the present difficulty and I shall today or tomorrow cable you a

proposed solution in accordance with this idea. Additional instructions from

his Government are awaited by Bridgeman and he is not urging an early

decision on the matter of 8-inch guns. Sending copy to London. [End

paraphrase.]

[Document 115]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

GENEVA, July 19, 1927—midnight.

110. I was informed this evening by Bridgeman that Cecil and he had

received instructions to proceed to London for consultations which would

consume about a week’s time, but that he trusted he would be able to return

to Geneva by Monday to resume his duties. It seems to me that while

Bridgeman and Cecil are discussing matters with the Cabinet in London it

would be a most opportune time for a plain presentation of the American

attitude as regards essentials to be placed before the British. My reason for

suggesting this is that from the commencement of the Conference both the

Japanese and American delegations have felt that Bridgeman was loath to

believe that the statements made by our two delegations were the real

opinions of the American and Japanese Governments, and that we would

eventually accede to the British proposals if some method could be found to

disguise the main issues. We therefore undertake to suggest that you present

to the British Ambassador or to Mr. Chilton a full statement of our views in

the premises, or, if you do not consider this advisable, that you have Mr.

Houghton transmit a résumé of our position to Chamberlain in London so

that during their conferences with Bridgeman the Cabinet may have our

opinions before them. It is further suggested that a plain statement be made

that we consider the following points absolutely essential and that we have

no intention of foregoing these, and that we do not consider it at all

necessary to continue discussing other matters if the British are unwilling to

have a discussion on this basis.

1. In order to negotiate a treaty which would be acceptable to us it

would be necessary to fix a tonnage level which would represent

real limitation, i. e., very slightly greater than tonnage now in use

by the British plus the surface combatant vessels they now have

under construction.

2. Under an amount to be determined upon, the United States

cannot agree to a limitation of unit displacement of cruisers which

would render impossible mounting what we consider efficient 8-

inch gun batteries.

Definite announcement by the British regarding their stand on the above

matters would make it possible for us to decide whether any advantage

would be gained by proceeding further with our negotiations. Therefore, we

entertain the hope that Mr. Bridgeman will, upon his return from London,

be able to give us definite replies.

In my conversation with him this evening I said that I hoped the British

would find it possible to meet us on some common ground and that he

would not return with their old proposals under different guise.

GIBSON

[Document 116]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

week, it is somewhat embarrassing to take matter up again with British

Government. I am willing, however, to do anything that will be of

assistance in bringing about an agreement.

In regard to your suggestions, the first seems to be taken care of by my

telegram to Houghton; do not fully understand the second.

If I go no further than to say to the British that we cannot accept limitation

of unit displacement of cruisers which would preclude armament of

efficient battery of 8-inch guns, would not British assume that we are

willing to make agreement to build cruisers below 10,000 tons with 8-inch

guns?

KELLOGG

106].

[Document 117]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

the liberty, after agreement on total tonnage for cruisers, to construct within

the agreed tonnage any type and number of vessels up to 10,000 tons with

the right of placing thereon 8-inch guns or such armament as our

requirements might call for.

This would constitute, and we feel it our duty to draw your attention to the

fact, a more unbending attitude than was envisaged in the course of the

conversations we had in Washington when it was determined that our rights

should be upheld to the allocation in maximum size cruisers of 60 to 70

percent of our total cruiser tonnage. The statement under reference, further,

runs counter to Admiral Jones’ declarations in the technical committee and

to my own statements in the plenary session and to those of the other chief

delegates, to the effect that we would be willing to examine the subject of

the percentage of largest size cruisers if desired. We feel quite certain,

should we at the present time flatly declare our right to allocate our entire

tonnage to 10,000-ton vessels, that the British would claim that we had

gone back on our previous promises in the matter and would be quick to use

this as an excuse for wrecking the Conference. In the event of a rupture, we

should be most careful not to furnish them with a pretext. My telegram No.

106, July 18, contained a suggestion concerning the smaller class of cruiser

which had been elaborated by the naval advisers of our delegation. They are

now in receipt of the Navy Department’s studies, transmitted in your

telegram No. 56, of July 19, which show that our needs can be efficiently

met by an 8,300-ton cruiser, and we therefore believe that it would be far

[Document 118]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

59. There is no intention to restrict you to more rigid stand than was thought

of during discussions in Washington in regard to the use of about 70 percent

of total tonnage in the construction of 10,000-ton cruisers. Remaining

cruiser tonnage would include 10 cruisers of the Omaha class and the class

of efficient 8-inch-gun cruisers of an agreed tonnage. Department does not

desire you, of course, to refuse to discuss any plan or proposal which you

have agreed to discuss. Department feels, however, that recommendation

all new cruisers with 8-inch guns should be adhered to.

KELLOGG

[Document 119]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

60. Sir Esme Howard called on me today, primarily, so he said, to let me

know that Mr. Chilton was returning to Washington, but that Sir Esme

himself was going back to Manchester, Massachusetts, but would come

down any time I wished. He then remarked, incidentally, that he had

observed in the press that the British and Japanese delegations had reached

agreement on equality of submarine tonnage, and that he wished to deny

truth of report. I said that I did not understand that the two delegations had

come to such an agreement, although the British had proposed one which

the Japanese had stated they did not desire. I thought it well that I should let

him know I was aware of the British proposition. The Ambassador then

discussed the Conference very generally, saying he was not very hopeful in

regard to it and that he felt Great Britain had made great concessions but

that the American delegation had not made any. I stated very emphatically

that our delegation had made extensive concessions by suggesting we might

agree to tonnage level much higher than we had originally proposed; that it

was true that if the British demanded over 400,000 tons there would be no

object to making a treaty, and that we did not believe that the Japanese

would accept this. As far as concerns Great Britain’s position in trying to

force this Government to build the greater portion of its cruisers in small

tonnage with 6-inch guns, the British Government might as well understand

that the Government of the United States could not and would not accept it.

I explained to him again the necessity for larger unit cruiser displacement

and for 8-inch-gun armament, particularly in view of larger number of

merchantmen which Great Britain has which she can arm with 6-inch guns.

Howard said that British Navy denied this. I replied that I depended on our

Navy for our opinion. I also took advantage of this occasion practically to

comply with your No. 110, July 19, midnight, and to inform Howard that

Great Britain must not only agree to a total tonnage, if any treaty was to be

made, but must also agree to the mounting of 8-inch guns. I do not doubt

that he will report immediately to his Government what I said.

KELLOGG

[Document 120]

The Ambassador in Japan (MacVeagh) to the Secretary of State

102. A member of my staff who had an informal talk with the Vice Minister

for Foreign Affairs today took the occasion to refer to the reported

agreement on July 16th at Geneva by the Japanese delegation with the last

British proposal. The Vice Minister for Foreign Affairs stated that Admiral

Kobayashi had expressed the opinion to Admiral Field that the Japanese

Government would accept these proposals. Mr. Debuchi said that the

Japanese Government had not however given its assent and that the

proposals were still subject to tripartite discussion. He intimated that the

Japanese Government still hoped to bring the maximum combined cruiser-

destroyer tonnage down to 450,000 tons and stated that the British 6-inch

gun proposal had not received the approval of the naval experts here. He

said that the Japanese Government also realized that the obsolete cruiser

tonnage clause presented difficulties. As regards submarine tonnage, he said

that the Japanese had hoped for 70,000 tons. The Vice Minister for Foreign

Affairs reiterated, however, that no decision had been reached by the

Japanese Government and that they especially wished our Government to

understand, as he having [had] made and felt sure Saito had made plain,

that they have no intention of placing us in a difficult position by reaching a

preliminary accord with the British. He said that this was a three-power

Conference and would remain so.

MACVEAGH

[Document 121]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, July 22, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I have not written you of late about the Geneva

Conference, as I thought the paraphrase of telegrams we are forwarding

would keep you fairly well posted, that is, if you have time to go through

them. I know it is quite a job and the discussion is often more or less

technical. Everything that comes from Geneva is taken up with the Navy

Department and I am keeping in close touch with the Secretary and with

Admiral Eberle and his Assistants. I cannot say that I am very hopeful of

any practical result from the Conference. As you will notice, there seems to

be very little trouble about an agreement so far as submarines and

destroyers are concerned, although no definite understanding has yet been

reached by the Conference, but there are very grave difficulties over the

question of cruisers. The principal points raised are, first, the total tonnage

of cruisers, and second, the size of cruisers and the gun caliber of their

armament. As to the first proposition, as you know much to the surprise of

everybody, Great Britain’s demands as to the tonnage of cruisers were

exorbitant. Japan would not think of agreeing to anything of the kind and so

far as the United States is concerned it would be perfectly unless, in fact,

injurious to make such an agreement. Admirals Jones and Long and Mr.

Gibson, who had been in touch with the British during the Preliminary

Conference and with the British Admiralty in London, were very greatly

suprised and disappointed. We had, in fact, no reason at all to think Great

Britain would demand any such thing.

You will notice that they started in with a suggestion of about 600,000 tons.

One of their experts even suggested 750,000 tons. They then came down to

562,000 tons and finally stated they would be willing to accept 462,000

tons up to 1936, but should build to 562,000 tons after that. Of course

neither Japan nor the United States was willing to agree to any such

proposition and after a long time I think the British Government came to the

conclusion that it was useless to negotiate on that basis. Finally the British,

after discussing it with the Japanese, suggested that they might agree to

500,000 tons of cruisers and destroyers, under sixteen years of age for

cruisers and twelve years of age for destroyers, provided they were

permitted to keep twenty-five percent of their total tonnage (500,000 tons)

in addition to this in vessels over these ages. Why this was put in this form I

cannot understand and neither do the Navy, and I am awaiting detailed

explanation from Geneva. We could agree to 500,000 tons which could be

divided, say 200,000 tons for destroyers and 300,000 tons for cruisers, and,

in fact, I suppose we might make an agreement for 625,000 tons divided

between the two. But it all depends on what we can build in the place of our

old cruisers, all of which are over twenty years of age except 75,000 tons,

and whether we would have to scrap a large number of modern destroyers.

On this subject we have not yet received any information.

Second, the question of the size of cruisers and armament is a more difficult

problem. Great Britain insists that the three powers agree on the number of

10,000 ton cruisers which the countries shall reserve the right to build

during the life of the treaty and the number of smaller cruisers and the size

of guns. Great Britain would like to have 6,000 ton cruisers or 7,500 ton

cruisers, armed with six inch guns. Our experts in Geneva and the Navy

here insist on the right to build 10,000 ton cruisers armed with eight inch

guns, their reasons being that we need cruisers of wider cruising range than

a 6,000 or 7,000 ton cruiser can have, and that Great Britain has a large

number of merchant ships, over fifty I believe, which are fast and can be

armed with six inch guns, while we have but few. Great Britain has many

naval posts all over the world, which enables her to use smaller cruisers

with shorter cruising range.

In answer to this the British say that if we build all our cruisers hereafter

10,000 tons, they will be compelled to build a large number. Great Britain

already has something like seventeen cruisers between 9,750 tons and

10,000 tons, mostly the latter. Geneva has asked instructions as to whether

we insist on the right to build all our tonnage in 10,000 ton cruisers armed

with eight inch guns. After a long session yesterday, the Navy concluded

that as we already had ten 7,500 ton cruisers that we could agree that during

the life of this treaty we would not build over about seventy percent of our

total tonnage in 10,000 ton cruisers. I take it from all that was said

yesterday that we probably could not do it anyhow, and this would be a

perfectly safe agreement, at least the delegation at Geneva and the Navy

authorities here agree so, but they insist that if they build cruisers less than

10,000 tons they shall have the right to arm them with eight inch guns. Of

course this is a technical question on which I am not qualified to speak and

I am governed by the opinion of the Navy officials. However the fact that

we have 75,000 tons of these modern cruisers makes it safe for us to agree

on the percentage I have suggested. I think the Navy would be willing, if

we desired to build more than seventy percent of our total tonnage, to build

7,500 or 8,000 ton cruisers if they could arm them with eight inch guns.

Personally, I am under the impression that if we desire more cruisers we

could use some smaller cruisers at home bases, I mean by that in the

neighborhood of the United States and Hawaii, just as well as the British

Government would do, but I do not feel competent to decide this question

myself.

We sent a telegram yesterday authorizing them to agree that we would not

build over about seventy percent of our cruisers in 10,000 ton size before

the expiration of this treaty in 1936, but insisted on arming all our cruisers

except those we already had with eight inch guns. Of course, there is

absolutely nothing in Great Britain’s claim that the building of small

cruisers is an economy, because taking a certain tonnage, say 300,000 tons

of cruisers, of course it is more expensive to build small cruisers than large

cruisers and it is just the same with battleships if you wish to maintain the

same total tonnage. This economy program which Great Britain is putting

forward is without the slightest merit and is put forward in my judgment to

camouflage a demand for an enormous tonnage of cruisers.

The British delegation have been called home to consult the Cabinet. What

the result will be I cannot say, but I doubt very much whether Great Britain

will be willing to make any agreement which our Navy officials would be

willing to make and which we could get ratified by the Senate. I told the

British Ambassador yesterday that the American delegation had made great

concessions in raising the total tonnage of cruisers, that we did not believe

that the Japanese would even come up to this basis, that if the British

Government was trying to force the United States to build a major portion

of its cruisers in small tonnage armed with six inch guns they might as well

understand that we would not do it, that Britain must not only make a

limitation in total tonnage to which we could agree, with the right to arm

with eight inch guns, or no treaty could be made. I am doing, of course,

everything I can to make the Conference a success, practically spending all

my time at it, but I am somewhat disturbed by the situation over there and

by the insistence of the British Government on its demands. I cannot

understand against whom Great Britain feels it necessary to have such sized

armament. There are no other navies in the world which could possibly

endanger her commerce or her colonies, or could possibly threaten her

present navy and we have offered to put a clause in the treaty which would

release all parties if any country laid down a building program which would

threaten the building program of any of the signatory powers.

It is hard to keep you posted from day to day as things change so rapidly

and the flood of telegrams is so great I do not feel justified in sending all of

them to you by telegram.

Faithfully yours,

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 122]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Received 7 p.m. ]

my 105,75a should not be construed as a Japanese suggestion. It represents

points discussed by British and Japanese delegations and indicates a method

the British hope may serve to reconcile differences between British and

Japanese regarding total tonnage.

Following is in explanation of heading 2 respecting retention of an

additional 25 percent over and above 500,000 tons of surface craft for the

United States and Great Britain and approximately 300,000 tons for Japan.

In executive committee meeting July 9th Viscount Ishii said that the

Japanese delegation were prepared to consider favorably a suggestion made

by Mr. Bridgeman that if a number of ships were allowed to be retained

after they had reached their replacement age this would facilitate discussing

the questions of total tonnage and total number of smaller cruisers. This

idea of retaining over-age vessels has previously been incorporated in

of the proposal is:

First, neither the United States nor Great Britain shall maintain

more than 500,000 tons of auxiliary surface craft including

cruisers and destroyers which are under the age limits of 16 and

12 years;

Second, the two powers may each maintain an additional 125,000

tons of ships which have passed the ages of 16 and 12 years;

Third, as ships pass from the first to the second group they may

be replaced in the former by completed new construction; but in

the event that the tonnage of the second group had already been

entirely taken up by over-age vessels an equivalent tonnage from

the second group would have to be scrapped;

Fourth, the total tonnage of the first group could be filled up to its

limit by new construction and thereafter new construction could

only proceed as vessels of the first group passed the age limit.

Insofar as our present situation is concerned such a proposal would not

require immediate scrapping. In the allowed 500,000 tons of surface craft

old cruisers and all our 307,000 tons of destroyers. In the over-age tonnage

of 125,000 we could place our remaining 115,000 tons of very old cruisers

or we could maintain such other subdivision of cruisers and destroyers as

appeared desirable. As new cruisers are completed we could fill up the first

group to the allowed 500,000 tons and thereafter transfer over-age vessels

to the second group as required and scrap the oldest vessels when the

125,000-ton limitation is reached. (All figures in Washington standard

tons.)

This proposal as advanced is of advantage to Great Britain in that the total

tonnage figure is camouflaged and permits her to build up to a total of

500,000 tons of cruisers and destroyers below their proposed age limits of

16 years for cruisers and 12 years for destroyers. Great Britain is in a

position to fill the supplementary group of 125,000 tons during the life of

the treaty with efficient vessels which are now less than 16 years old (which

we could not do) and gives them a clear advantage over the United States of

all vessels placed in the second group. Before we could discuss such a plan

we should have to devise modifications which would give us adequate

compensation in second group.

The Japanese do not desire a total tonnage limitation which will lead to new

construction on their part, as they have stated that their people would force

them into building if the treaty permitted it. On the basis of approximately

300,000 tons of surface craft in first place they would not have any free

tonnage available for construction other than that tonnage required for the

completion of the 10,000-ton cruisers now building or projected by them.

Further they would not have any considerable number of vessels which

would pass into the second group thus making room for new construction.

The vessels which the Japanese would be able to place in the second group

are generally of low combatant value and it is judged from their previous

propositions that they feel they would be as satisfactorily situated without

these vessels as with them. The Japanese have apparently acquiesced in this

proposal in an endeavor to facilitate solution of the British problem. The

only features of this plan which might make it deserving of consideration

with a view to modification to meet our situation are that it tends to restrict

new construction on the part of the nations and brings the tonnage of

cruisers in first group within figures Japanese are apparently prepared to

discuss.

An unsatisfactory feature of this proposal as presented is that the cruisers

we have available for placing in the second group are of low combatant

value and it will be impossible for us to derive any considerable benefit as

far as cruisers are concerned from the additional [125,000 tons] during the

life of the treaty as compared with Great Britain unless some satisfactory

modification can be found. The Japanese, like ourselves, secure no

substantial benefit from second group but they seem more interested in

restricting first group to approximately 300,000 so as to make further new

construction unnecessary.

In unofficial conversations, members of the Japanese technical advisory

group have stated that they do not favor the plan for themselves and further

that they recognize the plan as being obviously unfair to the United States

in its present form. Ishii and Saito on the other hand seem favorably

disposed to the plan but probably would not oppose modifications which

would make it more equitable for us if such modifications did not force

them to demand changes for themselves which would require new

construction.

We are giving careful attention to this scheme and to modifications

necessary to make it even a possible basis for discussion as we object to its

camouflage features. We are working on modifications which will fully

guard our interests and limit tonnage in a straightforward manner.

[Document 123]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

with Japan, as set forth in my telegram 106 of July 18.

In a recent informal conversation with some of the members of the Japanese

delegation they expressed their regret that we had not taken up the question

of ratio with them in detail and they indicated their fear that other questions

would be settled, leaving unsettled only the question of ratio with Japan,

and that if the Conference should then fail on account of American-

Japanese disagreement on ratio this would bring about bad feeling between

the two countries which they were most’ desirous of avoiding.

Hitherto we have refrained on purpose from discussing the ratio question

with the Japanese in detail since our disagreements with British delegates

seemed of such a fundamental nature that it would be bad policy to raise

difficulties with the Japanese as well, particularly as we hoped for their

support in reducing the exaggerated British tonnage demands and the

maintenance of our freedom to arm with 8-inch guns. However, in view of

the possibility that the British delegation will be in a position to negotiate

on these points upon their return it may be necessary for us to discuss ratios

and tonnage with the Japanese at a very early date.

As you know, even before the Conference the Japanese were emphatic in

their demands that they could not take home a treaty based on the minority

ratio with any hope of obtaining ratification. Nevertheless, I have every

reason for hoping that even the encouragement which British have given

[Document 124]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

draft which follows is submitted with the hope that you will let us have

your comments as to whether you consider objectionable a political clause

similar to the one contained therein. The American delegation is conscious

that a treaty without such a clause would be preferred and will suggest such

a clause only should it prove to be the sole way of harmonizing our positive

stand concerning freedom of action on armament with the British insistence

that they will be compelled to ask for some rearrangement of the total

tonnage limitation for cruisers if the United States persists in maintaining its

right to build cruisers which will carry 8-inch guns.

As a practical thing, I do not believe the British would ever wish to make

use of such an article or that our construction program would ever cause

them any actual uneasiness and this was the only reason I suggested the

possibility of such a clause. However, it is quite possible that an article of

this nature might assist materially in obtaining British ratification of any

treaty which might be negotiated between the three powers at Geneva.

It should be understood, of course, that the draft given below is only a

rough form of what such an article might include and an expression of your

views in the premises would be appreciated:78

“In event that prior to December 31, 1936, any one of the

contracting powers shall consider that the tonnage allocation in

the cruiser class has been utilized by any other of the contracting

powers in a manner to call for an adjustment of the total tonnage

allocation of that class, such high contracting party may at any

time, subsequent to January 31, 1931, convoke a meeting of the

Powers parties to the present treaty, with a view to ascertaining

whether such an adjustment can be made by mutual agreement. In

the event that no agreement is reached at such a conference, any

of the high contracting parties may give notice of the desire to

terminate the present convention and this notification shall be

effective within one year after the receipt thereof by the other

parties to the treaty. In such an event, the treaty shall terminate

with respect to all of the parties thereto.”

When this matter was discussed in the American delegation, the opinion

was expressed that while it was improbable, from a practical standpoint,

that a conference would be convened by reason of any program of

American naval construction, nevertheless, such a clause might give rise to

the objection that a pretext is given to bring diplomatic pressure designed to

hamper legitimate construction.

This objectionable feature might be overcome by an article in which more

general phraseology was used, similar to the rough draft given below:78

“If, during the term of the present treaty, circumstances should

arise which, in the opinion of any contracting power, materially

threaten its national interests, the contracting powers will at the

request of such power, meet in conference with a view to the

reconsideration of the provisions of the present treaty and its

amendment or abrogation by mutual agreement, provided that

such request be made not less than 6 months prior to the time of

meeting and the reasons for the request are fully set forth.”

GIBSON

[Document 125]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

political clause if necessity arises for it. In view of long distance the

Japanese have to travel and time required by both countries to prepare for

conference it might be well that 6 months’ notice be required before any

meeting called under this clause be held; or, the clause might be made a part

of general revision clause of the treaty.

KELLOGG

[Document 126]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

variations which were reconxmended by naval experts at Conference and

reported in your No. 106, and which were approved here. Naturally we have

no interest in the word “ratio” and would be willing to have it interpreted

into actual tonnages. I should like to have recommendation of your naval

advisers on how much variation they would recommend. Political question

which must finally be decided is how far we could vary from Washington

treaty without endangering treaty itself. Any substantial variation from the

Washington treaty, as you can readily see, would at once be seized upon for

opposition; on the other hand a variation arising naturally from inclusion of

a certain number of cruisers would not be serious.

KELLOGG

[Document 127]

President Coolidge to the Secretary of State

RAPID CITY, S. DAK., July 25, 1927.

[Received July 27.]

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: So far as I have been able to follow the course of the

Conference, I have nothing but commendation for the position you have

taken and the ability with which Mr. Gibson and the Admiral have

presented our position. We have made a perfectly straightforward and

candid presentation of a plan for limitation. I do not think we should deviate

from it. If others are unwilling to accept it, we can very well be content with

having made a fair proposal and leave others with the responsibility for its

rejection. We should by all means keep our right to build such 10,000 ton

cruisers as we wish and arm our vessels with such 8 inch guns as we wish.

This statement, of course, is limited by any agreement we can make with

others and the right of the British to build a like number. I am not in favor

of the 6 inch gun and small cruiser proposals. I must confess that it is very

disappointing to have the British position revealed to us, as it apparently

shows a state of mind on their part which I did not suppose existed. In my

opinion they are very shortsighted and can not hope to secure any

advantage by building a navy larger than ours. Of course, there is no other

navy against which they need to build.

Very truly yours,

CALVIN COOLIDGE

[Document 128]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

63. The press of Great Britain is evidently trying to impress the British

public with view that their Government are seeking economy in advocating

small cruisers. Daily Mail says that if the Conference breaks down it will be

clear to world that it was brought about not through British intransigence

but by ambitions of the United States to build a big navy. While I do not

wish to interfere with any amicable discussion which you may be having at

Geneva, I shall nevertheless be compelled, if this sort of thing continues, to

say publicly that Great Britain is the only country which is seeking a large

naval program carrying with it an enormous increase in cost; that this

Government offered to restrict total tonnage of cruisers to 250,000 to

300,000 tons and is still willing to accept this restriction, but that the British

demand practically twice that amount; that with each country given a total

tonnage limitation there is no economy whatever in building small cruisers

but an increase in expense instead; that Great Britain can construct as many

small cruisers as she wishes, but that this Government does not wish to

construct a large number, not only because they are unsuitable to our needs

but also because they are more costly. If Great Britain wishes to build such

a size navy she is at liberty to go ahead and do it without a treaty. The

United States views the Conference as one for naval limitation, not for

naval expansion, and will insist on right to equality in the Navy with any

other power.

KELLOGG

[Document 129]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

116. Several alternative naval arrangements may be proposed should we fail

to arrive at a complete accord with the British and Japanese. The following

have been hinted at on numerous occasions:

1. That the United States enter into a two-power arrangement with

either the Japanese or the British;

2. That cruisers should be unrestricted and an agreement

negotiated covering only the two categories of submarines and

destroyers;

3. That small cruisers shall be unrestricted and restriction placed

upon 10,000-ton cruisers;

4. That an arrangement based on building program up to 1931

might be negotiated.

Am not sympathetic towards any of the above proposals and have given no

indication that I am. Therefore, unless I receive instructions to the contrary,

I shall assume the attitude that the United States is only concerned with an

arrangement which would be general enough to comprise all categories of

naval craft.

GIBSON

[Document 130]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, July 27, 1927—noon.

1. There is nothing to be gained by entering into a two-power

pact.

2. The United States will not make an agreement on destroyers

and submarines unless cruisers are included also. Certainly there

would be no object in our agreeing to limitation of destroyers of

which we have a large number and where we should have to scrap

live craft.

3. The United States will not enter into an agreement whereby

10,000-ton cruisers alone are restricted, and thus leave smaller

cruisers unrestricted. Such an agreement would limit us on those

cruisers we expect to build and would allow Great Britain to build

an unlimited number of smaller cruisers.

4. We do not see that there is much to gain from a building

program until 1931, as it is impossible for the Department to

predict what the Congress will do. We should be glad to have you

inform us what you have in mind on No. 4.

KELLOGG

[Document 131]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

statement yesterday afternoon outlining British position at Geneva. His

remarks included the following statement:

“In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government there need be no

difficulty in arriving at a temporary arrangement about the

immediate future of cruiser building. But the British Empire

cannot be asked to give to any such temporary arrangement the

appearance of an immutable principle which might be treated as a

precedent. Any other course would inevitably be interpreted in

the first article as involving the formal surrender by the British

Empire of maritime equality? a consummation which His

Majesty’s Government are well assured is no part of President’s

policy.”

Repeated Geneva.

HOUGHTON

[Document 132]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

122. This morning Bridgeman called and, although he did not reveal full

details of the new British proposals, he did not indicate that any substantial

change had been made in the previous British insistence on small cruisers

and armament of 6-inch guns. The delegates of the three powers are having

a meeting this afternoon.

We consider it extremely unlikely, in view of the foregoing, that a break-

down can be avoided, and this afternoon shall telegraph a general outline of

our proposed statement for the final plenary session. We shall insist that

sufficient time be allowed us before plenary session in order to

communicate fully with you and to receive your final instructions.

GIBSON

[Document 133]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

126. Private meeting this afternoon of the delegates excepting those in the

British Dominions. After apologizing for having delayed the proceedings of

the Conference for over a week, Mr. Bridgeman said that they were

prepared to continue the discussions on the basis of the memorandum

As having seen that this memorandum contained the same objectionable

provision with regard to 6,000-ton 6-inch-gun cruisers I asked Mr.

Bridgeman whether he had presented to the British Government the view I

armament of all cruisers with 8-inch guns. Both he and Cecil said that they

had discussed this question in great detail while in London and that the

British Government was of the opinion that it was desirable to limit for the

future the armament of cruisers to 6-inch guns. Bridgeman added that they

could not agree to a clause which left open the question of constructing

other than certain specified 10,000-ton vessels with 8-inch guns. They then

added that their last admonition from the Cabinet [was that] “unless the

treaty provides for the limitation of the 8-inch gun the British Government

feel that it would be a treaty not for a limitation but for an increase of

armaments.” We then made it clear that under these circumstances we were

apparently at a deadlock and I asked whether this was their final word on

this question as I was unwilling to transmit their proposals with a statement

that their position on the 8-inch gun was one of complete finality unless this

were the case. They then reaffirmed their position and stated that they could

not go further than as indicated in paragraphs 4 and 5 (a) of their

memorandum.

[Document 134]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, July 29, 1927.

Gibson has wired83 suggesting that Monday may be too early a date for us

to decide on the language of his speech, especially as we may desire to

consult with you, and as we waited ten days for the British it is entirely

reasonable for us to ask for more time. Have wired him83 that we do not

think there is sufficient time from now to Monday to properly consider the

final speech of the delegation, so I have no doubt he will get additional

time. With concurrence of the Secretary of the Navy we have sent following

message to our Mission at Geneva:84

“I think the consequences of the break-up and final abandonment

of this Conference are going to be disastrous, not only to the

relations between Great Britain and the United States, but

disastrous to all the world as an example that the two leading

naval powers are unable to come to any agreement as to

limitation, and will make any agreement in the future, even in

1931, perhaps impossible. The moral effect of such a failure, in

my judgment, is out of all proportion to the material interests

involved. I do not suggest that we can accept British proposition,

but wish to suggest for your consideration and immediate

suggestions whether it would not be better to abandon the plenary

conference on Monday and take an adjournment of this

conference for a few months to permit time for reflection. After a

plenary conference and the position of both governments stated it

will be all the more difficult if not impossible to effect any

reconciliation between divergent points of view. I should wish

time to consult President about this move, but while I am

convinced that no treaty could be ratified on the British basis I

view with great alarm a final break-up in this conference.”

[Document 135]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

71. The President at his press conference this afternoon said:

“I think the Press has all the information that has come to me

relative to the Naval Conference at Geneva. The proposals that

have been made by the representatives of Great Britain seem to us

to call for the building of a much larger Navy than we think is

necessary, so that we haven’t been able to agree. Now, whether

these proposals may be modified as the result of conference and

discussion, I don’t know. The proposals that have been presented,

as I understand them, call for the building of a larger Navy than

we should wish to agree to. I think that is the main obstacle.

There are some other collateral questions about the tonnage of

ships and the calibre of the guns, but I think the main difference is

in the size of the Navy. We called this Conference, thinking that it

might result in placing a limitation on Armaments which would

perhaps help the countries interested to reduce some as years

went by the size of their Navies, which would result in making

economies, and secondly, what I thought was of even more

importance, the promotion of a spirit of peace and good will and

better understanding. I have placed that, of course, as the main

object in view. The matter of the removal of the burden of

taxation and the economic benefits would be the natural

consequences of peace and good will among the Nations. But up

to the present time the expressed desire on the part of

representatives of the British Government is for so large a Navy

that our representatives and our government haven’t been able to

agree.

As I said before, I want to emphasize that discussion may modify

it to such an extent that we can agree.”

KELLOGG

[Document 136]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

agreement with you on disastrous consequences of final break, with public

statements made of the differing positions. Delegation feels very strongly,

however, that it would be equally as disastrous were we to let it appear that

after having reached a deadlock over a clear-cut question we had avoided

issue with inference that we lacked confidence in our position. Any

initiative on our part for an adjournment would inevitably leak out and

would be interpreted as admission by us that there would be possibility of

making concession to British on question where on one hand there is

nothing but surrender of a principle and on the other its maintenance. We

understand that our position has the almost unanimous backing of the

American press. We question if this backing may not be jeoparded for first

time if we take the initiative to adjourn.

If we were to accept a proposal for adjournment, clearly emanating from

another government, however, this difficulty would be avoided; it would, in

fact, be obvious that our acquiescence in such a proposal would be only

reasonable. If you desire, suggestion can be made to Japanese delegation

(not revealing our initiative) that they propose an adjournment to us and to

the British. We believe the latter would be very glad to accept such

proposal; we should have to make clear, however, that adjournment and

plenary session are mutually exclusive. Once a public stand had been taken

an adjournment would be of no purpose. On other hand, if adjournment be

agreed on, it is obviously not desirable to prejudice further discussion by

making definite public statements.

Please instruct without delay.

GIBSON

portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134].

[Document 137]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

said: “We feel here that perhaps a reasonable adjournment would be better

than a complete breakdown but would like your opinion before proposing it

definitely.” The President replied as follows: “Adjournment probably means

continuing recriminations with little prospect of better result. Have clear,

firm statement made of our position. Ask for time to prepare it.”

Have not yet had any further word from the President. If either of the

other countries makes suggestion of adjournment, cable us and we will

consider it.

Have not heard from you about postponement of meeting on Monday. If

Bridgeman insists on making his speech at that time you should go ahead

with yours, as they should both be made at the same time.

KELLOGG

portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134].

“Message relative to adjournment received. Use your own discretion as to

[Document 138]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

82. New York Times this morning has despatch from London that a new

naval holiday plan is understood to be the result of the hastily called

Cabinet meeting yesterday and that the deep concern of the Cabinet meeting

was how to avoid and check propaganda in Great Britain, the United States

and Japan if present conference is doomed. The article further states that the

main point of the British plan will be to impose a limit during an agreed

provisional period during which building of big fighting cruisers should not

go on. British Navy would undertake not to lay down further 10,000 ton

cruisers during the period in exchange for an American agreement not to

exceed the British number and a Japanese undertaking said to be already

obtained not to exceed three-fifths proportion in that category of warships.

If the American delegation would accept such a temporizing agreement an

effort would be made during the period of grace to organize a second

attempt to obtain a treaty of naval limitation. It is the British view that

conferences ought to be continued persistently even though the gathering of

admirals and diplomats at Geneva disbands.

[Paraphrase.] Any suggestion for a naval holiday during a provisional

period should be given careful consideration before breaking up

Conference. [End paraphrase.]

KELLOGG

[Document 139]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

139. I received a call from Ishii this morning; he informed me that he had

had an interview with Bridgeman last night in an endeavor to learn whether

there was not some way to find a basis of discussion so that we might

proceed with our conversations. He said it was quite apparent that

Bridgeman did not believe the American delegation was serious in saying

that it would accept no transgression of the principle of freedom of

armament and that he was confident that at the last moment some radical

concession would be granted by the United States. The views expressed by

the American delegation, Ishii said, he was firmly convinced were those of

the American Government and that he did not believe unless I knew them to

be those of my Government that I would have been presumptuous enough

to state definitely that the proposals made by the British, concerning

cruisers large enough to mount 8-inch guns, were totally unacceptable to the

United States. I paid Bridgeman a visit after Ishii’s call on me and told him

that I considered that I should inform him that I was in receipt of a full

confirmation from my Government of the opinion I had given him that the

British proposals concerning the armament of cruisers were absolutely

unacceptable to the United States. He was further informed by me that I

considered it necessary to request a delay of the next plenary meeting, so

that I might be fully informed as to the views of the American Government

before a final session of the Conference, and I said most emphatically that

should such a plenary session be held it must be looked upon as the end of

the Conference at Geneva.

In reply Bridgeman said that on the contrary he considered that it would be

favorable if a full statement of our opposite opinions was expressed, after

which a final appeal to the public might be made by Cecil and that we could

then have a private meeting at which a final endeavor could be made to

reconcile the views of the different delegations. The American delegation, I

said, was ready to accept any means of accomplishing an agreement and

that it was only too willing to give all its efforts and ingenuity to this end,

but if any real success was to come from such a private meeting the

endeavor should be made before another plenary session was held; that it

would be useless to begin negotiations all over again after we had stirred up

public opinion by stating in a positive manner our divergent opinions.

The political clause proposed by us, Bridgeman said, was entirely

unsuited to British needs as they were of the opinion that Governments

would procrastinate in assuming the rights allowed them by such a clause.

If the United States would consent not to construct more than a small

number of cruisers capable of carrying 8-inch guns, say two or three,

besides the 10,000-ton vessels to be specified, Bridgeman said he thought

some solution might be found, or, if the United States should incorporate in

the treaty a statement to the effect that it was not our intention at present to

construct any cruisers capable of carrying 8-inch guns besides those 10,000-

ton vessels to be decided upon, but that ample notice would be given should

we decide later to construct these cruisers. In reply I stated that I thought

such a statement, which could only be a conjecture, would be subject to

serious opposition and really had no proper place in a treaty. I said I saw no

objection concerning the provision for giving advance notice and that as far

as that provision alone was concerned it seemed entirely proper. (The

United States would doubtless notify the other parties to a treaty of any new

) The above was not deemed to be sufficient by Bridgeman.

The question was then raised by Admiral Jones whether the British

intended, when discussing 10,000-ton cruisers, to include any craft of

sufficient size to allow the mounting of effective 8-inch-gun batteries. In

reply Bridgeman stated that such was his intention and that the maximum

class could include even 8,000-ton vessels carrying 8-inch guns.

At this juncture, I stated that the whole question seemed to have very little

relation to realities, as the only question seemed to be whether any

construction we might undertake within the limits of tonnage allowed us

would be of interest to the British Empire and that considering our present

and past policy we were absolutely sure that this was not so. The reply

made by Bridgeman, in a very dry manner, was that this was not the way

the British look upon the matter.

I was then asked by Bridgeman if I would interview Cecil this morning and

see if he had anything to suggest. Of course I consented to do so and paid

Cecil a visit during which he proceeded to repeat just what Bridgeman had

previously told me. I took the matter of the postponement of the plenary

session up with Cecil, as I knew Bridgeman’s consent to this depended

upon Cecil’s assent. His reply was he would have no objection to this

provided I could give him some hope of agreement, but if we were asking

for this delay so that we might prepare an aggressive and effective speech,

he would certainly object. My reply to this was that the American

delegation did not require any time for the latter purpose, as I was ready to

make a full and definite statement concerning the American position should

they desire the session to convene tomorrow, but that neither the Japanese

nor American delegations considered this a wise course to pursue. He then

stated that he could not oppose delaying the plenary session and in

accordance with this an arrangement has been made to postpone it until

Wednesday or Thursday. The British said that they might give preference to

Thursday, in order to allow Lord Jellicoe to be present, he having been

detained in London due to the death of his brother.

It was the Americans’ turn, Cecil then said, to put forth some suggestion as

to how the present impasse could be overcome. My reply was that I

considered that a maximum proposal had been made by the Americans

when they suggested the clause relieving the British of the obligations of

the treaty should they decide that the American construction program of

cruisers capable of mounting 8-inch guns was too offensive, and that I did

not see, when this had been put aside by the British as not offering ground

for discussion, how any minor suggestion would meet the situation, but that

if there was any reasonable way to smooth matters out I was quite willing,

as I had been from the first, to consider it.

[Document 140]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

141. There are very insistent press reports in Geneva that Baldwin is

considering going to Washington to consult with you as to what course may

be followed to prevent the collapse of Naval Conference here. Should there

be any truth in this report, you may think it best to postpone plenary session

until after your meeting with the Prime Minister. The American delegation

trusts that conversations between you and Baldwin may be means of

bringing to his attention the broader aspects of the problem. Candidly, our

efforts to treat problem in broad manner are restricted by Bridgeman’s

incapacity to see any broader scope to question. We see no prospect of

slightest British concessions if matter is left entirely in his hands, as he has

no patience with any views except those of a purely technical nature.

GIBSON

[Document 141]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

Government or Baldwin of any desire to confer with me on subject of the

Naval Conference. I do not think that any useful purpose would be served

by my going to Canada to see him, for I have no idea that he would change

program adopted by British Cabinet; in any event, he would interpret this

action on my part as a weakening on the part of this Government. I shall see

him Sunday afternoon, of course, and after the dedication exercises at

Buffalo91 shall ride with him to view Niagara Falls, and although we may

naturally have a conversation on the subject I assume it will be too late to

talk about anything at that time. Howard called on me this morning and was

apparently without instructions to make any concessions or any further

propositions. I said that Bridgeman and Cecil insisted on making speeches

at plenary session not for purpose, seemingly, of arriving at any

compromise but avowedly of making appeal to public opinion. I said that I

thought that if British Government desired an agreement, the making of

public speeches of this kind could do no good. Howard quite agreed, but did

not indicate that British Government intended to do anything about it. I

went over whole situation with him and said candidly that in my opinion the

increase in naval construction Great Britain proposed was not a good

policy; that I failed to see why any such building at this time was necessary

to safeguard the British Empire. I went over again the arguments for real

limitation of naval armaments as opposed to expansion.

Referring to article in the Times on subject of naval holiday, Howard did not

indicate whether or not British Government had inspired it but he said he

thought that it might offer basis on which the Governments might be able to

agree.

KELLOGG

[Document 142]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

147. The present situation may be summarized as follows:

1. Pursuant to your suggestions concerning my telegram No. 133,

July 29, we are proceeding with preparation of the statement to

be made at the plenary meeting on Thursday afternoon93 and to

bring the Conference to an end.

2. No proposals for a few months’ adjournment without a definite

termination have been made and while this idea has been

indirectly but clearly conveyed to the Japanese delegation they

have not been responsive to it to the extent of even broaching it to

us and they apparently do not wish to take any part in such a

suggestion.

3. Bridgeman, I understand, paid Ishii and Saito a visit this

morning during which he stated that he had no further proposals

to offer and then proceeded to inquire pointedly whether the

Japanese had any they wished to suggest. The impression which

the Japanese delegation seemed to draw from this inquiry was

that Bridgeman seemed anxious for them to propose some

suggestion, possibly of a compromise nature, and consequently

they have today been studying the situation to see whether they

could evolve anything. Also, in an indirect manner, they have

endeavored to learn just what our opinion would be regarding the

submission of such proposals should the Japanese delegation

succeed in discovering any to offer. The American delegation has

made it plain that we would naturally welcome any proposal

which would be the means of accomplishing a successful

outcome, but that there could be no question of our conceding the

fundamental principle which was the cause of the deadlock

between the British and ourselves.

4. It will doubtless be necessary to convene a meeting of the chief

delegates in order to compose an agenda for the closing meeting

before having the final plenary session. It is possible on this

occasion that the British or Japanese may make some suggestion

that, instead of a debate and statement of the divergent positions

of the different delegations, a statement be drafted setting forth

the work accomplished by the Conference for which no solution

could be found at the present time and the recommendation that

the problems which have vexed the Conference be given study by

the different Governments represented. It may further be

advocated that the Conference recommend to the three powers

represented that, should it not be possible to consider them at an

earlier date, the limitation of auxiliary craft be discussed at the

Conference to be held in 1931. (The Japanese delegation has

indicated on different occasions that, should the Conference fail,

they would favor some resolution concerning a discussion of

auxiliary craft before or during the Conference of 1931.)

Acrimonious debate would naturally be prevented by such a final

act of the Conference, but it would likewise prevent our making a

clear statement, such as that already drafted, concerning the

American attitude. Do you desire me to support or oppose such a

proposal should it be suggested and accepted by the British and

Japanese? If such a proposal should be made and supported by the

British and Japanese, you may wish to give consideration to the

effect of rejecting it.

5. In considering the program for the final session, it is also

possible that a proposal may be made that three inoffensive

speeches should be made after being circulated and approved by

the three delegations represented. This is not favored by me and I

[Document 143]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, August 3, 1927.

Following very urgent telegram received from Gibson yesterday:94

“No. 149. Saito and Ishii called upon us tonight and stated that

they had been studying the possibilities of finding some measure

of agreement which would avert complete failure; that they had

worked out hastily an idea in tentative form which they would

like to submit to us before submitting it to the British Delegation;

that they realized it had many shortcomings but was meant

merely as an indication of a general scheme for dealing with

construction up to the time of the 1931 conference while avoiding

the irreconcilable difference in regard to the eight inch gun. The

document they submitted reads as follows:

‘1. The British Empire and Japan to undertake that

before December 31, 1931, they shall not lay down,

except for replacement, any more auxiliary vessels

besides those included in their authorized programs, it

being understood that the said programs shall not be

altered except in so far as is provided for in the next

following article.

2. The number of cruisers of the ten thousand ton class

shall not exceed twelve each for the United States and

the British Empire and eight for Japan.

The British Empire shall be at liberty to utilize in such a

way as she may see fit the remaining cruiser tonnage in

her authorized programs.

The maximum unit tonnage of cruisers of smaller class

shall be eight thousand.

3. The United States to undertake that at no period

before December 31, 1931, cruiser tonnage shall exceed

that of the British Empire.

The contracting parties to undertake that they shall

furnish to one another information concerning such

building plans and programs as may be decided upon

before December 31, 1931; provided that in the event

that any of the contracting parties shall consider that

readjustment of the present agreement is required as a

consequence of any plans or programs adopted by any

of the other contracting parties a conference shall be

called with a view to secure such readjustment.

4. Questions regarding auxiliary vessels not provided

for in the present convention shall be settled in a later

conference to be held as soon as possible and not later

than the beginning of 1931.’

I stated that I wanted to assure them of our very warm

appreciation of the helpful spirit which had prompted them to

seek a solution; that we were sincerely desirous of some

reasonable agreement and that we shared their view that it would

be deplorable if the only result of the President’s invitation should

be (as a result of disagreement over a technical problem) a

renewal of competitive building and they could be sure that their

proposal would be examined in the most sympathetic spirit.

Admiral Jones raised a number of questions as to points in the

proposal and said that we should, of course, have to study it very

carefully before we were in a position to discuss it intelligently.

We suggested that we should call on them tomorrow morning for

further discussion.

Further comments on this proposal in the morning.”

The following is a paraphrase of the delegation’s comments on the Japanese

idea outlined above:95

“I think you understand that this proposal is based on the idea that

Great Britain and Japan should not undertake to construct any

cruisers, other than those authorized at present, before the end of

1931 and during this time should the United States desire she will

be able to bring her cruiser strength up to the British strength. Of

course, the word ‘authorized’ should be defined most carefully

and should, it is our opinion, include only those vessels under

construction and for which appropriations have been made, which

would give, according to their figures, a British tonnage in

cruisers of approximately 378,000 tons. We are also of the

opinion that the proposal would be more acceptable if the

authorized programs were expressed in total tonnage figures not

to be exceeded before 1931 by either the United States or Great

Britain.

As the Japanese themselves were the first to state, the draft

submitted by them is only a rough outline and would need many

alterations, additions and amendments.

Concerning paragraph four, we are of the opinion that it might be

well at least to give consideration to the question of whether an

agreement could not also be concluded now concerning

destroyers and submarines so that we might have a better basis on

which to work out and consolidate the limitation of auxiliary craft

in 1931.

We find it difficult to understand how the Japanese suggestions

could prove acceptable to the British even as a basis for

discussion since this would necessitate surrender by the latter in

regard to the question of eight inch guns and such a surrender

would be mitigated only by the fact that the agreement would

contain no mention of such guns. Therefore, even though as far as

we are concerned certain points of the proposal would have to be

modified, we believe that the responsibility for rejecting it, if this

is done, should rest with the delegates of Great Britain, and if the

latter are in reality ready to avail themselves of the suggestion of

the Japanese delegates to meet our position, we ought not

ourselves assume the responsibility for rejecting the initiative

taken by the Japanese. Such rejection on our part might lend itself

to the interpretation as a declaration that it is only upon our own

terms that we are prepared to negotiate.

I saw Saito this morning with Admiral Jones and informed him

that since the exchange of views last night between the American

and Japanese technical advisers it appeared that the results of

such a scheme would have to be carefully studied and elaborated

in greater detail before it would be possible to estimate whether it

would bring about a naval holiday in reality. We suggested that

Saito should communicate his idea to Bridgeman in view of the

short time remaining to us. This morning he is seeing Bridgeman

for this purpose.”

I replied yesterday, after consultation with the Navy, as follows:96

“Should a proposal such as that contained in your telegram No.

149 be put forward, it ought to be given very thoughtful

consideration. Lacking more particulars it is not possible to judge

of it here. Surely, we would be unable to concur in the proposal

that the British Empire should build up to the program which it

has authorized, which would bring its total tonnage up to

approximately 465,000 tons, nor is it our understanding that

America’s laying the keels of 10,000 ton cruisers would be

considered to prevent us from bringing our Navy to an equality

with Great Britain in 9,800 ton ships or other classes of cruisers.

Naturally, it would be far wiser to permit Great Britain to turn

down this proposal than for us to do so.”

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 144]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, August 3, 1927.

We received a telegram yesterday afternoon reading in part as follows:

August 1, 11 p.m., from the chairman of the American delegation, printed

It was important to answer at once so after consultation with the Navy we

wired as follows:97

“If the Japanese or British delegations should make a suggestion

such as that contained in paragraph four of the foregoing telegram

that the conference might end without any prolonged and detailed

speeches but merely with a statement issued on the part of the

conference and concurred in by all three of the delegations and

put out by the Secretary General of the conference which should

recommend that the whole question be considered in 1931 I think

that such a proposition ought to be given your support. I agree

also with the ideas you set forth on the subject contained in

paragraph five.”

I received another message in which the delegation stated that:98

“If Japanese initiative is rejected by the British or fails for other

reasons our delegates are prepared to go ahead with their

speeches. However, our delegations recommended a substitute for

Japanese proposal in paragraph four and five of this telegram,

which the delegation feels would be approved by public opinion

and leave an opportunity open for future negotiations. This would

require an authorization to go to see the British delegation and

that of Japan and show them that public discussion on the

differences of opinion could only bring about ill feeling and make

matters complicated in the future. Likewise that the course of

broad-mindedness and common sense would be to issue a joint

statement stating that we had come to an impasse on technical

matters but that as all three countries are united in a desire to

arrive at an agreement we are not willing that any mere

interchange of points of view should be taken as final. That on

this account we are agreed that the only possibility now open is to

issue a joint public statement that we have been unable to reach

agreement with respect to the question of cruisers. That on that

account we agree to adjournment in an effort to give a chance for

negotiations directly between governments in the hope that united

efforts and common devotion to the cause of naval limitation will

lead in the end to the type of reasonable understanding which

could alone be considered worthy of three great nations on

friendly terms.

We think that a statement of this nature read at the public meeting

by the Chairman of the conference would be altogether dignified

and would have the tendency to sound a more reasonable note

between the governments and might bring about a calming down

of the recriminations which at present or in the near future make

the carrying on of negotiations extremely difficult if not

impossible.

As there is only a very short time now before the plenary session

we hope that you can give us a decision very shortly on this

subject.”

In view of the shortness of the time I have sent the following telegram as

they had to have the answer this morning. I consulted with the Secretary of

the Navy and answered as follows:99

afternoon with many portions considerably garbled. However I

believe I fully understand your suggestions.

1. Should the Japanese proposal for a compromise be

turned down by the delegation of the British Empire or

should it fail for any other reason you have stated that

you are ready to proceed with your public statement in

accordance with my instructions. I approve of this

course. Should, however, a public plenary session be

held and the British state their views naturally we must

follow the same course.

2. Your calling in the delegations of Great Britain and

Japan to suggest to them a joint statement of the fact

that you are unable to arrive at an agreement and that on

that account you are in accord that an adjournment

should be taken in order to give a chance for

negotiation directly between the interested governments

appears to us to be statesmanlike. Both the Secretary of

the Navy and I give our approval to the idea.”

Neither one of these propositions contemplates an adjournment for a few

months but practically an ending of the conference with a reference of their

work to the 1931 conference, thus leaving it open for diplomatic

negotiations if possible. We have, as you know, desired to avoid

recriminations but, of course, if the British insist on making speeches we

will do the same. To make a treaty recognizing a large building program on

the part of Great Britain of course is inadvisable. I am in hopes that this

may be avoided.

Just been notified by the British Ambassador that British Government

insists on speeches being made. This probably ends any attempt.

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 145]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

95. This morning the Democratic leader in the Senate (Robinson) called on

me. I discussed with him the entire situation at Geneva. Thoroughly

approving our course, he says he will support it. If speeches are made, he

said we should state our position fully and frankly.

KELLOGG

[Document 146]

The Chairman of the American Delegation (Gibson) to the

Secretary of State

[Received 3 a.m.]

unable to meet us until this evening because of other arrangements and

Bridgeman’s lack of instructions in regard to Japanese suggestion.

We first took up Japanese suggestion and, in answer to question as to what

was meant by “authorized programs,” Bridgeman confirmed our view that

this would call for approximately 458,000 tons of cruisers by 1931; that

their understanding was that this would involve their stopping on

completion of present construction of 10,000-ton cruisers but utilizing other

available tonnage for other cruisers so that this was merely a substitution of

programs and not in any sense a reduction of tonnage. I was obliged to say

this did not seem to offer any real limitation and after I had thanked the

Japanese delegation for their friendly effort to find a basis of agreement

Viscount Ishii stated that the idea outlined by the Japanese delegation would

not be put forward in the form of a proposal.

I then asked Bridgeman and Ishii if they had any further proposals to bring

forward. They replied in the negative.

I then raised the subject of tomorrow’s meeting and outlined very fully the

desirability of making a joint statement rather than separate and

controversial statements. I went so far as to read them large part of my 152,

and Cecil were unwilling to discuss any abandonment of their present plan

and stated that they had the most categorical instructions from the Cabinet

which had been fully confirmed in a telegram received this evening, that

they must make a statement setting forth their point of view and justifying

their position. I went as far as [I] could in insistence, urging the possibility

of Bridgeman’s telephoning to London to indicate that a preferable method

had been suggested and asking authority to refrain from making his

statement but he was unwilling to do this. In view of their obvious

determination to make their prepared statement we felt that it was futile to

make any further efforts. We then took up the question of procedure for

tomorrow’s meeting. It was agreed:

1. That I should make a brief introductory statement to be

approved by the other delegations stating the progress made thus

far, adding that we had reached the end of our labors, and

indicating the important points with regard to which we had

reached disagreement.

2. That statements should then be made by Bridgeman, Saito, and

myself and in that order.

3. That there should be no debate after the statements.

4. That a joint declaration should then be read and approved by

the Conference recognizing the deadlock which made it wise to

adjourn the present Conference with a frank statement of

divergent views and also stating that these views would be

submitted

to

the

respective

Governments

with

the

recommendation that they be carefully studied in the hope that

consultation may lead to an eventual agreement.

The text of this declaration now being prepared and will be telegraphed

shortly.

GIBSON

apparently drafted late in the evening of August 3.

[Document 147]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, August 4, 1927.

At the conclusion of the Plenary Session, Gibson read the following

declaration, text of which had been approved by all three delegations:

“1. In pursuance of the suggestion of the President of

the United States, the plenipotentiary delegates of the

President of the United States, His Britannic Majesty,

and of His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, met at

Geneva on June 20 to discuss the limitation of auxiliary

naval craft.

2. Meetings have been held from that date until the 4 of

August, during which period the delegates and their

advisers have considered in detail various methods of

effecting this object. On many important questions

provisional agreements have been reached, certain of

which are embodied in the annexed report of the

technical committee of the conference. These points of

agreement relate particularly to the limitation of

destroyers and submarines, and it was only when the

conference took up the question of the limitation of

cruiser class that difficulties were encountered. These

difficulties proved to be of a character to render it

desirable to adjourn the present negotiations until

respective governments have had an opportunity to give

further consideration to the problem and to the various

methods which have been suggested for its solution.

3. The American delegates presented the view that

within total tonnage limitations, [which they] initially

suggested should be between 250,000 and 300,000 tons

in the cruiser class for the United States and the British

Empire and between 150,000 and 180,000 tons for

Japan, each of the powers should have liberty to build

the number and the type of vessel which they might

consider best suited to their respective national needs,

with freedom, subject to limitation of the Washington

Treaty, to arm these vessels as they saw fit.

4. The British delegates, whilst putting proposals

tending to a limitation of the size of vessels of all

classes, have opposed the principle of limitation by total

tonnage alone on the ground that the largest [larger]

ship and the heaviest gun permissible must inevitably

become the standard. They desired first a strict

limitation of the number of 10,000 [-ton] 8 inch gun

cruisers, and secondly the establishment of a secondary

type of cruiser of a maximum [displacement of 6,000

tons, carrying guns of a maximum] calibre of 6 inches.

The British delegates contended that the establishment

of this type [would] alone enable the British Empire,

within a moderate figure of total tonnage, to attain the

numbers which it regards as indispensable to meet its

special circumstances and its special needs.

5. The Japanese delegates presented the view that low

total tonnage levels should be fixed which would effect

a real limitation of auxiliary naval vessels. As for the

question of the 8 inch gun cruisers, while the Japanese

Government could not agree to any restriction as a

matter of principle, they had no difficulty in declaring

that, provided a tonnage level of 315,000 tons for

auxiliary surface vessels were fixed for Japan they

would not build any further 8 inch gun cruisers until

1936, except those already authorized in existing

programs.

6. Various methods were considered of reconciling the

divergent views indicated above but, while material

progress has been made and the points of divergence

reduced, no mutually acceptable plan has been found to

reconcile the claim of the British delegates for numbers

of vessels, for the most part armed with 6 inch guns,

with the desire of the American delegates for the lowest

possible total tonnage limitation with freedom of

armament within such limitation, subject to the

restriction as to armament already set by the

Washington Treaty.

7. Faced with this difficulty, the delegates have deemed

it wise to adjourn the present conference with this frank

statement of their respective views, and to submit the

problem for the further consideration of their

governments, in the hope that consultation between

them may lead to an early solution.

8. Further, the delegates agree to recommend to their

respective governments the desirability of arranging

between the signatories of the Washington Treaty that

the conference to be called pursuant to paragraph 2 of

Article 4 [21] of that Treaty should be held earlier than

August 1931, the date contemplated under the terms of

that instrument, in order that any decision reached by

such a conference may come into force before the

capital ship construction program commences, namely

in November of that year.

9. In making these recommendations and in submitting

this statement of the points of agreement as well as of

the points on which agreement has not yet been

achieved, the delegates desire to place on record a

statement of their conviction that the obstacles that have

been encountered should not be accepted as terminating

the effort to bring about a further limitation of naval

[Document 148]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, August 4, 1927.

I gave the following statement to the Press this morning concerning the

final session of the Conference:

“I regret of course that the Geneva Conference did not succeed in

making an agreement for limitation of naval armament. The

Conference was suggested by the President in the hope that he

could accomplish a real reduction in building programs. He also

believed if the three great naval powers could succeed in such

limitation it would prevent competitive building, lift enormous

burdens from the countries involved, and be a great moral

example to the world. We believed that there was no condition

today which could threaten the security of the powers interested

or justify increased building programs. It was found impossible to

get an agreement either to reduce naval armament or to limit it

within what we considered reasonable bounds. What was sought

was to extend the principles of the Washington treaty to other

naval auxiliary craft. This was found impossible without greatly

enhancing a cruiser building program, which we thought neither

necessary nor wise. I do not think the United States can afford to

give its moral approval to such an expansion with all it implies.

We proposed as a maximum 300,000 tons of cruisers and were

not prepared to increase this by 126,000 tons and probably more

in order to make a treaty. Pursuant to the Washington treaty, the

United States made drastic cuts in its capital ship program and

scrapped the largest capital ship navy in the world. It made

greater sacrifices than any other country; in fact it scrapped

780,000 tons of capital ships. It had every reason to believe that

the British government was prepared to carry out a real reduction

and our delegates labored earnestly and conscientiously along

[Document 149]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State

[WASHINGTON,] August 5, 1927.

The Japanese Ambassador called on me today and wished to know if I had

any news from Geneva of which I wished to inform him. I told him that we

were very much pleased with the attitude of the Japanese Delegation and

congratulated them on their work there. That there had been no trouble to

agree with Japan but that we could not agree to such an enlarged building

program as the British government wanted. That the lowest proposition they

made would permit them to build at least 426,000 tons of cruisers and even

more if they did not build up to what they wished in submarines and

destroyers. They said they wanted 90,000 tons of submarines and 221,000

tons of destroyers. This would leave 426,000 tons for cruisers and even

more if they should not build up in the other two classes. We could not

agree to any such program. We thought the maximum proposed by us of

300,000 tons was adequate. We could not understand that there was any

danger to British commerce or foreign possessions, since the only navies in

the world amounting to anything were the Japanese, the British and the

United States. That if they had accepted 300,000 tons and allowed us to

build the same number of 10,000 ton cruisers and 9,800 ton cruisers as

Great Britain had, with the cruisers we had already there would only be

60,000 tons to build and there probably would not have been any trouble to

agree on what size they should be. He said his government was very

anxious not to have a big building program and wanted to know if we

would have a big one. I told him I had no expectation of it, but of course I

could not tell. He said he had seen in the papers that the President was

going to call another conference. I told him I had seen the President’s press

statement this morning which stated that he had no expectation of calling

another conference before 1929, and as he would go out of office in March,

1929, there seemed to be little possibility of it, but said I did not wish to

make any statement that would bar him if he should wish to do so. I told the

Ambassador that I had no intimation from the President that he wished to

do so. I asked him if the Japanese Delegation was coming back this way

and he said that he hoped they would but he was not sure. This was about

the substance of what he said.

[FRANK B. KELLOGG]

[Document 150]

The Secretary of State to President Coolidge

WASHINGTON, August 10, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: I suppose with the telegrams that we received from

Geneva and instructions we gave, together with the report which the

Secretary of the Navy made to you, you are well informed on what took

place at Geneva and the reason for the failure of the Conference. While the

British Government assured Mr. Houghton they were perfectly willing for

the United States to have parity on all classes of ships, Bridgeman did not

make this offer in Geneva at all until he was instructed by London and even

in that case I am assured by one of the press men who was present that

when he was asked the question as to whether Great Britain was willing to

make a treaty for parity in ships other than the 10,000 ton class, he said

“Well, we would have to consider that”. Undoubtedly he went there

intending not to grant it and every proposition there made was intended to

deprive the United States of an equal, effective navy. … It became more

and more evident that the only possible way to have a treaty with Great

Britain on this subject was to agree to a total tonnage beyond all reason and

one which would not be a limitation but an expansion. Furthermore, the

Navy insists that we do not want small cruisers and to agree to build them

would give the British a superiority owing to her naval bases and make it

impossible for us to have as effective a navy as Great Britain. The lowest

possible limit which Great Britain proposed was 426,000 tons of cruisers

which might be increased by building fewer destroyers and submarines. In

other words, they proposed the global or total tonnage system which they

had opposed strenuously at the Preliminary Conference. This would give

them the right to build cruisers in tonnage not built in the other classes. Of

course, the New York World and the Times have frequently suggested that

there should have been diplomatic correspondence preceding the

Conference so that each country would have known exactly what the other

country was willing to agree to. If that could have been done, no

Conference would have been necessary. Of course, there is no ground for

this except the statements of the Times and the World and Vice President

Dawes’ speech. … The most careful preparations were made, as you know.

The British Government was sounded out and a letter from Jones states that

the British went back on everything they had agreed to with him in

London. We had every assurance from the British Government that they

desired an agreement on equal terms with the United States and any such

tonnage as they proposed was far beyond any suggestions they had ever

made and beyond the tentative understanding made at the Washington

Conference.

Of course, I did everything in my power to make some agreement but I

could not recommend an agreement that did not give us parity in fact as

well as in principle or that would provide for an enormous expansion in

cruiser building. Any such tonnage as was demanded by the British

Government was absolutely uncalled for and unnecessary. We demonstrated

to them that there was not over two hundred thousand tons of cruisers in all

the rest of the world outside the United States and Japan; that there could be

no possible threat to the British Government, her commerce or her

possessions. Either the British Navy has gone mad or Great Britain has felt

compelled to continue ship building to furnish employment. Perhaps both

had something to do with it. I, of course, regret the outcome but I do not see

how we could have prevented it. Personally I think it would have been

perfectly simple to have entered into an agreement for a building program

prior to 1931 on the following bases: that Great Britain should not build any

additional ships beyond those already laid down; that the United States

would not build more 10,000 ton ships than Great Britain has built or is

building. This, of course, to include the 9800 ton ships, four of which Great

Britain has. This is all we could build or could reasonably expect to build

between now and 1931 but if we did desire to build more than this, we

should build the smaller size cruisers. As near as I can find out from the

Navy, they do not think there is any possibility of our building more before

that time. Great Britain did not agree to this. Apparently she did not intend

to agree to anything. It is evident that British opinion is not unanimous on

this subject. I enclose you an article published by a man by the name of

Bywater who I understand is an authority in Great Britain on naval affairs.

I cannot say that this represents a majority of British opinion. I do not think

it does. I think the majority of the British opinion is that Great Britain ought

to have supremacy on the sea. I do not know what effect this is going to

have on our building program before the Congress but I think there is a

pretty strong feeling that we should extend our building program.

Faithfully yours,

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 151]

The Secretary of the American Representation on the

Preparatory Commission (Marriner) to the Secretary of State

BERNE, December 9, 1926.

[Received December 23.]

No. 190

SIR: I have the honor to refer to the second paragraph of the Department’s

written communication to the Secretariat of the League commenting on the

report of the Joint Commission. It had not been my intention to submit any

communication in writing without specific instructions from the

Department and I had intended to embody my suggestions on this subject in

the general report on the work of this session of Subcommittee “B”.

However, as the pressure of work for translators in the Secretariat has been

very great due to the meeting of the Council, the Legation has not yet

received the documents incident to the session in question. Therefore,

inasmuch as any communications to be submitted should be in the

possession of the Secretariat by December 31st, I have decided not to await

the receipt of the procès-verbaux and copies of the report before submitting

my suggestions on this particular subject.

p.m., the preamble of the report of Subcommission “B” reserves “for all

the governments represented on it the right to make any observations that

they may think fit, either in documents to be submitted before December

31st for distribution to the Preparatory Commission, or orally in the course

of the discussions which will take place in the Preparatory Commission on

the questions dealt with in the report”. The position of the American

Delegation was made especially clear by the inclusion in the same section

of the report of the following sentence:

“In particular, the United States Delegation, having had no

connection with the work of the Joint Commission and hence no

opportunity to express its views, desires to make it clear that the

views of the United States Delegation on each of the questions

referred to Subcommission ‘B’ are those set forth by it on each of

these questions in the report of Subcommission ‘A’.”

Therefore, since the relation of the American Government to the report of

the Joint Commission is made clear, and since all rights for either oral or

written comment in the future are reserved, it does not seem to me that there

is any necessity of submitting written comment on the subject matter of the

Joint Commission report before December 31st. However, in the event that

the Department should desire to make any observations in writing at this

time and to amplify in any such document the statements of the American

Delegation already contained in the report of Subcommission “B”, I am

giving below, for the Department’s convenience, and as a possible basis for

such a communication, specific references to the position of the American

Delegation as set forth in the report of Subcommission “A” on each of the

questions dealt with in the report of the Joint Commission.

With reference to Sections I and II of the Joint Commission report, “with

regard to the Proposal submitted by the Belgian Delegate to the Preparatory

Commission” relating to the insertion in any possible convention of

provisions similar to those contained in the Statute of the International

Labor Office (Articles 411–420 of the Treaty of Versailles), the point of

view of the American Delegation is contained in a text submitted by the

delegations of Chile, Italy, Japan and the United States on page 8 of

document C. P. D. C. A. 170 (f), and in a declaration by the delegations of

the British Empire, Chile, United States, Italy, Japan and Sweden on the

same subject on page 16 of the same document.

In connection with Section III of the Joint Commission report “with regard

to the proposal submitted by the Delegate of the British Empire to the

Preparatory Commission” concerning poison gases, the position of the

American Delegation is contained in document C. P. D. C. A. 170 (d) of the

report on the same subject by Subcommission “A”.

With reference to Section IV of the Joint Commission report “with regard to

the Note relating to the Preparatory Commission’s Commentary on

Questions II (b) and III”, which deals with the question of military

expenditure, the position of the American Delegation has been set forth in

the statement of the delegations of the Argentine, Germany, Japan, the

Netherlands and the United States of America on page 49 of document C. P.

D. C. A. 170 (i) and in the declaration of the delegations of Germany, the

Argentine, Japan, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United States of

America on page 97 of the same document.

With reference to Section V of the report of the Joint Commission “with

regard to the Preparatory Commission’s Commentary on Question V (a)”,

concerning the principle on which it is possible to draw up a scale of

armaments taking into account certain specified factors, the American

Delegation’s position is contained in documents C. P. D. C. A. 170 (b) and

C. P. D. C. A. 73 (b) page 3.

With reference to Section VI of the Joint Commission report “with regard to

Question I (a)” on the influence of the material resources of a country on its

war strength, the point of view of the American Delegation is to be found in

the text submitted by the delegations of the British Empire, Bulgaria,

Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and the United States of

America on page 2 of document C. P. D. C. A. 170 and in the explanatory

statement of the Delegation of the United States on pages 9 to 14, inclusive,

of the same document.

In connection with Section VIII of the Joint Commission report “with

regard to Question VII” on the subject of regional self-sufficiency, the

attitude of the American Delegation has been set forth in a statement of the

Delegation of the United States on page 8 of document C. P. D. C. A. 170

Should the Department desire to submit any written communication

containing comment on the report of the Joint Commission, it will be

necessary that I be so informed by telegraph in order that the document may

reach the Secretariat before December 31st.

[Document 152]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Marriner)

Joint Commission report. Please address immediately to the Secretariat a

letter in the following general terms, with the request that it be circulated to

the governments concerned:

Refer to the decision of Sub-committee B of the Preparatory Commission

for the Disarmament Conference providing for the submission in writing

before December 31 of the views of the governments on the Joint

Commission Report. State that your government has received copies of the

Joint Commission report only within the past few days, and has not yet had

sufficient time to study it and make, before December 31, a detailed

statement of its views thereon, as it will desire to do. Therefore, your

Government hopes that when its views have been transmitted to the

Secretariat, which it hopes will be within a month, the Secretariat will cause

these views to be circulated to the various governments. Pending the above-

mentioned submission of its detailed views on the Joint Commission report,

your Government wishes to draw attention to the statement in regard to the

American position appearing in the preamble to the report of Sub-

statement refers to the American position in regard to those questions

considered both by Sub-committee A and the Joint Commission, there were

certain questions before the Joint Commission which were not before Sub-

committee A. With respect to these latter questions your Government

wishes you to make it abundantly clear that it does not accept the

conclusions of the Joint Commission’s report, and that in its forthcoming

commentary concerning the Joint Commission’s report, it will set forth its

detailed views as to the whole of the report in question.

Department will endeavor to forward by pouch, to reach you not later than

the end of January, statement in question.

KELLOGG

[Document 153]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Committee on

Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives (Porter)

WASHINGTON, January 11, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. PORTER: I learn that certain Members of Congress feel some

misgiving as to the desirability of appropriating funds for our further

participation in the work of the Preparatory Commission on the Limitation

and Reduction of Armaments, which was recommended in the President’s

message of January 7. These misgivings appear to be based on the feeling

that the Preparatory Commission has achieved nothing in the way of the

limitation and reduction of armaments. It is clear that this is due to a

misapprehension as to the task of the Preparatory Commission and it seems

to me that I can not do better than to outline briefly for your information the

purpose of the Preparatory Commission and the work thus far performed by

it.

In the first place, the Preparatory Commission was not convened for the

purpose of concluding agreements for the reduction and limitation of

armaments. It was felt that if the representatives of all governments met in a

conference to seek a solution of the complicated problems of disarmament

on land, sea, and in the air, and conclude definite agreements for the

limitation and reduction of armaments it would prove to be a hopeless task

and no definite results could be achieved. It was therefore considered

desirable to convene the representatives of a limited number of states to

conduct a preliminary survey of the general problems involved and to draw

up, if possible, an agenda which could serve as the basis of discussion of a

final conference. The American Government felt that it could not fail to

give its full cooperation to any effort of this sort, particularly in view of the

fact that it has at all times earnestly advocated practical measures looking to

the effective reduction and limitation of armaments, and accordingly a full

and well equipped delegation was sent to Geneva with instructions to

cooperate in the most generous and friendly spirit.

You are doubtless familiar with the questions which were submitted for the

study of the Preparatory Commission and I need not, therefore, go into

them in detail. However, a copy of the Questionnaire is transmitted

herewith for your convenience in reference. It cannot be justly said that

there has been no progress although it is as yet too soon to prophesy with

any certainty as to how far definite achievement will prove practicable, but

it is the view of this Government that so long as there is any hope of

attaining definite results it would be inconsistent with our traditional policy

for us to withhold our full cooperation.

When the Preparatory Commission met there were many divergent views

expressed as to what constituted practical solutions for the various problems

set forth in the Questionnaire. These problems were referred to various

technical subcommittees which, after discussing them during several

months, succeeded in eliminating a number of conflicting views and

narrowed the field to two principal schools of thought.

One school of thought, which is representative of the views of a group of

governments chiefly situated within a limited area of the European

Continent, may be generally indicated by five of its fundamental principles:

(1) That security must be guaranteed by some form of military

assistance against aggression as a necessary condition precedent

to the reduction and limitation of armaments;

(2) That agreements for the reduction and limitation of armaments

must be guaranteed by an international inspection and control of

the military establishments to ascertain whether treaty obligations

were being faithfully executed.

(3) That there exists a complete interdependence of armaments

and that it is impossible to deal with any single category (land,

sea, or air) without simultaneously dealing with the others;

(4) That it is not sufficient to deal with the actual peace-time

armaments of nations but that industrial, financial, economic, and

other factors must be taken into account in any general scheme

that may be drawn up;

(5) That any agreements on the limitation and reduction of

armaments in order to be effective must be universal and that

there must be a single standard system applicable to all countries

of the world.

This scheme appears to us to involve so many complicated and difficult

factors that its adoption would retard rather than forward the limitation and

reduction of armaments. Consequently at the beginning of the Conference

the American Delegation presented certain principles for consideration

which may be briefly stated as follows:

(1) That there should be a direct approach to the question of

limitation and reduction of armaments without awaiting

complicated measures for providing security, in the belief that the

cause of security will be promoted through the reduction and

limitation of armaments and the elimination of suspicion and ill-

will which can be expected to follow;

(2) That in order to be really effective agreements for the

reduction and limitation of armaments must be founded upon a

respect for treaty obligations and a belief in the good faith of the

contracting parties. It is our belief that any agreements founded

upon distrust and providing for a machinery of inspection and

control will not only fail to achieve its purpose but will create

new elements of suspicion and ill-will;

(3) We believe that insistence upon a joint consideration of land,

sea, and air armaments will tend to render needlessly complicated

the task of a final conference and will tend to render more

difficult achievement in regard to the limitation and reduction of

any single category of armament. For that reason we feel that

ultimate success lies along the line of isolating from the general

problem as many concrete questions as possible and dealing with

them in a direct and practical manner;

(4) We feel that the only practical approach to the question of the

limitation and reduction of armaments is through dealing with

visible armaments at peace strength. We feel that this is a

relatively simple problem where we are dealing with known

quantities and where, through the exercise of patience and good

will, we can hope for constructive achievement. We feel, on the

other hand, that any scheme involving the complicated and

variable industrial, financial and economic factors would tend to

inject a needless complication into the problem and render more

difficult any hope of real achievement;

(5) It is our view that there is no possibility of devising a system

for the limitation and reduction of armaments which could be

made either applicable or acceptable to all countries of the world

and that any attempt to reach such a solution would merely mean

an indefinite postponement of achievement. We feel that land and

air armaments constitute an essentially regional problem and that

different solutions can best meet the needs of different regions;

that naval armament can best be dealt with through direct

agreement among a limited number of naval powers.

I may state, for your information, that when we entered the Preparatory

Conference in May, 1926, we had no previous arrangements or

understandings with any government. Our representatives stated our views

at the opening meeting and we feel that the six months discussion which

followed have only served to confirm the soundness of the stand taken by

our representatives. This is further confirmed by the fact that from a

position of almost complete isolation at the beginning of the conference our

thesis has so far commended itself to other delegations that before the

recent adjournment in November almost half of the conference voluntarily

came to support our views without any changes, concessions, or

abandonment of principle on our part.

It seems to me that it has been a distinct step in advance to eliminate many

divergent views and narrow the field down to a choice between two schools

of thought. This work has been carried as far as it could be by the technical

representatives who conducted most of the discussions at the first meeting.

At the meeting in March the entire problem will be taken up by our political

representatives, whose essential duty is, so far as possible, to conciliate the

conflicting views which I have set forth for your information and to prepare

[Document 154]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Marriner)

WASHINGTON, February 10, 1927.

No. 8

SIR: Reference is made to the Department’s telegram AmMission No. 85, of

addressed to the Secretary General of the League of Nations pursuant

thereto.

There is transmitted herewith a memorandum containing observations on

the Report of the Joint Commission, and you will forward this to the

Secretary General of the League with the request that it be circulated to the

governments represented on the Preparatory Commission.

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Enclosure]

Memorandum Containing American Observations on the Report of the Joint Commission

The Report of the Joint Commission represents, of course, merely the views

of a group of individuals as to the economic effect of the reduction and

limitation of armament and conversely as to the influence of certain

economic and financial factors upon the problem of reduction and

limitation of armament. The views of the individuals on the Joint

Commission are interesting and represent a considerable amount of labor.

However, the applicability of the conclusions reached by the Joint

Commission and indeed the appropriateness of taking into account the

economic factors suggested by the Joint Commission in approaching the

concrete problem of the reduction and limitation of armament are matters

solely for consideration and decision first, by the Preparatory Commission

for the Disarmament Conference, and, second, by the governments

represented thereon.

The American Government has noted that Sub-Committee B of the

Preparatory Commission has been careful to reserve for all the governments

represented on the Preparatory Commission the right to make any

observations they may think fit either in written documents or orally in the

course of the discussions at the forthcoming meeting of the Preparatory

Commission. The American Government desires to make the following

remarks relative to the subjects considered in the report of the Joint

Commission, reserving the right to amplify those remarks before the

Preparatory Commission.

Section I

This Section of the Joint Commission’s Report contemplates the

supervision or regulation of certain essential national industries, and

international agreements among such national industries looking to the

divulgence of certain information and the rationing of manufactures. There

is also contemplated a system for the collection and publication of statistics

of manufactures.

The American Government, as has been repeatedly stated by the American

Delegation at Geneva, does not view favorably any proposal partaking of

the nature of international supervision of the administration of an agreement

limiting armament. It believes that the surest foundation upon which to

construct such an agreement is that of international good faith and respect

for treaties. It believes that the introduction of the element of supervision

and control is calculated to engender suspicion and illwill, the

disadvantages of which would far outweigh any advantages to be derived

from such supervision or control.

With regard to the specific suggestion of agreements between national

industries, it may be pointed out that in the United States, at least, there

might be grave legal and constitutional objections to an international

agreement whose effect was to compel American industries to enter into

agreements with industries of other countries.

It may further be pointed out that it is the practice of many countries,

including the United States, to publish periodically statistics covering the

production of various industries.

Section II

This Section of the Joint Commission’s Report may be divided into two

parts:

(1) The advisability of the insertion in a General Disarmament

Convention of provisions similar to those contained in the Statute

of the International Labor Office (Articles 411 to 420 of the

Treaty of Versailles) and

(2) The effect, economically, of inserting such provisions in a

convention regarding the prohibition of certain forms of warfare.

As regards the insertion of such provisions in a convention limiting

armaments, it is noted that the Joint Commission recommends a

comprehensive plan of procedure, providing for investigation of complaints

by a commission of experts and action upon the recommendation of that

commission by the Council of the League of Nations.

Quite aside from the fact that the United States is not a member of the

League of Nations and that consequently proposals calling for the

submission of disputes to the Council for investigation and action would

necessarily not concern it, the American Government desires to call

particular attention to the declaration in which the American Delegation at

Geneva joined with the Delegations of Chile, Italy, and Japan in the Report

of Sub-Committee A on the questions contained in paragraph 2B of the

report of the Preparatory Commission to the Council. The objections there

set forth from the military point of view to a system of control similar to

that contained in the Statute of the International Labor Organization would

seem to be equally applicable from the economic point of view.

In regard to this general question, the American Government believes it

appropriate to reiterate here the declaration which the American Delegation

at Geneva made jointly with the Delegations of the British Empire, Chile,

Italy. Japan and Sweden, with respect to the question of international

control and supervision, the substance of which was as follows:

“… any form of supervision or control of armaments by an

international body is more calculated to foment ill-will and

suspicion between states than to create a spirit of international

confidence, which should be one of the more important results of

any agreement for the reduction and limitation of armaments. The

execution of the provisions of any convention for the reduction

and limitation of armaments must depend upon the good faith of

nations scrupulously to carry out their treaty obligations.”

With reference to a proposal for commissions of inquiry, et cetera,

submitted by certain delegations,—generally similar to the proposals of the

Joint Commission,—the six delegations above mentioned submitted the

following observations:

“(1) The work of the proposed Commission would be

complicated in the highest degree. It should not only be regarded

from a technical point of view (military and economic), but

should also be regarded from a political point of view, since, as

Sub-Committee A has already shown, the primary criterion as to

whether the armaments of a country are designed for defensive or

offensive purposes lies in an appreciation of the political

intentions of the Government interested. The Commission in

question would, therefore, be called upon carefully to take

account not only of military and economic considerations, but

also political considerations. In other words, the Commission

should be composed of quite exceptional representatives of each

country, and, if it were to do its work effectively, it should in fact

be a kind of International General Staff.

“It would be extremely difficult for such a body to carry out its

duties. It would be inevitably driven to encroach on the legitimate

functions of these bodies which, in all countries, are entrusted by

Governments with the duty of advising on the measures to be

taken to ensure the safety of the State and to place it in a position

to fulfil its international obligations.

“It has been contended by others that the above use of the term

‘International General Staff’ can not really be applied to a

Commission of this sort; it was further contended that the powers

of such a Commission would not differ appreciably from those of

many existing commissions. The six Delegations submitting this

declaration do not share this opinion; they know of no body

whose duties would be comparable to the duties of the

Commission proposed.

“(2) It would be very difficult for the proposed Commission to

arrive at unanimous reports. More often there would be two or

more divergent opinions, the choice between which would have to

be taken by appeal to a higher body. In any case, in order to

ensure the supervision of the execution by a State of its

obligations, the Commission would require to investigate further

and to complete its information and to invite that State to furnish

observations and explanations. This would require considerable

time, during which the situation under examination might change.

“(3) If this organization were composed of all the States

signatories of the Convention, it would be unduly numerous and

its procedure would, therefore, be very slow. If, on the other hand,

it were composed of some only among these States, the difficulty

would arise of settling which of the countries adhering to the

Convention should be represented on it.

“It has been contended by others that it cannot be claimed that the

creation of supervisory organizations is impossible on material or

practical grounds since many precedents already exist. It is

further contended that a precedent could be found in the Opium

Convention and in the Statute of the International Labour

Organization. The six Delegations submitting this declaration

wish to point out that there is no analogy between Opium and

Disarmament, and as to the extension of the Statute of the

International Labour Office to Disarmament, this could not be

invoked as a precedent; on the contrary, Sub-committee A had

been asked to examine whether the application of that statute was

possible or not.

“(4) It is very doubtful whether the method of procedure

contemplated for the proposed Commission can be in practice

applied. An example will best explain the position. The

commission receives reports which may possibly lead to the

suggestion that in country X there are certain indications which

might be considered to show that that country is not fulfilling its

formal obligations, or to show the growth of aggressive intentions

against country Y. What will be the position of the proposed

Commission? They will find themselves obliged at once to study

questions which have not only a technical, but a political aspect,

and it is safe to assume that in many cases the members of the

Commission will find themselves influenced by divergent

political considerations. If the case is quite clear, these political

considerations may be disregarded; but if, as is more probable,

the position is a complicated one, then it is safe to say that these

political considerations are bound to hamper an impartial inquiry.

In such a situation it is to be feared that divergent opinions will

come to light and the only way of removing them would be by

verifying the situation on the spot. This means that a proper

application of the proposed method would frequently lead to

inquiries on the spot. The Delegations subscribing to this

declaration consider that most unfortunate results both political

and technical would follow from these inquiries. It is impossible

to disregard the possibility that, in certain circumstances, one

country might bring a charge against another in order to obtain,

unjustifiably, information about the secret defensive organizations

of the country accused. Moreover, the Delegations of the British

Empire, Chile, the United States of America, Italy and Japan, are

entirely unable to accept for their own Governments anything in

the nature of itinerant inquisitorial Commissions.

“It was contended during the deliberations on this question that

the ‘unfortunate results both political and technical’ mentioned

above, which the six delegations submitting this declaration claim

would follow from these inquiries, would in fact not exist since

‘inquiries of this kind have already been carried out to the general

satisfaction’. Since, obviously, no such inquiries of this nature

have ever been carried out in the past, it is difficult to understand

how such a contention can be held.

“(5) Further, it may be pointed out that if, in fact, it were decided

to limit the task of the proposed Commission to examining,

comparing and drawing conclusions from the variety of

information at their disposal, the reports drawn up by the

Commission would give rise to further objections.

“From the technical point of view, any conclusions at which the

Commission might arrive ‘without inquiry and direct control

likely to affect the secret military preparations of the different

States’ would be liable to be completely erroneous and

misleading. The result might be that technical Commission would

be writing reports impugning the good faith of nations without

having at their disposal the essential facts such as could only be

gleaned from a first-hand study of the situation on the spot. And,

in general, it is inconceivable that Governments can view, without

irritation, the requests for explanations which would be the result

of insufficient data and which might, therefore, be regarded,

according to the different circumstances of the case, as vexatious,

disingenuous, or actually provocative.

“(6) The work so far carried out by Sub-committee A proves in

the opinions of the Delegations subscribing to the present

declaration, that the only basis on which it is possible to hope for

satisfactory and permanent results is the creation of an

atmosphere of good faith. It cannot be denied psychologically and

from all experience that the introduction of restrictions upon the

sovereign rights of each State, tends to militate against the

creation of this atmosphere. It is common knowledge that in every

country restrictions of all kinds are necessary, but these

restrictions have only been imposed as the result of experience

and by the nation itself in the exercise of its sovereign powers.

The Delegations of the British Empire, Chile, the United States,

Italy, Japan and Sweden consider that restrictions of this nature

should not be contemplated in international engagements except

where absolutely necessary and with the fullest consent and

approval of the nations concerned.

“With regard to this entire declaration, it developed during the

proceedings on this question in ‘Subcommittee A that others

contended that the authors of this declaration in setting forth their

observations had stressed political and psychological arguments

and omitted technical arguments. The signatories of this

declaration are of the opinion, on the contrary, that they have

submitted both technical and political arguments; but in any case

it will be for the Preparatory Commission to make this distinction

if it sees fit’.”

In regard to the second part of the Joint Commission’s answer to this

question, relative to the insertion in a convention for the prohibition of

certain forms of warfare of provisions similar to those in the Charter of the

International Labor Office, it is observed that the recommendations of the

Joint Commission confine themselves to the typical case of chemical

warfare. It is further observed that these recommendations are conditioned

upon agreements among the national industries concerned. The American

Government does not consider that such agreements are in any way

germane to the question of the limitation of national armaments. It is well

known that the great majority of the chemical products which may be

utilized for military purposes in time of war are essential to the daily peace-

time life of industry.

Section III

This Section of the Report relates to questions concerning the convertibility

of chemical factories for the manufacture of poison gas, and means for

hindering their conversion to such use. Proposals to that end are made by

the Joint Commission.

The views of the American Government as to the appropriateness of the

conclusion of industrial agreements among chemical industries have been

stated above. With respect to the proposal that each state undertake to

establish as a crime at common law any exercising or training by military

persons or civilians in the use of poisons or bacteria, and, in particular, the

exercising or training of air squadrons, it is the opinion of the American

Government that such a proposal is impracticable. In this connection, it may

be pointed out that no nation could safely agree to refrain from preparations

for defense against attack by chemical warfare regardless of the existence of

international conventions prohibiting the use of such warfare. In order to

prepare against attack by such warfare, training in chemical matters is

essential. To forbid absolutely training in the use of poisons and bacteria

would, in the broadest meaning, put an end to chemical and medical

research. Such a measure would be impossible to administer.

Section IV

This Section deals with the possibility of using military expenditure as a

criterion for the comparison of armaments, and of effecting arms limitation

by a limitation of such expenditure.

The conclusions reached by the Joint Commission relative to the usefulness

of taking into consideration military expenditures in the comparison or

limitation of armaments serve to emphasize the point of view which has

been expressed by the American Delegation on the Preparatory

Commission, namely, that military expenditure constitutes neither a real

measure for the comparison of armaments nor an equitable basis for the

limitation of armaments. The Joint Commission’s report points out that

certain groups of countries having similar military organizations, similar

wage levels and standards of living, might profitably use expenditure as a

standard for the comparison of their armaments. The American Government

does not doubt that it might be possible for certain countries to employ such

a method of comparison profitably as among themselves.

Without commenting in detail upon the conclusions reached by the Joint

Commission on this subject, the American Government believes that the

true relation of budgetary expenditure to the comparison of limitation of

armaments is accurately stated in the declaration made by the Delegations

of Germany, the Argentine, Japan, The Netherlands, Sweden and the United

States at the meeting of Sub-Committee A of the Preparatory Commission

as follows:

“The Delegations of Germany, the Argentine, Japan, The

Netherlands, Sweden and the United States of America are of the

opinion that while the reduction in national expenditure on

armaments is highly desirable as one of the results to be attained

by the reduction and limitation of armaments, this result would

automatically follow from any effective reduction and limitation

of armaments.

“They are strongly of the opinion that monetary expenditure for

the creation and maintenance of armaments does not afford either

a true measure of armaments or a fair basis for limitation of

armaments. They hold this opinion for the following reasons:

“(1) The direct and indirect costs of personnel under the

conscriptive and voluntary systems are so variable in different

countries and in their overseas possessions and are influenced by

so many different factors that these costs are practically

impossible of simple and equitable conversion to a common

basis.

“(2) Due also to differences in rates of pay, production costs,

maintenance charges, costs of labour and material, varying

standards of living, variations in the rates of exchange and lack of

uniformity in the preparation of budgets, any attempt to apply this

method of limitation would be unfair and inequitable.

“(3) The method of limitation of expenditure is an indirect

method of obtaining a limitation or reduction of armaments. All

methods heretofore considered have been positive and direct; the

application of an indirect method seems highly undesirable as a

means of accomplishing what might better be accomplished by

direct methods.

“The above mentioned Delegations maintain their opinion that

from a technical standpoint armaments can be effectively limited

by direct methods.

“(4) While comparison without limitation is possible, obviously

there can be no equitable limitation of expenditure by

international agreement without a comparison. In other words,

comparison of expenditure is a pre-requisite to equitable

limitation of expenditure. Therefore, since comparison cannot be

made between budgets of different countries, as has been agreed

upon in the study of standards of comparison, it will be

impracticable to use a budgetary method in any formula for the

reduction and limitation of armaments.

“For these reasons the above Delegations are firmly of the

opinion that the method of limitation of armaments based upon

the limitation of budgetary expenditure is impracticable,

inequitable, and hence inadmissible.

“Since the mandate of the Preparatory Commission calls for a

reply to this question only in case the limitation of expenditure is

considered practicable, and since in the opinion of the above-

mentioned Delegations the method seems inapplicable, it would

appear that the reply to the question submitted should be, that the

limitation of expenditure is not a practicable method for the

limitation or reduction of armaments.”

Section V

This Section relates to the principle upon which it will be possible to draw

up a scale of armaments permissible to the various countries, taking into

consideration population, resources, geographical situation, length and

nature of maritime communications, density and character of the railways,

et cetera.

The views of the American Government are in general accord with the

reply to this question contained in the Report of Sub-Committee A and it

does not appear to be necessary to restate those views in this document. It

may be observed, however, that the conclusions reached by the Joint

Commission in reply to this question indicate with a fair degree of clearness

that the only factor which can be applied with any accuracy is that of

population and that the application of this factor in the matter of limitation

or reduction of armaments should be merely a basis for the determination of

the maximum allowable amount of personnel in the armed forces.

Section VI

This Section deals with the influence of the material resources of a country

on its war strength.

It is noted that the Joint Commission has approached the consideration of

this question apparently with a view to pointing out those factors which it

would be necessary to equalize or to compensate for in order to allow the

various countries of the world to wage war upon one another on a more or

less equal footing.

The American Government does not desire to comment in detail upon the

observations of the Joint Commission in this regard since it will be readily

admitted that in order to wage an effective war a country must have either

within its own borders or accessible to it elsewhere the necessary supplies

of raw materials, manufactured goods, and financial resources. With respect

to these materials, each country is faced with a separate problem which, in a

general sense, can never be solved by artificial international agreements.

Those countries rich in raw materials and industrial facilities cannot be

deprived of that wealth nor can countries poor in such wealth be provided

with it except through the normal course of agricultural and industrial

development.

Section VII

This Section indicates certain elements of a country’s war-time power

which are, in the opinion of the Joint Commission, capable of being

expressed in figures.

It may be pointed out in passing that the list of the raw materials indicated

by the Joint Commission as essential for waging war does not appear to be

complete.

Section VIII

The final Section of the report contains the Joint Commission’s views

relative to the possibility of considering areas or regions of the world as

essentially self-supporting economically. This question was raised in

connection with the consideration of the practicability of regional

agreements for arms limitation.

The American Government believes that the problems of land and air

armament are particularly susceptible of regional limitation agreements

quite regardless of whether the regions covered by such agreements might

be economically self-contained or not. While the observations of economic

experts on this subject are perhaps of interest, the practicability of regional

agreements will be determined eventually by political conditions and by

decisions of governments as to whether they wish to adopt a policy which

promises an immediate limitation of land and air armaments.

[Document 155]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

57. The following is authoritative, but is not yet to be made public. On

assembling of Preparatory Commission on March 21, Cecil24 has been

authorized to lay before it a draft convention which embodies following

plan: The high contracting parties are to bring their proposals on strength in

land, sea, and air forces before the final Conference, and appropriate

subcommittees are to consider these proposals separately. That this plan is

squarely opposed to French idea of interdependence of arms is recognized,

but it is conceded to Cecil so that League may have all possible opportunity

to reach practical result through the Preparatory Commission. Admiralty

believes that Cecil’s draft convention will not be acceptable and that

impasse will be reached before Easter holidays. At all events, no great time

will be permitted for discussion. The Admiralty expect that the Three-

Power Naval Conference will meet in June.

HOUGHTON

[Document 156]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

186. Preparatory Commission convened this afternoon. Cecil presented his

that this was merely a framework for discussion and that he would welcome

alternative drafts from other delegations and proposed that any effort to

reconcile them be made by special subcommittees. Paul-Boncour27 in

conciliatory speech stated that he preferred beginning by general discussion

of the reports of technical subcommittees but that under the circumstances

he was prepared to adopt British method and would tomorrow or

Wednesday press the alternative draft embodying French views and

expressed his hope that the other delegations would present drafts and

suggestions. The Italian delegate read long prepared statement to the

general effect that Italy would not consider present armaments as a basis of

discussion and that regardless of the forces of other European countries

Italy would demand total strength equal to that of any other European

country. Japanese delegate read a declaration in which he associated himself

with Italian view that the armaments of each country must be settled

entirely by that country. I took no part in the discussions aside from

expressing satisfaction over the agreement to take British and French drafts

as a basis of consideration and added that the generous manner in which the

French delegate subordinated his preference in the method of work was a

good augury for future success.

There is no work before the Preparatory Commission until the French draft

is made available but a meeting will be held tomorrow merely because of

the fear which was openly expressed that failure to hold a meeting might

have an unfortunate effect upon public opinion.

[Document 157]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

95. In reply to the inquiry made February 24 in your private letter to Mr.

Dorsey Richardson of the Division of Western European Affairs, on

position to take should necessity arise of defining this Government’s

attitude toward an economic blockade which the Council of the League of

Nations might declare under article XVI of the Covenant of the League, you

will be guided by the following statement:

“1. The Government of the United States cannot

become a party to any agreement involving an

undertaking on its part to sever either trade or financial

relations with any state in any contingency, nor can it

participate in any blockade which may be decreed by

any power or by any group of powers, whether the

blockade is decreed under the auspices of the League of

Nations or otherwise. No arrangement directly or

indirectly contemplating possibility of prohibiting or

restricting carrying on of trade or commerce by

American citizens with any other country or countries

by institution of an economic blockade can be entered

into by the Government of the United States.

2. This Government will not agree to any form of

international supervision or control of armaments. This

Government considers that, as far as it is concerned,

sole sanction for reduction and enforcement of any

convention for reduction or limitation of armaments is

[Document 158]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 12: p.m.]

191. The entire character of the proceedings of the Preparatory Commission

will change with the presentation of the British, French, and possibly other

texts as basis for work instead of the original agenda.

The French draft is based entirely upon the idea of enforcement of the

Treaty of Versailles by the League of Nations; nominally the British draft is

also largely based on League enforcement but in this respect its provisions

are more readily susceptible of being worked out by organizations and

procedure which does not bear the label of the League, as Cecil has

indicated in his statement. Such action, however, would meet with

determined opposition from the French bloc. We must decide how far our

course of action is to be affected by this change. We have two courses open

to us, in my opinion: (1) To continue to present our views on all questions

with view to having them adopted in draft of convention; (2) to set forth our

views making known the sort of treaty we would be in position to accept

and leave to other delegations adoption, or otherwise, of such a draft,

placing on them the responsibility for adoption of a draft which would

make our participation impossible.

Adoption of first course would lead inevitably, I think, to deadlock,

providing those who hold other views with pretext for throwing on us

responsibility for failure to solve problem of disarmament; certainly the

tension with the French would be increased, as well as with nations

supporting them, and it would lead to multiplicity of arguments, merits of

which a large part of the continental press and possibly a portion of the

American press would inevitably distort. I do not see how, by such

methods, we could arrive at a generally acceptable treaty draft.

Second method, if well presented, would enable us, on the other hand, to

state our views with equal clarity and would at same time allow for

recognition of fact that measures which we could not accept for

constitutional or legal reasons might be desirable and practicable for other

countries. Essential obstacle to a plan generally acceptable is that large

number of delegations desire to have entire machinery of disarmament

placed under supervision and control of League in order to make

disarmament contingent on security under League, on international

inspection and control, and to put measures of sanction under jurisdiction of

the League Council. We might express desire to enter into general scheme

for limitation and reduction of armaments and then leave to the others the

decision as to which was more important: Abandonment of use of League

in this matter in order to obtain American participation, or agreement upon

what they deemed to be effective measures under League, with full

knowledge that this action would thereby eliminate us from any final

arrangement.

I shall cable you a tentative outline of statement on this subject for your

consideration. If it proves acceptable I should appreciate your full

instructions for exact form in which matter is to be presented. Urgent that I

have instructions early, as the situation may develop so rapidly that our

attitude will have to be made clear in course of next few days.

GIBSON

[Document 159]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

GENEVA, March 23, 1927—midnight.

At today’s session of Commission, Boncour in presenting his draft declared

that it was only in an earnest determination to meet American position that

he framed provisions of his draft concerning carrying into effect of

convention

and

embodying

erection

of

Permanent

Disarmament

Commission; otherwise he would have preferred to utilize already existing

League organs. French draft, unlike British, still provides for supervision

and control of contracting parties’ territory.

[Paraphrase.] If second course should be adopted, however, Boncour is so

conciliatory that I feel that I might suggest the possibility of dividing the

convention into two parts, the first part to contain the absolute provisions

for the limitation and reduction of armaments and the second to comprise

those provisions which members of the League of Nations might be

desirous of having enforced by those agencies under the control of the

League. It is believed that under such circumstances the members of the

League could apply the second convention as among themselves while we

might adhere to the first with such additional undertakings as might make

our adherence acceptable to those states members of the League. [End

paraphrase.]

GIBSON

[Document 160]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

195. If you decide upon the adoption of the second course indicated in my

a statement somewhat along the following lines. For example, I have sought

to avoid on the one hand appearing to be obstructive and on the other the

appearance of a swan song. There are some repetitions but they are

intentional to make sure of driving home essential points.

“With the submission of the drafts, which are now before us, the

work upon which we are engaged has assumed a new aspect.

Heretofore we have been engaged upon the discussion of a

number of technical questions but now we have before us texts

which embody not only technical views by [but] the political

views of various Governments as to the practical solution of

actual problems of the limitation and reduction of armaments. I

cannot [but] feel this is a distinct step forward on the basis of very

valuable technical work which has already been done. We are

now in a position to begin the thorough examination of the still

more difficult and involved political problems. While the

American delegation does not feel that it can usefully submit an

additional draft convention, it welcomes the candor which has

prompted the presentation of the drafts now before us which are

of the greatest value in that they indicate how far certain

Governments are disposed to go, and secondly, the methods

which they feel can best solve these problems. I think I can say

that in a general way the drafts before us indicate certain schools

of thought which have been developed in the course of lengthy

discussions as to the most acceptable methods of limiting and

reducing armaments. It may best serve the avowed purpose of

these drafts and facilitate the work of the Conference if I offered

at this time certain frank comments on a type of provisions

common to all of them. I refer most particularly to those

provisions in both drafts which envisage utilizing the machinery

and authority of the League of Nations in carrying out the

provisions of a final treaty either through providing for security,

the punishment of an aggressor state, or international inspection

and control of armaments.

During the discussions of the past few days I have been greatly

impressed by the obvious conviction of many delegations [that]

the solution of the armament problem can best be found through

utilizing in full measure the machinery and authority of the

League of Nations. The sincerity of this conviction commands

our fullest respect, not only our respect, but a growing belief that

this very confidence in the efficacy of the League as an organ of

peace may indicate that these nations are feeling their way

forward surely to a solution of their problem. The American

delegation believes that the possibilities of such a solution

deserve the most careful friendly examination and if it be found

that this is the way to accomplish the task it will rejoice in every

measure of success that may be achieved. Moreover, my

Government is deeply and genuinely sensible of the friendliness

and good will which has been shown throughout these discussions

in an effort to deal in a practical manner with the problem created

by the fact that the United States is not a member of the League

of Nations. As has been brought out in these discussions this

constitutes a difficult problem and it may be that even infinite

goodwill will not suffice to obtain the advantages sought by those

who wish to use the authority of the League and at the same time

make adequate [provision?] for the existing difficulties created by

America’s nonmembership. I am confident, however, that if this

extremely difficult problem cannot be solved it will be through no

lack of careful study and goodwill. There are other governments

which are not members of the League, but the American

Government is the only one among them which is here

represented to bring forward this point of view. The fact that my

Government is not a member of the League imposes very definite

limitations as to the undertakings which it is in a position to give

in connection with a convention of this sort. In the course of the

discussions

in

the

Preparatory

Commission

and

its

subcommissions, it has repeatedly been made clear that any

convention, in order to be acceptable to my Government, must

take full account of the fact that it is not a member of the League

and further that it is not in a position to subscribe to international

agreements based on supervision or control. I trust it will be

clearly understood that I am not bringing up this question in any

spirit of criticism or with a view to raising doubts as to the

effective measures or desirability of the methods. I am merely

calling attention to a fact.

I realize that there is a broad difference in the possible types of

conventions which might be drawn up. On the one hand there is

the type of convention which some delegations here might be

ready to accept in which they would utilize in a very extended

form the authority and supervision of the subtreasurer. At the

other extreme is the form of convention which would be

acceptable to my Government, namely, a general international

convention binding as between the contracting parties and

depending for its fulfillment upon international good faith and

respect for treaties without recourse to the League.

Regardless of the views of any delegation or group-meeting of

delegations and regardless of the particular situation of any

delegation, what this Commission is chiefly concerned with is the

elaboration of a convention which will most effectively deal with

the problem of the limitation and reduction of armaments. In the

view of my Government everything should be subordinated to

that end. After the very exhaustive studies which may be made by

the members of this Commission it may be felt by many

delegations that the problem can best be solved by the adoption of

a text which involves the full use of League machinery and the

[conferring?] of definite and extensive powers on the League. If

in the reasoned opinion of this Commission that course will

accomplish the purpose for which it has been convened, my

Government would not wish its special situation to be considered

an obstacle to general agreement. We quite realize, as I have said,

that a treaty utilizing to the full the machinery and authority of the

League might best be calculated to meet the problem even if the

United States should be unable to become a party to it. On the

other hand a treaty which takes full account of the special

situation of the United States in such measure as to make it

acceptable to us might be considered of doubtful value in dealing

with the situation in other parts of the world and my Government

above all desires that its special position shall not impede the

adoption of the most effective convention possible.

I have ventured to set forth these views in explanation of my

Government’s position but I have not done this with the desire to

ask the Preparatory Commission to give its immediate attention to

this special problem. It will, I hope, be taken care of in the normal

course of discussion incident to the preparations of a draft

convention in which work the American delegation will take its

full share, since any decision of the Commission not to make

special provision for America’s status would in no way diminish

our interest in the general problem.

In this connection the Commission will wish to consider how far

the general question or problem of armaments will be affected if a

draft is adopted to which the United States cannot become a party.

It may perforce be felt that the armaments of my country hardly

require the measures of supervision and control prescribed in the

proposed convention. It may also be borne in mind that with

respect to naval armaments we are already strictly bound as

regards certain classes of ships by a treaty which still has a

number of years to run. Under proposals which have recently

been made by the President32 we are seeking to reach an

agreement which we hope will result in limitation of the classes

of ships not already dealt with in the Washington treaty. As

regards our land armament, it is well known that it has been

reduced to a figure far below that of any other country with

anything [approximating] our population and that our whole

history and tradition is in the direction of a military establishment

reduced to a minimum. While I am of course in no position to

give any undertaking on behalf of my Government at this time, I

am authorized to say that there is no present intention of

materially increasing our land forces. I do not wish to urge this

view upon the Commission but merely submit it for consideration

in connection with the general problem which I have raised.

My Government is thoroughly alive to the very real problems

which confront many of the countries here represented. It quite

realizes the great complexity of the query which they are now

called upon to meet. It is this recognition of the difficult position

of other countries which has led my Government to authorize this

declaration of its position. It feels that the problem at issue is so

great that it will willingly subordinate its own desire to join in this

convention to its still stronger desire to witness the successful

conclusion of a concrete achievement which, even if it should fall

short of the utmost desirable, would still be a most noteworthy

contribution to the cause of peace and an alleviation of armament

burdens and, it may well be hoped, constitute an incentive to

further accomplishments in the same field. This is a task which

will call not only for intelligence and industry but for great

courage and indefinite [infinite?] tolerance. My Government is

most anxious to contribute its full share and will work

wholeheartedly for the success of this effort in that spirit.

A number of my colleagues have referred in very friendly terms

to their anxiety to draw up a text which can be accepted by my

Government.

Monsieur

Paul-Boncour

in

his

admirable

presentation of the French draft showed clearly that he had made

an earnest effort to reconcile his belief in the efficiency of League

authority with his desire to bring America into the final treaty. We

are deeply sensible of the friendly spirit which prompted him to

go to the lengths [to] which he has gone in [preparation?] of his

draft. In examining Lord Cecil’s draft it is obvious that he has

[Document 161]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 4: p.m.]

double convention similar to the one I outlined to the Department has

suggested itself to some of my colleagues who were most anxious to broach

the subject this morning. To prevent this, I suggested that such a proposal

would be premature and that it would be embarrassing to me if presented

before my Government had had an opportunity to examine the drafts which

had been submitted, for consideration. It is apparent that most of the value

of this contribution would be lost to us if before I can present the matter it is

even hinted at by others. I would, therefore, request that you let me have

your decision regarding my suggestion at the earliest possible moment in

order to minimize the risk of losing the initiative in the matter.

I am firmly convinced that our position now and in the future would be

greatly strengthened if the suggestion which I have outlined were adopted.

GIBSON

[Document 162]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

98. Owing to late arrival of your telegrams on statement you propose to

make, it is impossible for me to examine matter carefully and advise you

tonight. I think, however, that in main it is too much an endorsement of

League supervision, as our argument has always been not only that such

supervision could not be accepted by us but that it is vicious in principle as

its only effect will be to create distrust and suspicion between nations. In

addition I do not think that we are justified in saying that we have no

intention at present of materially increasing our land forces. Your draft will

be considered and reply sent some time tomorrow.

KELLOGG

[Document 163]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

be interpreted as a departure from the consistently maintained American

position. Throughout the discussions, as you will recall, the statement by us

that we deemed supervision vicious in principle and declined to accept it for

ourselves was coupled invariably with the statement that no objection

would be offered by us if others wished to apply it among themselves. If we

are not to be illogical, we must take an occasion to reiterate our position

either now or as soon as the question of supervision comes up. Should all

the other powers consider that supervision by the League, applied to

themselves but not to the United States, does not create suspicion but is, on

the contrary, the only method to allay their mutual suspicions, opposition by

us would not be consistent and would make our position untenable. The

a.m., or something like it, should be made promptly. Three courses remain

open to us:

(1) Make such a statement, thus removing any pretext for

charging us with obstruction. This would leave us free to

concentrate on trying to obtain in a separate convention what we

regard to be essential. Also, this would clearly reveal our sincere

desire for the promotion of achieved results.

(2) Await the same proposal from France or Belgium (see my

make it in a day or so, thereby creating the impression of going to

extreme limits of concession in order to make the convention

acceptable to us. A refusal would be difficult, and agreement

would make it appear that we accepted a favor conferred upon us.

(3) Refuse the proposal in (2) above and fight for a general

convention which would be acceptable to us. This course, in our

opinion, is not to be considered. Most of the other delegations

favor the use of League machinery to a greater or lesser extent,

and most of them wish to apply supervisory measures among

themselves. The best possible pretext to accuse us of rendering

disarmament measures impossible would be afforded them if we

oppose this course.

It should be kept in mind that the prospect of success for the Conference is

problematical at best and that, if we do meet the situation handsomely, we

shall leave to others the shouldering of their share of responsibility for the

failure. Should we advance this proposal, the clearest indication will have

been given that we are not fighting them politically, though we may not

agree with them on technical matters.

Another consideration is that some indecision is evident among the French

regarding their reply to our last naval invitation. Should we remove, in a

conspicuously friendly way, what they consider to be the chief present

obstacle in the way of their extreme League program, this may help in

convincing them that, though on technical questions we have opposed them,

no hostility to France was involved and we are anxious to treat with them in

a friendly and generous way. Although this is pure conjecture, their decision

regarding naval matters might be affected thereby.

Nolan35 approves as accurate the statement that we do not intend a material

increase of our land forces, but this I do not deem of any consequence in

comparison with the main point developed by me. If you prefer, therefore,

this sentence could be omitted without the value of the statement being

affected.

A general statement has been made by each delegation, except those of

Argentina and Colombia. Owing to the special position of the United States

respecting the League, it is felt that, until our views become known, no

[Document 164]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

99. Your No. 195 has been considered with all care possible in short time

given, and I do not think that your suggested statement contained therein

should be made to plenary conference.

(1) Fundamental objection is that other powers are deliberately encouraged

to set up scheme of international supervision and control; and (2) very

definite impression is given that only reason this Government cannot join is

that the United States is not a member of the League.

Perhaps you do not really intend statement to have that effect, but certainly

that is impression made on my mind, and I fear that the other delegations

and the public as well would receive it the same way.

(3) One of our principal objections to both the French and British drafts is

the provision they carry for international supervision—in your words, based

on punishment of an aggressor state—or for international inspection and

armament control. Military action or economic boycott is only punishment

that could be inflicted, and each is not only impractical and unacceptable to

this country, but, in my opinion, very likely to be rejected by other

countries. We have insisted constantly that control of armaments as far as

this country is concerned must be left to the good faith of nations.

(4) I think that the American delegation should put diplomatically before

the plenary conference the arguments set forth in section 3, report of

subcommission A, by the delegates representing the Governments of the

British Empire, Chile, Italy, Japan, Sweden and the United States. I cannot

see why these nations should not urge upon plenary conference the

arguments advanced in the report.

(5) I do not think that we impliedly should advocate a plan even for other

nations which we would be unwilling to accept for ourselves.

(6) I cannot go over your statement in detail, but in many passages it seems

to me that idea of approval of international supervision for other countries

is conveyed. In section 2, for instance, you state that if in the reasoned

opinion of the Preparatory Commission complete League control will

accomplish purpose for which it was convened, the Government of the

United States would not wish its special position to be looked upon as

obstacle to general agreement; and that it is fully realized that a treaty

utilizing to fullest extent the machinery and authority of the League of

Nations could best be calculated to meet problem, even should the United

States not be able to be party to it. Our point is that we do not wish to be put

in position of saying that international supervision is good thing for other

nations but not for ourselves.

I have no objection to offer to your making conciliatory and diplomatic

statement within limits here set forth and stated already in our instructions.

The position of this Government, reduced to its lowest terms and stated in

language which perhaps can be modified and put in more conciliatory form

may be described thus: The Government of the United States cannot agree,

for its part, to any form of international supervision or control of

armaments. This Government holds that, as far as it is concerned, sole

sanction for execution and enforcement of any convention for reduction and

limitation of armaments lies in the good faith of all nations involved,

naturally obligating them to a scrupulous observance of their treaty

obligations. The United States would have no concern, therefore, in what

other powers may decide to do toward establishment of an international

supervision or control applicable to themselves.

Principle involved here is of broader significance than any question having

to do with efficacy of League machinery or of our nonmembership in

League of Nations. The Government of the United States is unable to find

itself in accord with proposals for any form of supervision or control of

armaments by any international body, whether League of Nations or any

[Document 165]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 9: p.m.]

201. Your No. 99 sets forth six main objections to statement I proposed in

my No. 195. We understand and are in agreement with them as they tend to

make our original intention clearer.

Objection No. 1. We shall amplify statement so as to make it clear

beyond doubt that our Government adheres fully to position set

forth in declaration to which you refer published in section 3 of

subcommittee A report; we shall state that we thoroughly

disapprove, as wrong in principle and not workable in practice, of

international supervision and control of armament; that not under

any conditions will we accept it; and that we are convinced that it

is upon the good faith of nations and respect for treaties that the

execution of any international agreement for the limitation of

armaments must depend.

Objection No. 2. This objection will be obviated by statement as

amplified under No. 1.

Objection No. 3. Amplification of statement will make clear that

we will not accept sanctions of nature indicated.

Objection No. 4. We are adhering fully to declaration published in

section 3 of Subcommittee A report. Our adherence will be made

clearer in statement when rewritten, and when discussions reach

subject of control will be dealt with more fully. On this issue

Germany, Italy, and some of the other powers will continue to

oppose the French; the better part for us is to state our position

and leave it to them to protect their own interests.

Objection No. 5. We are not impliedly advocating a plan “even

for other nations which we would be unwilling to accept for

ourselves”. We are adhering strictly to statements made

repeatedly in pursuance of your written instructions which make

it clear that should other powers desire to apply to themselves a

regime of inspection or control, this is not a matter which

concerns the United States. Statement I proposed will not in any

way go beyond this position repeatedly taken and is merely

a.m. indicated urgent necessity of this course from strategical

point of view, and our position will be very greatly strengthened

if we adopt it and will be seriously impaired if we do not.

Objection No. 6. Your quotation from my proposed statement

read “machinery and authority of the League of Nations could

best be calculated to meet problem”; my statement read “might”

instead of “could” but nevertheless this portion will be omitted.

The above changes in the proposed statement seem in large measure to meet

your views and at same time to carry out our original intent. The

Preparatory Commission has begun a detailed discussion on the coordinated

Anglo-French draft on land armaments, and until we shall have enunciated

a general policy we are in an awkward position to press our views. We

request your authority to redraft the statement in conformity with above

changes and present it as soon as we can.

The fact that the issue is not confined to the question of control should be

borne in mind. All the other delegations on the Preparatory Commission are

prepared to use the League of Nations machinery in forms which would not

be acceptable to us and which range from the obligation to report activities

to the League to provisions of elaborate nature for security and sanctions.

We clarify the situation and at same time relieve ourselves of necessity for

cooperating in any of these matters if it is agreed that the convention is to

be restricted broadly to limitation provisions to which you could adhere.

Members of the League would be left free to take whatever measures they

can negotiate to make the convention operative among themselves. We have

frequently declared that any such arrangements do not concern us, and if the

Conference is to break down on disagreements on League matters among

European powers it seems highly important that we should avoid taking

sides beyond a statement of our views.

The cross-currents and tension here are difficult to describe. Speaking with

our knowledge of the situation, we feel strongly that the course we propose

should be taken without delay, as tension here will largely be relieved as far

as we are concerned and we shall be left free to maintain our full thesis on

what should go into a draft convention which is restricted to provisions of

limitation; at same time we shall be free from resentment which is

inevitable if we take part in what is now becoming a European political

fight.

All of us attach the utmost importance to idea of a double convention as

only means of avoiding participating in delicate discussions of League of

Nations problems, and as means whereby others will be left free to reach

agreement among themselves. As I stated in my No. 199 it is important that

you communicate your views without delay, for it would be unfortunate

were we anticipated in this proposal and I were not in position where I

could make some sort of response.

GIBSON

[Document 166]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

about is to appear before Conference and world as originators and

proponents of a formula that would hereafter be known as the “American

Plan”, which in effect calls for joint international supervision and control of

armaments for every power except ourselves. Although distinction between

affirmative proposal and passive acquiescence may seem fine in this matter

it is real nevertheless. Double treaty formula may be well worth considering

although in working it out and putting it in practicable shape serious

difficulties may be encountered, but after having given question mature

consideration we are convinced that we ought not to accept responsibility of

originating suggestion. On other hand we so genuinely appreciate possible

embarrassment which it is evident that you are feeling keenly that we are

anxious to go as far as we can towards meeting your views. It seems to us

that our position before the Conference would be quite understandable and

tenable were you to speak to your associates something along following

lines: They have proposed some form of international supervision and

control; we do not believe in this (give reasons) and cannot accept it; if,

however, they want it and insist upon it for themselves and if they can find

any way by which to accomplish what they desire for themselves and can at

same time eliminate, as far as the United States is concerned, the feature of

international supervision and control, then you are ready to cooperate with

them in sincere endeavor to find solution of that problem.

In our judgment, statement along these lines represents limit to which we

can go. Other delegations will then be able, as you expect, to come forward

with the double convention suggestion.

Ketoce

[Document 167]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

214. Proceedings of the present Commission forced ahead at such a pace as

to preclude careful work or any effort at negotiation or compromise. … If

work was being carried on at a normal rate most of the things we wanted

would be brought out in the discussions but now we must state them each

time lest the discussion be closed before our views are made known. We are

agreed that the best course for us is to let other people state our views where

they will; otherwise, to state them ourselves as briefly as possible and in an

entirely objective manner and further to keep out of controversial debates

except where it is essential to make our views on technical matters clearly

of record.

Thus far the discussions have been on technical matters but at rate we are

proceeding we shall probably reach discussion of a number of highly

controversial subjects of a political character by Wednesday evening. These

include budgetary expenditures, supervision and control, matters involving

the use of League machinery in administering disarmament provisions of

treaty and in all probability discussions of security under the authority of

the Council.

These questions will arise one after another and will be the subject of bitter

controversy; as controversies increase in bitterness there will be a fresh

effort to choose a scapegoat for any failure of the Commission. We are at a

stage of distinct jockeying. As matters now stand there are so many delicate

European questions that need adjustment that so far as I can gather the

inclination of those countries would be if possible to avoid recriminations

among themselves and seek the scapegoat elsewhere. If on each of the

contentious questions about to be considered we adopt an antagonistic

attitude with no constructive or conciliatory offers we must expect that

there will be a serious and perhaps plausible effort to hold us primarily

accountable for failure. We can of course make a statement in connection

with each of these problems that on account of our special conditions and

special views we will not accept or be a party to any solution involving use

of League machinery. But if this attitude of bare opposition is adopted we

fall into a very dangerous situation. It is of course possible that delegations

may give us a way out by suggesting a separate convention but it is

becoming increasingly likely that they will emphasize and give wide

publicity to our opposition to every proposal irrespective of the League,

which many of them claim is the only way of bringing about effective

measures of disarmament and thus make a concerted effort and saddle upon

us the responsibility and blame for rendering agreement impossible.

I am still of the opinion that a bold suggestion of a treaty limited to

disarmament provisions, accompanied by a protocol for its enforcement,

would be the most sure means of warding off the real danger above set

forth. In view however of your repeated instructions disapproving this, the

force of which I entirely appreciate, it remains to be seen if the same result

cannot be reached by other means. One way still appears to offer hope of

bringing us safely out of the delicate situation I have described, while it

likewise conforms to the limits laid down in your recent telegraphic

instructions. I therefore venture to recommend that we take occasion

whenever the first of these enforcement questions arises to make a general

statement which applies not only to that particular question but to the

purpose of the whole idea of League machinery and authority; to make it

perfectly clear that we will not accept any measure of League jurisdiction,

any obligation to the League for information or otherwise, and that the

whole idea of sanctions, supervision, et cetera, whether carried out under

the League or not, is thoroughly unacceptable to us; that on the other hand

we must recognize the fact that all the other members of the committee are

members of the League and that we cannot stand in the way of their

adopting such measures as they may deem desirable no matter how

impractical or unworkable they may appear to us; that we would be wanting

in frankness if we did not make it clear that our failure to accept these

reasonable measures was not due solely to our nonmembership in the

League but primarily because we believe them unsatisfactory and

unworkable; that we hope our views to this effect will be given their earnest

consideration as we are reluctant to see them adopt any measures which in

our opinion can lead to no practical results; that the fundamental part of our

doctrine is that the way to disarm is to disarm and that the most effective

sort of treaty is only one which specifies the disarmament provisions upon

which governments are able to agree and leaves to their good faith the

enforcement of these provisions. In this connection I purpose to refer to the

Washington treaty as a successful example. We believe that any attempt to

control, direct or spy will inevitably tend to foster mistrust and suspicion

and take us farther away than ever from our common goal. However if the

other members of the Commission are able to reach agreement among

themselves for measures of this sort and really believe that they will be

efficacious, the American Government would not stand in the way of such

agreement; that of course we could not become a party to it and that they

might feel they preferred such an agreement among themselves to an

entirely different agreement to which the United States could become a

party; that in this event we should of course offer no objection and should

warmly welcome any measures of success which might be achieved by their

agreement. We might then say that we were sincerely desirous of becoming

a party to a general limitation treaty and that we hoped some method could

be found which would enable them to suggest the measures they deemed

desirable while at the same time recognizing our special position and our

convictions.

At this point I should throw out the suggestion that the treaty should contain

merely disarmament provisions leaving its enforcement to the good faith of

each Government. This would obviate the objection in your telegram to

suggesting a double convention but would leave it open to some other

delegate to suggest that there be a separate protocol as to enforcement

among the other League members. However, as indicated above, the

situation has so changed from that set forth in my earlier telegrams that we

cannot rely confidently upon other delegations’ helping us out in this

manner. The situation needs some active stimulation. I would therefore

propose to take steps with a view to insuring that when I make my

statement and suggestion as above set forth another delegation will propose

that my suggestion of a limited treaty be complemented by a protocol [of]

enforcement as between those believing in supervision and control, and I

can then accept this suggestion. I feel fairly confident that I can

satisfactorily handle this phase of the situation.

It seems clear to me that the proposal of a single treaty confined to

disarmament provisions and with no proposals on our part of a separate

agreement among League members obviates the objection raised in your

should be confining ourselves to a suggestion which could not be distorted

as you feared would be the case with my original suggestion.

Any general statement of this sort, in order to have its maximum effect,

should be made whenever the first question involving the use of League

machinery or authority arises. It will come with much lessened effect if we

have made reservations on one or more points and then come out with a

general statement. It will then look as though we had been forced into it as a

matter of self-protection, whereas if we do it spontaneously we may get the

credit of trying to find some helpful way of meeting one of the definite

problems of the Conference, and furthermore any stand we later take on

technical problems will bring less resentment than if we are opposed to the

continental thesis all along the line.

Commission finished first reading of air armaments today and begins naval

armaments tomorrow morning. I do not see how we can help getting on to

the question of enforcement of the treaties by Thursday at the latest. An

immediate action is therefore essential. Marriner will be able to explain the

very involved situation here which makes it imperative that we lose no time

in divorcing ourselves from these European quarrels and confine ourselves

strictly to the technical aspects of disarmament which in themselves I fear

offer insurmountable obstacles.

I therefore request your authorization to pursue the course outlined above

which, moreover, I believe falls within the limits of your instructions. I may

be required to take a stand on one or more of these questions by Wednesday

evening and hope you can give me your full instructions by that time. I

earnestly hope you can agree with the foregoing as none of us can see any

other effective way of emerging with credit from the present delicate

situation.

[Document 168]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

approved, and I authorize statement along lines indicated at time you deem

most opportune. Begin statement at point reading “I therefore venture to

recommend.” I suggest that it might be desirable to omit portion beginning

“that of course we could not become a party” and ending “which might be

achieved by their agreement.” This portion might be open to

misinterpretation and does not seem to be necessary.

KELLOGG

[Document 169]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

216. Commission in this morning’s session took up question limitation of

naval effectives. After general discussion in which I briefly stated our

position, the question was reserved as Cecil declared that he could take no

further part in discussion until he received an answer to his request for

instructions. While he in no way committed himself, this tends to indicate

that he may go some distance in meeting French thesis.

Remainder of morning session and entire afternoon session devoted to

discussion comparative methods of limitation of naval units by classes or by

total tonnage. The majority of delegates set forth their views on the general

subject without deviation from the position taken by them in subcommittee

A. Paul-Boncour, however, at the end of a speech delivered with what

seemed clearly deliberate moderation of tone stated that France might be

prepared to envisage the publication of its naval building program within

the total tonnage to be allocated to her. Having purposely refrained from

speaking until after Paul-Boncour, I took occasion, after making a statement

as to our attitude on this question, to observe that the suggestion made by

Paul-Boncour and the general spirit of the remarks in which he had couched

it, opened up most interesting and hopeful possibilities and that we should

be glad to examine any proposal he might bring forward. Cecil expressed

himself in the same sense and requested Paul-Boncour to put his suggestion

precisely in writing. This the latter agreed to do. Marinis38a then said that as

regards publicity respecting naval building programs he thought the

pertinent provisions of the Washington treaty might afford a basis of

agreement. He also will submit his proposal in writing.

These two written proposals will probably come before the Commission

tomorrow and I shall then be able, if necessary, to ask for instructions

thereon.

GIBSON

38a Italian delegate on the Commission.

[Document 170]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

221. Cecil informs me his Government is prepared under certain conditions

to yield to the French in regard to the limitation of naval effectives. He is

informing Boncour that he will be prepared to discuss acceptance of such

limitation provided (1) that acceptable agreement can be reached in regard

(2) that limitation of effectives is accepted by the United States and Japan.

He feels that while limitation of naval effectives is not a sound method he

can see no vital objection to it and is disposed to make certain concessions

to the French if this will lead them to reciprocal concessions on naval

tonnage.

Although we believe that the method of limitation by limiting effectives

unnecessarily complicates the problem and have so represented to the

Conference, we are not prepared to contend that it is wholly inadmissible.

The views of the Navy Department are especially desired on the subject in

view of the fact that the effectives of the Marine Corps and Coast Guard

will necessarily be included in naval effectives. Due consideration of the

fact that our air effectives are integral components of the naval effectives

also is necessary. This latter not being the case with Great Britain or Italy

will naturally affect the number of effectives necessary for us in comparison

with those two countries.

GIBSON

[Document 171]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

acceptable the principle of limitation of naval effectives.

KELLOGG

[Document 172]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

repeats that his Government is prepared to yield to the French on naval

effectives, providing that acceptable agreement can be reached with respect

to limitation of tonnage. While fully realizing that limitation of naval

effectives is not a good or even a practical method I feel that the question

has now reached a brighter phase where you may feel it advisable to

consider making concessions if by so doing an acceptable compromise

agreement can be reached on the more fundamental important question of

tonnage limitation. Department will of course bear in mind situation created

if British yield and leave us alone in opposition. The possible effect of any

agreement on the contemplated three-power conversations will be watched

and you will be kept fully advised of progress. I therefore request the

Department’s instructions at its earliest convenience.

GIBSON

[Document 173]

The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of

State

[Paraphrase]

83. Text of memorandum from naval attaché of Embassy follows:

First Lord of Admiralty informally requested naval attaché to see

him, and attaché called last evening. Bridgeman emphasized that

he was speaking only for the Admiralty not for the Government

but expressed his views as follows:

He feared that divergent positions might be taken by the United

States, Japan, and Great Britain as a result of certain proposals

now being made at Geneva and thought that an effort was being

made to prejudice the success of the Three-Power Naval

Conference by causing discord among the powers concerned at

the present time. The French proposals he considered clever

though impossible of acceptance and was confident that the

present discussions at Geneva would yield nothing tangible. He

trusted that unanimity in replying to questions raised at the

present session of the Preparatory Commission might always be

preserved among the three delegations. While deeming it best that

no change be made in the attitude adopted last summer as regards

opposition to theory of total tonnage or personnel limitation, he

believed that modifications in details might for diplomatic

reasons be made and that he would have no objection to them on

the condition that the United States and Japan acted identically.

Bridgeman laid emphasis, however, on fact that no pressure was

being exerted by the Admiralty upon either of these powers to

make them depart from agreements in principle already arrived at.

It was the naval attaché’s opinion that the First Lord appeared

hopeful of results which the Three-Power Naval Conference

might yield but that he also appeared to think that a prerequisite

to its success was that the three powers should not enter upon it

committed to different engagements arising out of the present

negotiations. Bridgeman stated that he expected to head the

British delegation, accompanied by naval officers including Vice

Admiral Field. He added that the British delegation would present

to the Conference proposals of an easily comprehensible kind.

Commenting upon this, the naval attaché thought that the British

scheme that has been formulated is not in accordance with some

of the recent proposals at the present session of the Preparatory

Commission which have been partially approved by some of the

powers.

As Bridgeman felt that cooperation in the matter was of

importance he emphasized the fact that he would be grateful if his

views were communicated to the appropriate American

authorities.

HOUGHTON

[Document 174]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

French method of limitation of naval effectives is not acceptable, if a

workable form of limitation of total strictly naval personnel, unhampered as

to assignment or employment at home or abroad, could be devised some

compromise on this subject might be accepted, possibly in exchange for

some other concession.

Should Great Britain and Japan consent to limitation of naval effectives as

one of the elements to be taken into consideration in the limitation of naval

armaments, you are authorized to yield on this point as a matter of

conciliation, after restating our opposition to the principle and after

outlining the difficulties of estimating the number to be used as a basis for

such limitation in the United States, as the Navy includes the Marine Corps

and also aviation units. Furthermore, the position of the coast guard, which

comes under the Treasury Department, would have to be especially

considered. You should likewise inform the Conference that you will be

compelled to insist on the exclusion of the above mentioned classes of

naval personnel from consideration in the total for purposes of limitation

when the question shall arise.

KELLOGG

[Document 175]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

227. I have been informed that instructions to state that the French proposal

is quite unacceptable have been received by Cecil today. Unless and until

some agreement is reached on naval matter, Boncour holds that it is futile to

continue discussion of the other phases of the draft convention under

consideration.

In strict confidence I was told this afternoon by Loudon, chairman of the

Commission, that he believes these facts will be announced to the

Commission tomorrow during the morning session. It is believed that the

French and British will recognize each other’s honest effort towards

compromise and will come to an agreement that the best course to pursue

will be to adjourn immediately, in order to give the Governments time to

negotiate some form of agreement, in the hope that it may be possible

sometime in June to reconvene the Preparatory Commission. The belief is

held by Loudon that every effort will be made on both sides to leave the

door open for eventual compromise and he seems confident that there will

be no recriminations.

GIBSON

[Document 176]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

frank statement of his views. You may inform him unofficially that the

American delegation at Geneva is fully aware of the desirability of the three

chief naval powers maintaining united front in discussions now going on at

Geneva.

KELLOGG

[Document 177]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American

Representation on the Preparatory Commission (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

disagrees entirely with Boncour’s position that to continue discussion of

other phases of draft convention would be futile without an agreement on

naval matters. If, however, an adjournment is desired, the Department

perceives no objection.

No conflict with the Three-Power Naval Conference is to be feared, in any

event, as the Department has maintained the feasibility of carrying on these

conversations during the work of the Preparatory Commission.

KELLOGG

[Document 178]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

Cecil injected the subject of the forthcoming Three-Power Naval

Conference squarely into the Commission’s discussions at the outset of this

morning’s session. While stating that he was prepared to abandon the

British contention that only shore-based aircraft should be limited, he made

the expressed proviso that this should not prejudice any discussions to be

had or decisions to be reached at the forthcoming Conference and the

general tone of his remarks in this connection at least laid them open to the

interpretation that in naval matters the three powers in question were more

concerned with what might happen at the said Conference than with the

present labors of this Commission. In his reply Boncour took note of this

and although he did not overemphasize the point, referred to “the

approaching Conference which hovers above all our work here.” Saito

said that he would not have permitted himself to refer to this subject if Cecil

had not already done so but that he now felt that he might properly do so.

He then spoke in laudatory terms of the Washington Conference, the way it

had been carried out, the complete appreciation in his country of the high

purpose of President Coolidge in calling this new Conference and the

independent and unconflicting nature of the latter with respect to the work

of this Commission.

In a brief speech I declared that although I could not believe that my

colleagues were under any misapprehension, yet as the matter is such a vital

one I wished if any such misapprehension existed completely to dissipate it.

I quoted from the memorandum annexed to the President’s message of

February 10th41 showing that our delegation was under instructions to work

wholeheartedly for the success of this Commission and that the conception

[Document 179]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

“Mr. President: The French and British draft conventions which

we have now been engaged in examining for the past fortnight

have unquestionably constituted a noteworthy contribution to the

solution of the disarmament problem. Whereas in last year’s stage

of the work of the Preparatory Commission and its

subcommissions we were necessarily engaged in the discussion of

technical questions, these drafts now embody not only the attitude

taken on technical questions, but also the political views of

various Governments as to the most practical methods of solution

of the actual problem of the limitation and reduction of

armaments. During the course of our present deliberations many

delegations have again found occasion to reaffirm their technical

views on points under discussion; nevertheless we are becoming

more and more engaged in consideration of the still more difficult

and involved political problems which the preparation of a final

draft convention necessarily presents. The American delegation

has not felt that it could usefully submit an additional draft

convention but it has welcomed the presentation of the drafts now

before us which are of the greatest value in that they indicate how

far certain Governments are disposed to go, and, further, the

methods which they feel can best solve the question at issue. In a

general way the drafts before us indicate certain schools of

thought which have been developed in the course of lengthy

discussions as to the most acceptable methods of limiting and

reducing armaments. It might best serve the avowed purpose of

these drafts and facilitate the work of the Conference if I offered

at this time certain frank comments on a type of provisions

common to both of them. I refer most particularly to those

provisions in both drafts which envisage utilizing the machinery

and authority of the League of Nations in carrying out the

provisions of a final treaty.

During the general discussion it was clearly the obvious

conviction of many delegations that the solution of the armaments

problem can best be found through utilizing in full measure the

machinery and authority of the League of Nations. My

Government, however, is deeply and genuinely sensible of the

friendliness and good will which was shown throughout the

general discussion in an effort to deal in a practical manner with

the problem created by the fact that the United States is not a

member of the League of Nations. As was brought out in the

discussion, this fact constituted a difficult problem. I am

confident, however, that if this problem cannot be solved it will

be through no lack of careful study and good will. There are other

governments which are not members of the League but the

American Government is the only one of them which is here

represented. The fact that my Government is not a member

imposes very definite limitations as to the undertakings which it

is in a position to give in connection with a convention of this

sort. In the course of the discussions in the Preparatory

Commission and its subcommissions it has repeatedly been made

clear that any convention, in order to be acceptable to my

Government must take full account of the fact that it cannot

accept the jurisdiction of the League and further that it is not in a

position to subscribe to international agreements based on

supervision or control.

It will be recalled that in the discussions above referred to the

delegates of the United States, as well as those of the British

Empire, Chile, Italy, Japan and Sweden, set forth their views that

any form of supervision or control of armaments by an

international body would be extremely complicated and

impractical; they also affirmed their conviction that such

measures would be more calculated to foment ill will and

suspicion between states than to create the spirit of international

confidence which should be one of the most important results of

any agreement for the reduction and limitation of armaments, and

that the execution of any convention must depend upon the good

faith of nations scrupulously to carry out their treaty obligations. I

will not take up the time of the Commission in reviewing the

detailed objections of these delegates to any such form of

supervision or control, but I should be wanting in frankness if I

did not make it clear that our nonmembership in the League is not

the only reason for our unwillingness to accept measures of this

character. We are opposed to them primarily because we believe

them unsound and unworkable. We cannot divest ourselves of the

idea that the only practical way to disarm is actually to disarm,

and that the most effective sort of treaty is one which specifies the

disarmament provisions upon which governments are able to

agree and leaves to their good faith the enforcement of these

provisions. In this connection I desire to remind the Commission

that there is a disarmament treaty which has now been in effect

for four years and which, dependent for its enforcement solely

upon international good faith, has been observed by all the high

contracting parties in the most faithful and scrupulous manner.

I trust it will be understood that I am not attempting to open up

again the whole question here involved but I believe it, however,

my duty to state fully and frankly the opinion of my Government

as to the best method of enforcement of international conventions

irrespective of the consideration that it is not a member of the

League of Nations. Nevertheless, this nonmembership is a fact

which bears upon the framing of any convention in which my

Government is to take part and I feel it advisable at the present

moment once more to call attention to this fact.

A number of my colleagues have referred in very friendly terms

to their anxiety to draw up a text which can be accepted by my

Government.

Monsieur

Paul-Boncour

in

his

admirable

presentation of the French draft described the efforts he had made

to reconcile his belief in the efficacy of the League authority with

his desire to bring America into the final treaty. We are deeply

sensible of his friendly spirit. In examining Lord Cecil’s draft it is

obvious that he has been animated by the same spirit. My

Government on its part is most anxious to find some solution of

the problem which will enable it to accept a draft convention

which commends itself to the other members of this Commission

as effective and desirable.

I realize that there is a broad difference in the possible types of

conventions which might be drawn up. On the one hand there is

the type of convention, which some delegations here might be

ready to accept, in which they would utilize in a very extended

form the authority and supervision of the League. At the other

extreme is the form of convention which would be acceptable to

my Government, namely, a general international convention

binding as between the contracting parties and depending for its

fulfillment solely upon international good faith and respect for

treaties without recourse to any international agency for its

enforcement.

I have already set forth, and I trust with adequate clarity, the

reasons why my Government is opposed to any measures of

international supervision and remains firmly of the opinion that

any attempt to control, direct, investigate, or inquire within the

territory of a high contracting party will inevitably tend to foster

mistrust and suspicion and take us farther away than ever from

our common goal. I am, therefore, constrained once more to

affirm the belief of my Government that a convention of the kind

which we are now attempting to frame should confirm [confine?]

itself to provisions of disarmament pure and simple, leaving its

enforcement to the good faith of each Government. Nevertheless I

fully recognize the fact that all the other members of this

Commission are at the same time members of the League. If they

are able to reach agreement among themselves on measures for

utilization of League machinery and believe that they will be

[Document 180]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Argentina (Cable)

[Paraphrase]

16. During the meetings of subcommission A, Preparatory Commission for

the Disarmament Conference, Argentine representatives associated

themselves with the representatives of the United States, Great Britain,

Japan, and Chile in a declaration which supported proposal to limit naval

floating material by classes of ships (the method followed in the

Washington Conference on Limitation of Armament) in contradistinction to

French thesis of limitation of total tonnage only.

Our representation on Preparatory Commission at Geneva has telegraphed

that at Commission’s meeting on April 11 Argentine representative

declared, to Gibson’s surprise, that he accepted a modified French proposal;

meaning of this action is abandonment by Argentina of thesis of limitation

by classes.

You will endeavor discreetly to ascertain reasons for apparent change of

front; also if it was result of instructions. Bring matter informally to

attention of Minister for Foreign Affairs and inform him of your surprise

that abandonment in this way of our common position should so suddenly

take place.

KELLOGG

[Document 181]

The Chargé in Argentina (Cable) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 7: p.m.]

[Document 182]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

260. Preparatory Commission adjourned this evening. In closing speech

President singled out American delegation alone for warm tribute to our

helpful attitude which had promoted good understanding. He alluded to the

forthcoming three-power conversations as calculated to facilitate the further

approach to the problem of disarmanent.

GIBSON

[Document 183]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 8: p.m.]

Office to get necessary information. Sickness of Minister for Foreign

Affairs delayed consideration several days, then Under Secretary assured

me Chile’s policy since prior to last Pan American Conference47 had been

limited by categories and he did not believe personality had changed but he

would consult Navy Department in which instructions originated. This was

subsequently confirmed by Minister for Foreign Affairs. A few days ago

Under Secretary gave me a memorandum stating that, though Chilean

policy had not changed, its Navy Department had construed the French

proposition as a compromise fixing limit for total tonnage with a liberty of

varying within it the limit fixed for each class, thus serving what the

memorandum calls “a freedom for the distribution of tonnage”. This was a

desire entertained by Chile even at the time of Pan American Conference.

The memorandum of Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs says he believes

that there is a contradiction between the terms “limitation of tonnage by

categories” and “distribution of tonnage among the different types of ships”

and that as a result of this misunderstanding Chilean policy had been

changed. By this the Under Secretary evidently meant that instructions

inconsistent with Chilean fixed policy had been given. The Under Secretary

of State for Foreign Affairs communicated these views to Under Secretary

of the Navy who in turn consulted General Staff of Navy whose reply had

not been received at the time the memorandum was handed me a few days

ago. Yesterday Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs told me Under

Secretary of the Navy told him that evidently the French proposal had been

misconstrued and the Chilean delegate had been erroneously informed but

that shortly correct instructions would be given to oppose all propositions

inconsistent with the idea of limitation by categories. Under Secretary of

State for Foreign Affairs has promised to send me copy of memorandum of

Navy Department or its proposed instructions as soon as received by him. I

will send full text of his memorandum in the next pouch.

COLLIER

[Document 184]

The Chairman of the American Delegation to the Naval

Conference (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

GENEVA, August 1, 1927—noon.

148. In conversation with one of the members of our delegation this [last?]

evening, Clauzel, one of the French Mission d’Information, stated that, if

the Naval Conference should fail, necessity would arise of postponing

meeting of the Preparatory Commission scheduled for next November, and

that he intended to consult Cecil in regard to this. It was suggested to him

that until Naval Conference adjourned it seemed somewhat premature to

discuss matter. Clauzel said he appreciated that fact but that he would like

to speak to us about it after the meeting Thursday. …

GIBSON

[Document 185]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the American

Delegation to the Naval Conference (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

was not responsible for calling the Preparatory Commission and should not

be responsible for the Commission’s discontinuance or postponement. That

is a matter which is entirely in the hands of the League of Nations. If

continuation is desired we shall attend and if they wish to postpone we shall

make no objection, but they must take the responsibility. We do not have

any affirmative suggestions to make and we do not wish to enter into any

agreement on the subject.

KELLOGG

[Document 186]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)

53. The report of the Third Committee of the League Assembly, dated

section 3, what amounts to an agenda of a committee on security to be

created by the Preparatory Commission during its next meeting in

November, at which short meeting the United States will be represented by

Wilson.

Please telegraph your suggestions and comments regarding the attitude of

the American delegation to the Preparatory Commission concerning the

formation of the proposed security committee and possible American

representation on this committee.

KELLOGG

[Document 187]

The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

BERNE, October 25, 1927.

[Received November 12.]

No. 144

SIR: I have the honor to transmit herewith a communication from the

Secretary General of the League of Nations dated October 24, 1927, (C. L.

Department paragraphs of the resolution of the Assembly and of the

decision of the Council providing that states, nonmembers of the League of

[Document 188]

The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Received 5: p.m.]

how an American representative could participate fully in work of Security

Committee. On the other hand I feel that it would be unfortunate and afford

pretext for criticism if we were to adopt attitude of complete aloofness.

Would it not avoid these extremes and evidence friendly interest if Wilson

were to accept invitation to sit on Security Committee explaining that while

he could not, in view of our nonmembership in the League, join in written

recommendations to Council or Assembly, he would be glad to follow

proceedings and give from time to time, as they might be desired, our views

on matters of interest to the other members of the Committee.

GIBSON

[Document 189]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson)

[Paraphrase]

Council of the League of Nations, the Preparatory Commission is requested

to create a subcommittee or commission composed of representatives of all

the states participating in the Conference. Consideration of the subjects of

security and arbitration is the declared object. It appears from a reading of

the resolutions both of the Assembly and of the Council together that scope

of inquiry is broad one; that it includes mutual covenants and guarantees of

security, treaties of arbitration both bilateral and multilateral, and also

question of sanctions for enforcement of covenants and guarantees.

Evidently whole subject of Geneva protocol of 1924 is in this way sought to

be opened again, with a view as well, perhaps, to wider application of

Locarno formula. Conclusion is difficult to avoid that this proposal is

wide departure from (at least, striking enlargement of) purposes of

Preparatory Commission as these were originally laid down. If proposal be

adopted, it would virtually establish a parallel organization to Preparatory

Commission. Assembly’s resolution clearly expresses opinion that work of

Preparatory Commission is practically in suspense and that further progress

cannot be made until problem of security is worked out. It appears that

League, instead of taking up problem of security as strictly a League matter

as has been its practice heretofore, is adopting rather peculiar expedient of

attempting to work problem out through and under Preparatory

Commission. Whether or not this procedure is merely device to bring this

Government into that discussion, it is certain that the United States cannot,

in any event, enter into mutual covenants that guarantee security or

undertake to use either its military or naval forces in the application of

sanctions or sign arbitration treaties such as European nations seem to

regard as essential to their particular needs. We are inclined to believe,

under these circumstances, that this Government ought not to be drawn into

negotiations of this nature, and that should the Preparatory Commission

resolve itself, in effect, into a conference on the subject of security and

sanctions, we should have to consider possibility of withdrawing altogether.

Our present judgment (on which we should like to have your opinion) is

that of course Wilson should be authorized to attend forthcoming meeting

of Preparatory Commission but that he should be instructed to take no part

in organization of proposed Security Commission or to accept a place on

that Commission on behalf of the United States.

At same time it should be made plain that this Government intends to

continue its representation on Preparatory Commission, participating in

deliberations of that body and rendering assistance that it can in connection

with the matters embraced in the original agenda. If Security Committee is

eventually to report to Preparatory Commission, question of what course

this Government would feel obliged to follow in that contingency would

naturally command our consideration at that time.

KELLOGG

[Document 190]

The Ambassador in Belgium (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received November 10—5 p.m.]

we be represented on Security Committee as discussions in that Committee

will be constantly referred to in subsequent sessions of Preparatory

Commission. This in no way commits us, as discussions in Security

Committee will be of purely preparatory character like those of Preparatory

Commisison; when strictly League of Nations questions are discussed our

representative can make our nonparticipation clear by a reminder of our

nonmembership, as we have always done in such cases in the past. The

Committee will doubtless involve itself in inconclusive discussions

regarding application of the Covenant and revival of the Geneva protocol.

Our representative, in that event, will automatically revert to role of

observer. He will be in position, however, to correct any misstatements

which will be made from time to time.

Should we refuse to participate, past experience justifies belief that effort

will be made to convince public opinion that it was with a desire to further

consideration of disarmament that Security Committee had been set up to

devise some method of creating security that would be acceptable to the

League and the United States alike; and that because of our prejudice

against the League of Nations, we had refused even to listen to the

discussion and that we had thereby blocked effectively any further progress.

We avoid this by having someone present and letting the others demonstrate

that they are not able to agree among themselves upon any security

measures.

The Department might consider giving authorization to Wilson to point out

that several years ago we joined in a four-power treaty52 and that we

consider this treaty (as we hope that the other signatories also consider it) is

entirely adequate for security in its special terminology; and also that

having accomplished this to meet our own needs we view the endeavors of

the continental powers to solve their difficulties with the greatest sympathy.

To do this would focus attention on that important treaty, would show our

sympathy for the efforts of others, and would afford opportunity to indicate

how they must work out their problem as a practical matter as we have

done. A statement of this sort, carefully prepared, could demonstrate

effectively that there is no justification for any attempt to hide behind our

skirts and to assert that the nations of Europe cannot reach agreements

among themselves for the reason that we will not accept League

jurisdiction.

Of course, I agree that the discussions in the Committee might assume a

character which would make desirable our withdrawal altogether from the

Committee, but before that step is decided upon it seems to me that it is

desirable to get some of the foregoing ideas clearly on record.

GIBSON

[Document 191]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, November 15, 1927—noon.

94. You are instructed to attend forthcoming session of Preparatory

Commission53 as Chief of the American Representation. You will be

assisted by Mr. George Anderson Gordon, first secretary of embassy at

Paris, Mr. Jay Pierrepont Moffat, first secretary of legation at Berne and Mr.

S. Pinkney Tuck, consul at Geneva, to whom you should issue appropriate

instructions.

When proposal is brought up for a Committee on Security and Arbitration

in accordance with the Assembly’s Resolution of September 26, confirmed

by the Council on September 27, you should refrain from expressing any

opinion on advisability of proposed action; when, in your discretion, it

becomes necessary, inform Preparatory Commission that in 1921 this

Government concluded what might be denominated a security agreement

with the Governments of Great Britain, France, and Japan for the

Preservation of the General Peace and the Maintenance of Rights in

Relation to Insular Possessions and Dominions in the Region of the Pacific

Ocean. You may add that the Government of the United States believes, as

we hope the other signatories believe, that this treaty is entirely adequate for

security in its special field; that for that reason we look with greatest

sympathy on endeavors of the continental powers to solve their difficulties

in some similar manner, having recourse to machinery which is at their

disposal. The fact is well known, furthermore, that the Government of the

United States has always favored international arbitration and conciliation

in principle and in practice; that it has entered into many bilateral treaties of

arbitration and conciliation with various nations; that at any time it would

be pleased to add to the number of these treaties which, if observed in good

faith, it is believed will reduce to a minimum the danger of aggressive war.

In view of its traditional policy of noninterference in European affairs and

also in view of fact that it is not a member of the League of Nations, the

American Government believes that it would be unable usefully to

cooperate in the labors of the Committee the establishment of which is

proposed. The American Government will be prepared, when a general

disarmament conference may be called, to consider in light of its historic

policy the recommendations made by a Security Committee working

parallel with the Preparatory Commission, in whose labors this Government

intends to continue its wholehearted cooperation.

In regard to Secretary General’s note of October 24, forwarded with

Legation’s L. N. No. 985, October 25, you may inform Sir Eric Drummond

that you have been instructed to attend forthcoming session of Preparatory

Commission, and on that occasion you will express your Government’s

views on the proposed Security Committee.

KELLOGG

Nations, Documents of the Preparatory Commission, etc., Series V, p. 18.

[Document 192]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

[Paraphrase]

97. It is my belief that American sympathy with all endeavors to encourage

disarmament can be made evident without representation of the United

States on the Security Committee.

If there are likely to be efforts made to throw on this Government the blame

for a possible failure to obtain results, it seems that this could more

plausibly be done if the United States were represented on the Security

Committee as an active participant; for, by reason of the fact that the United

States is not a member of the League of Nations and also because of other

conditions peculiar to this country, it would be especially difficult to avoid

appearance of obstructing Committee’s deliberations in event that

representatives of other nations made deliberate effort to put the United

States in a false position.

Should there be representation by an observer only, appearance of

obstruction might also be brought about by fact that an observer would not

be, naturally, in a position to offer constructive suggestions; instead, he

would be compelled to call attention to strict limits which circumstances

impose upon extent of formal American cooperation.

At meeting of Preparatory Commission when creation of Security

Committee is under discussion, you might propose, or arrange to have

proposed in interests of closer understanding and cooperation that procès-

verbaux of meetings of the Committee be made available to members of the

Commission and likewise that the procès-verbaux of the Commission be

made available to the Committee.

[Document 193]

The Chief of the American Representation on the Preparatory

Commission (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

5. Fourth session Preparatory Commission closed today. Security

Committee meets on or about February 20th, Preparatory Commission

March 15th.

WILSON

[Document 194]

The Secretary General of the League of Nations (Drummond) to

the Secretary of State

GENEVA, 17 December, 1926.

[Received December 31.]

SIR: I have the honour to inform you that at its sitting of December 9th,

1926, the Council of the League of Nations adopted the following

Resolution:

“The Council,

“In view of the Resolution adopted by the Assembly on

September 21st, 1926, with regard to the private manufacture of

arms and ammunition and of implements of war,

“Decides:

“To refer the draft Convention prepared by the Committee to a

special Commission composed of representatives of the present

Members of the Council, on which representatives of the United

States of America and of the Union of Sovietist Socialist

Republics would be invited to sit, in order that this Commission

may prepare a final draft which might serve as a basis for an

international conference.

“This Commission is authorized to forward its final draft, through

the Secretary General of the League of Nations, to all those States

which were invited to attend the 1925 conference on the

supervision of the international trade in arms and ammunition and

in implements of war, with a view to holding an international

conference which might meet in Geneva in the autumn of 1927 if

the general Disarmament Conference cannot take place before the

eighth ordinary session of the Assembly”.

I enclose the Report of M. Benes, which was approved by the Council

simultaneously with the above Resolution (Document C.701.1926. IX), as

well as Document A.47.1926.IX, which contains the draft Convention

mentioned in the Resolution and other documents referring to this

question.

The preparation of a draft Convention for the supervision of the private

manufacture of arms and ammunition and of implements of war was

decided by the Council on December 12th, 1925, as the outcome of a

Resolution of the Assembly of the League of Nations, in which the

Assembly endorsed the declaration inserted in the Final Act of the

International Conference for the Supervision of the International Trade in

Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War, to the effect:

“that the Convention of to-day’s date must be considered as an

important step towards a general system of international

agreements regarding Arms and Ammunition and Implements of

War, and that it is desirable that the international aspect of the

manufacture of such Arms and Ammunition and Implements of

War should receive early consideration by the different

Governments”.

The Assembly and the Council of the League of Nations have several times

put on record the importance which they attach to the question of the

supervision of the private manufacture of arms and ammunition and of

implements of war in connection with that of the supervision of the

international trade, and notably in the following passage of a report adopted

by the Council on September 26th, 1925:—

“The Council has taken note of the Resolution adopted by the

Sixth Assembly on the supervision of the manufacture of arms

and ammunition and of implements of war. The Council is aware,

as pointed out in M. Guerrero’s Report, which was adopted by the

Assembly, that this Resolution was prompted by two currents of

opinion. On the one hand, all the Assemblies have shown a desire

to put into operation the provisions of Article 8 of the Covenant

with regard to the supervision of the private manufacture of arms

and ammunition and of implements of war. On the other hand, at

the Conference of May-June, 1925, on the Supervision of the

International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements

of War, there was a strong tendency to assert the equality of non-

producing and producing States. The non-producing States

pointed out that, as the Convention for the Supervision of

International Trade subjected the purchase of arms to the regime

of publicity, the producing States must, in order to re-establish

equality, accept the same principle of publicity by concluding a

Convention on the supervision of manufacture”.

I beg to draw your attention to the passage in the enclosed Report in which

the Council refers to the collaboration of your Government in the work to

be undertaken:—

“Further, the Assembly has more than once recommended that the

Government of the United States should be invited to assist in the

preparation of the proposed draft convention; this assistance, we

are happily entitled to hope will be forthcoming in view of the

formal statements made by the representative of the United States

of America at the Conference for the Supervision of the

International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements

of War”.

I therefore have the honour to invite you to appoint a Representative to sit

as a member of the Special Commission created by the Council, as

specified in the enclosed Report, to meet in Geneva on March 14th at 4 p.m.

I have [etc.]

ERIC DRUMMOND

[Document 195]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland

(Marriner)

21. Please transmit the following to the Secretary General of the League of

Nations in the usual informal manner.

“The Secretary of State of the United States of America refers to

the note of the Secretary General of the League of Nations, dated

December 17, 1926, in which he was good enough to invite the

American Government to appoint a representative to sit as a

member of a Special Commission created by the Council of the

League of Nations, to meet at Geneva, March 14, 1927, to

consider a draft convention with regard to the private manufacture

of arms and ammunition and of implements of war, and to prepare

a final draft which might serve as a basis for an international

conference. It has been noted that the preparation of such a draft

convention is stated by Sir Eric Drummond to have been decided

upon by the Council of the League on December 12, 1925, as the

outcome of a resolution of the Assembly of the League endorsing

the declaration inserted in the Final Act of the International

Conference for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms

and Ammunition and in Implements of War, the purport of which

was that the international aspect of ‘the manufacture of such

Arms and Ammunition and Implements of War’ should be given

consideration by the different Governments.

It is further noted that Sir Eric Drummond draws attention to a

passage in the Report adopted by the Council on December 9,

1926, which based the hope of American participation in the

forthcoming meeting of the Special Commission upon certain

statements made by the Honorable Theodore E. Burton, Chairman

of the American delegation at the Conference for the Supervision

of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in

Implements of War.

The statements of Mr. Burton to which reference is made were

substantially to the following effect, viz: 1) that the United States

Government has for many years collected and published statistics

covering the production in this country of arms and ammunition,

2) that the United States would be willing to enter a suitable

international agreement providing for the publication of such

statistics by the governments parties thereto, 3) that such an

agreement, to be effective, should cover the manufacture of arms

and ammunition in both private and government factories.

The American Government believes that the principles enunciated

by Mr. Burton would provide a sound basis for an international

convention, and therefore has been pleased to designate the

Honorable Hugh S. Gibson, American Minister to Switzerland, to

attend the meeting of the Special Commission.”

GREW

[Document 196]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland

(Gibson)

WASHINGTON, February 28, 1927.

No. 598

SIR: In addition to your other duties, you are hereby designated to attend, as

the representative of this Government, the meeting of the Special

Commission which is to meet at Geneva, March 14, 1927, to prepare a

Draft Convention which might serve as the basis for an international

conference with regard to the supervision of the private manufacture of

arms and ammunition and of implements of war. The membership of this

Commission, which has been formed pursuant to a resolution of the Council

of the League of Nations, adopted December 9, 1926, will comprise

representatives of the present members of the Council and of the United

States. It is understood that the Soviet Regime has been invited to send a

representative to attend this meeting, but has declined the invitation. A copy

of the invitation extended to the United States Government by the Secretary

General of the League, under date of December 17, 1926, and a copy of this

Government’s reply thereto, dated February 23, 1927, are transmitted

herewith for your information.

You will recall the history of the efforts which have been made from time to

time by the League of Nations to bring about an international conference

and a resulting convention dealing with the problem of the private

manufacture of arms and ammuniton. Article 8 of the Covenant of the

League of Nations provides inter alia as follows:

“The members of the League agree that the manufacture by

private enterprise of ammunitions and implements of war is open

to grave objections. The Council shall advise how the evil effects

attendant upon such manufacture can be prevented, due regard

being had to the necessities of those members of the League

which are not able to manufacture the ammunitions and

implements of war necessary for their safety.”

This problem was discussed at the First Assembly of the League which

requested the Council to instruct the competent Commissions of the League

to investigate it without delay. The Permanent Advisory Commission, with

whose constitution you are familiar, reached the following conclusions in

February, 1921:

(1) No direct action other than that already provided for by the

treaties of peace can be taken in the case of producing states

against the right of their private factories to manufacture war

materials.

(2) Even if at some future time measures were contemplated to

diminish production, no action should be taken to prevent non-

producing states from becoming producers if they had the will

and the means.

In 1921 the Temporary Mixed Commission took up consideration of the

problem. It had before it two proposed methods of dealing with the

subject:

(1) The absolute prohibition of the private manufacture and,

(2) The control of private manufacture.

Method (1) was rejected by the Commission as contrary to the interests of

states which do not produce all the munitions they require. The

Commission therefore decided to recommend a system of international

control and suggested the following measures as likely to render that

control more effective:

(1) The prohibition of all export of arms without a special license

from the Government of the exporting country;

(2) The prohibition of all import of arms without a license from

the Government of the importing country;

(3) Such licenses to be published by the League of Nations;

(4) No munitions or implements of war to be manufactured

without a Government license, and, possibly, that such licenses

should be published by the League of Nations;

(5) Conversion of bearer shares of armament firms to nominal

shares;

(6) Armament firms to publish, at stated intervals, complete

reports on their financial situation, and any contracts entered into

by them;

(7) An audit of the accounts of private armament firms;

(8) No person interested in an armament firm to be permitted to

hold stock in similar firms in other countries;

(9) Such persons not to be permitted to publish, or hold stock in

companies publishing newspapers;

(10) Non-nationals to be prohibited from holding stock in private

armament firms;

(11) No patent relating to munitions or implements of war to be

issued to non-nationals;

(12) No warship to be transferred from one flag to another

without notice being given to the League of Nations.

It was realized, however, that to institute any system of control it would be

necessary to base it upon an international convention. There appeared to be

many difficulties in the way of framing such a convention, among them the

traffic in arms which at that time was not regulated effectively. The

Temporary Mixed Commission finally came to the conclusion that should

the traffic in arms and munitions be subjected to a sufficient measure of

supervision the continuation of private manufacture would be of little

danger.

The efforts of the League were for that reason directed primarily to the

formulation of an arms traffic convention rather than to the control of the

private manufacture of arms.

Nevertheless, a considerable number of states members of the League

consistently expressed the view that an arms traffic convention could never

be fully effective unless it were accompanied by a convention supervising

and controlling the private manufacture of arms. This view has not been

shared by the United States which, while anxious to cooperate with all

efforts which appeared calculated really to lead to the reduction or

limitation of armament or to remove causes of international discord, did not

for many reasons favor the elaborate and often impractical proposals that

have been made looking to the control or supervision of the private

manufacture of arms. As you are aware, the Arms Traffic Convention

signed at Geneva, June 17, 1925, has not yet received the requisite

number of ratifications and has not therefore come into effect. Certain

countries which favored the simultaneous treatment of the problem of

private manufacture with the problem of arms traffic have now advanced

the belief that the arms traffic convention will prove ineffective if not

totally useless unless a further convention regarding the private

manufacture of arms is concluded. It is in response to this appeal that the

Special Commission upon which you are to represent this Government has

been created. In order that you may have clearly in mind the policy of this

Government in regard to international agreements regarding the private

manufacture of arms and munitions and may be in a position to explain and

carry out that policy at the forthcoming meeting, you are advised as

follows:

In its instructions to me while I was American Minister to Switzerland and

in subsequent instructions to you in regard to participation in the meetings

of the Temporary Mixed Commission during 1924, the Department

pointed out that manufacture or production is not per se commerce and that

Congress, under the interstate power, cannot control mere manufacture or

production within the states. It was pointed out that Congress could,

however,

(a) control production of arms in the District of Columbia and the

territories and possessions of the United States, and

(b) prohibit shipment of arms in interstate commerce or foreign

commerce except under Federal license.

In addition, it is clear that this Government may collect and publish at

stated intervals statistics of arms and ammunition production.

During the course of the meetings of the Temporary Mixed Commission

certain foreign members thereof persisted in bringing into the discussion the

question of private manufacture. The American representative did not enter

into such discussions at any time.

During the arms traffic conference, when the question of private

manufacture was again raised—although it was not on the agenda of the

conference—the Honorable Theodore E. Burton, Chairman of the American

Delegation, made certain statements in regard thereto. These statements

taken together set forth the policy of this Government in regard to a

practical manner of dealing with this problem and indicate the limit to

which this Government would be prepared to go in an international

convention. The statements are quoted below for your information as they

appear in League of Nations Publication A.13.1925 IX “Proceedings of the

Conference for the Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and

Ammunition and in Implements of War”:

“This pending discussion on the subject of the manufacture of

arms, and upon the subject of publicity for manufacture by

producing States, is one of the greatest interest to the delegation

from the United States.

“Some weeks ago I stated that it was the custom in our own

country to publish statistics of manufacture. That is still our

custom, and will be for years to come, and, in view of that fact,

we should be willing to join in a Convention providing for

publicity for producing states as well as for non-producing states.

Having made that statement, I was of the opinion that it was for

other delegates from other countries to follow it up by a concrete

proposal if they so desired.

“I am aware of the objections that have been raised against doing

anything in that way. It has been said that the present Conference

was called merely to deal with the control of the trade in arms, of

which the main feature is publicity. Let me call your attention,

however, to the fact that if we adopt a liberal construction, control

of statistics relating to producing countries is within the scope of

this Convention. The objection has been raised by the non-

producing countries that any agreement would be ineffective if it

applied to them only or applied particularly to them, and that, in

order to secure their rights, statistical information must also be

given as to production.

“It seems to me that we are authorized to give a liberal

construction to the work which this Conference was called upon

to do. We are not to be bound by any hard and fast rules. If, when

the representatives of forty nations come together, a proposal or

subject suggests itself, which is closely associated with the main

question before the Conference, it is for us to act upon it, at least

by adopting a resolution stating the sense of the Conference. I

trust, Mr. President, that not merely in order to protect the non-

producing states, but in order to secure an ampler result and to

make a more progressive step, something will be done in this

Conference in this direction.” (Pages 299–300).

“… The point of view of the United States is already on record in

some remarks made here yesterday week, and I welcome the

proposal introduced by the Roumanian delegate in regard to

publicity in the manufacture of arms. The only question that I ask

is whether it goes far enough. I could not, however, favour

postponement of the operation of this Convention until another is

adopted. Postponement of good intentions until some other

gathering may meet, or some other Convention be concluded, has

been the graveyard of some of the best aspirations of the human

race.

“We are here for a purpose. The Temporary Mixed Commission

considered the question of joining up with our agenda a proposal

regarding the private manufacture of arms. The Assembly

approved the conclusion of that Mixed Commission that it was

preferable to keep the two matters separate. It was with that

understanding that the delegates came from the United States—

that we were to do something here of which the central fact

should be publicity. And now I must run counter to an opinion

which is prevalent among lovers of peace in regard to the

prohibition of the private manufacture of arms.

“Many of those in Europe and America with whom I have

cooperated for years past in movements for peace think that the

solution of their problems rests in the prohibition of private

manufacture. They argue, that so long as private manufacture

continues, there will be a powerful industrial interest, the

prosperity of which will be promoted by war, and this they

consider to be a barrier in the way of peace. They consider also

that these private manufacturers have also been extremely skilful

in the circulation of propaganda unfavorable to peace. Thus, they

say, the manufacture of arms, munitions and implements of war

should be restricted to Governments.

“Let me point out to you the fallacy of this argument. The private

manufacture of arms and munitions is flexible and adapted both

to peace and to war. It may consist of the manufacture of

explosives and material for industrial purposes, of sporting arms

which have nothing to do with war, to which can be added in time

of conflict the manufacture of military arms. Take my own

country as an example; the manufacture of munitions and military

arms was negligible before the late Great War, but, during that

period, private industry increased to enormous proportions; it has

now fallen back to what it was before.

“Government manufacture and control, on the other hand, are

inflexible and look to a state of war. It involves the maintenance

of a very considerable force, always engaged in the manufacture

of implements of destruction. If that force is disbanded the nation

is helpless, and there is always a strong interest in favour of

maintaining in any form of Government activity a large force,

expanding its operations to the maximum. Thus, I say that, at

least in a country like the United States, the idea that the private

manufacture of arms should be prohibited, and that such

prohibition would promote peace, is a chimera. More than that,

why should a Conference be called for the prohibition of private

manufacture and leave the Governmental or public manufacture

alone? Shall the respective Governments of the world, whether

warlike or peaceful in their intentions, build huge structures to

make arms, and at the same time prohibit the private

manufacture? What of the private manufacturers, many of whom

have the most pacific intentions? What have they done that there

should be this discrimination against them? What hope have the

lovers of

peace in prohibiting private manufacture if

Governmental manufacture may still go on to an enormous and

unlimited extent? …” Page 251.

The American Delegation at the Arms Traffic Conference signed the Final

Act of that Conference in which was contained the following declaration:

“That the Convention of today’s date must be considered as an

important step towards a general system of international

agreements regarding arms and ammunition and implements of

war and that it is desirable that the International aspect of the

manufacture of such arms, ammunition and implements of war

should receive early consideration by the different governments.”

In reply to a questionnaire received from the Secretariat of the League of

Nations and prepared by a Committee of the Council on the subject of

control of the private manufacture of arms and ammunition communicated

to this government under date of January 9, 1926, this Government

“The Secretary of State of the United States of America has

received the communication of the Acting Secretary General of

the League of Nations, dated January 9, 1926, transmitting a copy

of a questionnaire concerning the control of private manufacture

of arms and ammunition and of implements of war.

“In view of the fact that the Convention for the Supervision of the

International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements

of War has not yet been ratified this Government does not desire

to make any comment on the questionnaire at the present time.”

This Government is not sanguine as to the possibility of reaching an

international agreement which will effectively control whatever evils may

be inherent in the private manufacture of arms. It cannot escape the

conviction that many of the proposals which have been made for such

conventions are in effect attempts on the part of goverments which obtain

their armament from government arsenals or government controlled

factories to place at a disadvantage countries such as the United States

which obtain the vast majority of their ammunition and war equipment from

private enterprise. The draft convention prepared by the Committee of the

Council and transmitted to this Government with the Secretary General’s

invitation of December 17, 1926, is for the most part unacceptable to this

Government as a basis for an international agreement. There is transmitted

herewith as an annex to this instruction a memorandum commenting in

detail upon the provisions of the draft convention in question.

This Government decided to accept the invitation of the Secretary General

to designate a representative to attend the forthcoming meeting for two

principal reasons:

(1) It believed that a refusal to attend might be interpreted in

certain foreign quarters, perhaps disingenuously, as

an

unwillingness on the part of the United States to cooperate in

what purported to be a sincere effort to solve one of the

companion problems of the general problem of disarmament. In

view of this Government’s participation in the Preparatory

Commission to [for] the Disarmament Conference64 and in the

Arms Traffic Conference and of its long established policy of

cooperating with all sincere efforts calculated to preserve the

peace of the world and to remove the causes of war, it should give

no ground for misunderstandings which might arise out of its

refusal even to discuss the question of the manufacture of arms.

(2) The policy of this Government in regard to this question was

clearly set forth by Mr. Burton, as noted above, and it was on the

basis of Mr. Burton’s statements that the Council of the League of

Nations predicated the hope that the United States would be

willing to attend the proposed meeting.

You are instructed therefore to make it clear at the meeting that the United

States is prepared to consider the conclusion of an international convention

which provides for the collection and periodic publication by the

governments parties thereto of statistical information covering the

production of arms and ammunition and implements of war. The specific

arms and ammunition to be covered by such a convention would, in

general, correspond to those in the categories established by the Arms

Traffic Convention. A separate Memorandum on this subject is transmitted

herewith, as an annex, for the purpose of guiding you in the more detailed

discussion of this phase of the matter.

You should resist any effort to include in published statistics the names of

manufacturers with details of their individual businesses and contracts.

Such publication resulting from investigation would not be acceptable, so

far as this Government is concerned.

You will observe that in this Government’s reply, dated February 23, 1927,

to the Secretary General’s invitation, the intention of this Government not

to go beyond the collection and publication of statistics is clearly indicated.

You should take an early opportunity to reiterate this Government’s point of

view.

Although leaving the matter entirely to your discretion in the light of

developments which may occur during the course of the forthcoming

meeting, the Department suggests that it would appear to be unwise for you

to allow yourself to be drawn into any detailed discussion of the various

unacceptable provisions of the Draft Convention.

In case the position of the United States in refusing to agree to the proposed

provisions, other than those covering the publication of statistics, is

questioned or in any way attacked, the Department believes that you should

confine your reply first to an allusion to this Government’s reply to the

League’s invitation and second to a statement to the following general

effect:

The Arms Traffic Convention has not yet been ratified and has not come

into effect. The proposed draft convention for private manufacture presents

an involved and complicated agreement, the provisions of which would be

difficult if not impossible to administer and the necessity for which is not

clear to the United States Government. The American Government believes

that an adequate system of publicity as to production for both private and

government factories will furnish valuable information to the governments

signatories to the treaty. Such an agreement, in addition to the Arms Traffic

Convention, will provide effective machinery for making known to the

world any abuses either by individuals or governments in connection with

the manufacture of or traffic in arms. If, when such agreements have been

in operation, it is shown by experience that further and even stricter

international agreements are necessary, it will then be appropriate to discuss

what further measures are possible.

In this connection, the following remarks made by Lord Cecil at the 8th

meeting of the First Sub Commission of the Temporary Mixed Commission

at Paris on March 28, 1924 are of interest:

“Colonel Carnegie has said that a certain control over private

manufacture would result from the convention on the control of

the traffic. He personally agreed, but he thought that they would

therefore be much better able to form a judgment after the coming

into force of the said convention and that the question of private

manufacture could only be finally settled in the light of the

experience derived from the application of the convention on the

traffic.”

The American Government is particularly impressed by the danger involved

in complicated and detailed international agreements, difficult to

administer, the alleged breach of any technical provision of which would

inevitably lead to international mistrust and ill-will.

Should an attempt be made to separate governmental from private

manufacture you should insist that any agreement to be acceptable to the

United States must cover both categories. In this connection, you may point

out that such a provision would appear to be absolutely essential to make an

international agreement for publicity useful since the contingency might

arise wherein a government which followed the policy of manufacturing all

of its military equipment in government arsenals might engage in practices

very similar to those which are imputed to private manufacturers and

condemned. A memorandum pointing out the distinction between the

position of the United States Government and of certain other governments

in regard to methods of supplying needs for military equipment is

transmitted herewith as an annex to this instruction.

You will, of course, not join in any report which the Special Commission

may make to the Council of the League of Nations. In this connection, you

may advise the Commission that you will make your report to your

government.

You should make it abundantly clear during the meeting that should the

other nations represented on the Commission wish to recommend the

formulation of a convention of a more elaborate nature this government

would, of course, offer no objection, although it would naturally reserve its

right to abstain from adherence to such a convention or to adhere to it with

reservations in keeping with its announced and well known policy in the

premises.

There is transmitted herewith, as an annex to this instruction, a

memorandum covering in general the statistics of production of arms in the

United States in recent years. By reference to this you will observe that

the United States has taken a very minor part in this type of business. You

should emphasize these data in case an attempt is made to place upon the

United States the onus for prospective failure of the Commission’s work or

any statements are made to the effect that a convention regarding arms

manufacture could not be effective without American participation.

The above-mentioned memorandum further contains certain suggestions as

to the statistical material that will be most readily and economically

obtainable and also suggestions as to the frequency of collection and

publication which should be provided for in any convention.

There is transmitted herewith as an annex to this instruction a memorandum

setting forth the existing law and practice of this government respecting the

collection and publication of statistics and indicating the general authority

of the government in the premises.65a

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Enclosure 1]

Memorandum Commenting Upon the Preliminary Draft Convention Submitted to the Committee

of the Council by the Committee of Inquiry

The following countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Whereas the international trade in arms and ammunition and in implements

of war is governed by the Convention concerning the Supervision of the

International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in Implements of War

signed at Geneva on June 17th, 1925;

Whereas the International Conference which drew up the said Convention

unanimously declared:

“That the Convention of to-day’s date must be considered as an

important step towards a general system of international

agreements regarding arms and ammunition and implements of

war, and that it is desirable that the international aspect of the

manufacture of such arms, ammunition and implements of war

should receive early consideration by the different Governments”;

Whereas the international trade in arms and ammunition and in implements

of war should be subjected to a general and effective system of supervision

and publicity;

Whereas such a system is not provided by existing treaties and conventions

in regard to manufacture;

Whereas the manufacture of arms, ammunition or implements the use of

which in war is prohibited by international law ought not to be permitted for

such purpose:

Have decided to conclude a Convention and have accordingly appointed as

their plenipotentiaries:

(Here follow the names of the plenipotentiaries.)

Who, having communicated their full powers, found in good and due form,

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:

This preamble appears to be unnecessarily long and involved. It is believed

that all necessary purposes could be served by a brief preamble somewhat

to the following effect:

“Whereas it is desirable that the international aspect of the

manufacture of arms, ammunition and implements of war should

receive consideration” etc.

Categories

Article 1

(Same as Chapter I of the Convention for the Supervision of the

This Article is satisfactory.

Supervision and Publicity

Article 2

For the purposes of the present Convention, private manufacture shall be

considered to mean manufacture taking place in establishments of which

the State is not the sole proprietor.

This Article should be eliminated, since any convention to which the United

States would desire to become a party would necessarily cover both

governmental and private manufacture.

Article 3

The High Contracting Parties undertake not to permit in the territory under

their jurisdiction the private manufacture of the articles included in

Categories I, II, III and IV and paragraph 1 of Category V without the

written authorization of the Government.

This authorization shall be given in the form of a licence, which shall be

valid for a period to be determined individually by each High Contracting

Party and which shall be renewable for a further period.

This Article is not acceptable from the point of view of the United States.

The constitutional possibility of establishing a licensing system for

manufacturers of arms and ammunition is to say the least extremely

doubtful. As has been pointed out in the body of the instructions it would

probably be possible to require manufacturers to obtain Federal licenses to

manufacture arms in the District of Columbia and in the Territories, and

also to obtain licenses for inter-State or foreign commerce in arms and

ammunition. The possibility of obtaining legislation of this character,

however, seems so remote that it is not desirable for the American

representative even to discuss the possibilities in this regard during the

course of the coming meeting.

Article 4

The High Contracting Parties undertake not to grant a licence for the

manufacture of the material referred to in Article 3 and to withdraw such

licence if it has been granted to any firm which is in a position to influence

a newspaper either because it holds a sufficient portion of its capital or

because it conducts the management or any other part of its work, or

because its directors, managers or high officials are in a position to exercise

such influence.

The High Contracting Parties undertake to withdraw the licence of any

holder who has advertised war material covered by Categories I, II and III

or who has advertised war material covered by Categories IV and V in the

special zones defined in Chapter III of the Convention concerning the

Supervision of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in

Implements of War.

This Article is obviously unacceptable for the reason stated under the

comments on Article 3. Further, the administration of the provisions

contained in this Article or of other provisions directed substantially to the

same end would appear to be almost impossible from a practical point of

view. The most elaborate investigational machinery would be necessary to

ascertain the connection of munition manufacturers with the press and it is

not believed that an attempt in this direction would serve any practical or

useful purpose.

The second paragraph of Article 4 seems likewise impossible to administer

effectively.

Article 5

Each of the High Contracting Parties undertakes not to conclude any

contracts for the supply of the kinds of war material enumerated in Article 3

with a private firm one or more of whose directors or managers are

members of the legislature of that Contracting Party.

The provisions of this Article, while plausible on first sight, would not be

acceptable. The war materials included in the Categories of the Arms

Traffic Convention are manufactured in many types of industrial plants,

some of which could not be termed strictly munitions factories. To endeavor

to eliminate from consideration all manufacturing establishments capable of

producing any of the articles included in the Categories, in which members

of the Senate or the House of Representatives are directors or managers

would be both unwise and impracticable.

Article 6

The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish within two months after

the close of each quarter the licences granted during that quarter, together

with the following particulars:

(a) The kind or kinds of war material which the holder of a

licence is allowed to manufacture;

(b) The names, styles and addresses of the proprietor or

proprietors in the case of enterprises belonging to a private

individual or to the partners in a firm having a collective title, and

those of the managers or directors in the case of enterprises

organised as commercial companies;

(c) The names of all the enterprises with which the holder has

concluded agreements or associations of any kind whatever, with

a view to the production of the articles of war material for which

the licence has been granted.

The High Contracting Parties also undertake to publish annually a report of

each holder’s operations relating to the manufacture of the material for

which the licence has been granted such report to be drawn up by the holder

and verified by the High Contracting Parties.

The United States Government is in favor of a system of publicity for

manufactures of arms and ammunition. It would appear, however, that a

more appropriate system of publicity is provided for in Article 7 as noted

below, than in Article 6. Eliminating the idea of licenses from Article 6,

there remain merely the provisions that the names, styles and addresses of

the proprietor or proprietors, partners, managers or directors of munition

plants, be published, and that the existence of all munitions contracts be

made known along with an annual report of the business of each munitions

manufacturer.

It is not perceived how the publication of this information would be of great

value to anyone save the competitors of the manufacturers in question. In so

far as the trade of individual plants with foreign countries is concerned the

Arms Traffic Convention provides adequate publicity.

Article 7

To complete the general system of publicity for armaments, irrespective of

their origin, provided for in the Convention for the Supervision of the

International Trade in Arms signed at Geneva on June 17th, 1925, the High

Contracting Parties undertake to publish within two months after the close

of each quarter a statistical return of the articles covered by Categories I, II

and IV delivered or held in stock during that quarter.

This return shall be drawn up in accordance with the specimen form

contained in Annex* to the present Convention and shall show under each

heading of the said categories in Article 1 the weight, the number and the

value of the articles manufactured under a licence. The first statistical return

to be published by each of the High Contracting Parties shall be for the

quarter beginning on the first day of January, April, July or October

subsequent to the date on which the present Convention comes into force

with regard to the High Contracting Party concerned.

The High Contracting Parties undertake to publish as an annex to the

above-mentioned return the text of the provisions of all statutes, orders or

regulations in force within their territory dealing with the manufacture of

war material covered by Article 1, and to include therein all provisions

enacted for the purpose of carrying out the present Convention.

Amendments and additions to these provisions shall be likewise published

in annexes to subsequent quarterly returns.

The provisions of the present article shall also be applied as far as possible

to articles manufactured in establishments of which the State is sole

proprietor.

This Article appears to be acceptable provided always that it is extended to

cover the production of Government as well as private factories. The

quarterly collection and publication of statistics as provided for in this

Article, however, might involve an unnecessary expense that would not be

justified by the object sought to be attained. It is believed that annual or

semi-annual publication of these statistics would be adequate.

Article 8

The High Contracting Parties, in all cases covered by Category III,

undertake to publish within two months after the close of each quarter a

return for that quarter, giving the information detailed below for each vessel

of war constructed, in course of construction or to be constructed within

their territorial jurisdiction on behalf of the State:

(a) The date of the signing of the contract for the construction of the vessel,

and the following data:

Standard displacement in tons and metric tons;

The principal dimensions, namely: length at water-line, extreme beam at or

below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement;

(b) The date of laying the keel and the following data:

Standard displacement in tons and metric tons;

The principal dimensions, namely; length at water-line, extreme beam at or

below water-line, mean draft at standard displacement.

This Article is acceptable.

Article 9

The articles covered by Category V shall only be subject to such publicity

as may be prescribed by the national legislation.

This Article would appear to be acceptable.

General Provisions

Article 10

The provisions of the present Convention are completed by those of Annex*

which have the same value and shall enter into force at the same time as the

Convention itself.

The Annex to which this Article refers not being available it is impossible

to make any comment thereon.

Article 11

The High Contracting Parties undertake to conclude no purchase contract

for the supply of articles covered by Categories I, II and III in a State which

is not a Contracting Party to the present Convention.

The apparent object of this Article is to force all countries to subscribe to

the convention. It is believed that its inclusion in the convention would

operate as a strong deterrent to ratification on the part of many

Governments which would desire to preserve their liberty of action in

regard to the purchase of war materials.

Article 12

In time of war the application of the present Convention shall be suspended

as regards belligerents until the restoration of peace.

This Article is acceptable.

Article 13

The present Convention shall not be deemed to affect any rights and

obligations which may arise out of the provisions either of the Covenant of

the League of Nations, or of the Treaties of Peace signed in 1919 and 1920

at Versailles, Neuilly, St. Germain and Trianon, or of the Treaty limiting

Naval Armaments signed at Washington on February 6th, 1922, or of any

other treaty, convention, agreement or engagement.

It is believed that phraseology similar to that of Article 34 of the Arms

Traffic Convention would be preferable in place of this Article.

Article 14

The High Contracting Parties will use their best endeavours to secure the

accession to the present Convention of other States.

Each accession will be notified to the Government of the French Republic,

and by the latter to all the signatory or acceding States.

The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the

Government of the French Republic.

Article 15

The present Convention may be denounced by any High Contracting Party

thereto after the expiration of four years from the date when it came into

force in respect of that Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification

in writing addressed to the Government of the French Republic, which will

forthwith transmit copies of such notification to the other Contracting

Parties, informing them of the date on which it was received.

A denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of the receipt of the

notification thereof by the Government of the French Republic, and shall

operate only in respect of the notifying States.

Should the Convention be denounced by one of the Powers whose

ratification is a condition of its entry into force, any other High Contracting

Party may also, within a period of one year from the date of such

denunciation, denounce the Convention without waiting for the expiration

of the period of four years mentioned above, and may require that its

denunciation shall take effect at the same date as the first-mentioned

denunciation.

Article 16

The High Contracting Parties agree that, at the conclusion of a period of

three years from the coming into force of the present Convention under the

terms of Article 18, this Convention shall be subject to revision upon the

request of one-third of the said High Contracting Parties, which request

shall be addressed to the Government of the French Republic.

Article 17

The present Convention, of which the French and English texts are both

authentic, is subject to ratification. It shall bear to-day’s date.

Each power shall address its ratification to the Government of the French

Republic, which will at once notify the deposit of such ratification to each

of the other signatory Powers.

The instruments of ratification will remain deposited in the archives of the

Government of the French Republic.

Article 18

A first procès-verbal of the deposit of ratifications shall be drawn up by the

Government of the French Republic as soon as the present Convention shall

have been ratified by the following Powers . . . .

The Convention shall come into force four months after the date of the

notification of this procès-verbal by the Government of the French Republic

to all signatory Powers.

Subsequently, the Convention will come into force in respect of each High

Contracting Party four months after the date on which its ratification or

accession shall have been notified by the Government of the French

Republic to all signatory or acceding States.

The above Articles are unobjectionable.

[Enclosure 2]

Memorandum on the Categories and Statistics of the Proposed Convention

1. The categories appearing in the Convention for the Supervision

of the International Trade in Arms and Ammunition and in

Implements of War, signed at Geneva on June 17, 1925, should be

taken without change as a basis for the categories to appear in the

proposed Convention on the Manufacture of Arms, for the

following reasons:

a. The proposed Convention is supplementary to the

Arms Traffic Convention.

b. No reason exists for any distinction in regard to

publicity of statistics for export of arms, etc., and for

the manufacture of arms, etc.

c. The Arms Traffic Convention lays the basis for

coupling private and Governmental production.

2. While it is realized that certain items appearing in the

categories as laid down in the Arms Traffic Convention can serve

no useful military purpose and in consequence such items might

well be omitted, the danger involved in tampering with the

categories as they now exist on account of the possibility of

including additional items, is such that any attempt to alter or

amend these categories should be opposed on the grounds

indicated above.

3. As to the type of statistics to be provided for in the proposed

Convention on the Manufacture of Arms, it is believed that the

statistics required should be, in general, in a form corresponding

to the type adopted in the Annex to the Arms Traffic Convention.

Such statistics should, in general, be limited to totals and any

effort to include the names of firms, either as producers or as

purchasers, should be opposed as involving a danger of unfair

competition and further as being an unwarranted interference with

the industry concerned.

4. As regard the periods of time to be covered by the statistics in

question, it is believed that publication at one year intervals is

sufficient to serve the purpose of the proposed Convention. While

an effort may be made to provide for publication of statistics in

conformity with the provisions of the Arms Traffic Convention in

regard to export, that is, publications within two months of the

end of each quarter, it is believed that any publication at intervals

of less than six months might involve so much labor and expense

as to be prohibitive.

5. On the other hand, the Bureau of the Census is undoubtedly in

a position to collect and publish statistics with as great efficiency

as the statistical office of any other government. Therefore, while

too frequent collection of statistics should be opposed as

unnecessary and uneconomical, argument [agreement?] should be

given if there is unanimous insistence on quarterly publication by

the other governments.

6. Every effort should be made to restrict the required statistics to

those of the production of combined articles. An effort to collect

statistics of the production of component parts of many of the

articles listed in the categories of the Arms Traffic Convention

would entail an excessive amount of labor. If the inclusion of

component parts is insisted upon, an effort should be made to

enumerate such parts, and to include in this enumeration only the

most important parts, essential to the use of the completed article

for military purposes. For example, regarding fire control

equipment, it might with justice be pointed out that statistics of

the production of lenses suitable therefor might be sufficient,

without requiring statistics of the other component parts.

[Enclosure 3]

Memorandum on Methods of Supplying Needs for Military Equipment

1. The position of the United States in regard to dependence upon

private manufacture for the supply of its wartime needs in arms,

ammunition, and implements of war is different from that of any

other great Power. The United States is the only great nation

which does not maintain Government arsenals in time of peace

for the supply of its wartime needs in arms, ammunition and

implements of war. While the United States maintains six so-

called arsenals, these plants are in reality little more than

experimental laboratories. Under the most favorable conditions

they can be expanded to an extent which will furnish only a small

percentage of our wartime requirements in arms, ammunition, and

implements of war. During the World War, Government arsenals

as such furnished less than 9% of our munitions requirements.

Over 91% of our munitions requirements were furnished by

private manufacturers, either on a lowest bidder or cost plus basis.

2. There does not exist in the United States either the large

Government arsenals such as are maintained by England, France,

Japan, Italy, Czecho-Slovakia, and Spain, or the subsidized or

quasi-Government plants such as Krupp, Creusot, Armstrong,

Vickers-Maxim, Schneider, Mitsuibishi, Samara, Skoda, etc. Such

relatively small private munitions plants as we have owe their

peacetime existence in the main to peacetime trade which for

various reasons is comparatively small. It takes immeasurably

longer to create a new industry in time of war than to expand an

industry already in existence. This time element is influenced not

so much by the time required to construct the plant as by the time

necessary to procure and train the skilled personnel required in

the highly technical operations of munitions production.

3. The above statement indicates clearly the necessity for

coupling private and Governmental production in any convention

whose purpose may be to exercise some measure of control upon

the manufacture of arms, ammunition, and implements of war.

Measures of restriction if applied solely to private plants would

cripple the United States by affecting more than 90% of its source

of supply. Such measures would affect other great nations

relatively to a very much less degree.

4. The continuance of our present system of relying upon the

private munitions industry for meeting war requirements is

desirable for the following reasons:

(a) Such a system is comparatively inexpensive.

(b) Under such a system quantity production can be

obtained with a reasonable degree of promptness in the

event of an emergency.

(c) Such industries are susceptible of prompt and

satisfactory conversion to meet new conditions.

(d) The private industries concerned can be engaged

upon a variety of development and production within

the same plant according to demands.

(e) Under such a system the existence of reserves of

material and trained technical personnel will be insured

at least to a certain degree.

(f) Such a system develops well trained organizations

composed of both personnel and means of production

susceptible of quick expansion or development to meet

unexpected or unforeseen demands and conditions.

5. On the other hand, the construction of Government arsenals of

sufficient capacity to meet probable war requirements as to arms,

ammunition, and implements of war under the War Department

General Mobilization Plan would require an initial expenditure in

excess of two billion dollars. The creation and maintenance of a

war reserve of munitions capable of supplying our requirements

under the War Department General Mobilization Plan from the

beginning of an emergency until the time when production would

meet probable war consumption, computed on a basis of

expenditure such as existed in the World War, would involve the

initial expenditure of a sum in excess of five billion dollars. This

amount does not include the initial cost of production plants nor

does it include costs incidental to storage. It should be noted that

on a basis of a 5% annual turnover for depreciation and

obsolescence, the maintenance of such a reserve would involve an

annual expenditure of two hundred and fifty million dollars. Since

this country is in no position to enter upon a scheme which would

involve such colossal appropriations and expenditure, it seems

obvious that the only solution in so far as our own country is

concerned is to reject any steps which may tend to limit

consideration to the private manufacture of arms, and insist that

both private and Governmental production must be included. It

should further be noted that no measures of restriction, control, or

[Document 197]

The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Received 11 a.m.]

177. Commission on Private Manufacture met last evening. Bernstorff

chairman. In the course of general discussion I made short statement of

our views including necessity for publicity for both private and government

manufacture. Italian delegate objected on the ground that his instructions

did not permit him and the Commission was not competent to deal with

government manufacture and was supported by legalistic arguments

advanced by several other delegates. Belgian delegate, who warmly upheld

my contention that both categories should be dealt with, suggested that

inasmuch as certain phases of question would probably be considered by

the Preparatory Commission and the final Disarmament Conference it

might be well to make haste slowly with a view to seeing whether both

categories could be dealt with either together or separately. I then stated that

any agreement in order to be acceptable to us must provide publicity for

both private and government manufacture and that if it was decided that the

Commission could deal only with the one category I should be embarrassed

in continuing. Japanese delegate said that his instructions definitely

precluded him from discussing government manufacture but he expressed

readiness to agree to delay in the hope of finding a solution. It was finally

agreed that the chairman appoint subcommittee on which we are to be

represented and that each delegation is to submit to this subcommittee its

full views in order that they may be examined and an attempt made to

reconcile them. It is not anticipated that there will be any future meetings

the Private Manufacture Commission for the present.

GIBSON

[Document 198]

The Minister in Switzerland (Gibson) to the Secretary of State

[Received 12: p.m.]

afternoon. I had previously informed the chairman, Bernstorff, that as long

as the committee was not prepared to consider a draft agreement providing

publicity for government as well as private manufacture it was difficult for

me to participate. As he made it clear that this condition could not be met, I

did not attend meeting and confined myself to forwarding a memorandum

to chairman commenting on secret [secrecy?] provisions of the draft

agreement and emphasizing that any more detailed discussion thereof

would be useful only if the essential principle of publicity for government

manufacture were to be accepted. As Commission is more or less evenly

divided, question will probably be referred to June session of Council

before further steps are taken.

GIBSON

[Document 199]

The Secretary of State to Diplomatic and Consular Officers

WASHINGTON, May 12, 1927.

Diplomatic Serial No. 601

G. I. Consular No. —

SIR: The Department takes occasion to summarize for your information the

status of the several Treaties concluded by the Conference on the Limitation

of Armament, held at Washington, November, 1921–February, 1922, as

regards their ratification by the signatory Powers and as regards adherences

thereto by non-signatory Powers; also the status, as regards adherence, to

such of the Resolutions adopted by that Conference as provided for

adherences by non-participating Powers. This instruction supersedes

Diplomatic Serial No. 271, G. I. Consular No. [unnumbered] of May 31,

1924, which is hereby cancelled.

TREATIES

I. Treaty between the United States of America, the British Empire, France,

Italy and Japan limiting Naval Armament, February 6, 1922 (Conference

Ratifications deposited and Treaty effective, August 17, 1923.

II. Treaty between the United States of America, the British Empire,

France, Italy and Japan relating to the Use of Submarines and Noxious

Awaiting ratification by France.

Adherences of non-signatory Powers not invited pending the coming into

force of the Treaty.

III. IV and V. Treaty between the United States of America, the British

Empire, France and Japan relating to their Insular Possessions and Insular

Dominions in the Region of the Pacific Ocean, together with Declaration,

Ratifications deposited and Treaties effective, August 17, 1923.

VI. Treaty between the United States of America, Belgium, the British

Empire, China, France, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands and Portugal relating

to Principles and Policies concerning China, February 6, 1922 (Conference

Ratifications deposited and Treaty effective, August 5, 1925.

Adherences invited from Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Denmark,

Germany, Mexico, Norway, Persia, Peru, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.

Adherences received from Norway (note of November 16, 1925); Sweden

VII. Treaty between the United States of America, Belgium, the British

Empire, China, France, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands and Portugal relating

to the Chinese Customs Tariff, February 6, 1922 (Conference Report, pp.

Adherences invited from Brazil, Denmark, Norway, Spain and Sweden, in

accordance with a Resolution adopted by the Conference on February 4,

Adherences invited from Denmark, Norway, Spain and Sweden, August 6,

1925.

Adherences received from Denmark (note of August 27, 1925); Sweden

RESOLUTIONS

V. Resolutions regarding Extraterritoriality in China. (Conference Report,

Adherences invited from Brazil, Denmark, Norway, Peru, Spain and

Sweden.

Adherences received from Spain (note of November 7, 1922); Denmark

XL Resolution regarding Existing Commitments of China or with respect to

Adherences invited from Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Denmark,

Germany, Norway, Persia, Peru, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.

Adherences received from Switzerland (note of June 27, 1922); Chile (note

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 200]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Marriner) to the Secretary of State

BERNE, December 23, 1926.

[Received January 7, 1927.]

No. 1055

p.m. 1926, and to enclose the text of the invitation (with attached

document C.E.I.6) of the Secretary General of the League of Nations,82

inviting the United States to take part in the appointment of the members of

the International Economic Conference which will be held on May 4th,

1927. It will be noted that the invitation specifies that each country is to

appoint not more than five members, who may be accompanied by experts

who will have the right to attend the proceedings of the Conference, but

without the right to speak or vote, except by special permission. It likewise

specifies that the expenses of the members and experts shall be borne by the

respective Governments. The members of the Conference, although

appointed by Governments, will not in any way bind their Governments nor

be qualified to act as spokesmen of an official policy. The Secretary

General would be grateful for a telegraphic reply to this invitation before

the end of February, 1927.

I have [etc.]

J. THEODORE MARRINER

[Document 201]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Marriner)

11. On February 5 President sent a message to Congress recommending that

appropriation of $15,000 be authorized to cover expenses of American

participation in appointment of members of Economic Conference. He

stated in part as follows:

“I consider it important that the Government of the United States

participate in the appointment of members of this conference, not

only in order that this Government may be adequately informed

of discussions in their relation to American interests but also in

order that the American point of view may be duly presented and

in the hope of contributing to the development of sound economic

foundations of friendly intercourse and prosperity. The United

States is taking its part in study of the problem of arms limitation

at the invitation of the League of Nations. This country should

also stand ready to aid in the study of means to promote economic

progress.

This is not the occasion to discuss specific problems outlined in

the agenda. It is sufficient to note that the conference

contemplates an inquiry into important problems affecting

American interests. This Government will have the benefit of its

deliberations, but will not be bound by its results.”

Mail text of the foregoing to Embassies London, Paris, Berlin, Rome and

Brussels.

KELLOGG

[Document 202]

Memorandum by Mr. Wallace McClure, Assistant to the

Economic Adviser

[WASHINGTON,] February 8, 1927.

On yesterday I had an opportunity to enter into conversation with

Congressman Cordell Hull of Tennessee and took occasion to remind him

of the fact that Dr. Thomas Walker Page, of the Institute of Economics, a

member of the Preparatory Commission of the International Economic

Conference, had telephoned to him in regard to this subject shortly after

returning from Geneva, after attending the second session of the

Preparatory Commission.

Mr. Hull expressed considerable interest in the subject, noting his pleasure

in the fact that the President had sent a message to Congress asking for an

appropriation with which to defray the expenses of American participation

in the appointment of members of the Conference. When questioned as to

what he considered to be the appropriate line of action for such a

Conference to take, Mr. Hull confined his remarks almost entirely to the

question of tariff barriers. He spoke at some length in regard to the

desirability of a general reduction of import duties and appeared to feel that

the tariff of the United States is the key to the entire world situation. When I

suggested that perhaps concrete results from this Conference could scarcely

go beyond the subject of equality of treatment in commercial matters, he

expressed heartily his interest on this ground. He referred to speeches which

he had made on the subject in 1916 and on subsequent occasions.

Mr. Hull expressed the opinion that the only danger connected with the

desired appropriation would lie in the possible objection of some individual

or individuals to its passage, with consequent delay and possible failure

because of the end of the session. He expressed the opinion that whatever

Mr. Madden’s Committee recommended would be adopted by the House.

Speaking in regard to an entirely different subject, Mr. Hull expressed the

opinion that the action of the Democrats in defeating the Lausanne Treaty

was ill-advised; was the result of misunderstanding and propaganda, and

would not result in getting a better treaty for the United States with Turkey.

W[ALLACE] MCC[LURE]

[Document 203]

The Chairman of the American Delegation to the International

Economic Conference (Robinson) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, June 10, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I have the honor to lay before you, for presentation to the

President, my report as Chairman of the American Delegation to the

International Economic Conference held in Geneva.

I wish in particular to express my deep appreciation of the unfailing

courtesy and support extended to the Delegation by the representatives of

the State Department in Geneva.

HENRY M. ROBINSON

[Enclosure]

Report of the Chairman of the American Delegation to the International Economic Conference

The dislocation following the war resulted in instability in currencies,

interruption of the usual flow of international credits, reduced production

and difficulties of transport across frontiers; it was accompanied by

unemployment and impaired purchasing power, with the further result that

agriculture suffered from a loss of markets and lack of credits. These

adversely affected the standards of living.

The several States, on the theory of protecting individual interests,

undertook various devices of relief that in the majority of instances further

retarded the natural flow of credits and trade.

The first concerted attack on this multiple problem was made at the

Brussels Conference in September–October, 1920. The work of this

Conference was confined mainly to discussion on the problem of unstable

currencies and established fundamental formulae for stabilization that have

become effective in all but two important countries.

This Conference was followed by the “Expert Committees” set up by the

Reparation Commission and the formulation of the Experts Plan for

payment of reparations and the rehabilitation of the German economy.

Then followed the Conference at Locarno, from which resulted the

treaties which have tended materially to clarify the political situations in

Europe.

It may be assumed to have been in the minds of international political and

economic leaders in every country that the need existed of concerted

discussion of various factors still contributing to the unstable conditions in

Europe. The League of Nations called this International Economic

Conference to discuss and advise upon some of the remaining questions.

From the date of the Brussels Conference to the date of this Economic

Conference, continuous improvement has been in evidence throughout

Europe in practically all social and economic conditions, naturally more

marked in some countries than in others.

The Agenda recommended by the Preparatory Committee, and the

documentation prepared at its request, has portrayed a condition of distress

in Europe which in the view of the Delegation of the United States did not

at the time of the Conference obtain in all lines of endeavour. The Agenda

was based upon the commercial interdependence between nations, more

particularly on the interdependence existing between the different countries

in Europe. The facts developed and discussions had at the Conference

emphasized not only the necessary interdependence of all the countries of

the world, but the interdependence of the several social groups as well.

Within the limits fixed by the Agenda, in the main, discussion and the

resultant recommendations revolved around European problems, though the

general resolutions, for the most part, have world-wide application. No

discussions were had on governmental debts, reparation or movements of

population.

The Conference, looking forward rather than backward, confined its

attention to tangible problems, viewing nothing as static, with full

recognition that the weights of the various factors would change from time

to time. Fundamental policies of national economy, such as free trade

versus protection and nationalization of resources, were not included in the

deliberations of the Conference. Recognizing the definite progress, almost

to completion, of the stabilization of currencies on a gold basis, and that

tariff levels were less important relatively than the rationalization of tariffs

and also that nationalization of resources was more a domestic than an

international question, the transactions of the Conference did not include a

discussion on these subjects except incidentally.

The Members of the Delegation were greatly impressed with the men who

were gathered at this Conference, brought together from every quarter to

give their experience and information and contributing on every phase of

economic life. Very helpful had been the work of the Preparatory

Committee and the Economic Section of the League. This gave direction to

the discussions and considerations; and with this start, the Conference, with

its Advisors, supplemented and elaborated in a large degree the preparatory

work and material.

The Permanent Secretariat of the League had made careful and well

organized arrangements and the mechanism provided for carrying on the

work of the Conference was admirable and effective.

The Members of the American Delegation were accorded full right and

participation in the work of the Conference. The names of the Delegation of

the United States, their several responsibilities in, and respective official

connections with, the Conference, are set forth in Annex I. The Experts and

Advisers of the Delegation of the United States had participation in the

discussions and in the preparation of materials for the use of the

Conference. The names of the Experts and Advisers who assisted at the

Conference and of the Secretary and two Assistant Secretaries of the

Delegation are set forth in Annex I.

The Conference developed the value of personal contacts with members of

the several Delegations and also with the experts and advisers

accompanying them. There were 194 Delegates and a larger number of

Experts and Advisers, representing 48 countries. As a result of personal

discussions, notable progress in clarification and standardization of the use

of technical terms was achieved. Through personal discussions it became

possible for the Delegates from different countries to weigh and value

points of view of other countries. Furthermore, through personal discussion

it became possible for Delegates to better differentiate between economic

and political phases of questions.

It might be fair to say that the indirect discussions of the Conference may

be of quite as lasting and general benefit as the resolutions passed. Many

divergencies of opinion existed between Delegations and with Delegations;

but in spite of these divergencies, there were evolved definite formulae for

the relief of economic difficulties that still militate against international

commerce.

At the opening of the Conference our Delegation was asked to give a

statement on the character and probable causes leading up to the relatively

prosperous position of the United States. Europe, which possesses rich and

varied natural resources, has an area approximately that of the United

States. The individual States of our country are geographically and

physically as heterogeneous as the different States in Europe; but in trade

and industry, we are a homogeneous whole, without barriers or currency

differences. Europe, on the other hand has a series of separate units, each

contending for national economic independence. Both employers and

workers have in the main adopted the policy of unrestricted output; and

generally workers have accepted substitution of machines for hand labor,

and employers in turn have compensated the workers with appropriate

increases in wages. The conditions obtaining in our country have been

important factors in the creation and maintenance of higher wage levels,

resulting in higher standards of living and, in turn, in greater power of

consumption and production. A comparison between the situation in the

United States and the European countries has led certain economists to

advocate an economic United States of Europe.

It developed in the Conference that “consumers’ goods” were being used,

even in Europe, at as high a rate per capita as prior to the war; but the

production and consumption of “capital goods” was considerably lower and

that this, in the main, accounts for unemployment and, in turn, had reduced

wages and purchasing power to a lower level.

The discussion of the Conference further disclosed the fact that if the

development of unused or inadequately developed resources throughout the

world could be initiated and financed, increased consumption of capital

goods would follow, with the result of reduction or elimination of

unemployment, and the probable increase in the wage level and

consumption of consumable goods.

The Conference divided itself into three committees on Commerce,

Industry and Agriculture. Each of these divided itself into subcommittees

for specialized discussion. In the Committee on Commerce the discussion

revolved largely about trade barriers. A limited discussion on tariff levels

disclosed the age old differences of opinion, but at the same time brought

out the fact that even more important than relative differences in levels of

custom duties was their freqeunt and abrupt alteration. Lack of continuity of

policies, differences in the standards of classification, discrimination and

other unequal treatments are more injurious than differences in tariff levels.

No recommendation was made in respect of tariff levels but the support of

all the members was secured approving the principle of “equality of

treatment” and the “unconditional most-favored-nation” clause as well as an

accord condemning the policy of artificial limitation of raw material

exports. The resolutions will also disclose that existing trade barriers would

be less harmful if general adoption could be obtained of improvements in

practice resulting in simplification of customs formalities, standardization

of tariff nomenclature and consolidation of customs charges and other

technical improvements.

On rationalization in industry there was a full discussion; the principal

differences grew out of the fact that the European workers regarded

rationalization as likely to bring about increased unemployment. However,

finally agreement was had on a formula based on experience of the

countries in which rationalization had been most highly developed. The

conference went on record in opposition to indirect and direct states

subsidies, but without undertaking critical definitions of the terms, urging

that subsidies should not be likely [lightly?] invoked.

In the discussions on Cartels, appeared also differences between workers

and operators. In addition to this, the subject was relatively new and

untried, so no accurate definition was possible.

We recognize that there are certain physical and geographical conditions in

particular situations that might make it desirable and economical for some

form of international industrial agreements to be made; but we are

apprehensive of the dangers of restricted output and the tendency to

monopolistic exploitation. The resolution on Cartels sets out most of the

objections and points out that the success of Cartels will be conditional on

the character and policies of the Management.

Early experience in the United States in agreements of a similar character

resulted in restrictive legislation. Because of this and the conviction that

governments would participate in Cartels, our Delegation felt that we could

not by our actions approve international Cartels and we took a definite

position against international Cartels with Governmental participation.

The Committee on Agriculture adopted resolutions in support of

international extension of co-operative marketing, in favor of enlargement

of agricultural credits in countries where these are still inadequate and

urging the world-wide collection of comparable statistics on production,

movement, stocks and consumption of farm products.

The full text of the resolutions reached by the Conference and in each case

the degree of agreement reached is shown in Annex 2.

In conclusion we have appreciatively to acknowledge the contributions of

the various departments of the Government in Washington. Before the

departure for the Conference, sub-committees were set up to explore the

questions set forth in the Agenda on which were experts from the following

Departments of the Government, State, Treasury, Commerce, Agriculture,

Labor and the United States Tariff Commission. These sub-committees held

many meetings before the delegation convened in Washington. Before

leaving Washington, the members of the Delegation had two meetings with

the expert members of the sub-committees. In the eight days crossing the

ocean the Members of the Delegation and the experts accompanying the

Delegation held fourteen meetings for the discussion of the documentation

of the Preparatory Committee and all the facts and statistics developed by

the sub-committees of experts relating to the economic position of the

world and particularly with reference to the United States. During the

course of the Conference, daily meetings were held, including Delegates

and Experts and Advisors, at which the policies of the day were outlined.

We feel that within the limits fixed for discussion and recommendation, the

conference has pointed ways for the removal or modification of obstacles to

the natural flow of international trade, and for the lowering of costs of

production. We believe if the formula evolved should be followed, it will be

beneficial to the peoples not only of Europe but of the world. We are

convinced that improvement in economic condition in Europe will make for

universal peace.

[Annex 1]

Personnel of the American Delegation

Delegates:

Mr. Henry M. Robinson.

Member of the Dawes Commission, and President of the First

National Bank, Los Angeles.

Mr. Norman H. Davis.

Formerly Assistant Secretary of Treasury and Under Secretary of

State.

Mr. John W. O’Leary.

President of the United States Chamber of Commerce.

Mr. Alonso E. Taylor.

Director of Food Research Institute, Stanford University.

Mr. Julius Klein.

Director, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, U. S.

Department of Commerce.

Mr. Robinson and Mr. O’Leary served on the Committee on Industry; Mr.

Davis and Mr. Klein served on the Committee on Commerce; Mr. Taylor

served on the Committee on Agriculture.

Experts and Advisers of American Delegation to the International

Economic Conference:

Dr. Arthur N. Young.

Economic Adviser to the Department of State.

Dr. E. Dana Durand.

Chief of the Research Division, Department of Commerce.

Mr. Grosvenor Jones.

Chief of the Finance and Investment Division, Department of

Commerce.

Mr. Louis Domeratzky.

Chief of the Regional Division, Department of Commerce.

Mr. E. W. Camp.

Commissioner of Customs, Treasury Department.

Mr. Asher Hobson.

Permanent American Delegate to the International Institute of

Agriculture at Rome.

Dr. Percy W. Bidwell.

An Economist of the United States Tariff Commission.

Mr. Henry Chalmers.

Chief of the Division of Foreign Tariffs, Department of

Commerce.

Mr. John P. Frey.

Representing the Department of Labor.

Secretary:

[Document 204]

The Consul at Geneva (Tuck) to the Secretary of State

Council today adopted Stresemann report fixing date Diplomatic

Conference Abolition Export and Import Prohibitions [and] Restrictions for

October 17, 1927. This date chosen in order not to conflict with proposed

meeting Preparatory Commission for Disarmament in November. Report

calls attention of states invited to Conference to conclusion[s] formulated

by International Economic Conference90 on the subject [of] prohibitions.

All countries who sent delegations to Economic Conference will receive

invitation to attend.

TUCK

[Document 205]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

60. Has Legation received an invitation from League requesting American

representation at Diplomatic Conference for the Abolition of Import and

Export Prohibitions and Restrictions to be convened October 17, 1927?

You are requested to telegraph a summary of any invitation to an

International Conference which Legation may receive in future, giving date

received and date of mailing.

KELLOGG

[Document 206]

The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

[Received 10: a.m.]

895, whereby United States was invited, on behalf of the Council of the

[Document 207]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

unsigned document in which even the space for the name of the invited

Government was left blank. Such a blank circular form can in no way be

considered an invitation to any diplomatic conference.

[Document 208]

The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

BERNE, August 4, 1927.

[Received August 23.]

No. 56

invitation extended by the League of Nations to the United States to send a

duly authorized delegation to take part in an international conference with a

view to framing an international convention for abolishing import and

export privileges and restrictions, I beg leave to transmit herewith, for the

Department’s information, a copy and translation of a letter dated August 2,

1927, from the Director of the Economic and Financial Section of the

League94 enclosing a signed duplicate of the above referred to invitation of

likewise transmitted herewith.

I have [etc.]

For the Minister:

LEON H. ELLIS

Secretary of Legation

[Enclosure]

The Deputy Secretary General of the League of Nations (Avenol) to the Secretary of State

GENEVA, April 2, 1927.

SIR: On behalf of the Council of the League of Nations I have the honour to

invite the United States Government to send a duly authorised delegation to

take part in an international conference with a view to framing an

international convention for abolishing import and export prohibitions and

restrictions.

This invitation is addressed to States Members and non-Members of the

League of Nations in pursuance of the following resolution adopted by the

Council on March 11th, 1927.

“The Council,

a) approves the report of the Economic Committee on

its 21st Session;

b) decides to convene at Geneva a diplomatic

conference of duly authorised representatives of the

Governments Members and non-Members of the

League of Nations, with a view to the framing of an

international convention for the abolition of import and

export prohibitions and restrictions. The invitations to

the States will be accompanied by the documents

already prepared by the Economic Committee.

November 14th, 1927, is the date provisionally fixed

for this conference.”

It has been decided provisionally that the Conference should meet on

November 14th, 1927, but the Council may, if circumstances require it, alter

this date at its next session.

At the same time, the Council decided to communicate to all the

Governments invited to the conference the enclosed document (C.I.A.P.1.)

drawn up by the Economic Committee to serve as a basis for the

conference’s discussions. This document contains a preliminary draft

international agreement for the abolition of import and export prohibitions

and restrictions, preceded by a brief historical sketch and a summary of the

results of the enquiries conducted by the Economic Committee with the

Governments and the commercial and industrial organisations of the

various countries, and followed by observations on certain articles of the

preliminary draft agreement.

In the two annexes will be found the amendments proposed and

observations submitted by the organisations concerned and by certain

Governments concerning the individual articles of the preliminary draft

agreement.

I should be glad if you would be so good as to let me know whether the

United States Government is prepared to send representatives to this

conference.

I have [etc.]

J. AVENOL

[Subenclosure—Extract]

III. PRELIMINARY DRAFT AGREEMENT ESTABLISHED BY THE ECONOMIC COMMITTEE

ARTICLE 1

Subject to the exceptions provided for in the following articles, each

contracting State undertakes within a period of six months to abolish all

import and export prohibitions and restrictions and not thereafter impose or

maintain any such prohibitions or restrictions.

In the meantime, the contracting States will adopt all practicable measures

to reduce existing prohibitions and restrictions to a minimum and to avoid

the imposition of any fresh ones.

Further, they undertake to adopt all necessary measures to see that the

provisions of the present Agreement are strictly observed by all

Governments, central or local authorities, and that no administrative

regulation is issued in contravention thereof.

ARTICLE 2

Should the contracting States in pursuance of their general legislation

subject the importation or exportation of goods to certain regulations in

respect of the manner, form or place of importation or exportation, or the

imposition of marks, they undertake that such regulations shall not be made

a means of disguised prohibition or arbitrary restriction.

ARTICLE 3

In the case of any prohibitions or restrictions which may be applied within

the limits set by the present Agreement, the contracting States shall in the

matter of licences comply strictly with the provisions of Article 3 of the

International Convention for the simplification of Customs Formalities

ARTICLE 4

The following classes of prohibitions and restrictions are not prohibited by

the provisions of the present Agreement, provided that they are applied

equally to all foreign countries where the same conditions prevail and are

not applied in such a way as to conceal measures the object of which is

purely economic:

1. Prohibitions or restrictions having in view national defence,

public safety or order;

2. Prohibitions or restrictions issued on grounds of public health;

3. Prohibitions or restrictions having in view the protection of

animals and plants against disease, degeneration or extinction;

4. Prohibitions or restrictions imposed for moral or humanitarian

reasons or for the suppression of improper traffic, provided that

the manufacture of and trade in the goods to which the

prohibitions relate are also prohibited or restricted in the interior

of the country;

5. Export prohibitions or restrictions issued for the protection of

national treasures of artistic, historical or archaeological value;

6. Prohibitions or restrictions intended, in conformity with the

national legislation or international conventions, to protect

industrial, literary and artistic property, and to prevent unfair

competition in regard to the false marking or appellation of

origin, on condition that an analogous protection or supervision is

applied to national products;

7. Prohibitions or restrictions imposed for the purpose of

extending to imported goods measures of control equivalent or

analogous to those applying to home products of the same kind;

8. Prohibitions or restrictions applied to articles which in the

interior of the country are subject to State monopoly or to

monopolies granted by the State as regards either manufacture or

trade;

9. Prohibitions or restrictions established in pursuance of

international conventions regulating the traffic in arms, opium or

other forms of trade which give rise to dangers or abuses, or

relating to methods of unfair competition;

10. Prohibitions applicable to coins, gold, silver, currency notes

or securities.

ARTICLE 5

Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the right of any contracting State to

take on importation or exportation all necessary measures to meet

extraordinary and abnormal circumstances and to protect the vital economic

and financial interests of the State. Nevertheless, in view of the grave

inconveniences caused by prohibitions and restrictions, they shall only be

imposed in cases of exceptional necessity and shall not be made an arbitrary

means of protecting national products or of discriminating against any other

contracting State. Their duration shall be restricted to that of the causes or

circumstances from which they arise.

ARTICLE 6

Each contracting State agrees not to invoke the provisions of the present

Agreement as a ground of objection to measures of prohibition or restriction

applied by another contracting State to the products of a third State which

imposes on its products prohibitions or restrictions of a kind prohibited by

the present Agreement or which subjects its commerce or shipping to

measures of exclusion or discrimination or to unfair methods of

competition.

ARTICLE 7*

Should a dispute arise between two or more contracting States as to the

interpretation or application of the provisions of the present Agreement, and

should such dispute not be settled either directly between the parties or by

the employment of any other means of reaching agreement, the parties to

the dispute may, before resorting to any arbitral or judicial procedure,

submit the dispute, with a view to an amicable settlement, to such technical

body as the Council of the League of Nations may appoint for this purpose.

This body will give an advisory opinion after hearing the parties and

effecting a meeting between them if necessary.

The advisory opinion given by the said body will not be binding upon the

parties to the dispute unless it is accepted by all of them, and they are free,

either after resort to such procedure or in lieu thereof, to have recourse to

any arbitral or judicial procedure which they may select, including

reference to the Permanent Court of International Justice as regards any

matters which are within the competence of that Court under its Statute.

[If a dispute of the nature referred to in the first paragraph of this article

should arise with regard to the interpretation or application of Articles (. . .

.) of the present Agreement, the parties shall, at the request of any of them,

refer the matter to the decision of the Permanent Court of International

Justice, whether or not there has previously been recourse to the procedure

prescribed in the first paragraph of this article.]*

The adoption of the procedure before the body referred to above or the

opinion given by it will in no case involve the suspension of the measures

complained of; the same will apply in the event of proceedings being taken

before the Permanent Court of International Justice, unless the Court

decides otherwise under Article 41 of the Statute.

ARTICLE 8

The present Agreement shall be open for signature for a period of twelve

months from the present date by any State which is a Member of the

League of Nations or to which the Council shall have communicated a copy

for this purpose.

Thereafter any such State may accede to the Agreement by an instrument

communicated to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations, who shall

at once notify its receipt to the other parties to the Agreement.

ARTICLE 9

The present Agreement shall be ratified and the ratifications deposited at

Geneva with the Secretary-General of the League of Nations as soon as

possible. It shall come into effect ninety days after the date on which the

Secretary-General notifies the parties that it has been ratified or acceded to

by (. . . .† ) States, including those mentioned in Appendix.‡

As regards a State ratifying or acceding to the Agreement after it has come

into force, the Agreement shall come into force ninety days after the

notification of such ratification or accession by the Secretary-General of the

League of Nations. If within two years from the present date sufficient

ratifications and accessions have not been notified to bring the Agreement

into force, the States which have ratified or acceded to the Agreement will

confer with a view to deciding whether the Agreement should be put into

effect as among themselves.

ARTICLE 10

Any contracting State may denounce the Agreement by a notification in

writing addressed to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations at any

time not less than (four) years from the date when the Agreement comes

into force. Such denunciation shall take effect one year after its receipt by

the Secretary-General and shall only operate in respect of the denouncing

State.

If one of the contracting States named in the preceding article or five other

contracting States not so named denounce the present Agreement, any

contracting State shall be entitled to request the Council of the League of

Nations to summon a Conference to consider the situation thus created. If

the Council declines this request, any contracting State may denounce the

present Agreement by six months’ notice. Should the Conference meet

under the auspices of the League of Nations, any contracting State which

dissents from its decision may similarly denounce the Agreement by six

months’ notice.

ARTICLE 11

In order to indicate the progress which has been made in regard to the

abolition of import and export prohibitions or restrictions, each contracting

State shall, within twelve months of the coming into force in its own case of

the present Agreement, furnish the Secretary-General of the League of

Nations with a statement of the steps which it has taken for the purpose,

with a view to the communication of a summary of this information to the

various States.

ARTICLE 12

If before the expiration of the period of four years mentioned in Article 10

one-third of the contracting States notify the Secretary-General of the

League of Nations of their desire that the present Agreement should be

revised, the other contracting States undertake to participate in any

consultation that may take place with a view to the revision or maintenance

of the Agreement.

NOTE.—The Agreement, if it takes the form of a Convention, will need to be

completed by the usual articles which have become “common form”,

dealing with such matters as the position of colonies and overseas

possessions or of countries which form part of the same sovereign State, the

relation of the Convention to the rights and duties of States as Members of

the League of Nations, etc.

[Document 209]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland

(Wilson)

following to the Secretary General of the League of Nations in the usual

informal manner:

“The Secretary of State of the United States of America refers to

the note of the Deputy Secretary General of the League of

Nations, dated April 2, 1927, in which he was good enough to

invite the Government of the United States of America to attend

an international conference with a view to framing an

international convention for abolishing import and export

prohibitions and restrictions. The Government of the United

States is glad to accept the invitation of the League of Nations

and to participate in this Conference, which, it is informed will

convene at Geneva on October 17, 1927. The President has

appointed Mr. Hugh Wilson, American Minister to Switzerland to

attend the Conference as the representative of the United States.

He will be assisted by one or more advisers whose names will be

communicated to you as soon as possible.”

Full instructions will be transmitted to you later.

CARR

[Document 210]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

WASHINGTON, October 6, 1927.

SIR: The President has instructed me to inform you of his desire that you

should represent this Government at the forthcoming conference on import

and export prohibitions and restrictions to be held at Geneva beginning

October 17, 1927, to consider the adoption of an agreement for the abolition

of such prohibitions and restrictions. You will be assisted by H. Lawrence

Groves, Commercial Attaché at Vienna; Charles E. Lyon, Commercial

Attaché at Berne; Henry F. Worley, of the Treasury Department; and Percy

W. Bidwell, one of the European representatives of the Tariff Commission.

Mr. S. P. Tuck, American Consul at Geneva, will serve as secretary of the

delegation.

The Department desires you to be governed by the following instructions as

representative of the United States at the forthcoming Conference on Import

and Export Prohibitions and Restrictions, which convenes at Geneva

October 17, 1927.

The subject matter of the Conference is the preliminary draft agreement

prepared by the Economic Committee of the League. The following

comments are made in relation thereto.

Article 1

Having in mind that the object of the conference is to abolish the system of

prohibitions and restrictions, it appears that the undertaking in the first

paragraph to abolish “all import and export prohibitions and restrictions”

could probably not be construed as extending to import duties imposed for

the purposes of revenue or protection to domestic producers. The

Department, however, feels it essential to dispel any possible doubt on that

score. It is believed that most if not all the other governments will share that

view. The Department therefore desires that an appropriate modification to

that effect be embodied in the agreement. If an appropriate amendment is

proposed by one of the other delegations you may support it. If not, you

may suggest that the following be included as a separate article:

“Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as affecting the

right of any contracting state to impose import duties; or to adopt

measures to prevent or counteract dumping or to offset bounties

or subsidies paid to foreign producers.”

It would appear preferable that the proposal of such an amendment, if found

necessary, be made in the latter stages of the conference, in order to avoid

giving opportunity for the suggestion to be made that import duties be

brought within the scope of the conference.

Article 2

No observations appear to be called for.

Article 3

The provisions of Article 3 of the International Convention for the

Simplification of Customs Formalities of November 3, 1923, should be

incorporated in the Article rather than merely included by reference. Since

the United States is not a party to that Convention, it is the more desirable

that any agreement to be signed at the present Conference be complete in

itself.

quoted on page 21 of Document C.I.A.P.1, which contains the draft

agreement under discussion at the present conference.

It is suggested that the introductory paragraph of Article 3 of the draft

Agreement should read as follows:

“In the case of any prohibitions or restrictions which may be

applied within the limits set by the present Agreement, the

contracting States shall in the matter of licenses comply strictly

with the following provisions:”

There should then be inserted paragraphs (a) to (d) inclusive of Article 3 of

the Convention of November 3, 1923. The Department feels, however, in

the light of its experience in endeavoring to protect American trade with

countries having a system of licenses, that paragraph (e) of that Convention

needs to be revised and broadened in order to prevent possible abuses.

There is transmitted herewith for your information a copy of the draft form

of Article 7 which is being inserted in commercial treaties now being

negotiated by the United States. You will note that the fourth paragraph of

Article 7 deals with the issue of licenses.

The Department feels that sub-paragraph (e) should be revised, to read as

follows:

“(e) That, in the event of the fixing of rations or quotas, no

conditions or formalities shall be imposed or required, in

connection with the allocation of licenses for restricted goods

authorized for importation or exportation, that may prevent

according to each other contracting state an equitable share of

such importation or exportation, having regard to the normal

volume of trade of the respective countries in the particular class

of goods in question. In the application of the provisions of this

paragraph no distinction shall be made between, direct and

indirect shipments.”

It may be added for your information in connection with paragraph (e) of

considered the possible bearing of the practice and requirements of the

Federal Narcotics Board, which allocates among American importers

permits to import narcotics. The Department understands that the reference

in paragraph (e) to “equitable allocation”, refers to allocation in respect of

foreign sources of supply, and not to allocation among domestic importers,

since the latter is obviously an internal question. In order to avoid any

possible question, it is important that the language adopted on this point be

entirely clear.

Article 4

With respect to the reference in the introductory sentence to the possibility

that prohibitions and restrictions may have a concealed economic purpose,

the Department calls attention to the circular instruction recently issued on

this subject, copy of which is transmitted herewith. This instruction sets

forth the position in the matter of the United States Department of

Agriculture.

The United States has in force certain prohibitions or restrictions coming

within all the ten categories of suggested exceptions excepting numbers 5, 8

and 10. The views of the Department concerning each, of the proposed

exceptions are as follows:

Point 1. The legislation of the United States in relation to helium gas, copies

of which are enclosed, comes under this point, and the maintenance of this

exception is necessary from the standpoint of the United States.

Point 2. American prohibitions or restrictions on grounds of public health

relate, for example, to the importation of viruses or serums, or of hay and

straw not disinfected. The maintenance of this exception is thus obviously

necessary.

Point 3. American prohibitions or restrictions designed to protect animal

and plant life relate to foreign plants, fruits, seeds, bulbs, wild animals,

eggs, etc. as well as to the prohibition of importation of seal skins from

seals and otters taken in prohibited waters. The maintenance of this

exception is thus necessary.

Point 4. American prohibitions or restrictions imposed for moral or

humanitarian reasons or to suppress improper traffic relate inter alia to

intoxicating liquors, smoking opium and narcotic drugs, lottery tickets,

obscene and immoral articles, counterfeits, pictorial representations of prize

fights and the plumage of certain birds. The maintenance of this exception

is therefore necessary.

Point 5. The United States has no prohibitions or restrictions for protection

of “national treasures of artistic, historical or archaeological value”, but has

no objection to this exception.

Point 6. American prohibitions or restrictions to protect industrial, literary

and artistic property or unfair competition relate to infringements of trade

marks, trade names and copyrights, and also include the requirements of the

United States regarding marking of the foreign origin of imported goods.

The Department considers that the language of point 6 requires

modification in order to cover the necessary prohibitions or restrictions

enforced in the United States. In connection with this matter, reference is

made to Section 316 of the Tariff Act of 1922, which relates to unfair

competition. Reference is also made to the requirements of American law

that certain classes and kinds of imports be marked to show the country of

origin (see the customs regulations of the United States, index under

“Marking”; a copy of the Customs Regulations is among the documents left

at the American Consulate at Geneva by the American delegation to the

Economic Conference). It is of course impracticable for the United States to

require that domestic products for sale in the United States be marked in the

same manner as similar imported products.

The Department therefore considers that point 6 should be amended to read

as follows:

“Prohibitions or restrictions intended, in conformity with national

legislation or international conventions, to protect industrial,

literary and artistic property, and to prevent unfair competition in

regard to the false marking or appellation of origin, on condition

that an analogous protection or supervision (except in the case of

marking or appellation of origin) is applied to national products.”

Point 7. American prohibitions or restrictions extending control equivalent

or analogous to that applied to domestic products apply, for example, in the

case of intoxicating liquors. This exception is thus necessary.

Point 8. The United States has no prohibitions or restrictions such as those

enumerated under point 8, i. e. in relation to monopolies. It may be

observed that while State monopolies in foreign countries are frequently felt

to be detrimental to American interests, their establishment is in the last

analysis a matter of internal policy for the country in question, and the

Department accordingly feels that it is not in a position to offer any

objection to the proposed exception.

Point 9. While the Department has no objection to the exceptions embodied

in the draft of point 9, it considers that these exceptions should not be

limited to those made necessary pursuant to international conventions

relating to traffic in arms, opium, etc., or unfair methods of competition.

In this connection, reference is made to the Joint Resolution of Congress

approved January 31, 1922, authorizing the President to prohibit or restrict

the exportation of arms or munitions of war to countries in which the

United States exercises extraterritorial jurisdition, or in which conditions of

domestic violence exist. A copy of this resolution is transmitted herewith,

together with copies of a ruling of the Department of State dated May 3,

1927, concerning the kinds of articles requiring individual export licenses

when destined to Mexico. A copy of the President’s proclamation of

January 7, 1924, concerning the restriction of exports of arms or munitions

to Mexico is also transmitted herewith.

The Department accordingly considers that Point 9 should be amended to

read as follows:

“Prohibitions or restrictions established in pursuance of

international conventions or domestic legislation regulating traffic

in arms, opium, or other forms of trade which give rise to dangers

or abuses, or relating to methods of unfair competition.”

Point 10. The United States has no prohibitions applicable to “coins, gold,

silver, currency notes or securities”. While the establishment of prohibitions

such as would appear possible under the exception set forth in point 10

might be subject to abuse, there are circumstances in which such

prohibitions appear necessary and accordingly this Department makes no

objection to that exception. The Department is not clear why exception 10

makes no reference to “restrictions”. It appears also that a comma should

follow the word “currency”, in case, as it appears, that word is intended to

cover coins or circulating media other than gold and silver.

Additions to the exceptions listed in Article 4 are necessary to cover the

following points, in view of American legislation: (a) prohibition or

restriction of importation of prison-made goods; (b) restrictions and

prohibitions pursuant to the so-called grain, cotton and tea standards

legislation.

With respect to prison-made goods, the situation might be met in one of two

ways. The following statement might be included at the end of point 9:

“(including the prohibition or restriction of importation of prison-

made goods, regardless of whether domestic commerce in such

goods is prohibited or restricted).”

Alternatively, a separate exception having a distinct number might be

inserted, as follows:

“Prohibitions or restrictions applied to the importation of prison-

made goods, regardless of whether domestic commerce in such

goods is prohibited or restricted.”

With respect to the grain, cotton and tea standards legislation, it is

suggested that an additional exception be inserted, as follows:

“Prohibitions or restrictions in connection with the application of

standards for classification and grading of commodities in

international commerce, provided equivalent measures are

applied to national products.”

In connection with this matter, reference is made to the letters from the

Department of Agriculture, transmitted with the Department’s instruction

A further prohibition authorized by American law is that provided for in

Section 510 of the Tariff Act of 19228 to the effect that the Secretary of the

Treasury may prohibit importation of specific shipments when the foreign

shipper thereof has refused to permit a duly accredited officer of the United

States to inspect his records pertaining to the market value or classification

of the goods in question. The Department prefers that you should not raise

this question until the general discussions on the draft treaty have

practically crystallized the treaty into final form when you should ask

specific instructions on this point.

Article 5

The Department considers that this article, in its present draft form is far too

broad and vague, and that if permitted to stand might practically nullify the

convention. If the article were maintained, countries that have the system of

prohibitions and restrictions might feel free to contend that its continual

existence is necessary “to protect the vital economic and financial interests

of the State.” Heretofore, such measures have been defended as necessary

to protect the currency, or to develop industries regarded as “vital”. It is

believed that in general States considering it necessary to protect their

industries against foreign competition may do so with less disturbance to

international trade by employing protective duties than by the arbitrary

method of prohibitions or restrictions, which so greatly interferes with

commercial stability.

The Department suggests the following substitute for Article 5:

“Nothing in this Agreement shall affect the right of any

contracting State to apply to importation or exportation all

necessary measures in case of war or national calamity. The

duration of any such measures shall be restricted to that of the

causes or circumstances from which they arise”.

The Department attaches great importance to effecting the change set forth

above, and desires you strongly to oppose the original wording, even

though it appears likely that the State maintaining the licence system will

try to keep the original draft.

Article 6

The Department considers that the provisions of this article are necessary. It

is doubtless intended to cover the application of prohibitions or restrictions

as penalty measures, as authorized or contemplated in Section 317 of the

It is, however, necessary to leave out the word “third”. Otherwise, it appears

that a State party to the Agreement which might impose “measures of

exclusion or discrimination” would be in a position to object to prohibitions

or restrictions which another State party to the Agreement might adopt for

the purpose of penalty or retaliation.

Article 7

It is believed that the first paragraph of Article 7 would be clarified if the

words “provided they mutually agree to do so” are inserted in the fourth

line between “may” and “before.”

Inasmuch as the United States has not adhered to the Statute of the

Permanent Court of International Justice, it is essential that the United

States should not be obligated by the Agreement to submit to that Court a

dispute arising thereunder. At the same time, the United States naturally

does not wish to object to the adoption by the states adhering to the Statute

of such procedure for settlement of disputes among them as they may

consider appropriate. Nor does the Department desire you to take a position

that might be taken to indicate that it would not in any circumstances

submit a dispute to that Court.

The Department would greatly prefer to substitute for the entire Article 7

language based upon Article 35 of the Convention for the Supervision of

the International Trade in Arms and Ammunitions and in Implements of

War, concluded June 17, 1925, changing “shall” to “may” wherever

occurring. If this proves impracticable, you should telegraph the

Department for further instructions, at the same time offering such

suggestions as you may deem appropriate.

Article 8

The second paragraph of Article 8 is not clear. It provides that “such State”

may accede to the agreement. The reference is to the preceding paragraph

which provides for accession by States members of the League of Nations

or to which the Council shall have communicated a copy of the agreement

for purpose of signature.

It would thus appear that only such States as are members of the League of

Nations or are invited to sign the agreement may accede. Such a provision

is adequate only if all States are invited to sign. The Department considers

that the utility of an agreement on this general subject would be the greater

if all States should adhere thereto.

Article 9

The Department does not at this time desire to give you instructions as to

the number of States whose ratification is requisite, but desires your

telegraphic comment on this point after you have had opportunity to discuss

the matter with your colleagues.

The Department has no objection to the wording proposed. It is presumed

that it will not be suggested that the United States be included as one of the

States whose ratification shall be requisite before the Agreement becomes

effective, since the United States does not enforce the prohibitions or

restrictions against which the Agreement is understood to be directed.

Article 10

The second paragraph of Article 10 refers to the “contracting States named

in the preceding article.” No States are named in the preceding article, in

which there is only a reference to countries named in the appendix.

No time is fixed in the second paragraph of Article 10 within which the

Council must decide whether or not to summon a conference. Apparently

some clarification of drafting is requisite with respect to this matter.

Article 11

From the point of view of the countries not members of the League of

Nations, it seems preferable to omit this article, involving as it does, an

obligation to make a report to the Secretary General of the League.

Undoubtedly, Governments, regardless of League membership, would be

glad to respond to any inquiries which the Secretary General might make on

the subject.

Article 12

The Department feels that this article might appropriately be redrafted with

a view to making the obligations thereof more definite and clear.

In reference to the question raised in the note at the bottom of page 18 of C.

I. A. P. 1. as to the application of the Convention to colonies and overseas

possessions, the following provision which is contained as Article 13 in the

International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules in Regard to

Bills of Lading, signed at Brussels, in 1924 and 192512 would be

satisfactory to this Government:

“Article —.

“The high contracting parties may at the time of signature,

ratification, or accession declare that their acceptance of the

present convention does not include any or all of the self-

governing dominions, or of the colonies, overseas possessions,

protectorates, or territories under their sovereignty or authority,

and they may subsequently accede separately on behalf of any

self-governing

dominion,

colony,

overseas

possession,

protectorate, or territory excluded in their declaration. They may

also denounce the convention separately in accordance with its

provisions in respect of any self-governing dominion, or any

colony, overseas possession, protectorate, or territory under their

sovereignty or authority.”

The Department is concerned lest the various countries attending the

Conference may introduce so great a number of exceptions such as are

contained in Article 4 to the provisions eliminating import and export

prohibitions and restrictions that the usefulness of the proposed agreement

will be threatened. You should particularly observe signs of such a tendency

during the opening days of the Conference and should keep the Department

fully informed. It seems possible that, in the event that the usefulness of the

proposed agreement is too seriously threatened, this Government may

withhold its signature, in which case the introduction of exceptions by the

United States might possibly be omitted entirely.

The Department has undertaken to reduce as far as possible the number of

exceptions which it must request in order to conform to the requirements of

American law. In introducing those brought forward in this instruction you

may appropriately avoid being among the first delegates to propose

exceptions not included in the draft as prepared. You may also appropriately

introduce them one by one at times when they will create the smallest

impression of piling up exceptions.

The Department calls particular attention to the recommendations of the

Economic Conference endorsing the draft convention as “a very satisfactory

basis” for the work of the forthcoming conference. The Economic

Conference, however, in addition recommended:

“That, moreover, the application of the principles laid down in

this draft should not be indirectly defeated by such means as

export duties, the fixing of quotas, health regulations or any other

measures

not

justified

by

exceptional

or

imperative

circumstances;

“And, further, that the application of these principles should not

be indirectly defeated by restrictions on the free circulation of

capital—including, for example, any system for controlling

exchange which impedes the purchase or exportation of foreign

exchange for the purpose of paying for goods imported”. See

page 21 of the Final Report of the Economic Conference,

In the same connection reference is also made to the provisions on page 31

of the report of the Economic Conference dealing with “Export Duties”.

Accordingly, questions relating to the points quoted above will presumably

arise at the forthcoming conference. The Department will address to you

separate instructions regarding the attitude you should take concerning

these points.

The Department considers it important that a suitable agreement be reached

for the abolition of import and export prohibitions and restrictions. Such

measures have caused material difficulty to American commerce in the

period since the war, by reason of the arbitrary and discriminatory manner

in which they have been applied. They have interfered with that stability of

conditions which is so essential to the development and progress of

international commerce. Moreover, their application has led to a number of

diplomatic controversies and has complicated the negotiation of the

commercial treaties which the United States has desired to conclude in

order to establish its commercial relations with foreign countries on a

mutually satisfactory and permanent basis.

During the negotiations of the Conference you will of course keep the

Department closely advised of important developments, including the

substance of any new proposals that may be seriously considered. The

Department will endeavor promptly to instruct you in relation to such points

as may develop.

It may be that certain of the governments participating in the Conference

will be disposed to extend in some directions the scope of the matters dealt

with. As indicated above, the Department is of the opinion that in view of

the declarations of the Economic Conference in relation to export duties,

the scope of the Conference may be extended to deal with them. But the

Department is inclined to the view that in principle it would not be

advisable to extend the scope of the Conference in other directions for

example in relation to questions affecting import duties and commercial

treaties. Apart from the fact that certain inquiries pertaining to these matters

are being conducted by the League of Nations pursuant to the conclusions

of the Economic Conference, the Department believes that no useful

purpose will be served by the injection of such controversial matters into

the present Conference. The Conference is more likely to succeed if its

objectives are definitely limited.

[Document 211]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

[Paraphrase]

proposal will be made that scope of draft agreement be expanded to include

topics mentioned in quotation from Economic Conference report, you are

instructed further as follows:

1. In view of the detriment the American public has suffered through

foreign export duties and other measures of a monopolistic nature, this

Government would in principle favor addition of new article, toward end of

Convention preferably, to be based on first paragraph of passage quoted

from above report; article might take following form:14

“Each contracting State agrees to refrain from employing export

duties, quotas, or other measures applicable to exportation of

goods in such manner as to defeat the application of the principles

laid down in the present agreement and particularly in article 1

thereof.”

If, as we hope, the Conference adopts modification of article 5 along lines

desired by the Department, then reference to “exceptional or imperative

circumstances” in first paragraph of quotation from report would obviously

not be necessary; refer to your instructions on article 5. Likewise, first

sentence article 4 covers matter of health regulations. The words

“applicable to exportation of goods” are believed to be necessary in order to

rule out measures which are strictly internal.

2. The so-called raw materials question involves question of export duties.

Complete information on the general subject will be found in documents

left at the consulate by the delegation to the Economic Conference in

relation to the limitation and monopolization of trade. Export duties have

been and are being imposed in order to restrict exportation so as to bring

about monopolistic prices; rubber control is a case in point. Of course,

monopolistic measures may take some form besides export control, and

then would be, naturally, quite beyond scope of present discussions.

3. The Department does not wish to have the controversial question of raw

materials injected into the Conference if it would jeopard, as seems

possible, the primary purpose of the Conference instead of resulting in a

constructive step forward toward solution of raw materials problem.

Department does not desire you to introduce immediately any proposal, but

wishes you to observe carefully the tendencies in the Conference and to

cable us your advice as promptly as is practicable. You may wish to sound

out, discreetly, your French and Italian colleagues, as the French and Italian

delegates to the Economic Conference were especially interested in subject

of raw materials. Department will be glad to have you cable comment in

regard to text of any proposal on this subject which has likelihood of being

seriously pressed. You will then receive additional instructions as may be

appropriate.

4. Suggestion has been made (for example, the view expressed by the

British in correspondence with this Government on rubber restriction) that

export duties and import duties alike operate as restrictions upon freedom of

commerce. As it is possible that suggestion be made that insertion of clause

quoted above is not consistent with proposed separate article on import

duties discussed in Department’s instruction No. 65, October 6, the

Department calls attention to fact that, while export and import duties may

have restrictive or even prohibitive effect, duties on exports may cut off

supplies of particular commodities, raw materials in particular, which may

be of vital necessity to foreign countries and which are not available

elsewhere in sufficient quantities for their needs, while on the other hand

the restriction of importation into a given market through duties on imports

is rarely, if indeed it is ever, a vital matter to the country of origin, which

still possesses alternative outlets. The material differences which exist

between effects of import and export duties, as well as fact that latter appear

to be much less firmly embedded in the economy of countries than import

duties are, are thought sufficient to warrant their separate treatment.

5. It seems to Department that questions of free circulation of capital and of

artificial control of exchange operations are outside scope of the present

Conference. In Department’s view it is preferable that these questions

should not be made subject of seriously considered additional provisions,

but if proposals of this nature are pressed, you will cable comment and

recommendations.

6. Department of Commerce has approved these instructions.

KELLOGG

[Document 212]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

1. First session, morning. In view of cordial reference to presence of

American delegation, I thanked the President (Colijn, Netherlands),

expressed interest of my Government in finding solution of difficulties, and

assured Conference of earnest cooperation of American delegation.

Acknowledgement was also made by Egypt, only other nonmember state.

Second session, afternoon, devoted to general statements bringing out

especially on the part of Great Britain a warning against undue expectation

of complete accomplishment of the entire task at this time. Smaller

countries expressed general reserve awaiting action [of] neighbors and

stronger states industrially. I made no statement.

WILSON

[Document 213]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

4. Third session, morning, general discussion continued. Roumanian

delegation introduced following text either to be included in article 1 or as

special declaration:

“It is understood that the present agreement does not apply to

export and import, each state reserving the right to determine its

own customs tariffs.”

Since this is in some respects similar to your desires as outlined in criticism

delegate after session, pointed out difficulty for us to urge acceptance of an

article mentioning “export duties” and mentioned our desire to specify right

to counteract dumping and bounties. Roumanian delegate suggested that if I

would introduce, as substitute for his resolution, the following text he

would immediately withdraw his and support ours. Text follows:

“It is understood that the present agreement does not apply to

customs tariffs, each state reserving the right to establish customs

duties in accordance with its own necessities.”

Does Department feel that this text is sufficient for our needs? If so, it gives

a convenient way to enter this question with full support of another nation.

Urgent reply requested.

Dutch delegation stated that if they surrender the right to impose

restrictions, they would be giving up their only weapon against nations of

excessive tariffs. Therefore, the cooperation of Dutch delegation in this

convention could only be expected if the convention includes a declaration

against excessive tariffs which constitute another handicap to free

intercourse.

Fourth session afternoon. President announced that he intended to form

very small committees of rapporteurs. He had grouped the articles of

similar nature into four groups and would form eventually four such

committees as follows:

He added that there would be debate and explanation of amendments in

plenary session; that all amendments would then be returned to small group

for classifying and reporting back to the Conference with recommendations.

He then opened discussion on article 1. Amendments were proposed by

Italian and British delegations both tending to emphasize reciprocal

character of contractual obligations. Since document C.I.A.P.1, page 20,

paragraph 2, assumes obligations could only be held to extend to

contracting states, a principle corroborated in paragraph 1 of discussion

article 6, on page 24, I offered no objection to this interpretation. Extended

discussion followed as to rights of noncontracting states under most-

favored-nation clauses which was inconclusive. This I believe is not a

question which can be settled by this Conference.

Discussion of point 6 followed. Some doubts were cast by French and

British delegations as to necessity for this article. I stated that we

considered this article necessary and reserved the right to offer an

amendment and explain it subsequently.

Debate on article 9 was inconclusive and reverted to the previous discussion

on rights of noncontracting states under most-favored-nation clause, since

certain states feared obligation to grant concessions to such noncontracting

states. Great Britain made the only tangible proposal, namely, that the

number of states in blank should be double the number of those holding

permanent seats on the Council and states listed in appendix should be

those holding permanent seats. I desire more time to shape views for

recommendations on this subject. It may be advisable to await report of

reviseurs before making recommendations.

Article 10 was not specifically discussed.

President announced that at plenary session tomorrow articles 2 and 3 will

be taken up, adding that reviseurs would begin work in group 1 after

morning plenary session.

WILSON

[Document 214]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

[Received October 19—2 p.m.]

5. Fifth session, morning. I offered an amendment striking out word “third”

in third line article 6 making brief statement embodying second paragraph

your criticism, page 12, instruction 65, and pointing out that this

amendment was in accord with interpretation contained page 24 document

p.m., reporting fourth session), article 2, some discussion in which I took no

part on scope of article as to whether it refers purely to customs or other

matters. Debate inconclusive and somewhat perfunctory.

Article 3. I introduced redraft of article and made brief statement

following closely instructions your 65. While no exception was

taken to the idea of incorporating in some form provisions of the

convention of November 3, 1923, vigorous debate took place on

subparagraph (e), French and Italian delegations opposing its

inculsion on the ground that scope is too broad and would

necessitate another conference to debate it. Austrians and Poles

supported subparagraph (e) but Austrians desired elimination of

phrase “having regard to the normal volume of trade of the

respective countries in the particular class of goods in question.”

Being requested by the President at the instigation of Dutch

delegation to explain this phrase, I stated that it is not to be

considered as a mathematical formula but as a principle which

supplements the previous phrase “an equitable share of such

importation or exportation.”

Article 11. No debate on this article. In view of the somewhat

delicate position of America in this matter I preferred not to carry

out in plenary session instruction on page 14 your 65 but to talk

over matter informally with President pointing out our difficulty

and requesting his cooperation. Will report results.

Chair announced no plenary session for afternoon but meetings of groups 1

and 2 of rapporteurs.

WILSON

[Document 215]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

employing the draft article concerning export duties set forth in

be unsatisfactory because conflicting. Bearing in mind that Rumania

employs export duties extensively, at least for revenue purposes, you may

consider whether you would care to suggest privately to your Rumanian

colleague that in view of the Economic Conference recommendations

regarding export duties, he would wish to substitute “import” for “customs”

in his revised text. Alternatively, you might allow the present Rumanian

text to be adopted tentatively and make the change indicated in case later

developments should bring about adoption of article on export duties.

Department leaves to your discretion time and manner of your introducing,

in the absence of satisfactory similar declaration by another delegate, the

Department’s comment, page 2 of that instruction.

Comment on remainder of your telegram follows.

KELLOGG

[Document 216]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

8. Afternoon, first meeting, group 2.

Article 3. Discussion hinged on American amendment reported my 5,

October 19, 2 p.m. Detailed information was requested on exact

interpretation of phrases occurring in subparagraph (e) notably “equitable

share”, “normal volume of trade” and last sentence. Delegation was

p.m. ). Very determined opposition developed to subparagraph (e) in the

present form, notably, that it involved principles of wider scope than

contemplated in draft of convention and introduced the question of most-

favored-nation to allocation of rations. French delegation which in plenary

session had opposed American alteration in toto, finally offered

compromise reading as follows:

“In the event that, during the application of the provisions of the

present Conference, certain states should be led to maintain

certain prohibitions and retain a few exceptions (French,

derogations) in the form of licenses, the following rules shall

apply: (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the United States proposal. Point (e)

of this proposal shall be replaced by the following sentence:

‘The Conference did not express itself on the method of

allocation of quotas, but expressed the opinion that an

equitable allocation of these quotas is one of the

essential conditions of equitable commercial treatment

of the states’.”

[Document 217]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

(1) Referring to Dutch suggestion Department feels that question

of level of import tariffs is outside the agenda and that nothing

could in any event be gained by bringing into discussion such a

controversial question.

(2) Department concurs that under draft convention rights and

obligations extend to contracting parties only, also that question

of obligations of individual contracting parties under treaties of

their own with particular states ought not to be discussed at this

Conference. For your own information, however, it appears that a

most-favored-nation provision in the form now being included in

the treaties we are negotiating, if included in a treaty between this

Government and a state party to the proposed convention, would

oblige such state to extend to American commerce any favor that,

under the convention, it extended to parties thereto, regardless of

whether the United States were such a party. It should be

observed, however, that Article VII of the treaty proposed by the

United States to Austria and to other countries, calls for equitable

rather than equal treatment in respect of rations or quotas.

(3) Department approves your statement in discussion of Article 6

and awaits your further comment before commenting upon

discussion of Article 9.

KELLOGG

[Document 218]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

[Paraphrase]

provisions of a convention to abolish prohibitions and restrictions become

fully effective, and as numerous exceptions seem likely to be adopted,

Department holds view that article 3 is of importance and wishes you to

make every reasonable effort to have this article adopted approximately in

form in which you proposed it in accordance with Department’s

instructions.

Department is fearful that any provision in a multilateral convention less

positive and inclusive than provisions it wishes to incorporate in its bilateral

treaties will weaken its position in negotiating such treaties. Accordingly,

question presents itself whether it might not be preferable to omit article 3

altogether if unobtainable in reasonably satisfactory form. Most of the other

countries are probably parties to convention for simplification of customs

formalities and are, in consequence, bound by its provisions whether or not

it is quoted or referred to in convention now being drafted.

Essential portion of subdivision (e) is, in Department’s opinion, the part

requiring granting of licenses and assignment of quotas and formalities of

whatever kind to be equitable. If you are able to obtain provision

substantially to this effect you may accept it and consent to omission of rest

of other provisions of subdivision (e), including the one regarding normal

value to trade.

Department perceives no serious objection to draft introduction as proposed

by French starting at “In the event that”, but thinks drafting is not as good

as your substitute. As meaning is substantially same, Department perceives

no reason to change our draft. Not clear, furthermore, why French should

object to declaration in agreement but should be willing to insert it in final

act.

Rather than include nonbinding provisions in final act or elsewhere, the

Department suggests for your consideration that, after the precedent of the

Customs Formalities Conference of 1923, provisions be included when they

are acceptable to most states but be subject to reservations by states finding

difficulties. Before any such arrangement is proposed, however, please

comment and request final instructions.

If you are not able to have included provision substantially equivalent to

paragraph (e), report your recommendations and request instructions.

Your suggestion that “to other contracting states” follow “quotas” is

approved, but Department does not regard this matter as of great

importance.

KELLOGG

[Document 219]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

11. Sixth session. British introduced fairly satisfactory article relating to

prison-made goods. Also one embodying ideas similar to yours on

standards. I introduced yours on standards and, knowing British were

introducing one on other question, refrained for the moment from doing so.

Also introduced in accordance with instructions amendments on article 4,

withheld amendment for the moment to watch course of events.

Exception was taken by Italians, French, and Germans to a further

paragraph under article 4 relative to standards. I therefore made a statement

to dispel idea that our regulations constituted a barrier to trade and

endeavored to demonstrate that they are great assistance to trade.

President then declared that unless Conference would refrain from details

and attack essence of problem he would be compelled to call on us one by

one for our declaration as to whether we desired in general to strengthen the

convention or to weaken it. The British desired in general to eliminate from

scope of convention everything which is not strictly of economic nature and

preached the principle of making a document such as could be signed by the

maximum number of states. The Germans insisted on revision of paragraph

1 of article 4 to cover only arms and munitions of war. The Italians are

inclined to agree with the Germans while the French made no secret of their

dissatisfaction with the present situation relative to British dye restrictions.

This is behind a great portion of discussion going on between these four

nations but it has not clearly come to surface yet. I learn that the British

intend, if it comes to the surface, to defend the dye restrictions under article

4, paragraph 1 as necessary for national defense to build an industry capable

of producing explosives.

I presented general survey without going into details, reserving that for the

subcommittee, on our views respecting the articles under debate, namely, 4,

French made interesting suggestion that import restrictions should be

considered separately from export restrictions. This might furnish a solution

of many difficulties since it would give opportunity for separate

consideration of raw material problems and for maintaining concise

phraseology on import restrictions. Unless I am instructed to the contrary I

propose to offer no objection to such procedure since it may offer

possibility of agreement which looks doubtful at present.

Summarizing, today’s debate much more important than preceding and

shows wide divergence of views as to what form convention should take.

Can make no predictions at the present time.

WILSON

[Document 220]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

the following effect in the important sections of the speech. Relative to

article 7, I followed instructions closely.

“With regard to article 5 French delegate Serruys was inspired to

make the very wise suggestion that we could have the benefit of

this debate and the benefit of other suggestions made by other

delegations before putting in certain of our amendments. We have

been working on an amendment which we have not yet phrased to

our satisfaction but which we expect to submit. With reference to

the words ‘to protect the vital economic and financial interests’

we feel that this clause is so broad that its effect might nullify the

purpose of this convention. We fear that under the guise of ‘vital

interests’ so many exceptions and prohibitions and limitations can

be imposed that the convention may prove of little value if

finished in this form. What we are therefore seeking is some

phraseology which can perhaps be substituted therefor and we

suggest ‘in case of war or national calamity’. I do not feel that

this constitutes such a change in article 5 as to merit the reproach

that this is in effect something quite different from what was

anticipated.

With respect to article 4 we feel that we are undertaking a very

solemn obligation when we sign this document and that therefore

we must know exactly to the last iota the scope and extent of the

obligations which we undertake before affixing our signature

thereto. We believe that the exchange must be reduced to the

necessary minimum but we lay as much emphasis upon the word

necessary as we do upon the word minimum. Despite opinions

expressed to the effect that article 2 or other articles may cover

any necessary exceptions we are not perfectly certain that an

international court which after all is the last resort would agree

with the opinions expressed. We therefore want to know before

rather than after the fact exactly where we stand. I want to

emphasize in connection with article 4 simply that we must know

just where we stand and we must therefore insist or rather urge

the acceptance of such a resolution as we submitted regarding

standards. Also we must adhere to [and] urge the acceptance of a

further resolution proposed by the British delegation regarding

prison-made goods which falls within another category of our

laws. In so doing we do not feel that we are loosening the

convention but rather making it more exact and more obligatory

than it is in its present form.

With regard to Sir Sidney Chapman’s statement that he felt that

the path to follow was to draw up the kind of document that

would induce a maximum number of states to adhere thereto, of

course we also want to see the maximum number of states adhere

to that document. We feel however that there is a certain danger

that the Conference may be led in its desire to gather all the states

into such fold to sanction international practices which we are

brought together to abolish.”

WILSON

[Document 221]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

[Paraphrase]

discretion to associate yourself with the French suggestion that import and

export restrictions be considered separately, and affirmatively urge its

adoption. It is Department’s view that if suggestion be adopted it might

react favorably in solving raw materials and other problems, not in present

discussions alone but in future international conferences. Your attention is

KELLOGG

[Document 222]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

[Received 10: p.m.]

13. Group 2, second meeting. Many thanks for prompt instructions in your

October 20, 8 p.m., on basis of which I presented our point of view

unable to obtain in entirety text desired but believe that a satisfactory

compromise was reached. It reads as follows:

“In the case of any prohibitions or restrictions which may be

applied within the limits set by the present agreement, the

contracting states shall in the matter of licenses comply strictly

with the following provisions (first follows (a), (b), (c), and (d)

referred to on page 3, last paragraph your 65, and a further

paragraph reading as follows:) “As regards the allocation of

quotas, the contracting states, without laying down any rule as to

the method to be adopted, consider that an equitable distribution

of these quotas is an essential condition of an equitable treatment

of commerce between states.”

I explained that we were primarily concerned with the obligatory character

of the contractual obligations and that therefore I preferred that this should

be incorporated in the body of the convention. However, it was pointed out,

and I think correctly, that the last paragraph is not of such a nature as

normally to be included in the body or text of a convention. The committee

agreed, however, to incorporate in the protocol the following words: “The

present protocol will have the same force, effect and duration as the

convention of today’s date, of which it is to be considered as an integral

part.”

I am convinced that the Department will be preoccupied rather with the

binding force of this obligation than with its position in the text and since

we are satisfied on the first point I acquiesced in this arrangement.

WILSON

[Document 223]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

explained to him our difficulties regarding this article with a view to

achieving its elimination if possible. Colijn stated that he would use every

endeavor to find a satisfactory formula but that he considered, and he knew

that the Conference agreed with him, that some obligation to report was

necessary because of the recalcitrant states in which they could not place

confidence. He considered this an essential portion of the convention.

In this afternoon’s session fortunately the Egyptian delegate, also

representing a nonmember state, suggested an alternative phraseology for

this article, which reads as follows:

“In order to indicate the progress which has been made in regard

to the abolition of import and export prohibitions or restrictions,

the contracting states will within 12 months of the coming into

force in each case of the present agreement communicate to each

other through the intermediary of the Secretary General on the

subject.”

then stated that I welcomed this initiative on the part of the Egyptian

representative since I also had been troubled about this article; that I would

at once report this suggestion to my Government.

From my conversation with Colijn, I am convinced that the convention will

carry some article of this nature and after careful consideration and study of

similar documents the text quoted above seems as satisfactory from our

point of view as can be secured. Short of signing with a reservation

excepting this article, which is always to be regretted, I feel that we have no

alternative but to support it.

Please instruct.

WILSON

LXXXI, pp. 317, 345.

[Document 224]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

[Received 11: p.m.]

15. The rapporteurs of group 1 reported out this afternoon the following

draft on article l:19

“Subject to the exceptions provided for in the following articles

of [and?] the protocol, each of the high contracting parties

undertakes, within a period of six months from the date on which

the present convention enters into force as far as it is concerned,

to abolish all import and export prohibitions and restrictions, and

not thereafter to impose any such prohibitions or restrictions;

during this period the high contracting parties shall adopt all

practicable measures to reduce existing prohibitions and

restrictions to a minimum, and shall refrain from imposing any

fresh ones.

The high contracting parties further undertake to adopt all

possible necessary measures to see that the provisions of the

present agreement are strictly observed by a central or local

government, and that no regulation is issued in contravention

thereof.

The provisions of the present convention refer to all prohibitions

and restrictions on the importation into any of the territories of the

high contracting parties of goods produced or manufactured in the

territories of any other high contracting party, and the exportation

of goods from any of the territories of the said parties to the

territories of any other high contracting party. The territories here

referred to are those to which the convention applies in virtue of

article (blank).”

WILSON

[Document 225]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

view of altered drafting of article 1 the necessity for article 6 no longer

existed. The French delegation made suggestion that the question of the

rights of retaliation for acts foreseen in article 6 should be referred to the

group which handled article 7 on arbitration; since on the nature of the

arbitration obligation depended the phraseology relative to rights of

retaliation I made a statement based on your 6520 pointing out in addition

the intent of the Economic Committee as outlined on page 24 of C.I.A.P.1.

The rapporteurs were of the opinion that article 6 was intended to apply

only to the relation between contracting and noncontracting states and to

provide a method of retaliation against violators of the convention. It was

evident that the Economic Committee had had no intention in drafting this

article of authorizing tariff reprisals such as are contemplated in section

317.

The chairman requested me not to insist further at the present time on this

matter, expressly stating that each state of course retained the right to put in

further amendments and proposals to protect their necessary interests. I had

no recourse but to acquiesce.

I subsequently had conversation with two members of the Economic

Committee separately. Both of them insisted on the following thesis—that

the preoccupation of the American delegation relative to its rights to

enforce tariff measures was unfounded; that nothing in this convention

would or could be construed as affecting the right of any contracting state in

this respect, either in reference to noncontracting or contracting states; that

since article 6 as well as the whole convention did not envisage tariff

matters but merely those prohibitions and restrictions treated under this

convention, the importance of article 6 disappeared under the revised form

of article 1.

Serruys, the French representative, for his part stated that if we were

prepared to suggest any obligation relative to tariffs he was willing to

introduce and urge a resolution in the final act expressly stating that nothing

in this convention could be construed as interfering with the right of a state

to adopt such tariff measures as conformed with its necessities, but that the

Conference believed that no state should impose tariff measures in such a

way as to thereby replace the restrictions which might be eliminated by this

convention.

This brings up a thought to which Department may desire to give careful

consideration, namely, whether such a general disclaimer of the purpose of

this convention not to interfere in tariff measures is not a sufficient

guarantee of our right to take any action envisaged by section 317.

If the Department is interested in this thought, please so instruct me and I

will request Serruys to draft for transmission to Department what he

proposes to insert. Your criticisms in advance of his proposal would be

helpful.

WILSON

[Document 226]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

acceptable and your acquiescence in it approved.

KELLOGG

[Document 227]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

[Received 11: p.m.]

appears to us that the question of “standards,” which you bring up on page

10, may well be covered without further necessary article under paragraph

7, article 4, provided we obtain insertion of the words “and exported” after

the word “imported”. May I request consideration and instructions on this

point?

Considerable reluctance has been expressed in the debate to the general idea

of extending the list of articles and it might be easier for us to obtain our

desires under the proposed amendment to paragraph 7.

WILSON

[Document 228]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

[Paraphrase]

satisfactory to Department.

(1) Department does not doubt correctness of thesis on which two

members of Economic Committee insist, but nevertheless it

wishes insertion at appropriate time and place of a provision such

as Department suggested in instruction No. 65, October 6. As far

as duties are concerned, Mr. Serruys’ proposition is satisfactory,

though we should prefer “import duties” instead of “tariff

measures”.

(2) This disclaimer is not sufficient, however, to safeguard section

317 of Tariff Act, under the terms of which the President is

authorized, should additional duties fail, to proclaim prohibitions.

It follows that if article 6 be omitted, or be inapplicable, you

should arrange as unobtrusively as possible for an exception,

either in article 4 or somewhere else, to cover this contingency.

Following wording is satisfactory to Department:21

“The following are not prohibited by the present

agreement:

Prohibitions

or

restrictions

on

the

importation of goods to counteract measures of

discrimination or unfair competition.”

[Document 229]

The Chief of the American Delegation (Wilson) to the Secretary

of State

54. Plenary session this morning discussed Rumanian reservation export of

expressed to acceptance of the reservation under paragraph 2, article 6, of

protocol, without guarantees. Finally, Rumanian delegation made this

following declaration:

“The Convention (Conference] declares that, in accepting as

regards Rumania and having consideration of its exceptional

position de facto and de jure, the exception of crude petroleum

under paragraph 2 of article 6, it does not give its approval of

measures of prohibition and restriction of this product which it

considers very important for international markets. The

Conference expresses its confidence that Rumania itself, as soon

as circumstances shall permit, will abolish this prohibition in

conformity with the spirit of ad article 6, paragraph 2, of the

protocol of the convention and that meanwhile it will take into

account the interests of neighboring contracting countries. The

Rumanian delegation associates itself completely in this

declaration of the Conference.”

The President requested the delegations to state in roll call whether they

approved the principle of extending the categories of reservations and

whether they therefore voted to accept the Rumanian reservation. This gave

us excellent opportunity to go on record as opposed to extending categories

and I therefore stated that my Government attached great importance to

limiting these as far as possible and that I was therefore obliged to vote

[Document 230]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the American Delegation

(Wilson)

Saturday night. Draft agreement is extremely complicated and there will not

be time for the officials of this Government to give due consideration to the

matter. Furthermore, there appears to be no reason for such haste in rushing

through a matter of such importance.

KELLOGG

[Document 231]

The Minister in Switzerland (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

BERNE, November 22, 1927.

[Received December 16.]

No. 190

SIR: I have the honor to submit herewith a report concerning the convention

relative to the Abolition of Prohibitions and Restrictions on Exports and

Imports.

The convention falls naturally into certain sub-divisions:

Articles 1 and 2 represent the positive achievement of the convention. In

these articles the High Contracting Parties undertake to abolish, within a

period of six months after the date of the coming into force of the

convention, prohibitions and restrictions on export and import.

enumeration of exceptions under which the signatory states reserve the right

to maintain prohibitions and restrictions for certain specified purposes. This

class of exceptions are all of a permanent nature.

Article 5 provides for those exceptions which may arise of a temporary and

unforeseen character. It provides for those acts by states which may be

rendered essential by calamities, wars and other unforeseen and non-

recurring causes.

Article 6 provides for certain stipulated and listed exceptions specifically

reserved for individual states, after an examination on their merits, which

are either temporary in character or of no importance to international

commerce.

Articles 8 and 9 are the arbitration clauses, the one obligatory on all

signatories of the convention and the other optional for such states as desire

to extend the scope of arbitration.

making more precise the limits of the rights and obligations assumed under

the convention.

Articles 14 to 19 inclusive, treat the method of signature, ratification and

denunciation, as well as the admission of reservations.

As I pointed out in my telegraphic reports from Geneva, it was apparent to

one who followed the matter closely that from the first day of the

conference the greatest difficulty which would be encountered lay in the

determination of the British Delegation to maintain their prohibitions and

limitations relative to the import of dye stuffs. Nearly all the other

delegations expressed themselves ready to abolish without reservation

restrictions and prohibitions. (Whether this was done because they knew

that they were entirely safe in promising such procedure because they knew

the British would stand firm in their decision, or whether this

announcement represented sincere conviction is impossible to say with any

degree of certainty. In any case all the principal states are on record as being

willing to abolish restrictions and prohibitions, with the exception of those

of no commercial importance, if Great Britain will abolish this one

restriction.) Therefore, when the moment came to discuss the list of

with the choice either of writing a convention so phrased as to admit the

claim of Great Britain and thus permit her to be a signatory, or to draft a

convention as tight as or tighter than the original draft of the Economic

Committee. Great Britain would then not have signed the convention.

Rightly or wrongly, the choice was made in favor of the first alternative and

it can be said roughly that the type of convention which issued from the

conference was designed in its broad lines to meet the needs of Great

Britain and make it possible for that nation to be a signatory.

As I examine the protocol to the convention, it does not seem necessary to

enter into any detailed analysis. The articles are interpretative in character

and those which are of particular interest to us I have discussed already in

my preceding reports, both telegraphic and written.

Also in regard to the Final Act, if the Department will be good enough to

articles to which we took exception and of the failure to have these

exceptions accepted by the conference. I merely reiterate what I have before

stated, that the Final Act has no binding force, it is not signed by the

delegates as Plenipotentiaries of their Government, but is open for signature

to any person who attended the Conference. It is a compilation of

resolutions adopted by the individuals attending the conference. A signatory

state may instruct its delegate to sign the convention and protocol without

instructing him to sign the Final Act.

Relative to the convention itself, I append herewith an analysis26 in which

the convention, as finally signed, is compared article by article with the

original draft text of the convention issued by the Economic Committee. At

the same time short notes and comments are appended, together with

reference to those telegrams and despatches which deal with the particular

subject. In the preparation of this annex I am indebted in a large measure to

Dr. Lyon, the Commercial Attaché of this Legation.

Certain observations of a general nature occur to me. The convention, as the

Department will note, is of a reciprocal nature and this theory of reciprocity

has been emphasized in article 1. The benefits of the abolition of

restrictions and prohibitions accrue only to those states which sign the

convention. As a corollary to this situation there is nothing to prevent a

state signatory to the convention from increasing in any way it sees fit its

present categories of prohibitions and restrictions as against a state which is

not a signatory to the convention, so long as such action does not unduly

affect the trade of another signatory power.

There are certain faults, some obvious and some not so visible in the

convention. It is to be regretted that exceptions are permitted of any class or

kind. The convention would have been a simpler document and a much

more satisfactory document, from our point of view, had the original text of

the Economic Committee not only been adhered to but strengthened,

especially as to article 5. Also the further meeting which will take place in

the early summer of 1928 will be faced with a number of very thorny

questions; for example, the decision as to what states must ratify the

convention before it enters into effect. It is a pity that this decision had to be

deferred to a future date but there seemed no possibility of reaching a

solution until the convention was finally drawn up and until a full

knowledge was available of all the reservations that would form part of it.

Also the permission for states to introduce other reservations up to February

1st which may be discussed at this future conference may bring further

difficult questions, although urgent pleas were made in the conference and

the hope was expressed that the reservations should rather be reduced than;

increased by that time. The long delay which must elapse before the

convention can be effective (at the earliest this can hardly take place before

the summer of 1929) is also a source of regret. However, this is somewhat

mitigated by the fact that a signatory power undertakes not to increase its

prohibitions or restrictions during this period.

As opposed to these weaknesses there would appear to be certain

advantages which would accrue to the United States if it participated in this

treaty. In spite of the many reservations, there will be, if the treaty goes into

force, an enormous number of prohibitions and restrictions abolished. The

reservations do not appear to be of such a nature that they greatly affect the

trade of the United States, whereas many of the restrictions that will be

dropped in favor of signatory states do so affect our trade very seriously.

Should the Government of the United States decide that this treaty should

be signed I call attention to the fact that it would be well if this decision

were taken before the 1st of February 1928, since states signing the treaty

after that date may not present reservations under article 6. While many of

the delegates held that our prohibition of export of helium is adequately

covered in article 4, paragraph 2, there were others who took a contrary

view. I consider it advisable, therefore, in the event that we do sign, that we

should make a definite reservation regarding helium and not be put on the

defensive in the future regarding our maintenance of this prohibition.

[Document 232]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Marriner) to the Secretary of State

BERNE, January 13, 1927—noon.

[Received 2: p.m.]

that on January 12th experts on double taxation decided to hold next

meeting in London on April 4th, 1927, and have expressed the hope that an

expert from the United States will take part in that meeting.

Secretariat requests to be informed as soon as possible of name of

American expert so that formal invitation may be sent him.

MARRINER

[Document 233]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Switzerland (Marriner)

Secretary General of the League that this Government takes pleasure in

designating Professor Thomas S. Adams, of Yale University, New Haven,

[Document 234]

Memorandum by Mr. Wallace McClure, Assistant to the

Economic Adviser

[WASHINGTON,] March 16, 1927.

Professor Adams called at the Office of the Economic Adviser on Thursday

afternoon, March 10, 1927, for the purpose of discussing with officers of

the Department of State certain questions suggested by Professor Adams’

mission to represent this Government at the forthcoming League of Nations

Conference on double taxation. Those present were, besides Professor

Adams, Doctor Arthur 1ST. Young, Economic Adviser; Mr. C. M. Barnes,

Assistant Solicitor; Mr. F. D. K. LeClercq, of the Division of Western

European Affairs, and Mr. Wallace McClure, Assistant to the Economic

Adviser.

Professor Adams discussed briefly certain recent developments in the

matter of double taxation among European countries, especially the

considerable multiplication of bilateral treaties for the purpose of avoiding

double taxation. He mentioned the fact that the program of the forthcoming

Conference calls for the preparation of a model bilateral treaty for

recommendation to countries which may desire to negotiate on the subject.

Those present were inclined to the view that while a multilateral

convention, open to signature by all countries, would theoretically, at least,

prove a better solution to the problem of double taxation, such a solution

might not now be practicable.

Professor Adams inquired concerning the attitude of the Department of

State toward treaty provisions winch might have the effect of overruling

Acts of Congress. He had in mind the possibility of a convention on double

taxation later being negotiated that might contain provisions different from

those of our national revenue laws. The representatives of the Department

of State stated that as a matter of policy the Department undertook so far as

possible to avoid placing in its treaties provisions which might be in

conflict with existing statute law. It was suggested that it would be best to

put in the next revenue law some general provision contemplating

reciprocal agreements to avoid double taxation.

The possible usefulness of the most-favored-nation clause in solving the

problem of double taxation was discussed. Professor Adams inquired

particularly whether provisions in recent commercial treaties might have

any relation to the problem in hand. The representatives of the Department

of State were of opinion that the most-favored-nation clause in the treaty

concluded, did not apply to internal taxation, and that the provisions in

Article I and Article VIII of the German treaty in regard to taxation did not

provide for most-favored-nation treatment. It is customary in treaties to

accord national rather than most-favored-nation treatment. It was further

suggested that the most-favored-nation clause would probably not be useful

in solving matters of double taxation at the present time. The practice of

various countries, so far as the imposition of double taxation is concerned,

is now so diverse as to make it of doubtful policy for a country to promise

in advance to accord to any particular country as good treatment as it may

bargain for in the future with some third country. It was thought that the

right to make special bargains on the subject, without being committed in

advance to generalize the concessions granted, would for the present,

perhaps, be the appropriate policy for this Government to follow.

Professor Adams indicated that he expected concrete results from the

forthcoming Conference and that, though at first dubious of the practical

purposes of those backing it, he was now convinced that they intended to

accomplish something, and that the countries of Europe were prepared to

come to agreements on many points, reserving other points for the

reconciliation of differences of opinion and probable agreement in the

future.

W[ALLACE] MOC[LITRE]

Radiotelegraph convention between

the United States and other powers,

signed November 25, 192734

Foreign Relations, 1925, vol.

I, pp. 297 ff. For proceedings of the

text of the general regulations and appendixes to this convention, and for

text of the supplementary regulations (not signed by the United States), see

2760.

[Document 235]

Radiotelegraph Convention Between the United States of

America and Other Powers, Signed at Washington, November 25,

INTERNATIONAL RADIOTELEGRAPH CONVENTION

Concluded among the Governments of:

Union of South Africa, French Equatorial Africa and other colonies, French

West Africa, Portuguese West Africa, Portuguese East Africa and the

Portuguese

Asiatic

possessions,

Germany,

Argentine

Republic,

Commonwealth of Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,

Canada, Chile, China, Republic of Colombia, Spanish Colony of the Gulf of

Guinea, Belgian Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Curaçao, Cyrenaica, Denmark,

Dominican Republic, Egypt, Republic of El Salvador, Eritrea, Spain,

Estonia, United States of America, Finland, France, Great Britain, Greece,

Guatemala, Republic of Haiti, Republic of Honduras, Hungary, British

India, Dutch East Indies, French Indo-China, Irish Free State, Italy, Japan,

Chosen, Taiwan, Japanese Sakhalin, the Leased Territory of Kwantung and

the South Sea Islands under Japanese Mandate, Republic of Liberia,

Madagascar, Morocco (with the exception of the Spanish Zone), Mexico,

Monaco, Nicaragua, Norway, New Zealand, Republic of Panama, Paraguay,

the Netherlands, Persia, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Rumania, Kingdom of the

Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, Siam, Italian Somaliland, Sweden,

Switzerland, Surinam, Syro-Libanese Territories, Republic of San Marino,

Czechoslovakia, Tripolitania, Tunis, Turkey, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

The undersigned, plenipotentiaries of the Governments of the countries

enumerated above, having met in conference at Washington, have, by

common accord and subject to ratification, concluded the following

Convention:

ARTICLE 1—Definitions

In the present Convention:

The term “radio communication” applies to the transmission by radio of

writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds by means of

Hertzian waves.

The term “radio communication station” or simply “station” means a station

equipped to carry on radio communications.

The term “fixed station” means a station permanently located and

communicating with one or more stations similarly located.

The term “mobile station” means a station capable of moving and which

ordinarily does move.

The term “land station” means a station other than a mobile station used for

radio communication with mobile stations.

The term “mobile service” means the radio communication service carried

on between mobile stations and land stations, and by mobile stations

communicating among themselves.

The term “international service” means a radio communication service

between a station in one country and a station in another country, or

between a land station and a mobile station located outside the limits of the

country in which the land station is situated, or between two or more mobile

stations on or over the high seas. An internal or national radio

communication service which is likely to cause interference with other

services outside the limits of the country in which it operates is considered

as an international service from the viewpoint of interference.

The term “general communication system” means all the existing telegraph

and telephone channels of communication, wire and radio, open to public

service, but excluding the radio communication channels of the mobile

service.

The term “public service” means a service for the use of the general public.

The term “limited service” means a service which may be used only by

specified persons or for specific purposes.

The term “public correspondence” means all radio communications which a

station, by reason of being open to public service, must accept from the

public for transmission.

The term “private enterprise” means any person, company, or corporation

which operates one or more stations for radio communication.

The term “radiotelegram” means a telegram originating in or destined to a

mobile station, transmitted by radio over all or part of its route.

ARTICLE 2—Scope of the Convention

§1. The contracting Governments undertake to apply the

provisions of the present Convention to all radio communication

stations established, or operated by the contracting Governments,

and open to the international service of public correspondence.

They undertake likewise, to apply these provisions to the special

services covered by the Regulations annexed to the present

Convention.

§2. They agree, moreover, to take or to propose to their respective

legislatures the necessary measures to impose the observance of

the provisions of the present Convention and the Regulations

annexed thereto upon individuals and private enterprises

authorized to establish and operate radio communication stations

in the international service, whether or not open to public

correspondence.

§3. The contracting Governments recognize the right of two

contracting Governments to organize radio communications,

between themselves, provided only that they conform to all

provisions of the present Convention and the Regulations

annexed thereto.

ARTICLE 3—Intercommunication

§1. (1) So far as international communications between fixed

stations are concerned, each contracting Government reserves

entire freedom with relation to the organization of the service and

the determination of the correspondence to be exchanged by the

stations carrying on these communications.

(2) When, however, these fixed stations carry on an international

service of public correspondence, either from country to country

or with stations in the mobile service, they must conform,

respectively, for each of these two classes of communications, to

the provisions of the present Convention and of the Regulations

annexed thereto.

§2. With regard to communications between stations participating

in the mobile service, stations carrying on such communications

must, within the limits of their normal operations, exchange

radiotelegrams reciprocally without regard to the radio system

adopted by them.

§3. In order not to impede scientific progress, however, the

provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not prevent the

eventual use of a radio system incapable of communicating with

other systems, provided that this incapacity be due to the specific

nature of that system and it be not the result of devices adopted

solely for the purpose of preventing intercommunication.

ARTICLE 4—Limited service

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3, a radio communication station

may be assigned to a limited international service of public correspondence

determined by the purpose of the correspondence or by other circumstances

independent of the system employed.

ARTICLE 5—Secrecy of correspondence. False or deceptive signals

The contracting Governments agree to take or to propose to their respective

legislatures the necessary measures to prevent:

(a) The unauthorized transmission and reception by means of

radio installations of correspondence of a private nature.

(b) The unauthorized divulging of the contents, or simply of the

existence, of correspondence which may have been intercepted by

means of radio installations.

(c) The unauthorized publication or use, of correspondence

received by means of radio installations.

(d) The transmission or the placing in circulation of false or

deceptive distress signals or distress calls.

ARTICLE 6—Investigation of violations

The contracting Governments undertake to aid each other by supplying

information concerning violations of the provisions of the present

Convention and of the Regulations annexed thereto, as well as, if necessary,

in the prosecution of persons violating these provisions.

ARTICLE 7—Connection with the general communication system

Each of the contracting Governments agrees to take the necessary measures

in order that land stations established on its territory and open to the

international service of public correspondence shall be connected with the

general communication system or at least to take steps to assure rapid and

direct exchanges between these stations and the general communication

system.

ARTICLE 8—Exchange of information regarding stations and service

The contracting Governments shall notify each other, through the

intermediary of the International Bureau of the Telegraph Union, of the

names of stations open to the international service of public correspondence

and of stations carrying on special services covered by the Regulations

annexed to the present Convention, as well as of all data for facilitating and

expediting radio communication.

ARTICLE 9—Special devices

Each of the contracting Governments reserves the right to prescribe or

permit, in the stations covered by Article 8, independent of the installation,

the data relating to which shall be published in accordance with that Article,

other devices to be established and operated for special radio transmission,

without publishing the details of such devices.

ARTICLE 10—Conditions to be observed by stations. Interference

§1. The stations covered by Article 2 must, so far as practicable,

be established and operated under the best conditions known to

the practice of the service and must be maintained abreast of

scientific and technical progress.

§2. All stations, whatever their purpose, must, so far as

practicable, be established and operated so as not to interfere with

the radio communications or services of other contracting

Governments and of individuals or of private enterprises

authorized by these contracting Governments to carry on public

radio communication service.

ARTICLE 11—Priority for distress calls

Stations participating in the mobile service shall be obliged to give absolute

priority to distress calls, regardless of their origin, to answer such calls, and

to take such action with regard thereto as may be required.

ARTICLE 12—Chargés

Chargés applicable to radiotelegrams and the various cases in which these

are allowed radio franking privileges shall be established in accordance

with the provisions of the Regulations annexed to the present Convention.

ARTICLE 13—Regulations. Conferences

§1. The provisions of the present Convention are completed by:

(1) General Regulations which have the same force and

become effective at the same time as the Convention.

(2) Supplementary Regulations which bind only the

Governments which have signed them.

§2. The provisions of the present Convention and of the

Regulations annexed thereto shall be revised by conferences of

Plenipotentiaries

of

the

contracting

Governments,

each

conference fixing the place and the time of the following meeting.

§3. Before any deliberation each Conference shall establish Rules

of Procedure setting forth the conditions under which debate shall

be organized and carried on.

ARTICLE 14—Special arrangements

The contracting Governments reserve for themselves and for private

enterprises duly authorized by them the right to make special arrangements

on matters of service which do not interest the Governments generally.

These arrangements, however, must be in conformity with the Convention

and the Regulations annexed thereto so far as concerns the interference

which their execution might produce with the services of other countries.

ARTICLE 15—Suspension of the service

Each government reserves the right to suspend international radio

communication service for an indefinite period, if deemed necessary either

generally or only for certain connections and/or for certain kinds of radio

communication, provided that it shall immediately so advise each of the

other contracting Governments through the intermediary of the

International Bureau of the Telegraph Union.

ARTICLE 16—International Bureau

§1. The International Bureau of the Telegraph Union shall be

charged with collecting, coordinating, and publishing information

of all kinds relative to radio services, with examining the requests

for changes in the Convention and the Regulations annexed

thereto, with promulgating the amendments adopted, and

generally with performing all administrative tasks with which it

shall have been charged in the interest of international radio

services.

§2. The expenses resulting from these activities shall be borne by

all the contracting Governments in the proportion fixed by the

General Regulations.

ARTICLE 17—International technical consulting committee on radio

communications

§1. An International Technical Consulting Committee on Radio

Communications shall be established for the purpose of studying

technical

and

related

questions

pertaining

to

these

communications.

§2. Its composition, activities, and operations shall be defined in

the General Regulations annexed to the present Convention.

ARTICLE 18—Relations with stations of non-contracting countries

§1. Each of the contracting governments reserves the right to

determine the conditions under which it will accept telegrams or

radiotelegrams originating in or destined to a station not subject

to the provisions of the present Convention.

§2. If a telegram or a radiotelegram is accepted, it must be

transmitted, and the usual charges must be applied to it.

ARTICLE 19—Adherences

§1. (1) Governments which are not parties to the present

Convention shall be permitted to adhere to it upon their request.

(2) Such adherence shall be communicated through diplomatic

channels to the contracting Government within whose territory

the last Conference shall have been held and by the latter to the

remaining Governments.

(3) The adherence shall carry with it to the fullest extent

acceptance of all the clauses of the present Convention and

admission to all the advantages stipulated therein.

§2. (1) The adherence to the Convention by the Government of a

country having colonies, protectorates, or territories under

sovereignty or mandate shall not carry with it the adherence of

these colonies, protectorates, or territories under sovereignty or

mandate, unless a declaration to that effect is made by that

Government.

(2) Such colonies, protectorates, or territories under sovereignty

or mandate as a whole, or each of them separately, may form the

subject of a separate adherence or of a separate denunciation

within the provisions of the present Article and of Article 23.

ARTICLE 20—Arbitration

§1. In case of disagreement between two contracting

Governments, regarding the interpretation or execution of the

present Convention or of the Regulations provided for in Article

13, the question must, at the request of one of these governments,

be submitted to arbitration. For that purpose each of the

Governments involved shall choose another Government not

interested in the question at issue.

§2. If agreement between the two arbitrators can not be reached

the latter shall appoint another contracting Government equally

disinterested in the question at issue. If the two arbitrators can not

agree upon the choice of this third Government, each arbitrator

shall propose a contracting Government not interested in the

dispute; and lots shall be drawn between the Governments

proposed. The drawing shall devolve upon the Government

within whose territory the International Bureau mentioned in

Article 16 operates. The decision of the arbitrators shall be by

majority vote.

ARTICLE 21—Exchange of laws and regulations

The contracting Governments shall communicate to one another, if they

deem it useful, through the intermediary of the International Bureau of the

Telegraph Union, the laws and regulations which have been or which may

be promulgated in their countries relative to the object of the present

Convention.

ARTICLE 22—Naval and military installations

§1. The contracting Governments retain their entire liberty

regarding radio installations not covered in Article 2, and

especially with reference to naval and military installations.

§2. All these installations and stations must, so far as practicable,

comply with the provisions of the regulations regarding help to be

given in case of distress and measures to be taken to prevent

interference. They must also, so far as practicable, observe such

provisions of the regulations as concern the types of waves and

the frequencies to be used, according to the kind of service which

these stations carry on.

§3. When, however, these installations and stations are used for

public correspondence or participate in the special services

governed by the Regulations annexed to the present Convention,

they must, in general, conform to the provisions of the

Regulations for the conduct of these services.

ARTICLE 23—Execution, duration and denunciation

§1. The present Convention shall go into effect on January 1,

1929; and shall remain in force for an indeterminate period and

until one year from the day on which a denunciation thereof shall

have been made.

§2. The denunciation shall affect only the Government in whose

name it has been made. The Convention shall remain in force for

the other contracting Governments.

ARTICLE 24—Ratification

§1. The present Convention shall be ratified and the ratifications

thereof shall be deposited in Washington with the least practicable

delay.

§2. In case one or more of the Contracting Governments should

not ratify the Convention it shall be none the less binding upon

the Governments which shall have ratified it.

In witness whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the

Convention in a single copy, which shall remain in the archives of the

Government of the United States of America and one copy of which shall

be sent to each Government.

Done at Washington, November 25, 1927.

For the Union of South Africa:

H. J. LENTON

W. F. C. MORTON

For French Equatorial Africa and oilier Colonies:

CASSAGNAC

For French West Africa:

CASSAGNAC

For Portuguese West Africa:

ARNALDO DE PAIVA CARVALHO

For Portuguese East Africa and the Portuguese Asiatic

Possessions:

MARIO CORRÊA BARATA DA CRUZ

For Germany:

OTTO ARENDT

HERMANN GIESS

H. HARBICH

ARTHUR WERNER

GÜNTHER SUADICANI

E. L. BAER

For the Argentine Republic:

FELIPE A. ESPIL

LUIS F. ORLANDINI

FRANCISCO LAJOUS

For the Commonwealth of Australia:

H. P. BROWN

For Austria:

DR. MAXIMILIAN HARTWICH

ENG. HANS PFEUFFER

For Belgium:

J. PIERART

GOLDSCHMIDT

G. VINCENT

For Bolivia:

GEO. DE LA BARRA

For Brazil:

P. COELHO DE ALMEIDA

FREDERICO VILLAR

MANUEL F. SIMÕES AYRES

For Bulgaria:

ST. BISSEROFF

For Canada:

A. JOHNSTON

LAURENT BEAUDRY

C. P. EDWARDS

W. ARTHUR STEEL

For Chile:

I. HOLGER

For China:

CHIN CHUN WANG

CHANG-HSŨAN

HING GING Y. LEE

TI-CHING WU

For the Republic of Colombia:

ENRIQUE OLAYA H.

For the Spanish Colony of the Gulf of Guinea:

ADOLFO H. DE SOLÁS

For the Belgian Congo:

J. PIERART

G. VINCENT

ROBERT GOLDSCHMIDT

For Costa Rica:

J. RAFAEL OREAMUNO

For Cuba:

L. ALBURQUERQUE

GONZALO GÜELL

LUIS MARINO PÉREZ

For Curaçao:

G. SCHOTEL

For Cyrenaica:

PAOLO ZONTA

For Denmark:

T. G. KRARUP

C. WAMBERG

For the Dominican Republic:

M. L. VASQUEZ G.

For Egypt:

HORACE MAYNE

ALY IBRAHIM

For Eritrea:

CESARE BARDELONI

For Spain:

MARIANO AMOEDO

ANTONIO NIETO

ADOLFO H. DE SOLAS

JOSE SASTRE

For Estonia:

G. JALLAJAS

For the United States of America:

HERBERT HOOVER

STEPHEN DAVIS

JAMES E. WATSON

E. D. SMITH

WALLACE H. WHITE, Jr.

W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

WILLIAM ROY VALLANCE

C. MCK. SALTZMAN

THOS. T. CRAVEN

W. D. TERRELL

OWEN D. YOUNG

SAMUEL REBER

J. BEAVER WHITE

ARTHUR E. KENNELLY

For Finland:

L. ÅSTRÖM

For France:

L. BOULANGER

For Great Britain:

T. F. PURVES

J. JOYCE BRODERICK

F. W. PHILLIPS

F. W. HOME

L. F. BLANDY

Air Commodore

C. H. BOYD

A. LESLIE HARRIS

For Greece:

TH. PENTHEROUDAKIS

For Guatemala:

J. MONTANO N.

For the Republic of Haiti:

RAOUL LIZAIRE

For the Republic of Honduras:

LUIS BOGRÁN

For Hungary:

BERNARD DE PASKAY

For British India:

P. J. EDMUNDS

P. N. MITRA

For the Dutch East Indies:

G. C. HOLTZAPPEL

WARNSINCK

G. SCHOTEL

VAN DOOREN

For the French Indo-China:

G. JULLIEN

For the Irish Free State:

P. S. MACCATHMHAOIL

T. S. O’MUINEACHAIN

For Italy:

GUISEPPE GNEME

GIACOMO BARBERA

GINO MONTEFINALE

For Japan:

For Chosen, Taiwan, Japanese Sakhalin, the Leased

Territory of Kwantung and the South Sea Islands

under Japanese Mandate:

S. SAWADA

N. MORITA

K. NISHIZAKI

I. YAMAMOTO

SANNOSUKE INADA

T. USHIZAWA

T. NAKAGAMI

For the Republic of Liberia:

ERNEST LYON, Subj. to the ratification of the Senate

For Madagascar:

G. JULLIEN

For Morocco (with the exception of the Spanish Zone):

FREDERIC KNOBEL

For Mexico:

PEDRO N. COTA

JUAN B. SALDAÑA

For Nicaragua:

MANUEL ZAVALA

For Norway:

N. NICKELSEN

HARMOD PETERSON

P. TENNFJORD

J. J. LARSEN

For New Zealand:

A. GIBBS

For the Republic of Panama:

R. J. ALFARO

For Paraguay:

JUAN VICENTE RAMÍREZ

For the Netherlands:

G. J. HOFKER

J. A. BLAND VAN DEN BERG

W. KRUIJT

E. F. W. VÖLTER

WARNSINCK

For Peru:

A. GONZÁLES-PRADA

For Persia:

D. MEFTAH

en referendum

For Poland:

EUGÈNE STALLINGER

For Portugal:

JOSÈ DE LIZ FERREIRA JUNIOR

For Rumania:

G. CRETZIANO (ad referendum)

For the Republic of El Salvador:

FRANCISCO A. LIMA

For the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats and Slovenes:

V. ANTONIÉVICH

For Siam:

NIDES VIRAJAKICH

For Italian Somaliland:

VALERIO DELLA CAMPANA

For Sweden:

HAMILTON

LITSTRÖM

LEMOINE

For Switzerland:

E. NUSSBAUM

For Surinam:

G. SCHOTEL

For the Syro-Libanese Territories:

FREDERIC KNOBEL

For the Republic of San Marino:

FRN. FERRARI

For Czechoslovakia:

DR. OTTO KUČERA

ENG. STRNAD

For Tripolitania:

SETTIMIO AURINI

For Tunis:

FREDERIC KNOBEL

For Turkey:

J. A. BLAND VAN DEN BERG

For Uruguay:

VARELA

For Venezuela:

LUIS CHURION

[Document 236]

The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, November 29, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: The return to its rightful owners of Austrian property held by the

Alien Property Custodian is a matter in which the Federal Government of

Austria is deeply concerned. Insignificant as the amount involved may

appear in comparison to the figures tipping the scale of financial and

economic balance in the United States it is of no small consequence in the

combine of measures partly taken partly under contemplation in Austria

with a view of restoring private business to a state of normalcy. It is the

conviction of my Government that the successful restoration of public

household could only be of lasting duration, if the efforts made in

aforementioned direction will meet a like success.

The Austrian property is held, as Your Excellency are aware of, as a

security, to insure payment of claims, which the Government or citizens of

the United States or both may have against the Austrian Government for

damages resulting from acts of war. These potential claims, claims against

the Government, are therefore responsible for the failure of Austrian private

citizens and rightful owners obtaining their property seized in this country

during the war.

The Federal Government of Austria keenly feels this responsibility, the

more so, as Congress had in connection with the Winslow-Act37 resolved,

that enemy property in excess of $10,000. should be further retained—until

“other suitable provisions” are made by the respective Governments to take

care of American War Claims.

My Government, as Your Excellency may recall, tried at two previous

occasions38 to free private property from restrictions incurred through their

own obligations and sought to provide by an agreement for such “other

suitable provisions”, which would be accepted in lieu of seized private

property and open the way for an Act by Congress returning it to the

rightful Austrian owners.

These efforts failed for two reasons chiefly.—First, because the work of the

Tripartite Claims Commission, adjusting American claims, had not

sufficiently progressed to enable a somewhat accurate estimate as to the

magnitude of claims involved, and second, because the securities offered by

the Austrian Federal Government did not seem to satisfy the Government of

the United States and the Treasury Department in particular.

The present state of affairs in the Tripartite Claims Commission, however,

is now sufficiently advanced to permit a calculation of the sums which in

due course of procedure will be charged against the Austrian Federal

Government and to make a new and precise offer for their payment.

I am in a position to submit on behalf of my Government the following

proposal. The Austrian Federal Government is ready to place at the disposal

of the Government of the United States the money held in Trust by the

Alien Property Custodian for the Austrian Government including the

Imperial Royal Tobacco Monopoly also known under the name of K. K.

Österreichische Tabak Regie, and to supplement it by a cash deposit up to a

total of two and a quarter million dollars. This sum, although it will prove

to more than fully cover the awards ultimately to be rendered by the

Tripartite Claims Commission and charged against my Government, is

offered in this extent with a purpose of allowing an ample margin and

removing all conceivable causes which may obstruct a speedy return of

seized Austrian property.

The Austrian Federal Government asks the Government of the United

States to recommend to Congress in course of its next session an Act of

legislation which would authorize the Alien Property Custodian to release

Austrian property as soon as it has been ascertained in a statement made by

competent authorities (Treasury of the United States in agreement with

Hon. Edwin Parker, Commissioner, Tripartite Claims Commission) that a

sufficient cash amount has been deposited by the Federal Government of

Austria to take care of all her obligations arising from awards rendered and

to be rendered by said Commission.

The decision, when the moment for making such a declaration has come,

will be left entirely to the discretion of the said competent authorities. The

Federal Government of Austria believes, however, that in the near future the

work of the Tripartite Claims Commission will be far enough advanced to

allow, even before a complete adjustment of all claims, a statement as afore

indicated.

This would be the case f. i. if the Commissioner and the American Agent in

course of the proceedings of the Tripartite Claims Commission should come

to the conclusion that the total of the awards already rendered as well as the

claims still under consideration will at their highest possible extent and

value not exceed the 2¼ million cash deposit.

I have the honor to pray Your Excellency to kindly support my

Governments request and offer. I may add that the prerequisite prescribed

by Congress for the return of property, i. e. the making of “other suitable

provisions” for the satisfaction of American claims, seems more than fully

complied with in the offer of a cash security and payment made by my

Government. While in view of American traditions and the policy followed

by Your Government the seized private property could hardly be regarded a

true collateral, (American opinion being loath to satisfy claims against a

Government with property seized from private citizens) the cash deposit of

my Government is lacking this deficiency in its character as a security or

collateral, offering no moral or judicial objections against its application

towards the settlement of just American claims against the Austrian

Government.

Accept [etc.]

EDGAR PROCHNIK

the plan proposed in that letter was submitted by the Austrian Legation in

January 1927 (not printed). The Secretary of the Treasury in a letter to the

Secretary of State, Feb. 5, 1927 (not printed), stated that in view of lack of

information and the impossibility of obtaining action in the current session

of Congress it would be best to defer action until the next session of

[Document 237]

The Secretary of State to the Chairman of the Committee on

Ways and Means of the House of Representatives (Green)

WASHINGTON, December 10, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. GREEN: I have been informed by your office that you desire to

receive, for the information of the Committee, a statement from me

outlining the considerations involved in the question whether provision

should be made for the return of Austrian and Hungarian property at the

same time as provision is made for the return of the German property

sequestrated by the Alien Property Custodian, and that in particular you

would be pleased to know what, if any, representations in the matter may

have been made to the Department of State by the Austrian and Hungarian

Governments.

In a note dated November 29, 1927, the Austrian Minister submitted on

behalf of his Government a proposal from which I understand that the

Austrian Government is prepared to place at the disposal of the Government

of the United States for the purpose of satisfying the awards made against

Austria by the Tripartite Claims Commission, United States, Austria and

Hungary, a sum of not more than two and one quarter million dollars in

cash, this sum to be composed of the funds held by the Alien Property

Custodian which at the time of sequestration belonged to the Austrian

Government as such, including funds of the State owned Tobacco

Monopoly (K. K. Österreichische Tabak Regie), and of such further deposit

in cash as may be necessary to bring the total up to the sum of two and one

quarter million dollars. If this proposal is acceptable to the Government of

the United States, the Austrian Government requests that appropriate

recommendation be made to the Congress for the enactment during the

present session of an act of legislation authorizing the Alien Property

Custodian to release Austrian property as soon as it has been ascertained by

the competent authorities (for example, the Treasury Department and the

Commissioner of the Tripartite Claims Commission) that the sum of two

and one quarter million dollars deposited by the Austrian Government is

sufficient to satisfy the awards made by the Commission against Austria. A

copy of the note from the Austrian Minister is transmitted herewith.38a

It is my understanding that the figure of two and one quarter million dollars

mentioned by the Austrian Minister is based upon an estimate prepared by

the Austrian Agent before that Commission of the maximum probable

awards against Austria. An estimate has also been prepared by the

American Agent, and I transmit herewith a copy of the latter’s

memorandum containing his estimate which, you will note, exceeds the two

and one quarter million dollars fixed by the Austrian Government as the

amount it will make available for the satisfaction of the awards.

In considering whether the present proposal of the Austrian Government

may be regarded as constituting suitable provision for the satisfaction of the

awards made in favor of American claimants, your Committee will no

doubt wish to satisfy itself that the amount of the awards with interest will

not exceed the sum available for their satisfaction. In this connection there

are two considerations which I feel should be brought to your attention.

In the first place it should be noted that the Commissioner of the Tripartite

Claims Commission has held that, unless the Congress decides to apply the

property sequestrated by the Alien Property Custodian to satisfy the awards

of the Commission, neither the Austrian nor the Hungarian Government is

liable for debts owing by its nationals to American nationals in respect of

which the said Governments employed no measures in the nature of

exceptional war measures, or measures of transfer, nor can such debts

expressed in Austrian or Hungarian currency be valorized at the prewar rate

of exchange, viz. 9. cents to the crown. The Commissioner held that

“… in the event the Government of the United States, through its

lawmaking power, should elect to adopt the method of payment

or procedure provided for by paragraph (h) (2) of Article 249

(232) and paragraph 4 of the Annex to Section IV of Part X of the

Treaty39 and apply the Custodian Property to the payment of the

claims and debts defined therein, then under the terms of the

Treaty for the purposes of such payment the American creditors

would be entitled to have their debts converted into American

currency at the pre-war rate of exchange and also be entitled to

the benefits of paragraph 22 of the Annex to Section HI of Part X

of the Treaty with respect to interest.

“The Commissioner holds that under the Treaty only the

Government of the United States, acting through its law-making

power, may determine whether or not the proceeds of the

liquidation of the Custodian Property will be applied to the

payment of such claims and of such debts as may be found by this

Commission to have been owing by Austria (Hungary) or its

nationals to American nationals.” (Administrative Decision No.

II, page 16)

and that (Administrative Decision No. II, pp. 28, 29)

“From the analysis of the portions of Sections III and IV of Part X

of the Treaty applicable to the United States and Austria

(Hungary) and their respective nationals it appears that the only

provisions fixing direct and absolute liability on Austria

(Hungary) for debts owing by their nationals are those embodied

which Austria (Hungary) is held liable to make compensation for

damage or injury resulting from its own acts in applying war

measures to American property, rights, or interests, including

debts, credits, accounts, and cash assets, and in the second of

which Austria (Hungary) is required to pay to American nationals

or the American Government the proceeds of the liquidation of

American property, including debts.

“An indirect liability is fixed on Austria (Hungary) for debts

owing by its nationals (paragraph (j) of Article 249 (232))

contingent, however, on the Congress of the United States

electing to retain and apply the Custodian Property to the

payment of claims and/or debts in accordance with the provisions

Annex to Section IV.

“Austria (Hungary) is, of course, independent of any Treaty

provisions, primarily liable for its public debts, evidenced by its

bonds, treasury notes, and the like.

“But nowhere in such of the clauses of the Treaties as became

effective with respect to the United States and its nationals is

there found any provision fixing direct and primary liability on

Austria (Hungary) for the debts of its nationals to American

nationals in the absence of some act of the Austrian (Hungarian)

Government operating upon such debts to the prejudice of the

American creditors. The suggestion that, in the absence of such

act by the Austrian (Hungarian) Government, it is obligated to

pay American creditors for losses sustained by them due to

depreciation during and after the war in the exchange value of

Austro-Hungarian currency can be sustained only on the theory

that Austria (Hungary) is liable for all of the direct and indirect,

immediate and ultimate, consequences of the war. Clearly such a

construction of the Treaty is not justified (see reasons set forth in

the ‘Opinion in War-Kisk Insurance Premium Claims’ rendered

by the Umpire of the Mixed Claims Commission, United States

and Germany, Decisions and Opinions, pages 33 to 59,

inclusive).”

In these circumstances it is clear that in the absence of a special agreement

with the Austrian and Hungarian Governments on this point, the status of

American claims in respect of crown debts to which exceptional war

measures have not been applied depends upon the position taken by the

Congress regarding the disposition to be made of the Austrian and

Hungarian property held by the Alien Property Custodian.

In the second place, as your Committee no doubt is aware, not even full

payment by the Austrian Government of the awards which the Tripartite

Claims Commission may make against that Government will wholly relieve

the Austrian property sequestrated by the Alien Property Custodian from

the charges imposed by the treaties, since under Article 177 of the Treaty of

St. Germain (the benefits of which are accorded to the United States by the

Treaty signed at Vienna August 24, 1921) Austria accepted responsibility

not only for herself, but also for her Allies for the loss and damage caused

by the war, and the Austrian property may, in the discretion of the

Congress, be applied in satisfaction of Austria’s responsibility for loss and

damage caused by Germany and/or Hungary. It should, therefore, be borne

in mind that, according to the best information available, the amount of

Hungarian property sequestrated by the Alien Property Custodian is not

sufficient to meet the probable awards of the Tripartite Claims Commission

against Hungary individually, to say nothing of the awards which will be

rendered against Austria and Hungary jointly on account of reparation

claims, Hungary’s share of which has been fixed by the Commissioner of

the Tripartite Claims Commission, United States, Austria and Hungary, at

these circumstances the release of the Austrian property apparently would

affect directly the interest of claimants against Hungary, and the Committee

will undoubtedly wish to consider what provision is to be made to satisfy

awards against Hungary in the event that the Austrian and German

properties are released. The Department of State has received no proposal

on this subject from the Hungarian Government; on the contrary in a

memorandum dated December 16, 1926, the Hungarian Minister

informed the Department that his Government “is not asking for and does

not believe in an earlier release of the seized property of its nationals, but

expects to deal with this question when it will logically arise at the

termination of the work of the Tripartite Claims Commission.” A copy of

this memorandum was transmitted to the Treasury Department on

December 21, 1926, for its information in connection with the legislation

then pending. A further copy is enclosed herewith for the information of

your Committee.

While the point is not of much practical significance in view of the

relatively small amount of Hungarian property sequestrated by the Alien

Property Custodian, it might be observed to complete the record that under

Article 161 of the Treaty of Trianon (the benefits of which are accorded to

the United States by the treaty signed at Budapest August 29, 1921)

Hungary accepted responsibility not only for herself but also for her Allies

for the loss and damage caused by the war, and the Hungarian property

may, in the discretion of the Congress, be applied in satisfaction of

Hungary’s responsibility for loss and damage caused by Germany and/or

Austria. Mutatis mutandis the situation with respect to Germany and the

German property is the same.

In conclusion may I request that the enclosed communications from the

Austrian and Hungarian Legations be treated as confidential. If your

Committee desires to give them any publicity, the Department will be

happy to request the consent of the Austrian and Hungarian Governments

thereto.

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the Agent of the United States Tripartite Claims Commission (Bonynge)

MEMORANDUM OF AWARDS AND INTERLOCUTORY JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATED AMOUNTS INVOLVED IN CLAIMS PENDING AGAINST

AUSTRIA AND HUNGARY

An estimate has been made by the American Agency of the total amount of

the awards and of the probable awards to be entered by the Tripartite

Claims Commission against Austria and Hungary.

This estimate, except as to the awards and interlocutory judgments that

have been actually entered, is necessarily only a rough estimate based on a

cursory examination of each of the files, and on such information as is now

obtainable in reference to the claims that have not been finally submitted to

the Commission. It is subject to revision upon a full development of the

facts in each of the claims which have not been passed upon by the

Commission.

In making the estimate no account has been taken of the claims in the

unknown address file, nor of the principal of any bonds that matured during

the war period, except such as are now known to have matured during that

period. No exact computation of the interest from varying dates or at

different rates has been made, but the interest has been computed at the

average rate of four per cent for a period of ten years. All of the claims have

been valorized at the pre-war rate of exchange, namely, 9. cents to the

Kronen. In the case of debts payable in gold or foreign currency, the gold

value and the pre-war rate of exchange have been adopted.

This is the best and most accurate estimate that the American Agency is

able to make with the information now available.

The result is as follows:

Awards entered and estimated to be entered against and

Hungary

Awards entered and estimated to be entered against Austria 2,623,542.

Awards entered and estimated to be entered against Hungary 782,667.

Total

ROBERT W. BONYNGE

WASHINGTON, November 22, 1927.

38a Supra.

266.

[238] Additional Protocol Between the United States of America and

Other American Republics, Signed at Lima, October 19, 1927

Done and signed in the City of Lima on the nineteenth day of October,

nineteen hundred and twenty-seven, in duplicate, one of which shall be sent

to the Ministry of Foreign Relations of Peru and the other to the Pan

American Sanitary Office, so that copies thereof may be distributed through

the diplomatic channel, to the signatory and adhering Governments.

Treaty Series No. 763

[Document 238]

Additional Protocol Between the United States of America and

Other American Republics, Signed at Lima, October 19, 192743

The Presidents of the Argentine Republic, Bolivia, the United States of

Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, the United States of America,

Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, the

Dominican Republic, Uruguay and the United States of Venezuela, desirous

of adding to the Sanitary Convention signed at Habana on November 14,

1924, have appointed as their plenipotentiaries, to wit:

Argentine Republic:

Dr. Laurentino Olascoaga

Dr. Nicolás Lozano

Dr. Alfredo Sordelli

Bolivia:

Dr. Adolfo Flores

Dr. Adolfo Durán

United States of Brazil:

Dr. João Pedro de Albuquerque

Dr. Bento Oswaldo Cruz

Colombia:

Dr. Julio Aparicio

Costa Rica:

Dr. Solón Núñez F.

Mr. Jaime G. Bennett

Cuba:

Dr. Fernando Rensoli

Dr. Mario G. Lebredo

Ecuador:

Dr. Luis M. Cueva

United States of America:

Dr. Huph S. Cumming

Dr. Bolivar J. Lloyd

Dr. John D. Long

Guatemala:

Mr. Pablo Emilio Guedes

Haiti:

Mr. Víctor Kieffer Marchand

Dr. Guillermo Angulo P. A.

Honduras:

Dr. José Jorge Callejas

Nicaragua:

Mr. Julio C. Gastiaburú

Panama:

Dr. José Guillermo Lewis

Paraguay:

Dr. Isidro Ramirez

Peru:

Dr. Carlos Enrique Paz Soldán

Dr. Sebastián Lorente

Dr. Baltazar Caravedo

Dr. Daniel E. Lavorería

Dr. Julio C. Gastiaburú

Dominican Republic:

Dr. Ramón Baez Soler

Dr. Aleiandro Bussalleu

Uruguay:

Dr. Justo F. Gonzalez

United States of Venezuela: Dr. Emilio Ochoa

Who, after communicating to one another their full powers and finding

them in due form, have agreed to adopt, ad referendum, the following:

ADDITIONAL PROTOCOL TO THE PAN AMERICAN SANITARY CODE

The ratification[s] of the Pan American Sanitary Code shall be deposited in

the Office of the Secretary of State of the Republic of Cuba and the Cuban

Government shall communicate these ratifications to the other signatory

States, which communication shall constitute exchange of ratifications. The

Convention shall become effective in each of the signatory States on the

date of ratification thereof by said State, and shall remain in force without

limitation of time, each one of the signatory or adherent States reserving the

right to withdraw from the Convention by giving in due form a year’s

notice in advance to the Government of the Republic of Cuba.

Done and signed in the City of Lima on the nineteenth day of October,

nineteen hundred and twenty-seven, in duplicate, one of which shall be sent

to the Ministry of Foreign Relations of Peru and the other to the Pan

American Sanitary Office, so that copies thereof may be distributed through

the diplomatic channel, to the signatory and adhering Governments.

For the Argentine Republic:

Laurentino Olascoaga

Nicolás Lozano

A. Sordelli

For Bolivia:

A. Flores

Adolfo F. Durán

For the United States of Brazil:

João Pedro de Albuquerque

Bento Oswaldo Cruz

For Colombia:

Julio Aparicio

For Costa Rica:

Solón Núñez

Jaime G. Bennett

For Cuba:

D. F. Rensoli

Dr. Mario G. Lebredo

For Ecuador:

Luis M. Cueva

For the United States of America:

Hugh S. Cumming

Bolivar J. Lloyd

John D. Long

For Guatemala:

Pablo Emilio Guedes

For Haiti:

V. Kiefer Marchand

Gmo. Angulo P. A.

For Honduras:

José J. Callejas

For Nicaragua:

J. C. Gastiaburú

For Panama:

José G. Lewis

For Paraguay:

Isidro Ramirez

For Peru:

Carlos Enrique Paz Soldán

Sebastián Lorente

Baltazar Caravedo

D. E. Lavorería

J. C. Gastiaburú

For Dominican Republic:

E. Baez Soler

A. Bussalleu

For Uruguay:

Justo F. Gonzalez

For the United States of Venezuela:

E. Ochoa

Circular instruction to diplomatic

officers and certain consular officers

concerning questions arising from the

negotiation

of

foreign

loans

by

American bankers

[239] The Secretary of State to Diplomatic Officers and Certain

Consular Officers

Washington, December 28, 1927.

[Document 239]

The Secretary of State to Diplomatic Officers and Certain

Consular Officers

WASHINGTON, December 28, 1927.

Diplomatic Serial No. 681

SIRS: The following discussion of questions arising in connection with the

negotiation of foreign loans by American bankers is transmitted in view of

inquiries and suggestions received from diplomatic officers.

(1) The Department expects its diplomatic officers to extend to responsible

representatives of legitimate American interests, without discriminating

between competing American interests, such assistance as may be

consistent with their other duties and their diplomatic character (see

Instructions to Diplomatic Officers of the United States, March 8, 1927,

Department must of course rely largely on the good judgment and sense of

propriety of its representatives as to the form of proper assistance. Such

assistance normally may include aid in the establishment of contacts, the

giving of information, and the making of judicious suggestions, but

diplomatic officers will carefully avoid acting as intermediaries or

participating in private business transactions, or taking responsibility for

decisions of the private American interests concerned.

It will be recognized, however, that assistance in the negotiation of loans is

affected with considerations of special delicacy, not only because of the

reserve customary in any relationship affecting important credit

transactions, but also because of tendencies evident in several quarters to

emphasize, exaggerate, or misunderstand any relationship of the

Department or its officers to financial negotiations. While this does not

preclude the assistance normally given to American interests, special care

should be taken that the record with respect to financial negotiations be

clear and self-explanatory and that diplomatic officers in no way

inadvertently lend color to claims or imputations that there exist, between

the Department and bankers interested in negotiating foreign loans,

relationships involving the responsibility of the Department in connection

with such loans.

Thus, for example, in cases where there is no obvious occasion for recourse

to missions for a letter of introduction, it may be well discreetly to

discourage such requests or to satisfy them by giving merely a card of

introduction. Similarly, missions should discourage the transmission of

private messages through official channels, or, where the conditions are

such as to justify the use of official channels, as in the case of

authenticating the signatures of important papers, the text of the message

should be self-explanatory as to its private origin and the occasion for the

1924). A United States Senator has cited such a telegraphic authentication

as evidence of the Department’s sponsorship of a private loan.

Information which diplomatic officers can give in reply to inquiries of

bankers is, in the nature of the case, merely supplementary to information

otherwise available to them—a well-known manual lists under twenty-five

heads “some of the points” to be considered in purchasing foreign

Government bonds. Presumably it will be oral, personal in tone, and

accompanied with some disclaimer of relieving the bankers of any part of

the responsibility toward bond buyers which the ethics and practices of

investment banking impose upon them with respect to sponsoring flotations

of foreign and domestic issues alike. In this connection the following is

quoted from the Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury for the year

ended June 30, 1926:

“The question of the soundness of a particular loan is not one

upon which the Federal Government should pass, but it is the

banker floating the loan in this country who must decide this

question in the first instance, and it is the investor using his

savings to acquire the security who must finally decide whether

or not the risk is to be accepted. The test of the security of a

foreign loan does not differ from the test of the security of a

domestic loan.”

(2) Suggestions have been received that in connection with the

Department’s announcement of March 3, 192245 (see Diplomatic Serial No.

in the case of loans for industrial purposes, a guarantee that the books of the

borrower have been audited by responsible accountants, or that the

Department should at least ask its missions abroad whether they know of

any reason why the Department should object to a loan.

The Department, in its announcement of March 3, 1922, and its letters to

bankers pursuant to the announcement, has uniformly stated that it will not

pass upon the merits of foreign loans as business propositions, nor assume

any responsibility whatever in connection with loan transactions. In view of

the consideration that if the Department in some instances raises questions

of the investment merit of particular loans, it may soon be considered to

have no doubt of the investment merit of a loan when it expresses none,

correspondence pursuant to that announcement is the most inappropriate

occasion for giving bankers credit information.

American bankers may at will, and frequently do, have recourse for

information to the Department of Commerce, which is charged with the

dissemination of commercial information and which has established in the

Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce a Finance and Investment

Division. This is the normal channel for inquiry for such bankers as may

desire to supplement other available information with that obtainable from

the information services of the Government. Subject to such censorship and

editing as the Department may undertake, reports of foreign service officers

on financial subjects are transmitted in routine to the Department of

Commerce. It is felt that only in case of information presumably not

available through this or other channels to bankers exercising due diligence

would there arise the exceptional case of any ethical obligation on the part

of the Department of State to volunteer credit information to bankers

writing the Department for the entirely different purpose of allowing it to

express its views on the possible national interests involved in a

contemplated loan.

While the Department feels that in view of their responsibilities bankers

contemplating the issue of foreign loans must rely primarily upon

independent investigation and study and only incidentally upon

Governmental sources of information, the Department welcomes the

interest which diplomatic officers have taken in reporting particular credit

situations regarding which they feel concern.

Such reports are carefully observed by the Department of State and other

Departments and, in view of the breadth and importance of American

interest in foreign investments, they may serve a very useful purpose

through such confidential dissemination as they may be given by the

Department of Commerce or as information in the possession of the

Department in the event of direct consultation of the Department by

interested American citizens.

The Department indicates objection to loans only in view of important

interests of national policy. Regarding situations of this degree of

importance it will ordinarily have in its possession sufficient information to

guide its action without ad hoc consultation of its missions. At times it has

consulted its missions upon receiving an inquiry from bankers but the

establishment of a routine practice of doing so would not be justified in

view of the simplicity of the questions involved in most loan inquiries and

of the importance of promptness in replying to them in order that important

operations of American bankers be not subjected to the delay often incident

to Governmental procedure.

(3) It will be advisable to bring to the attention of Commercial Attaches or

Trade Commissioners the policies herein set forth, particularly in the event

of negotiations for a Government loan. American officials of Departments

other than the Department of State should act in any relations with foreign

officials only with the full knowledge and approval of the diplomatic officer

in charge of the mission.

FRANK B. KELLOGG

Boundary disputes

[Document 240]

The Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck) to the Secretary of State

ASUNCIÓN, February 9, 1927.

[Received March 17.]

No. 245

SIR: With reference to the possible submission of the Paraguayan-Bolivian

boundary question to the Government of Argentina, reported in this

report as follows.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs offers the information that this morning he

received a telegram from the Paraguayan Minister of Hacienda, Dr. Manuel

Benítez, now in Buenos Aires, stating that Bolivia had accepted the good

offices of Argentina.

He further stated that, under the circumstances, Paraguay would not submit

to the United States the note of which he had previously spoken, and of

which the Department was informed in this Legation’s telegram No. 15 and

He is doubtful if Bolivian representatives will appear when the time is set

for conference, as upon two former occasions they failed to attend at the

agreed time and place.

It is possible, however, he said, that Bolivia might make a pretense of

desiring the solution of the question, inasmuch as he had been advised that

the Bolivian Minister of Foreign Affairs had stated that he would confer

with the Argentine Chancellory during the first week in March.

If the question can be settled by the good offices of Argentina, all well and

good, but if from any cause failure should result, Paraguay will immediately

ask the United States to solve the difficulty. It is the Minister’s opinion that

this will be the outcome in the end.

I have [etc.]

GEO. L. KREECK

[Document 241]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Paraguay (Kreeck)

WASHINGTON, March 17, 1927.

No. 362

SIR: The Department has received and read with interest your confidential

dispute between Bolivia and Paraguay, of which copies have been sent to

the American Minister at La Paz and the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim at

Buenos Aires for their confidential information.

It is noted from the last paragraph of your strictly confidential despatch, No.

conversations on this subject with the Paraguayan Minister for Foreign

Affairs you were careful to avoid any indication or comment as to the

possibility that the Government of the United States might be willing to

enter into negotiations looking to the settlement of the controversy. The

Department assumes that you have consistently maintained this attitude,

which has its entire approval. This Government is particularly anxious not

to appear in any way to invite a request for its assistance, nor does it wish to

predict what its position toward such a request might be. The Department

believes that in the circumstances further inquiries on your part might be

misunderstood, and therefore desires you to refrain from making them. If

the Minister for Foreign Affairs again raises the subject, you will say

merely that you will ask the Department for instructions.

[Document 242]

The Chargé in Argentina (Cable) to the Secretary of State

BUENOS AIRES, April 29, 1927.

[Received June 8.]

No. 275

SIR: I have the honor to report that on April 22, 1927, a protocol was signed

in Buenos Aires by Dr. Alberto Gutierrez, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of

Bolivia, and Dr. Lisandro Diaz Leon, the Minister of Paraguay at La Paz, in

which Bolivia and Paraguay accept the good offices of Argentina in the

matter of the boundary dispute between the two countries.

It appears that several years ago, at a time when the Paraguayan-Bolivian

relations had reached an acute stage, the Argentine Government tendered its

good offices to the nations in question with a view to furthering an amicable

settlement of this problem. The signing of the Protocol, therefore, can

probably be ascribed to Argentina’s efforts.

The text of this document has been published by La Prensa, a translation of

which reads as follows:

“Messrs. Alberto Gutierrez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of

Bolivia, and Lisandro Diaz Leon, National Deputy of Paraguay,

having met at the Legation of Bolivia in the City of Buenos Aires,

on the 22nd day of the month of April, 1927, and being duly

authorized by their respective Governments and animated by the

desire to define and fix the international boundaries between the

Republics of Bolivia and Paraguay in a friendly and satisfactory

manner, have agreed upon the following:

“I. To repeat the acceptance of the good offices

tendered by the Government of the Argentine Republic,

with a view to promoting the cordial renewal of the

negotiations to solve the boundary question existing

between the two countries.

“II. For this purpose both parties agree to appoint

Plenipotentiaries who will meet in this Capital within

ninety days of the approval of this Protocol by the

respective Governments.

“III. The Plenipotentiaries must define the matters

which will form the subject of their deliberations. The

arguments or proposals which will be presented in order

to determine the boundary may include, in addition to

the proof or antecedents of each legal claim, formulas

of adjustment or territorial compensations.

“IV. Should it prove impossible to arrive at an

agreement respecting the definite determination of the

international frontier, the Plenipotentiaries will state the

reasons for the disagreement and fix the limits of the

zone which will form the subject of the decision of an

Arbitral Tribunal to be appointed by mutual agreement.

“V. Each one of these results will be communicated to

the Government of the Argentine Republic, under

whose good offices the conferences will be held, at the

same time that they are transmitted to the respective

Governments.

“This Protocol, which is signed in duplicate, will be approved by

the respective Governments as soon as possible.

“Signed: A. Gutierrez

“Signed: Lisandro Diaz Leon.”

The Department will note that no mention is made in the Protocol of the

character or composition of the Arbitral Tribunal which may be convened,

should the nations in question fail to reach a settlement of their dispute.

There has been as yet but little press comment on this event. The Buenos

Aires Herald, however, says that Dr. Gallardo and the Argentine Foreign

Office deserve all congratulations for their good work of inducing the

Governments of Paraguay and Bolivia peacefully to discuss their

differences in the calm atmosphere of Buenos Aires.

I have [etc.]

PHILANDER L. CABLE

[Document 243]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

BUENOS AIRES, October 3, 1927.

[Received October 26.]

No. 26

have the honor to inform the Department that in pursuance to the Protocol

signed at Buenos Aires on April 22, by Dr. Alberto Gutierrez, the Bolivian

Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Sr. Lisandro Diaz Leon, the Paraguayan

Minister at La Paz, the International Conference which will attempt to

determine the boundary between Paraguay and Bolivia held its first meeting

on Thursday, September 29, at 4 o’clock, in one of the rooms of the Foreign

Office.

The Paraguayan Commission is presided over by Dr. Eusebio Ayala, former

Minister in Washington. The other members are: Señores José P. Guggiari,

President of the Chamber of Deputies and leader of the Liberal Party;

Francisco G. Chaves, leader of the Republican Party; Fulgencio R. Moreno

and Manuel Dominguez. Captain Elias Ayala of the Paraguayan Navy and

Sr. José Antonio Moreno are assisting in an advisory capacity, together with

Dr. Pedro Saguier, Minister to Argentina.

The leader of the Bolivian Commission is Dr. José Maria Escalier. The

other members are Dr. Daniel Sanchez Bustamante, a former Minister for

Foreign Affairs and Public Instruction, who represented Bolivia in 1920 at

the Assembly of the League of Nations, Sr. Ricardo Mujía and General

Carlos Blanco Galindo. Colonel Oscar Mariaca Pando, Dr. Miguel Mercado

Moreira and Sr. Julio Gutierrez are acting as advisers of the Commissioners,

and Dr. Alberto Diez de Medina, Bolivian Minister to Argentina, is

collaborating with the delegates.

The Argentine Government will be represented at the Conference by Dr.

Isidro Ruiz Moreno, the Solicitor of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

Upon their arrival at the Foreign Office the delegates were received by Dr.

Sagarna, the Minister for Foreign Affairs ad interim. After the exchange of

credentials Dr. Sagarna, who presided over the first meeting, welcomed the

commissioners in the name of President Alvear and explained that

Argentina had extended its good offices in the desire that the long standing

difficulty should be satisfactorily solved without injury to the sovereignty of

either nation. Both delegations were then received by President Alvear, to

whom they presented their respects.

Certain Paraguayan and Bolivian delegates have given interviews to the

press, couched in vague but optimistic terms, alleging that their respective

delegations are inspired by a spirit of justice and friendship. Dr. Mujía, of

the Bolivian Delegation, however, is reported to have stated that his country

must have an outlet on the Paraguay River, which should be not only of

immense benefit to Bolivian commerce, but of great value to Paraguay. On

the other hand, Dr. Guggiari, one of the Paraguayan representatives, has

pointed out to La Nación that his country is much more vitally interested

than Bolivia in the Northern Chaco and has substantiated its claims

repeatedly during the last half century by military occupation, commercial

concessions, etc. This interview has called forth a sharp reply from Dr.

Escalier, who, in a letter to La Nación, expressed his surprise at Dr.

Guggiari’s statements and asserted that the Bolivian delegates could also

proclaim the incontestable rights of Bolivia to the Northern Chaco.

Among Argentine officials there seems to be slight hope of the Conference

reaching a solution of this long outstanding controversy. In Paraguay, so I

am informed by the diplomatic representative to Argentina from a

neighboring country, who has just returned to Buenos Aires from a visit to

Asunción, there is a pronounced feeling of pessimism on the outcome of the

Conference, and public opinion is strongly adverse to making any

concessions to Bolivia.

It will be remembered that Article 4 of the Protocol of April 22 provides for

the formation of an arbitral tribunal should the present Conference fail to

reach a definite agreement. In this connection press reports of apparently

trustworthy character state that the Argentine Government would decline to

accept a membership in any arbitral tribunal that might be formed in

pursuance to this Article, and it has been confided to me by a high

Government official that President Alvear would not consent to act as

arbitrator.

I have [etc.]

ROBERT WOODS BLISS

[Document 244]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

BUENOS AIRES, December 6, 1927.

[Received January 5, 1928.]

No. 92

SIR: With reference to my despatch No. 26 of October 3, I have the honor to

state that the negotiations of the Paraguayan and Bolivian delegations

appointed in pursuance of the Gutierrez-Diaz León protocol appear to have

reached an impasse. It is reported that the cause of the difficulties

encountered by these delegations consists in the divergence of opinion on

the subject of the status quo which the Department will remember was

defined in the Pinilla-Soler protocol of 1907. The Paraguayan

representatives desire to reach, first of all, some kind of a modus vivendi

based upon this status quo after which the determination of the international

boundary could be arrived at by direct negotiations. Should these fail, an

arbitral tribunal would be appointed and the limits of the territory defined

that would be submitted to its decision.

It is stated, however, that the Bolivians decline to consider at present any

such status quo or modus vivendi, asserting that the delimitation of the

international boundary must be first considered and not matters of relatively

secondary importance. It is also reported that, according to the Bolivian

viewpoint, the status quo of the Pinilla-Soler protocol had no bearing upon

the boundary lines which, according to the terms of that protocol, were to

be submitted to arbitration and which, the Bolivians allege, were altered by

the Mujía-Ayala protocol of 1913. The Bolivian delegates also declare

that the status quo had reference only to actual possessions and not to

boundaries.

To the observation of the Paraguayan delegates that Bolivia has erected

forts to the eastward of the line stipulated in the Pinilla-Soler protocol, their

Bolivian confreres reply that Paraguay has also made important advances

into the disputed territory.

It is alleged in this connection, however, that should the Paraguayan thesis

be adopted, it would not mean that Bolivia would be compelled, for this

reason, to evacuate the forts, as such evacuation would occur only in the

event that the treaty or arbitral decision gave the territory to Paraguay. It

would, however, be equivalent to a recognition by the Bolivians that their

occupation of this country was merely de facto and not de jure.

During October and November the delegations have held a number of

plenary sessions for the purpose of presenting various memoranda and

counter memoranda setting forth their views with respect to the status quo.

These memoranda are now being studied by a special committee appointed

for this purpose. This committee is composed of the following persons:

The Bolivian Plenipotentiaries, Doctors José María Escalier and Daniel

Sánchez Bustamante.

The Paraguayan Plenipotentiaries, Doctors Eusebio Ayala, José P. Guggiari

and Fulgencio R. Moreno, together with several technical advisers.

It will also examine the problems presented by the delimitation of the

frontier and the possible establishment of an arbitral tribunal. For the time

being, therefore, the plenary sessions of the delegations have been

suspended.

It is stated that but slight hopes are entertained of solving the difficulty in

question, although Dr. Ayala expressed himself in optimistic terms on the

occasion of a recent visit to Asunción. Should the direct negotiations

terminate in failure, the appointment of an arbitral tribunal, as provided in

Article IV of the Gutierrez-Diaz León protocol, would appear to be the next

step to be taken by both Governments.

I have [etc.]

ROBERT WOODS BLISS

[Document 245]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 10 p.m.]

109. A report that the Government of Argentina had offered its mediation to

settle the boundary dispute between Bolivia and Paraguay has been given

prominence in La Nación. The Foreign Minister has denied in the paper that

the Government of Argentina had offered mediation.

I have ascertained from a reliable source that about a week ago the

Government of Argentina instructed its diplomatic representatives at

Asunción and La Paz to inform the Governments to which they are

accredited in the following sense: An impasse having apparently been

reached in the negotiations between the Governments of Bolivia and

Paraguay to settle the long-standing boundary dispute, the Government of

Argentina deemed it important to settle the matter before the Pan American

Conference opened next month. As an evidence of its friendly and

neighborly sentiments and since the meetings of the Joint Commission were

being held in Buenos Aires, the Government of Argentina made the

suggestion that an agreement be reached between the two parties along the

following lines:

1. That the matter be submitted to definite arbitration.

2. That police forces be substituted for military forces in the small

regiments in the territory in dispute and along the frontiers.

3. That a nonaggression pact effective until the disputed question

is finally adjudged, be signed by Bolivia and Paraguay.

Bolivia answered that it gladly accepted Argentina’s offer of mediation, and

Argentina replied that it had not offered to act as mediator, would not accept

[a request?] to arbitrate, and had only suggested a logical and final way out

of the present difficulty. Paraguay answered that it accepted the Argentine

suggestion in principle.

BLISS

[Document 246]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

BUENOS AIRES, December 28, 1927.

[Received January 18, 1928.]

No. 114

SIR: I have the honor to inform the Department that the Paraguayan and

Bolivian Boundary Commissions, which have been attempting, without

success, to settle the boundary dispute between their respective countries,

adopted yesterday a resolution, which was immediately made public. A

translation of this resolution reads as follows:

“As the Governments of Bolivia and Paraguay have accepted, in

principle, the friendly suggestion of the Government of the

Argentine Republic, as a means whereby the plenipotentiaries of

the Boundary Conference who have met in this Capital may be

enabled to continue their task, in view of the lateness of the

season and the advisability for both delegations to place

themselves in contact with their respective Chancelleries, it is

resolved: To suspend the Conference until March 15, 1928.”

As stated in my telegram No. 113 of December 23, a member of the

Paraguayan delegation informed me that during the interim the Argentine

suggestions, set forth in my telegram No. 109 of December 19, will be

carefully considered by both Governments. He expressed to me the belief

that favorable chances existed for the boundary dispute being ultimately

submitted to arbitration.

I have [etc.]

ROBERT WOODS BLISS

>> Not printed.

[Document 247]

The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State

[Received 7: p.m.]

181. The Colombian Minister has just returned to Managua and states that

he expected to revive with the Nicaraguan Government the question of the

San Andrés Archipelago. I have discussed the subject with Diaz who

informs me that he favors the settlement proposed by Colombia as set forth

in the Department’s instruction 212 directed to Secretary Thurston under

Minister for Foreign Affairs to commence preliminary negotiations with

Colombian Minister tending toward such settlement.

EBERHARDT

[Document 248]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)

[WASHINGTON,] August 1, 1927.

SETTLEMENT OF TERRITORIAL QUESTION BETWEEN COLOMBIA AND NICARAGUA

The Colombian Minister called on Monday, August 1, at my request. I told

him that in the course of the last three or four years when we were

discussing together the settlement of the boundary between Colombia and

Panama and the boundaries between Colombia and Peru and Colombia and

Brazil he had said that when these were finished Colombia would have but

one outstanding territorial question, namely, that with Nicaragua which he

would like to have settled here also. I told him that the Department had now

received a telegram from the Legation in Nicaragua, stating that the

Colombian Minister had just returned to Managua and had said that he

expects to reopen this question with the Nicaraguan Government. The

matter had been discussed between President Diaz and the American

Minister and it seemed possible that Nicaragua might request the views of

this Government regarding the matter.

I reminded the Minister that some two years ago the question had come up

and that Colombia had then suggested a settlement by which Colombia

would withdraw her claim and would recognize Nicaraguan sovereignty

over the Mosquito Coast and Great and Little Corn Islands if Nicaragua, in

return, would recognize Colombian sovereignty over the Islands of San

Andrés and Providencia. Nicaragua had declined such a settlement and had

stated in return that Nicaragua could not discuss the Mosquito Coast nor

Great and Little Corn Islands, which must be recognized as Nicaraguan, but

would be willing to arbitrate the question of San Andrés and Providencia.

So far as I knew, this matter had not progressed further, but I presumed this

had not been accepted by Colombia as Colombia was now opening the

matter further.

Señor Olaya replied that this had been rejected; that Colombia could not

arbitrate only a portion of the claims, that either the full claims of both

would have to be arbitrated or there would have to be some outside

settlement and Colombia really did not want to arbitrate the question of the

San Andrés Islands. Besides holding valid titles to these Islands from Spain,

these Islands were inhabited and had been administered by Colombia for

the last 125 years. Hence Colombia would not wish to arbitrate giving them

up, but Colombia he thought would be willing to make the same

arrangement as proposed two years ago. I told the Minister that it might be

possible for this Government to be of some help in the matter and, as he

knew, the Department was always glad to be of assistance, at the request of

both parties, to the Republics of this hemisphere in settling their difficulties.

There was also a question in which the United States was also involved and

before going further in the matter I would like to know whether Colombia

regarded Roncador Key, Quita Sueño Bank, and the Serrana Bank as part of

San Andrés Archipelago. The Minister would recall that President Wilson

had issued proclamations in 191958 declaring these uninhabited Islands

possessions of the United States by virtue of the so-called Guano Act.

During the last year, when I was away from the Department, the question

had come up in connection with some British seamen, I thought, and I felt it

would be well to have it definitely settled that these Islands were not a part

of the San Andrés Archipelago.

The Minister replied that this was a matter in which there was a difference

of opinion; that the Islands were practically worthless. Part of the year they

are completely submerged and the rest of the year are used by fishermen

and also have some slight value on account of guano deposits. The Islands

are a danger to navigation, especially when submerged and that he

presumed the main interest of the United States in the Islands was on

account of the danger to shipping and the necessity of maintaining

lighthouses there.

The Minister stated that he was without instructions from his Government,

that he had studied the matter very closely and he would like to make a

personal suggestion which, if acceptable, he would recommend to his

Government:

Colombia and Nicaragua to conclude a treaty by which Nicaraguan

sovereignty is recognized over the Mosquito Coast and Great and Little

Corn Island[s] and Colombia would also in the same act confirm the rights

of the United States to Great and Little Corn Islands obtained by the Treaty

with Nicaragua of 1914. Nicaragua would recognize Colombian

sovereignty over the Islands of San Andrés and Providencia, and Colombia

and the United States would submit to arbitration the ownership of the other

keys and Colombia would agree, should she win the arbitration, to sell these

keys to the United States, should the United States so desire, for a

consideration to be agreed upon between the two Governments.

The Minister stated that it was a question of amour propre for Colombia as

she could not well give up the Islands or recognize American jurisdiction

over them except through arbitration and that he felt sure that Colombia

would accept anybody proposed by the United States as arbitrator. I told the

Minister I would look into the matter and advise him later.

F[RANCIS] W[HITE]

[Document 249]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)

[WASHINGTON,] August 2, 1927.

THREE POSSIBLE FORMULAS FOR SETTLEMENT OF TERRITORIAL QUESTION BETWEEN COLOMBIA AND NICARAGUA

The Colombian Minister called on Tuesday, August 2, and said that he had

been thinking over the question of the Colombian-Nicaraguan territorial

dispute as well as the question of Roncador, Quita Sueño, and Serranilla

keys, and that he had jotted down three possible formulas for settling the

matter. He read these over to me and left a copy thereof which is attached

hereto. The Minister stated that he thought that perhaps the third was the

most acceptable.

When the Minister first came in he stated that he had thought up four

solutions, although his memorandum contained but three. I therefore told

him that while I had not yet been able to study the matter fully as some of

the papers were in rather inaccessible archives and I had not yet been able

to get hold of them, I had nevertheless read certain of the papers and it

appeared to me that we were making a great deal out of a very small matter.

These keys had been claimed by the United States since about 1869 and the

President had issued a proclamation in 1919 formally declaring them to be

under the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the United States and out of the

jurisdiction of any other Government. Furthermore, these keys appeared to

have very little intrinsic value; that they do constitute a very real menace to

shipping, lying as they do on the trade route between the Panama Canal and

the Straits of Yucatan. That being the case, the United States had erected

lighthouses on them and maintains them and far from the Islands bringing

in any revenue to the United States they constitute an expense to the extent

of the erection and maintenance of the lighthouses, and that these

lighthouses are maintained for the benefit of everyone, Colombian shipping

as well as that of the United States and all other maritime nations. In view

of this fact, I thought that the easiest solution would lie in a general

recognition all around of the statu quo, that is, for Nicaragua to recognize

Colombian dominion over San Andrés and Providencia, Colombia to

recognize Nicaraguan dominion over the Mosquito Coast and the Corn

Islands and the United States dominion over these keys.

The Minister stated that Colombia could justify recognizing certain

territorial rights to Nicaragua because Nicaragua recognized Colombian

rights in return over San Andrés and Providencia, but in the case of these

keys the United States was not recognizing anything as Colombia’s in

return. He then alluded to the fact that the inhabitants of San Andrés now

fish in the waters off these keys and will probably wish to continue to do so.

I then suggested to him that that would give the United States the chance to

recognize the statu quo in favor of Colombia by according the inhabitants

of San Andrés the right to fish in the waters of these keys. …

The Colombian Minister stated that he had not ventured to put in writing a

further solution that suggested itself to him as he was without instructions

from his Government. I told him that I quite appreciated his position and

fully understood that any suggested formula that he might make to me was

purely personal and informal on his part without instructions from his

Government and was not binding in any way. He then said that somewhat

over a year ago Colombia had arrested certain British fishermen in these

waters and that the British Government told the Colombian Government

that it did not recognize the right of the latter to make the arrest in these

waters as the ownership of these Islands was in dispute between Colombia

and the United States, and had added that, should Colombia not have

jurisdiction in those waters, Great Britain reserved the right to make claims

for indemnity for the improper arrest. The Minister stated that they of

course would not like to be met with demands from the British Government

for indemnity of a million pesos or so for every West Indian Negro

fisherman arrested at that time, but he agreed with me that it was advisable

to settle the matter without too cumbersome a process and was inclined to

agree with the views I stated earlier in our conversation to the effect that the

Islands were hardly of sufficient importance to justify the expense of an

arbitration. Also he stated that he would like to have some quid pro quo to

justify Colombia recognizing these keys as appertaining to the United

States and giving up the position they had taken in the past that they

belonged to Colombia. The Minister therefore thought that the matter could

best be arranged by the signing of a Procès-Verbal by the Secretary of State,

the Colombian Minister and the Nicaraguan Minister, in which it would be

agreed that Colombia and Nicaragua would sign a treaty by which

Colombia would recognize Nicaraguan dominion over the Corn Islands and

Mosquito Coast and Nicaragua would recognize Colombian dominion over

San Andrès and Providencia, and the United States and Colombia would

sign a treaty by which Colombia would renounce her rights to the keys in

favor of the United States and recognize the dominion of the United States

over those keys, the United States agreeing in turn to grant the inhabitants

of San Andrès fishing rights of these waters in perpetuity and also to

construct lighthouses on San Andrès and Providencia, the lighthouses

thereafter to be maintained by Colombia.

I told the Minister that I thought this was a very good suggestion which I,

personally, was inclined to favor, and he stated that he would recommend it

to his Government and let me know as soon as he had a reply.

It will be recalled that when the United States established lighthouses on the

three keys in question, the Navy Department and the Department of

Commerce were both very anxious to establish lighthouses on San Andrés

and Providencia and asked the Department to take the matter up with the

Colombian Government. The Department replied that these Islands were in

dispute between Colombia and Nicaragua and that the Department believed

that, pending the adjustment of the dispute between Colombia and

Nicaragua regarding the Islands mentioned, it would be inadvisable to take

any action with a view to obtaining permission for the erection of aids to

navigation upon those Islands. The Department later on did request the

permission of the Colombian Government but never received an answer. At

that time the ratification by Colombia of the Treaty of 1914 for the

settlement of differences regarding the independence of Panama62 was

pending and also the matter was complicated by a press campaign in

Bogota against the United States on account of its action in erecting

lighthouses, without consulting Colombia, on the Roncador, Quita Sueño

and Serranilla keys, which were claimed by Colombia. The solution

proposed appears eminently satisfactory to the United States as it settles

another Latin American territorial conflict and clears up any question as to

[Document 250]

The Colombian Legation to the Department of State

undated

[Translation ]

THE COLOMBIA-NICARAGUAN MATTER AND THE RONCADOR, QUITA SUEÑO AND SERRANILLA KEYS

Possible formulas:

Number 1: The Colombian and Nicaraguan plenipotentiaries to sign at

Washington a treaty consecrating the status quo as follows: Mangle Islands

and the Mosquito to Nicaragua; San Andrés and Providencia to Colombia.

At the same time the United States and Colombia to sign an arbitration

convention to settle in this way the dominion over the Roncador, Quita

Sueño, and Serranilla Keys. The two parties may incorporate in this

convention such provisions as they deem expedient.

Number 2: Colombia and Nicaragua to sign at Managua a treaty

consecrating the formula: Mangles, Mosquito to Nicaragua; San Andrés and

Providencia to Colombia.

At the same time the Governments of the United States and Colombia to

exchange notes at Washington stating that the question of dominion over

the Roncador, Quita Sueño and Serranilla Keys will be settled by means of

an arbitration convention between the two Governments. In these notes the

parties can make such statements as they deem opportune which are to be

incorporated afterwards in an arbitration convention.

Number 3: The Secretary of State of the United States and the Ministers of

Colombia and Nicaragua, duly authorized by their respective Governments,

to sign a declaration or act, in which they will record the fact that the three

Governments have accepted the following formulas to settle pending

questions:

Nicaragua recognizes the rights of Colombia to the exclusive and complete

dominion over San Andrés and Providencia.

Colombia recognizes the rights of Nicaragua to the exclusive and complete

dominion over the Mosquito and the Mangle Islands.

The Governments of Colombia and Nicaragua engage themselves

immediately to give effect to this agreement by means of a public treaty.

The United States and Colombia agree that the dominion of the Roncador,

Serranilla and Quita Sueño Keys shall be settled by an arbitration

convention between Colombia and the United States to whose terms the two

Parties will agree later.

[Document 251]

The Minister in Nicaragua (Eberhardt) to the Secretary of State

MANAGUA, August 31, 1927.

[Received September 19.]

No. 464

SIR: With no instructions or comment from the Department to refer to in

to advise the Department that I have nevertheless discussed this entire

question informally with President Diaz and intimated that I saw no reason

why preliminary negotiations with the Colombian Minister should not be

undertaken. I am informed that this has been done. I hope my action in the

matter will have the approval of the Department. It would, however, be

appreciated by both President Diaz and this Legation if the Department

would indicate whether a settlement along the lines proposed by the

advisable to the Department, or what, if any, additional representations and

points might be brought up in negotiations tending toward the settlement of

this old question.

I have [etc.]

CHARLES C. EBERHARDT

[Document 252]

The Chargé in Nicaragua (Munro) to the Secretary of State

[Received 9: p.m.]

yesterday that he expected the Colombian Minister to take up the San

Andrés Archipelago question with him in the near future and that he was

therefore anxious to learn whether the Department had any views to

express. Is the Department now ready to make any suggestion to the

Nicaraguan Government regarding this matter?

MUNRO

[Document 253]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Nicaragua (Munro)

consideration to this question and instructions will be forwarded to you in

the near future.

KELLOGG

[Document 254]

The Chargé in Nicaragua (Munro) to the Secretary of State

[Received 5: p.m.]

today to ascertain when the Department would be ready to express an

opinion regarding the San Andrés Archipelago question.

MUNRO

[Document 255]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Nicaragua (Munro)

Department in connection with this question and your instructions have

been delayed pending receipt of reply. It is hoped that it may be possible to

send instructions to you before long.

KELLOGG

[Document 256]

The Chargé in Nicaragua (Munro) to the Secretary of State

[Received 8: p.m.]

has proposed a settlement leaving the San Andrés Archipelago to Colombia

and the Corn Islands and the Mosquito Coast to Nicaragua. The Nicaraguan

Government apparently regards this proposal with some favor but wishes to

do nothing until it hears from the Department. The delay is prejudicial to

the chances of a settlement because the prolonged discussion of the matter

by the newspapers and by the bipartisan advisory commission, which the

Government has appointed, can only do harm.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs told me today that he had been privately

informed by a Nicaraguan in Bogotá that the Colombian Government might

be persuaded to pay an indemnity of $500,000 for the relinquishment of

Nicaragua’s claim to the San Andrés Archipelago if a Nicaraguan Minister

were sent to Bogota to discuss the matter. I endeavored to discourage this

idea.

MUNRO

printed).

[Document 257]

The Chargé in Nicaragua (Munro) to the Secretary of State

[Received 2 p.m.]

327. The Minister for Foreign Affairs has asked me to inquire again when

the Department will be ready to express an opinion on the question of the

San Andrés Archipelago.

MUNRO

[Document 258]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Nicaragua (Munro)

you an answer next week.

KELLOGG

[Document 259]

The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

110. Colombian Minister has just called and states that on account of the

repeated specific promises of the President and Minister of Foreign Affairs

of Peru that the Colombian boundary treaty68 would be promptly submitted

to Congress for its consideration and the failure up to this time to comply

with these promises has created a critical situation in his country, one of the

leading papers with much influence urging the military occupation of the

territory in dispute. Curletti, Chairman of the Committee Foreign Relations

of the Senate and of the Joint Committee of the Senate and House,

report to the Senate on the treaty. Since then Curletti has taken no steps to

comply with his promise and has not submitted his report. The Colombian

Minister states that he interviewed Minister for Foreign Affairs today and

that the latter told him that the discussion of Tacna-Arica70 would not

interfere with the approval of the Colombian boundary treaty and assured

Lozano that he would immediately again interview Curletti at length and

that positively the treaty would be acted upon by Congress in the early days

of January.

However Congress will be in vacation for several days during new year and

the extra session will adjourn about January 20th and it is not known that

another extra session will be called during the year and on account of the

repeated disappointments in this respect Lozano feels that no action will be

taken in which case he states there will be no occasion for him to remain

longer as Minister in Peru and that he fears a serious rupture in the relations

of the two countries.

I have repeatedly recently urged upon both the President and the Minister of

Foreign Affairs the advisability of the prompt ratification of the treaty and

have been assured by both that such action will be taken but I have been

informed that since then largely on account of the Tacna-Arica question

there has been an unfavorable reaction in Congress towards the boundary

treaty.

It is possible that some [paraphrase] inquiry of Velarde71 regarding the

status of the treaty might help.

POINDEXTER

see also Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores del Peru, Tratados,

Convenciones y Acuerdos vigentes entre el Peru y otros Estados (Lima,

Imprenta Torres Aguirre, 1936), vol. I, p. 251.

[Document 260]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter)

[Paraphrase]

to have as many causes of dissension between the Latin American

Republics as possible removed before the Pan American Conference

convenes, you should take up this question again with the Foreign

[Document 261]

The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 9: p.m.]

4. President Leguía told the Colombian Minister that, due to the delicate

situation occasioned by the Tacna-Arica question, he would be unable to

submit the boundary treaty to the present Congress. The Colombian

Minister replied that, because of reiterated promises made by the President

and the Foreign Office on various specific occasions during the last few

years and especially during the last few months that the treaty would be

submitted to Congress and promptly ratified and the fact that they had

failed to fulfill any of these promises, he considered it useless to negotiate

further on this subject with the Government of Peru and he would not return

again to discuss the subject with him.

The Colombian Minister also told President Leguía that if the treaty were

not submitted and approved by this Congress, a dangerous condition of

public opinion in Colombia would be created. President Leguía seemed

greatly embarrassed and assured the Colombian Minister that the present

state of affairs was due to circumstances beyond his control. He begged him

to be patient, and again assured him that his intention to have the treaty

ratified at some future date was as strong as ever. The Colombian Minister

appears to have little confidence in this and has informed his Government

of the present state of affairs.

POINDEXTER

[Document 262]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)

[WASHINGTON,] June 15, 1927.

COLOMBIAN-PERUVIAN BOUNDARY TREATY OF 1922

The Colombian Minister called on Mr. White on June 15 and stated that his

Government is very anxious regarding the ratification of the Colombian-

Peruvian Boundary Treaty of 1922 and, as the Department had been most

helpful in this matter in the past and especially with relation to the signing

of the Procès Verbal on March 4, 1925, he would be very glad to know the

Department’s views in the matter and any suggestions it might have to offer.

The Minister stated that he had received a cable from his Government three

or four days ago stating that word had been received from the Colombian

Minister in Lima to the effect that the President of Peru had discussed the

matter recently with Ambassador Poindexter and had assured him that Peru

would ratify the Colombian Treaty during the coming session of the

Peruvian Congress.

Mr. White told the Minister that so far the Department had received no

report from Lima regarding this phase of the matter but, as the Minister’s

information apparently had been sent from Lima to Bogota by cable and

from there to Washington also by cable, there had evidently been a recent

development about which there had not been time to receive a report from

the American Ambassador in Lima. The last report that Mr. White had seen

stated that there had been no chance of the ratification of this Treaty during

the last session of Congress and that, had the matter been brought to a vote,

ratification would surely have been rejected. The indications, however,

pointed to a more favorable situation since then and Mr. White could only

suggest patience to the Colombian Minister.

Doctor Olaya referred to the unfavorable effect the delay had caused in

Colombia and said that he understood the situation and agreed that it would

be well to await further reports to know more definitely what recent

developments had taken place in Peru. Doctor Olaya asked Mr. White to

keep the matter in mind and, should it be possible to do anything, expressed

the hope that the Department would continue to use its good offices. Mr.

White stated that the Department would of course be glad at any time to be

helpful to the nations of this hemisphere in arranging their difficulties and

would watch developments in this case with great interest.

F[RANCIS] W[HITE]

[Document 263]

The Chargé in Peru (Boal) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase—Extract]

Lozano, the Colombian Minister in Peru, again expressed to me his

conviction that the Government of Peru was playing for time in the matter

of ratifying the Colombian-Peruvian treaty.

The Government of Colombia, Dr. Lozano states, considers that matters

have reached the point where further delay cannot be countenanced, and

that unless Parliament acts on the treaty within the next 20 days, he will

depart from Peru. Dr. Lozano earnestly requested me to speak to the

Foreign Minister and the President to urge ratification. It is my feeling at

this time that evidence of the interest of the United States would further

action, and unless the Department instructs me otherwise, I intend to

mention the subject to the Foreign Minister Saturday, September 10, and

inquire as to progress and stress the importance of prompt action in the

interest of good relations between Colombia and Peru. I believe that a call

on the President would be far more likely to produce results, but will not

take this step unless the Department instructs me to do so.

BOAL

files.

[Document 264]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Boal)

[Paraphrase]

discussed the ratification of the Colombian treaty with the Peruvian

Ambassador and manifested to him the interest of this Government in the

matter and the hope that this question would now be finally disposed of. He

said he would cable his Government immediately. You may take up the

matter with the Foreign Minister and, at your discretion, with the President,

should you have a favorable opportunity.

KELLOGG

[Document 265]

The Chargé in Peru (Boal) to the Secretary of State

LIMA, September 14, 1927.

[Received October 4.]

No. 811

ratification of the Peruvian-Colombian Boundary Treaty.

I have the honor to report that after receiving the Department’s No. 28,

above referred to, I called upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs and after

discussing several other matters with him, inquired regarding the progress

being made toward ratification of the boundary treaty with Colombia,

stating that I had heard that the delay in ratification was causing some

uneasiness in Colombia and that of course the Government of the United

States took a friendly interest in furthering the continuance of amicable

relations between these two important countries of South America.

Señor Rada y Gamio immediately entered into a long explanation of the

causes for the delay in the ratification of the treaty. He first alleged that the

delay was not as great as the Colombians seemed to think, inasmuch as the

period during which ratification could have been effected began only on

March 4, 1925, when the final agreement relative to the treaty was signed in

Washington. He then said that it had not been deemed advisable to present

the treaty for ratification last year as it had been felt at that time that such

action would have resulted in the Congress either rejecting the treaty or

demanding its modifications. Either contingency, he pointed out, would

have been most unwelcome to the Government and it was thought that the

only course to be pursued was to withhold presentation of the treaty until

the way to its certain ratification had been paved by the Government.

Señor Rada y Gamio assured me that every obstacle to the presentation of

the treaty to the Parliament and its ratification had now been removed. He

said that it had been necessary to go rather slowly with the Senators and

Deputies because of their well known susceptibilities, that if they felt the

Government was trying to hustle the members of the Foreign Relations

Committee of the Parliament into a hasty recommendation of the treaty, or

was trying to hustle the Parliament itself into a hasty ratification, they might

easily become antagonistic. He added that acrimonious comment in the

newspapers and the Parliament of Colombia and the obvious impatience of

the Colombian Government did not help matters when it came to

ratification here, that the main basis for asking for ratification of this treaty

lay in advancing the theory of Peruvian-Colombian friendship and that

every act of Colombia, or even of individual Colombians, which could be

used to show that Colombian friendship was not sincere, made it more

difficult to obtain favorable action from the Peruvian Parliament.

After our conversation at the Foreign Office, the Minister of Foreign

Relations asked me to accompany him to his house in order that he might

show me the extensive work which he had done himself in connection with

the Treaty. As we were leaving the Foreign Office building, he called one of

his two confidential assistants from his office … This gentleman … said

that the documents on which they had been working up to two o’clock in

the morning for several days past, were now almost ready and that within a

few days they would be in the hands of the Committee.

At his house Señor Rada y Gamio showed me a file of manuscript notes

which he had made in connection with his defense of the treaty in the

Parliament, as well as a series of very rough maps of the district which he

had drawn, and several large and fairly detailed maps which he had had

made. It was apparently his object to show me that the preparations for

submitting the treaty to the Parliament had necessarily been complicated

and lengthy and had required a great deal of work on his part. He said,

however, that he expected the treaty would be ratified in the course of the

month of October, as the Government expected to see it presented for

ratification at the end of this month or the beginning of next month and that

he did not think that the actual debates of the Parliament would take more

than five or six days.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs asked me to return to see him on Monday,

September 12th. When I returned to his office on that day, he told me that

he had spoken of the matter of the ratification of the Treaty to the President

and that the President had asked him to assure me that the Treaty would be

presented to the Parliament at the end of September or the beginning of

October, and would be ratified in the course of October. Señor Rada y

Gamio added that therefore the United States Government could rest

assured that this would be the case since we had the President’s assurances,

as well as his own, that the Treaty would “be ratified in the month of

October.”

Yesterday I had occasion to see the Colombian Minister and in the course of

a conversation with him, told him that the Foreign Minister had informed

me that the Treaty would be ratified during October. I pointed out to him

that the impatience of public statements and newspaper articles in Colombia

might be used by the enemies of the treaty in the Parliament here to seek to

justify further delay and to oppose ratification on the grounds that a

Parliament could not be pressed into ratification by public utterances and

press heckling from another country. Señor Lozano agreed with me in this

and said that he would telegraph to his Government, recommending that

every effort be made to prevent either the Parliament or the press from

giving vent to their impatience until the end of October. He said nothing

further about leaving Lima in the near future and I inferred from what he

did say that he intended to refrain from pressing the matter very urgently

upon the Peruvian Government until the end of next month and that he did

not now expect to leave Lima before that time.

It may be noted that since my telegram, No. 39, above referred to, the

Committee for Foreign Affairs has met again but that no business was

transacted as the senior Deputy present objected that a quorum of the

members of the Chamber of Deputies, who form a part of the Committee,

was not present. It may be noted that there was a quorum present of the

Committee itself because, although three out of five members appointed

from the Chamber of Deputies were absent, the full number of Senators was

present. I understand that the Committee is to meet within a few days, but

that it is prevented from meeting immediately because Deputy MacLean

has gone to spend a few days near lea for the sake of his health, and until he

returns there is not likely to be a possibility of having a quorum of the

Committee, since it is apparent that the Committee holds that a majority of

the Deputies and a majority of the Senators, who are members of the

Committee, must be present.

While it is my impression that the Peruvian Government is taking more

active steps toward ratification at the present time than it has done

heretofore, I believe that things are likely to drag on as they have in the

past, in spite of the assurances which I have reported above, unless it is

made clear to the Peruvian Government that the United States Government

understands that they have given a very definite undertaking to have the

treaty presented at the latest in the early part of October and ratified in the

course of that month. …

I have [etc.]

PIERRE DE L. BOAL

[Document 266]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White)

[WASHINGTON,] September 27, 1927.

COLOMBIAN-PERUVIAN BOUNDARY TREATY

The Ecuadoran Chargé d’Affaires called on Monday, September 26, and

stated that he wished to discuss with me the question of the Colombian-

Peruvian Boundary Treaty which we had discussed nearly two years ago.

The Ecuadoran Government, he stated, was very much upset by the

Associated Press report which is being published throughout Latin America

to the effect that the United States is urging Peru to ratify the Colombian-

Peruvian Boundary Treaty. Ecuador was very much upset by this secret

treaty, the terms of which Colombia had refused to communicate to her.

Ecuador considered that it was contrary to her interests and was contrary to

the spirit of their 1916 Boundary Treaty. Señor Barberis handed me a

copy of a confidential memorandum which was sent out by the Ecuadoran

Foreign Office to its Legations abroad, explaining the Ecuadoran point of

view and the reasons prompting it to break off diplomatic relations with

Colombia.

I told Señor Barberis that I had not seen the press report he referred to but

that it was not authorized by this Department; nothing had been given out

by it. I inquired if he knew from where the report emanated—he said he did

not but presumed either from Washington, Lima or Bogota.

After reading through the memorandum I told him that I could not see that

it altered in any way the situation since we had discussed the matter over a

year ago. I told him that my recollection of the matter was that Ecuador and

Colombia had executed a Boundary Treaty in 1916, by which certain

territory in the region of Putumayo River was recognized by Ecuador as

Colombian and that Colombia in 1922 had signed a Treaty with Peru giving

this territory to the latter. In other words, Colombia in 1922 had given to

Peru territory which Ecuador in the Treaty of 1916 had recognized as

Colombian. I told him I could see no ground for charging Colombia with

violating the treaty provisions in this transaction unless there was

something in connection with the 1916 Treaty of which I was not informed.

I told him that on the face of it, it would appear to be similar to our

ownership of Alaska. Alaska had been sold to the United States by Russia

and if the United States should now wish to sell or cede Alaska to Canada it

would appear to be a matter between the United States and Canada, and a

matter to which Russia could not object. The same would appear to apply to

the territory which Colombia had now ceded to Peru. Señor Barberis

between Ecuador and Peru81 and to certain minutes of negotiations

preceding the conclusion of the Treaty of 1916. I told him that it was my

understanding that the previous treaties had been superseded by the Treaty

of 1916 and that I was not informed, of course, regarding the minutes of

negotiations of the 1916 Treaty. However, the memorandum he had handed

me itself appeared to admit that Colombia had not violated any treaty

provisions and was legally entitled to conclude the Peruvian Treaty of 1922,

ceding this territory to Peru; the memorandum mentioned only a moral

obligation on Colombia.

The Chargé admitted that that was the case; that Colombia had not violated

any treaty provision but that by giving up this territory to Peru Colombia

had very seriously prejudiced Ecuador’s position vis-a-vis Peru in the

settlement of the Peruvian-Ecuadoran boundary dispute.

I told Señor Barberis that I could see the position of Ecuador in the matter

and appreciate fully their point of view, but it appeared to me, nevertheless,

that here were two different questions and that there was nothing in the

Colombian-Peruvian Treaty to prevent Ecuador from immediately

attempting to come to an agreement or understanding with Peru over their

boundary difficulties. In other words, they were two entirely separate

matters the same as the Peruvian-Colombian boundary dispute was entirely

different from the Peruvian-Chilean dispute over Tacna-Arica. The Chargé

stated that Peru and Ecuador had agreed, as I knew, in 1924 to submit to the

arbitration of the United States the points in their boundary litigation on

which they were unable to agree. I said that I fully understood that and

that I presumed in the three years since that agreement had been made

Ecuador had been endeavoring to determine upon what points they might

come to an agreement with Peru, and that they might well find that they

could come to complete agreement and have no matters to submit to a third

party. Señor Barberis replied that he did not know the present status of the

matter, but it was his understanding that this matter was under discussion.

However, he stated, what his Government now wanted was simply for the

United States not to make any recommendations to Peru regarding the

ratification of this treaty but merely to let it take its course. Ecuador was not

asking intervention on the part of the United States in the matter but merely

to abstain from taking any action.

I replied that this matter was the outgrowth of the Procès-Verbal signed in

Washington on March 4, 1925, between Colombia, Peru and Brazil, as the

result of good offices of the United States which had been given at the

direct request of the three parties concerned. The United States of course

could not admit any outside party to the discussion unless so requested by

all concerned. In other words, it was the policy of the United States to

intervene in such matters only when requested to do so by all parties to the

dispute. Peru, Colombia and Brazil had asked the United States to lend its

good offices and it had done so. Apparently they were the only ones directly

concerned in this matter. Ecuador of course felt that its interests were

involved on account of its bearing on the other dispute. The United States

could take no part in that unless requested by the parties at issue. I

explained that this was the policy inevitably followed by this Government

and that it had done the same when Bolivia desired to come into the Tacna-

Arica negotiations in 1922 and the United States had had to inform them

that it could not consent of this unless Chile and Peru should request it. It

was the same now in the case between Colombia and Peru.

Señor Barberis stated that his Government was not asking to come into the

negotiations or asking the intervention of the United States but merely that

it abstain from taking any action. I told him that I understood that, but that

in many cases to abstain from taking action would have as positive an effect

in a given situation as taking direct action and that therefore the United

States would be influenced in its attitude only by the request of the parties

at issue. Señor Barberis stated that he understood our position but it was a

[Document 267]

The Chargé in Peru (Boal) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

55. (1) I have just been asked by the Colombian Minister if I would inquire

of the Government of Peru as to the progress of the Colombian-Peruvian

boundary treaty, and intimate to it the hope that the treaty would be

approved before the Colombian Congress closes on November 17. He

thinks that the question is entering upon a decisive phase because the

president of the Peruvian Senate, in the name of President Leguía, his

brother, promised him that the Committee on Foreign Affairs would report

the treaty to Congress day after tomorrow, and that it would be approved by

the end of this month.

(2) The treaty appears to be on the eve of being presented to Congress

where there is much opposition to it and much agitation regarding it. With

the general public the treaty is without doubt unpopular. I have been

reliably informed that the president of the House of Deputies in his attempt

to convince vacillating members has told them that the Government of the

United States has been bringing pressure to bear upon Peru to ratify the

treaty. It is my observation that even the officials of the Foreign Office who

have assisted the Foreign Minister in preparing the defense of the treaty in

Congress bitterly oppose it.

(3) Should I make any inquiry now, even if very informally, either of the

Foreign Minister or the President, such action might be reported to those

opposing the treaty, who as a last resort to arouse public opinion might use

my inquiry as evidence that the Government of the United States is

endeavoring to force the hand of the Government of Peru. This would react

both against the treaty and the United States. The Colombian Minister has

told me that Senator Arana telegraphed to Loreto, for publication there, that

mass meetings are being held in Lima against the treaty. There have been no

such meetings, but the action signifies his intention to incite an uprising

there, and the length he is prepared to go. Rather than participate in

submitting the treaty to Congress, Senator de la Piedra has taken leave for

20 days; and one of the warmest supporters of the President, Focion

Mariategui, is actively opposing the treaty.

(4) I intimated to the Colombian Minister that while of course I would be

pleased to help him, nevertheless, it seemed to me that the present might not

be a propitious time to take the step he suggested.

(5) If the treaty is not presented to Congress early next week, a situation

might develop where an inquiry might be a decided incentive to present it. I

would appreciate it, therefore, if the Department would inform me whether

it desires me to make a discreet inquiry despite the possibility set forth in

paragraph (3), if there continues to be a delay in presenting the treaty and

the President seems inclined to postpone the matter until after the

conference at Habana, as some of the Deputies have suggested.

BOAL

[Document 268]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Peru (Boal)

[Paraphrase]

is taking a lively interest in the Colombian-Peruvian boundary treaty, and it

wishes, in any proper way, to encourage Peru to ratify the treaty. It feels

confident that the assurances given to you that the treaty would be reported

to the Peruvian Congress during this session will not be ignored. However,

the Department leaves it entirely to your discretion to bring this matter

informally to the attention of the Peruvian Government again or not to do

so, whichever course, in your judgment, would best meet the exigencies of

the situation, and best lead to a favorable result.

KELLOGG

[Document 269]

The Colombian Minister (Olaya) to the Secretary of State

[Translation ]

WASHINGTON, December 22, 1927.

No. 1360

SIR: By a cable of this date my Government informs me that it has learned

through its Legation in Lima that the boundary treaty signed on March 24,

1922, by Colombia and Peru, has been approved without amendment by the

Congress of the last-named Republic.

On this occasion it is now my honor and pleasure to present to Your

Excellency the testimony of the high and sincere appreciation of my

Government for the good offices for the settlement of the boundary disputes

between Colombia, Peru, and Brazil, which were tendered in such a lofty

spirit for the good of the Continent by the Government of the United States

and were consecrated in the procèss-verbal signed in the city of Washington

on March 4, 1925. From that date the said good offices were always found

in Your Excellency, an enlightened exponent who has labored for peace and

harmony between the Republics concerned in this question with high views

and for which they owe to Your Excellency their sincere gratitude.

I avail myself [etc.]

ENRIQUE OLAYA

[Document 270]

The Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde) to the Secretary of State

[Translation ]

WASHINGTON, December 22, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: Referring to the boundary treaty signed by Peru and Colombia on

March 24, 1922, I have the honor, by direction of my Government, to

transcribe to Your Excellency the following cablegram received on this day:

“By a vote of 102 to only 7, Congress approved the boundary

treaty between Peru and Colombia strengthening the intimate

friendship of the two peoples.”

I avail myself [etc.]

HERNÁN VELARDE

[Document 271]

The Secretary of State to the Colombian Minister (Olaya)

WASHINGTON, January 3, 1928.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note, No. 1360 of

December 22, 1927, informing me that the boundary treaty between

Colombia and Peru signed on March 24, 1922, had been ratified by the

Congress of the latter country without amendment.

This Government is very pleased to learn of the ratification of the treaty

which is further evidence of the desire of the countries of this hemisphere to

settle their differences by pacific means and to live in peace and harmony

with one another. It is particularly gratifying to this Government to think

that it was enabled through the Proces Verbal signed at Washington, March

4, 1925, to assist the Governments of Colombia, Peru and Brazil to arrive at

a solution of their boundary difficulties which is satisfactory to all three

countries and it is earnestly hoped that the remaining provision of the

Proces Verbal may shortly be implemented by the Governments of

Colombia and Brazil in order that all boundary questions between them

may be definitely settled.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 272]

The Secretary of State to the Peruvian Ambassador (Velarde)

WASHINGTON, January 11, 1928.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s

note of December 22 last, informing me of the ratification by the Peruvian

Government of the Boundary Treaty between Colombia and Perú.

The Government of the United States is very pleased to learn of this action,

regarding it as further evidence of the desire of the countries of this

hemisphere to settle their differences by pacific means and to live in peace

and harmony with one another. It is particularly gratifying to this

Government to think that it was enabled, through the Proces Verbal signed

at Washington on March 4, 1925, to assist the Governments of Brazil,

Colombia and Perú in arriving at a solution of their boundary difficulties

which is satisfactory to all three countries.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 273]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Haiti (Gross)

54. As it is probable that the boundary question will be discussed during the

visit of President Vasquez86 you should familiarize yourself with it. Follow

developments closely and keep the Department informed.

KELLOGG

[Document 274]

The Chargé in the Dominican Republic (Frost) to the Secretary

of State

SANTO DOMINGO, August 9, 1927.

[Received August 16.]

No. 574

SIR: Having taken occasion this morning to pay my respects to the Haitian

Minister, Mr. Dejean, who returned last evening from Port-au-Prince, I have

the honor to report that in a conversation which ensued Mr. Dejean

expressed himself as quite optimistic over the prospects of a prompt

solution of the Haitian-Dominican boundary question.

According to Mr. Dejean, the conversations between President Borno and

President Vasquez, as well as between high officials of the respective

governments, were very frank and friendly, and it is his belief that for the

first time there is the proper disposition on the part of the Dominican

Government to effect a solution of this long-standing question. Negotiations

will proceed on the basis of the so-called American line, which is the status

of present occupation and with a recognition that mutual accommodation

will be necessary. The spirit of the Treaty of 187487 will be invoked.

It is the hope of the Haitian Minister that an agreement will have been

reached before the time of the visit of President Borno to this country. He

considers it very desirable that the agreement be reached wholly by direct

negotiations and the expression of this thought on his part enabled me again

to express the interest which the Department has in a friendly solution of

the question, and its hope that solution can be achieved through direct

negotiations between the two parties. Mr. Dejean stated that in the possible

event of arbitration being necessary, appeal would naturally be made to the

American Government, but also frankly observed that he thought the

reception of the agreement by certain elements of the Dominican public

would be more favorable if American arbitration proved to be unnecessary.

He emphasized the value, however, of an occasional expression of interest

by the Department of State in an adjustment of this question, and stated that

it is his belief that previous expressions of that nature to the Dominican

Government had been of considerable assistance in promoting a disposition

on their part to find a solution.

Mr. Dejean will undertake the negotiations with the Dominican

Government, and the Legation will be informed of the progress made.

I have [etc.]

FRANKLIN B. FROST

[Document 275]

The Chargé in Haiti (Gross) to the Secretary of State

PORT AU PRINCE, August 10, 1927.

[Received August 24.]

No. 1057 (The High Commissioner’s Series)

the Haitian-Dominican boundary question.

The question of the Haitian-Dominican frontier was brought up as a subject

for discussion between Presidents Borno and Vasquez, during the latter’s

recent visit to this Capital. The conversations were friendly and indicative

of a mutual desire to arrive at a solution both logical and practical. The two

presidents agreed, in principle, to adopt permanently the status quo without

indemnity of any kind. No definite action was taken, however.

One or two minor problems remain to be worked out. One of these is the

question of frontier formalities on the trails between the Dominican towns

of Banica and Restauracion. These towns are about forty miles apart by the

trail usually used by the Dominicans, who find it easier to take this road

which crosses a corner of Haitian territory, rather than the road which

follows Dominican territory throughout. The journey over this road is

approximately five miles shorter than the distance by the road which

follows the Artibonite River from Banica as far as La Cruz de Cabrera. The

river road is on the Dominican side of the river most of the way. The

distance saved is small. On the other hand, the risk of the irritating

application of rigid frontier regulations, and the risk of the abuse of the

frontier regulations, if they are made lenient, is great.

There is a similar rumored frontier problem further south in the vicinity of

the town of Pedernales.

President Borno has told me that while nothing of a definite nature was

decided upon, it was the opinion of the two presidents that the question of

trails could be solved without difficulty and that if necessary an equivalence

of land could be exchanged in order that principal trails would not cross the

other’s territory. One parcel of territory which would doubtless enter into

such a trade, would be that around the eastern extremity of Etang (Lake)

Sumatre. It is President Borno’s desire that the frontier should pass between

these two lakes so that each country should have a trail around its own lake,

without crossing the other’s territory.

These adjustments appear to be desirable and satisfactory but it is possible

that any talk of exchange of territory will open up a phase of the question

which might delay indefinitely a solution to the whole boundary question.

I have [etc.]

C. GROSS

[Document 276]

The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary

of State

SANTO DOMINGO, September 28, 1927.

[Received October 11.]

No. 639

SIR: I have the honor to submit the following confidential report covering

recent developments respecting the Dominican-Haitian boundary question.

During the recent visit of President Vasquez to Port-au-Prince it was

suggested by President Borno that a brief convention be signed which

should declare (1) that all controversies and questions now existing between

the two Governments or which thereafter might arise should be settled if

possible through direct and friendly negotiations, and (2) should such direct

negotiations prove unsuccessful the good offices of a friendly third power,

if proferred, must be accepted.

The Convention was not signed, President Vasquez asserting that the death

of the wife of Señor Ricart, Dominican Secretary of State for Health and

Welfare, impelled him to return at once to Santo Domingo and that he

would later accord careful consideration to the matter. Shortly after his

return, President Vasquez called at the Haitian Legation to express to the

Minister his appreciation of the many courtesies extended to himself and his

party during their stay on Haitian territory, and stated that in the near future

he would cause to be sent to the Haitian Minister an important

communication. When three weeks had passed without any further

development, the Haitian Minister addressed a personal and confidential

communication to Minister for Foreign Affairs Sanchez in which reference

was made to the President’s visit to the Legation and his statement

regarding the formulation at an early date of an important communication.

The Haitian Minister pointed out in his note that he had not as yet received

any communication of the nature mentioned by President Vasquez and

stated that he would be most happy to receive at an early date, for

transmission to his Government, any communication which the Dominican

Government might see fit to address to him in the light of the mutual desire

of both Governments to effect a friendly settlement of any and all questions

pending between the two countries. After some delay Minister Dejean

received a note in reply from the Minister of Foreign Affairs saying in

substance that the Dominican Government was continuing to accord to the

questions its most sympathetic consideration but that for the moment he

was unable to amplify that statement.

The Haitian Minister, doubtless reflecting the attitude of his Government,

feels that since Haiti proposed the conclusion of a convention of the nature

mentioned above as preparatory to a serious consideration and discussion of

the boundary question the next move ought properly and appropriately to

come from the Dominicans.

In conversation with me last week at his summer home at Las Matas, where

in response to his invitation I spent two days, the President told me

confidentially that he had recently received a report from Port-au-Prince to

the effect that certain differences had arisen between the American High

Commissioner and President Borno respecting “certain amendments to the

Haitian Constitution,” and that he felt somewhat apprehensive lest the

situation might impair President Borno’s energy in dealing with the frontier

question. The President stated that he realized fully that an adjustment of

the boundary question could only be had if President Borno was in a

position to count upon the full support and cooperation of General Russell.

He added that he was causing a discreet investigation to be made, and that if

his previous information should be confirmed he intended to send a

personal message to President Borno counseling him in view of the great

importance of the boundary matter to make every effort to procure the full

cooperation of the High Commissioner and not permit any other question to

impair the fullest cooperation. I stated merely that I had not received any

information which would tend in any way to confirm his report. President

Vasquez then went on at some length, and in a very earnest and sincere

manner, to impress upon me his desire for an early settlement of the

question. He said that he regarded the present time as a very opportune one

[Document 277]

The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary

of State

SANTO DOMINGO, October 5, 1927.

[Received October 18.]

No. 644

SIR: Adverting to the Legation’s previous despatches respecting the

Dominican-Haitian boundary question, I have the honor to submit the

following report.

As reported in the Legation’s confidential despatch No. 639, September 28,

1927, President Vasquez recently received information indicating that

important differences of opinion had arisen at Portau-Prince between the

American High Commissioner and President Borno regarding certain

proposed amendments to the Haitian Constitution. During my recent visit to

the President at Las Matas he expressed some concern over the information

he had received, feeling that any important differences between General

Russell and President Borno might react unfavorably upon an early

settlement of the boundary question.

Mr. Dejean, the Haitian Minister here, went to Las Matas a few days ago, in

response to an invitation from the President, and during the course of the

visit President Vasquez inquired of the Minister whether he possessed any

information regarding the matter. Dejean assured the President that there

was no basis whatever for the report and stated that he had recently received

a personal letter from President Borno in which he referred to the proposed

constitutional amendments and said that he and General Russell were in

accord in the matter. President Vasquez expressed his gratification and

stated that a formal communication dealing with an important phase of the

relations between the two countries would be addressed to the Minister at

an early date.

In conversation with me, following his return from Las Matas, Mr. Dejean

said that in general he felt optimistic as regards the possibility of effecting

in the near future a final settlement of the boundary question. He again

expressed the opinion that it would be preferable to conclude the proposed

treaty of amity before entering into any formal negotiations respecting the

boundary. He suggested it would be helpful if I continued to manifest a

friendly interest in an early and amicable settlement of the controversy. I

said that there could be no question but that the Dominican Government

fully understood the attitude of the Department and that I should in the

future, as I had in the past, in my informal conversations with appropriate

Dominican officials impress upon them the friendly interest of my

Government in the effecting of a final and definite settlement of the

boundary question, an interest which was in entire harmony with that of the

two Governments more directly concerned.

In reply to an intimation from me that I should be glad to have more

definite and exact information with respect to the provisions of the

proposed treaty of amity, Dejean said that the draft as submitted to

President Vasquez was brief and embraced (1) a declaration outlawing war

as between the two countries, (2) a provision stating that in the event

friendly negotiations should fail of effecting the settlement of any question

between the two Governments, the good offices of a friendly third power, if

proferred, must be accepted. With regard to the second provision, Minister

Dejean said that it had been suggested here, not however by any Dominican

official, that the Dominican Government would construe the reference to

the “friendly third power” as in fact meaning the United States, and that if

the provision should be changed so as to provide for the submission to the

League of Nations of any question not susceptible of settlement by direct

negotiations the convention or treaty would find a ready acceptance by the

Government here.

Minister of Foreign Affairs Sanchez, together with the other members of the

Cabinet, is at Las Matas engaged in the drawing up of the national budget

for the coming year. I shall see him so soon as he returns to the Capital and

endeavor in a discreet manner to procure full information respecting the

Dominican Government’s attitude in the matter of the proposed treaty of

amity.

The Department will be kept fully informed by despatch or cable of all

developments.

I have [etc.]

EVAN E. YOUNG

[Document 278]

The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary

of State

SANTO DOMINGO, October 8, 1927.

[Received October 18.]

No. 648

SIR: Having reference to the Legation’s confidential despatch No. 644,

October 5, 1927, respecting the Dominican-Haitian boundary question and

the proposed treaty of amity, I have the honor to submit the following

confidential information regarding the attitude of the Dominican

Government in these matters as outlined to me yesterday by Minister of

Foreign Affairs Sanchez.

With regard to the Haitian proposal looking to the conclusion of a treaty of

amity between the two countries, Mr. Sanchez said that the Dominican

Government would be unable to sign the treaty in the form in which it had

been submitted by President Borno. The principal objection was to the

provision under which each Government bound itself to refrain from war

against the other. On this point, the Minister expressed himself as being

heartily in favor in principle of the provision in question, but asserted that

the boundary controversy could be adjusted only through one of three

view of the past history of the question the Dominican Government could

place little hope in any recourse to arbitration, and that if direct negotiations

between the two countries should fail, and the use of armed force,

precluded, the Dominican Government would find its hands tied. Sanchez

asserted that the Dominican Government had in fact no intention of

resorting to the use of armed force, but he emphasized the point that under

the status quo the situation is much more favorable to Haiti than to the

Dominican Republic, and said that he felt strongly that to outlaw war

through the medium of a solemn written undertaking, prior to the settlement

of the boundary question, would weaken the position of the Dominican

Government in any negotiations with Haiti looking to the definite

settlement of the problem.

The Minister then went on to say that once the boundary question was

settled he would be heartily in favor of the conclusion of the treaty of amity

as proposed by President Borno, or, if preferred by Haiti, the text of the

provisions of the proposed convention could be made a part of the final

treaty settling the boundary question.

Mr. Sanchez very confidentially informed me that the program of the

Dominican Government respecting the settlement of the boundary

controversy and the conclusion of a treaty of amity is at present as follows:

1. Refusal to sign the proposed treaty of amity unless it be so

modified as to eliminate the provision outlawing war perpetually.

2. To propose to Haiti that a joint topographic study of the frontier

zone be made by the two Governments. With reference to this

point he remarked that the absence of topographical information,

accepted by both Governments, rendered it very difficult to deal

in a satisfactory manner with the frontier question. He suggested

that if the so-called “American Line” had been definitely

established by markers from one coast to the other it would have

been of immeasurable assistance to both Governments in

connection with the boundary negotiations. He added that while

both Governments today possessed their own official maps it was

a matter of common knowledge that neither one was accurate.

3. With the necessary topographical data in hand and approved by

both Governments, there should then be, in the opinion of the

Minister, no serious obstacle to the speedy settlement of the entire

question. The Minister intimated that should the Haitian

Government agree to the proposal which the Dominican

Government intends to advance in the near future looking to the

establishment of a topographical commission the work would

probably be done by, or at least under the supervision of,

American experts.

In according me the information set forth above Mr. Sanchez requested that

it be regarded as highly confidential. I thanked the Minister for the frank

expression of his views and the statement of the present attitude and policy

of the Dominican Government, and I reiterated the hope that the settlement

of the question would continue to receive his most sympathetic and careful

attention and a very sincere and earnest effort made to arrive at an early

agreement with Haiti.

The Minister said that he would be glad to keep me informed of all

developments, and that he would wish to confer with me from time to time.

He added that he considered it highly important that the Government of the

United States be kept promptly and fully apprised of all developments and

that he felt that full and frank discussions with me would serve the best

interests of both the Dominican Republic and Haiti. In conclusion, he stated

that he had not considered it advisable as yet to discuss the entire matter

with the Haitian Minister as freely and fully as he had in his conversation

with me, but that a communication setting forth the Dominican

Government’s attitude toward the proposed treaty of amity would be

addressed to Minister Dejean in the near future.

I have [etc.]

EVAN E. YOUNG

[Document 279]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in the Dominican Republic

(Young)

WASHINGTON, October 27, 1927.

No. 187

SIR: The Department acknowledges the receipt of your confidential despatch

No. 644 of October 5 concerning the Dominican-Haitian boundary

negotiations.

The Department has noted in this despatch that some consideration is

apparently being given by certain Dominicans to a plan whereby the

boundary question may be submitted for arbitration by the Dominican and

Haitian Governments to the League of Nations. Please keep the Department

informed concerning this matter and state whether or not in your opinion

there is any possibility of the Dominican Government suggesting such a

course to the Haitian Government.

For the Secretary of State:

FRANCIS WHITE

[Document 280]

The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary

of State

SANTO DOMINGO, November 10, 1927.

[Received November 22.]

No. 691

SIR: Supplementing the Legation’s previous despatches respecting the

Dominican-Haitian boundary question and the conclusion of a suggested

treaty of amity, I have the honor to submit the following confidential

information with respect to the present status of these matters.

The efforts of the Haitian Legation here to effect the conclusion of a

convention or treaty of amity of the nature mentioned in my despatch No.

644 of October 5th have thus far proven unsuccessful. I am confidentially

informed, however, by the Haitian Minister that in a recent informal

conference with the Dominican Minister of Foreign Affairs he inquired

whether the Dominican Government would be inclined to enter into the

treaty without further delay if there should be eliminated from the present

draft the provision to the effect that if friendly negotiations should fail of

effecting the settlement of any question between the two governments, the

good offices of a third power, if proferred, must be accepted. Minister

Dejaan informs me that the Minister of Foreign Affairs indicated that it was

his personal opinion that the Dominican Government would be prepared to

conclude the treaty without delay with the elimination of the provision

mentioned. Minister Sanchez agreed to submit the matter to President

Vasquez and to inform Mr. Dejean of the President’s views, but the Haitian

Minister has heard nothing further in regard to the matter.

From the conversations which I have had with the Haitian Minister and

with the Minister of Foreign Affairs it is my opinion that the Dominican

Government is not considering suggesting to the Haitian Government any

[Document 281]

The Minister in the Dominican Republic (Young) to the Secretary

of State

SANTO DOMINGO, December 31, 1927.

[Received January 10, 1928.]

No. 747

SIR: I have the honor to report with respect to the Haitian-Dominican

boundary question that informal conversations, which it is hoped will

proceed to a point where formal negotiations can be undertaken with some

assurance of success, were instituted in this city on December 28th at a

conference in which participated Minister of Foreign Affairs Sanchez, Mr.

Troncoso de la Concha, Mr. Jacinto de Castro and Mr. Peyña-Battle,

representing the Dominican Government, and Mr. Dejean, the Haitian

Minister.

At the beginning of the conference a question arose as to whether Mr.

Dejean’s participation therein was based on special powers from the Haitian

Government to deal with the boundary question or was to be regarded as

solely in his capacity as Haitian Minister. Mr. Dejean said that he was

without any special powers, and that none appeared to be necessary for the

present. He then read to the conference extracts from personal letters

addressed to him by President Borno which clearly indicated a desire on the

part of President Borno that Mr. Dejean during his stay in this country

should interest himself primarily in matters pertaining to the boundary

question and its settlement.

In response to a suggestion which was then made by Mr. Sanchez that the

Minister should make a brief statement and embody therein any suggestion

which he might care to advance with respect to a desirable mode of

procedure, the Minister said that as he viewed the matter it was incumbent

upon the Dominican Government to “make the next move”; that he had

already acquainted the appropriate officials here with the views of his

Government,—viz.: That the status quo line “with compensation” should be

agreed upon as the basis of any discussions. He explained that by

“compensation” he meant that obviously it would be necessary for each

Government to cede to the other certain territory. He urged that a serious

effort be made to agree upon a boundary line, and strongly recommended

that the physical fixation of such line be left to a technical commission. He

contended that the work of preparing accurate maps of the frontier zone

might well follow rather than precede any efforts to reach an amicable

agreement with respect to the line itself.

The Dominican representatives pointed out that under the provisions of

Article 3 of the Dominican Constitution relative to the non-alienation of

Dominican territory the Government might find it necessary to convene a

constituent assembly for the purpose of procuring a modification of the

article in question prior to the consummation of any agreement with respect

to the boundary. In reply to a request for an expression of his opinion in the

matter, Mr. Dejean said that the question was of course one for the

Dominican Government to determine. He pointed out however that

somewhat similar provisions were to be found in the Haitian Constitution

and in the treaty of 1915 with the United States. After a further

conversation of a somewhat general nature, the conference adjourned to

reconvene on Monday, January 2, 1928.

Following the conference, I had a rather extended, though entirely personal

and unofficial conversation with the Haitian Minister. With respect to the

question of the provisions of Article 3 of the Dominican Constitution and

their bearing upon the boundary question and the negotiations directed to its

adjustment, I suggested as coming entirely from myself, that it would

appear to be both wise and expedient to push the negotiations now, and that

if the Dominican Government later should hold that an amendment to the

constitution was in fact necessary, such action might well follow the

conclusion of an agreement ad referendum between the two countries; that

should a constituent assembly be convened to amend the provisions of

Article 3, domestic political considerations might induce the Dominican

Government to suggest other amendments having no bearing on the

boundary question and it might become entangled with domestic political

matters. This, I thought, would be most unfortunate. I suggested that the

logical order of events in view of the considerations which I had advanced

would be (1) agreement on boundary question, (2) constituent assembly, if

necessary, to amend provisions of Article 3, (3) ratification of boundary

agreement.

The Haitian Minister agreed fully with my suggestions, and again expressed

his appreciation of the interest in the matter which had been taken by this

Legation and of our obvious desire in an informal and discreet way to be of

all possible assistance.

I have [etc.]

EVAN E. YOUNG

Statement by the Secretary of State

regarding Bolshevik aims and policies

in Mexico and Latin America

[282] Statement Left by the Secretary of State With the Senate

Committee on Foreign Relations

[Washington,] January 12, 1927.

[Document 282]

Statement Left by the Secretary of State With the Senate

Committee on Foreign Relations

[WASHINGTON,] January 12, 1927.

BOLSHEVIK AIMS AND POLICIES IN MEXICO AND LATIN AMERICA

The Bolshevik leaders have had very definite ideas with respect to the role

which Mexico and Latin America are to play in their general program of

world revolution. They have set up as one of their fundamental tasks the

destruction of what they term American Imperialism as a necessary

prerequisite to the successful development of the international revolutionary

movement in the new world. The propagation of communist ideas and

principles in the various countries of Latin America is considered secondary

to the carrying on of propaganda against the aims and policies of the United

States. Thus Latin America and Mexico are conceived as a base for activity

against the United States. Communists in the United States have been

repeatedly instructed to devote special attention to the struggle against

“American Imperialism” in Latin America and to the organization of

resistance to the United States. Bolshevik aims in this respect were

succinctly set forth in a resolution of the Third Congress of the Bed

“… 4. To unite the national struggle against American

Imperialism in individual countries in a movement on a

scale of the whole American continent, embracing the

workers of all countries of Latin America and the

revolutionary forces of the United States. Mexico is a

natural connecting link between the movement of the

United States of North America and Latin America,

therefore Mexico must be the center of union.

“… 7. In the name of the Trade Union Educational

League of the United States, to appeal to the toilers of

Latin America with a call to create a united front

against American Imperialism. …”

Similarly, a representative of the American Communist Party, speaking at

the VIth Session of the Enlarged Executive Committee of the Communist

International on February 24, 1926, declared:

“The last and most important task of our party is the fight against

imperialism. The Communist Party of America must become the

defender of the oppressed peoples of Latin America. The time is

not long distant when Latin America will become the China of the

far west and Mexico the Canton of Latin America.”

In the theses approved at the VIth Session of the Enlarged Executive

Committee of the Communist International it is stated, with respect to Latin

America,

“Latin America also can and must become a basis of support of

the liberation movement against imperialism (against the

imperialism of the United States). In the present state of things

the nations living in Latin America are as a majority oppressed

nations which sooner or later will be drawn into the struggle

against the imperialism of the United States.”

During the past few years the Bolshevik leaders have been giving more and

more attention to anti-American activities in Mexico and Latin America.

The Communists in the United States have been criticized for not

displaying sufficient energy in this sphere. Very specific instructions in this

regard were issued to the Communists in the United States in the

“Resolution on the American Question” adopted at the VIth Enlarged

Plenary Session of the Executive Committee of the Communist

International at Moscow on March 15, 1926. It pointed out

“to the American Communist Party the tremendous importance

which the labor movement (and the movement for independence)

is assuming in the countries of South America. There is no doubt

that in the future struggle for the overthrow of the yoke of the

bourgeoisie of the United States, the working class and the

peasantry of Latin America will play a tremendous role. The

American Communist Party must not be a party of self-centered

interests but must become a party which understands how to raise

the question of the hegemony of the proletariat in the whole

movement for freedom which is directed against the imperialists

of the United States. Moreover it is necessary that the workers

(Communist) Party maintain the closest contact with the labor

movement in the colonies of Cuba, the Philippines, etc., and

support them in their fight against American imperialism.

In view of this the Executive Committee of the Communist

International instructs the Central Committee of the American

Communist Party to devote the most serious attention to the tasks

cited and above all to appoint an earnest group of Party workers

to participate in the current work in Latin America in agreement

with the Presidium of the Executive Committee of the Communist

International.”

In accordance with Moscow’s instructions the American Communists

during the last two years have been placing special emphasis on their anti-

American work in Mexico and Latin America. Considerable attention was

given to this matter at the Fourth Convention of the Workers (Communist)

AU-American Anti-Imperialist League has been created by the American

Communists to carry out the instructions of Moscow in the matter of

organizing Latin America against the United States. The following is taken

from a report on “Anti-Imperialist Work” delivered at the Fourth National

Convention referred to above:

“The Fifth Congress of the Communist International severely

criticised nearly all the Communist Parties in the imperialist

countries for not carrying on a sufficiently energetic campaign

against imperialism.

“Under the present Central Executive Committee, the Workers

Party of America has for the first time made anti-imperialist work

one of its basic activities. The outstanding feature of our work

against American imperialism is that it has entered the field of

active practical cooperation with the oppressed peoples of

American imperialism, the most important step in this connection

being the successful organization of the All-America Anti-

Imperialist League.

“In January of this year 1925 a sub-committee was elected by the

Central Executive Committee which assumed charge of all the

anti imperialist activities of the Party. This committee prepared

material for campaigns, furnished articles on imperialism for the

party press, drew up manifestoes and leaflets, and was the

medium through which the party cooperated with anti-imperialist

organizations in Latin-America. Manifestoes were issued to the

Cuban Labor Congress held at Havana, to the International

Marine Transport Workers’ Convention held at New Orleans,

several manifestoes to the Mexican workers and to the Filipinos, a

special May Day manifesto to the workers of Latin-America, a

manifesto in connection with, the Tacna-Arica affair—and other

manifestoes and leaflets which will be referred to later on.

“Direct contact with Mexico was maintained throughout the

period, through the visits of Comrades Johnstone, Gomez, and

Lovestone to Mexico and through steady correspondence.

Comrade Wagenknecht visited the Philippines and established

connections there. Correspondence connections were also

established, with greater or less success, with practically every

country in Latin-America, as well as with Hawaii and the

Philippines. Through our activities five Filipino delegates were

secured for the International Transport Conference in Canton, for

which our Party was commended by the Communist

International.

“Our party has carried on a consistent campaign, both in this

country and in Latin-America against the ‘labor imperialism’ of

the so-called Pan-American Federation of Labor. Comrade

Johnstone attended the convention of the Pan-American

Federation of Labor at Mexico City, in November of last year,

(1924) and cooperated with the Mexican Party in its strategy in

connection with this convention.

“Comrade Gomez was sent to Mexico in April of this year (1925)

and attended the convention of the Communist Party of Mexico

as fraternal delegate from our Party. During this visit plans for

joint action of the Mexican, Central American and United States

parties against imperialist policies of the Pan-American

Federation of Labor were adopted.

“Our Party was largely instrumental in the establishment of the

All-American Anti-Imperialist League, which although organized

only a few months ago and still in its initial stages, has aroused a

real response in Latin-America, despite the miserably small funds

which we were able to put into this work. The All-America Anti-

Imperialist League was endorsed by the Communist International

and the Red International of Labor Unions.

“The League is a non-partisan international organization

admitting to affiliation all groups in the Americas willing to take

up the fight against American imperialism. It aims to give driving

force and centralized expression to the national liberation

movements in Latin-America, Hawaii, the Philippine Islands, etc.,

in alliance with the movement of this country.

“The All-America Anti-Imperialist League has a special

secretariat located in Mexico City, under whose supervision the

monthly Spanish language organ of the league, which has now

published five issues is edited, as well as special manifestoes,

leaflets, etc. Our party has contributed towards defraying the

expenses of the monthly magazine El Libertador and towards

other expenses of the Mexico City secretariat, but lack of funds

has made it impossible to give adequate support in this respect.

“A regular section of the All-America Anti-Imperialist League

has been formed in Cuba, with Julio Antonio Mella as secretary,

and is extremely active, holding mass meetings, lectures, etc.

Labor, peasant, and student organizations in Costa Rica, Panama,

Salvador, and Peru have affiliated, with the League, but no

regular sections have been formed in those countries as yet.

Contacts have been established with some of the foremost

intellectuals of Latin-America, who are supporting the league and

writing for its monthly organ.

“At the suggestion of our Party, the League sent out the call for

the observance throughout America of ‘Anti-Imperialist Week’

(June 29 to July 4), calling upon all anti-imperialist organizations

in

special

literature,

to

conduct

mass

meetings,

hold

demonstrations in front of American consulates and embassies,

etc. Our Party published a special leaflet for Anti-Imperialist

Week and actively cooperated in its observance.

“Tentative plans are already being laid, also at the suggestion of

our Party, for an All-America Anti-Imperialist congress to be held

at Buenos Aires some time next year.”

The Fourth Convention listed among the concrete tasks of the Party

“To carry on a systematic and active agitation against American

imperialism, particularly in Latin America. To demand the

withdrawal of American armed forces from foreign lands. …

“To give active support to the activities of the All-America Anti-

Imperialist League.”

The same Convention adopted a lengthy resolution with respect to the

struggle against American imperialism. This resolution pointed out that

“there is sufficient homogeneity to permit the building of a

powerful continental movement of workers and farmers against

American imperialism, and sufficient resentment due to the

occupation of the Central American and Carribean countries, the

sustaining of autocracies such as those of Venezuela and Peru by

United States aid, the interference in the internal affairs of all of

the countries, the system of financial and military advisors, the

monopolistic Monroe Doctrine and the robbery of the tremendous

natural resources of Latin America.”

The resolution declared that there were “millions groaning under the

American imperialist rule” in the Philippines, Porto Rico, Cuba, Mexico,

Haiti, etc., and that it was the task of the Communists to give active support

to the anti-American movements in the various countries in Latin America.

The resolution continues:

“42. There is a strong tradition of Latin-American

solidarity which is a historic force for the unification of

the anti-imperialist movements of the various Latin-

American countries. This will be an important weapon

in the struggle against Wall Street. The All-America

Anti-Imperialist League was created as the expression

of the liberating movement of all the exploited peoples

of the continent. The Workers Party took part in the

creation. Represented in the League are also the

Communist Parties of Mexico, Central America, and

South America, as well as student groups, labor

organizations, peasant leagues and national societies in

various countries.

“43. For us, the League constitutes an organizational

expression of our determination to fight side by side

with the exploited peoples of America’s colonies and

semi-colonies. While we strive to make the groups

affiliated to the All-America Anti-Imperialist League

recognize in the Communists and the Communist

International, the leaders of the world struggle against

imperialism, we must work conscientiously to build up

the league itself to push it into activity and to make of it

a powerful driving force for the overthrow of American

imperialism.

“44. The following is our concrete program of joint

action with the exploited peoples for the struggle

against American imperialism.

(a) Expose the purpose and methods of

American imperialism everywhere.

(b) Demand independence for all American

colonies and unconditional withdrawal of

American

troops

from

Latin-America,

Chinese and other foreign soil.

(c) Actively support Latin-American strikes

against American concerns.

(d) Ideological and practical struggle against

the doctrine of Pan-Americanism.

(e) Expose and struggle against the so-called

Pan-American Federation of Labor as an

agency of American imperialism, and the

Mexican and American Parties shall work out

joint plans for exposing the true character of

the Pan-American Federation of Labor and

propagate the idea of the formation of Latin-

American

Labor

Federation

with

anti-

imperialist tendencies.

(f) Interchange of delegates at conventions

and close cooperation with the Communist

Parties of Latin-America; fraternal relations

with the parties of the Far East.

(g) Help build the All-America Anti-

Imperialist

League

into

a

powerful

organization for the overthrow of American

Imperialism.

(h) Immediately strive to build up sections of

the All-American Anti-Imperialist League in

parts of the United States, through affiliation

of resident organizations of Mexicans,

Filipinos, Chinese, etc.

(i) Support the proposed plan of the All-

American Anti-Imperialist League for an All-

American Conference against Imperialism.

(j) The Machete, organ of the Mexican

Communist Party, and El Libertador, organ of

the Anti-Imperialist League (published in

Mexico) should be circulated among the

Spanish-speaking workers of the United

States.”

The activities and plans of the American Communists as regards the

organization of opposition to the United States in Mexico and Latin

America are summed up admirably in a resolution passed by the Central

Executive Committee of the Workers (Communist) Party on November 12,

1926. This resolution reads as follows:

“The tasks of our Party at the present time, as set forth in the

resolution of the political committee, are those presented by the

conditions of imperialism. American imperialism is able to win

over large sections of the American workers by sharing with them

a small part of super-profits and continues to extend its hegemony

in foreign fields. However, the steady expansion of American

capitalism upon an imperialist basis is accompanied by the

enormous extension of the vulnerable surface which it presents to

attack. Recent months have furnished striking evidence of the

widespread movement for Latin-American unity against Wall

Street. We cite particularly the present attitude of the Calles

Government in Mexico—its general Latin-Americanism, its

policy in Central America, its tendency toward cooperation with

the All-America Anti-Imperialist League, and the decision of

President Calles to send a personal representative to the Brussels

world conference against imperialism.

“The Comintern has repeatedly indicated that a basic task of any

party situated in an imperialist country is to stimulate and give aid

to the nationalist and national revolutionary movements in the

colonial and semi-colonial countries under the heel of

imperialism. This, together with the work among the American

masses, form the basis of our party work. While our party has

made considerable progress in anti-imperialist work, it is still far

from a proper realization of the importance of this work. A far

greater proportion of the party’s resources must be utilized in

anti-imperialist activities. District executive committees must

have standing subcommittees on anti-imperialist activity, and

these must be directed by capable comrades. The party machinery

on a district as well as a national scale must be drawn into this

work.

“The anti-imperialist work has been greatly hampered by lack of

sufficient comrades. The party must take measures to create and

train a corps of comrades engaged directly in anti-imperialist

work.

“In spite of many handicaps, we have done much to build the All-

America Anti-Imperialist League into an organization engaged in

actual struggle against imperialism. We have carried on

systematic work inside of the Pan-American Federation of Labor

and have achieved some valuable results there. We have

participated in work against United States imperialism in a

number of Latin-American countries, notably Mexico, Porto

Rico, Cuba, Panama and Peru. We have also established some

contact with the Philippine independence movement, altho we

have yet to establish our own nucleus there.

“The main task for the period immediaely ahead is the building of

a substantial section of the AAAIL (All-America Anti-Imperialist

League) in the United States itself. This will be accomplished thru

the affiliation of groups organized around specific issues, such as

hands-off-Mexico committees, etc. The Workers (Communist)

Party must remain the central factor in the United States section

of the AAAIL, grouping around itself as closely as possible other

working-class organizations.”

The significance of Mexico in the eyes of the so-called Soviet government

is revealed in the following extract from the report of Chicherin, made at

the III Session of the Union Central Executive Committee in March 1925:

“Resumption of Diplomatic Relations with Mexico

“In America, in this manner, we still stand before a question

mark. But in this time we have succeeded in re-establishing

diplomatic relations, which give us a political base in the new

continent, with the neighbor of the United States, Mexico. The

Mexican Government is based on the Right trade unions and the

radical small bourgeoisie. The Soviet Republic is extraordinarily

popular

in

Mexico.

Our

plenipotentiary

representative,

Pestkovsky, met in Mexico the most enthusiastic reception,

receiving constantly from all sides expressions of the most

friendly, even enthusiastic, attitude toward the Soviet Republic.

Mexico gives us, thus, a very convenient political base in

America for the development of our further ties.”

As respects relations between the Soviet Legation in Mexico City and

Communist activities being carried on in Mexico there is the following

evidence:

(1) Statement by Mexican Labor Deputy, Ricardo Trevino, in the Mexican

Chamber of Deputies on September 9, 1925:

“I can not say which are the better elements, whether ours or the

Beds or those whom the Russian Minister brought. And on this

point I must say that there are documents in which it is

established that certain Red and Communist elements receive

money from the said Minister and from the Communists at

Moscow in order to work along Communist lines in Mexico

against the United States whereby they would provoke an

international conflict.”

(2) Communication addressed to the Soviet Minister by the Central

Committee of the Mexican Federation of Labor by direction of the Seventh

Congress of that organization:

“To the Minister of Russia in Mexico City:

… On the other hand there was also considered by the

Convention the report referring to the fact that in the diplomatic

mission in your charge moral and economic support is lent to so-

called Communist radical groups, the enemies of the Mexican

Federation of Labor and of our government.

“This Central Committee was ordered by the Convention to

inform you in your character as representative of Russia in

Mexico that the Mexican labor movement represented by this

confederation maintains the principle that the workers of each

country must be organized in accordance with their opinions and

necessities and that no nation has the right to impose nor to lay

down for another the doctrine which must control its activities.”

of the Mexican Federation of Labor:

“… 3. That a courteous invitation be extended by the Central

Committee to the diplomatic representative of Russia accredited

to Mexico so that his office may abstain from lending moral and

economic support to the so-called radical group, enemies of the

Mexican Federation of Labor and of the government.”

statement were transmitted to diplomatic officers in Latin America, with

this notation: “Following was left with the Senate Committee on Foreign

Relations as part of the records of the Department of State for the

information of the Committee. The Secretary informed the Committee that

it was not confidential.”

[Document 283]

The Secretary of State to Dr. James Brown Scott

WASHINGTON, March 15, 1927.

SIR: The Department refers to the credentials signed by the President on July

8, 1924, designating you as a Delegate to the International Commission of

Jurists, which was then scheduled to meet in Rio de Janeiro in 1925.

Inasmuch as that meeting was not held, and in order to obviate any question

as to the adequacy of your credentials in connection with the postponed

meeting, which is to be held in Rio de Janeiro in April, 1927, the

Department transmits herewith a new Presidential certificate of

appointment, which you will present at the appropriate time as evidence of

your designation on the part of the United States as Delegate to the

Congress constituted pursuant to a Resolution of the Fifth International

Conference of American States. The certificate of appointment signed by

the President on July 8, 1924, should be returned to the Department,

through the American Embassy at Rio de Janeiro.

The Resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States,

pursuant to which the Congress of Jurists is to meet in Rio de Janeiro next

month, reads as follows:96

“RESOLUTION.

Codification of American International Law.

“The Fifth International Conference of American States,

RESOLVES:

1. To request each Government of the American

Republics to appoint two Delegates to constitute the

Congress of Jurists of Rio de Janeiro;

2. To recommend that the Committees appointed by the

Congress of Jurists be reestablished;

3. To request these Committees to undertake and to

reconsider their work in the light of the experience of

recent years and also in view of the resolutions of the

Fifth International Conference of American States;

4. To designate a Committee for the study of

comparative Civil Law of all the nations of America in

order to contribute to the formation of Private

International Law, so that the results of this study may

be utilized at the next meeting of the Congress of

Jurists. It is understood that in the term ‘Civil Law’

there are included the following topics: Commercial

Law, Mining Law, Law of Procedure, etc. Criminal Law

may also be included therein;

5. To convene the International Congress of Jurists at

Rio de Janeiro during the year 1925; the precise date to

be determined by the Pan American Union after

consultation with the Government of Brazil;

6. To recommend to this Congress that in the domain of

International Law, the codification should be gradual

and progressive, accepting as the basis the project

presented to the Fifth International Conference by the

Delegate of Chile, Mr. Alejandro Alvarez, entitled ‘The

Codification of American International Law;’

7. The names of the Delegates referred to in Clause 1,

should be communicated to the Government of Brazil

and to the Pan American Union;

8. The resolutions of the Congress of Jurists shall be

submitted to the Sixth International Conference of

American States, in order that, if approved, they may be

communicated to the Governments and incorporated in

Conventions;

9. To recommend to the Congress of Jurists that will

prepare an American Code of Private International Law,

that if it should consider it advisable, it decide

previously the juridical system or systems to be adopted

or to be combined, instructing to that effect the Special

Committees to be appointed to draft said Code, and

taking into consideration the motions submitted to the

Fifth Pan American Conference by the Delegations of

Argentine, Brazil and Uruguay, as well as any other that

may be submitted.”

While this Resolution provides that the conclusions of the Congress of

Jurists shall be submitted to the Sixth International Conference of American

States in order that, if approved, they may be communicated to the

Governments and incorporated in conventions, it appears that the purpose

and scope of the Congress is similar to the purpose and scope of the

International Commission of Jurists, which was created by the Third Pan

American Conference, and which met in Rio de Janeiro in 1912. This

earlier Commission was instituted to prepare a draft of a code of Private

International Law, and one of Public International Law regulating the

relations between the Nations of America.

Codification is a clear, systematic and authoritative statement of existing

law; it does not involve the framing of new legislation. The Delegates of the

United States to the Congress of Jurists should not, therefore, participate in

the drafting of new international legislation embodying changes in the

existing systems of law of the Nations of the Western Hemisphere.

Accordingly, you are instructed to scrutinize all proposals in the light of the

existing treaty arrangements and established policies of the United States of

America.

The draft plans for the reorganization of the Pan American Union,

contemplated by Project No. 9 of the Projects of Conventions, formulated

by the American Institute of International Law, and the draft plans for a Pan

American Court of Justice, Project No. 28 of the Projects of Conventions,

formulated by the same Institute, would require for their realization the

conclusion of international agreements far-reaching in character and of

doubtful advantage. As to such proposals the Delegates on the part of the

United States should take no position from which ultimate official approval

of the projects might even be inferred. You will, of course, take no position

on any question which might be construed as committing the Government

of the United States in any way whatsoever.

In a letter to the Secretary of State, dated March 15, 1926, the Director

General of the Pan American Union referred to the following

recommendation, approved by the Fifth International Conference of

American States on May 3, 1923:

“To forward to the Congress of Jurists which is to meet at Rio de

Janeiro in 1925 for the Codification of International Law, the

proposal presented by the Delegation of Costa Rica, regarding the

creation of a Permanent Court of American Justice, as well as all

other proposals that the various American Governments may

formulate in this respect.”

In compliance with this recommendation the Director General transmitted a

copy of the project to which it referred, and requested that the text of the

recommendation and a copy of the project of the Delegation of Costa Rica

be transmitted to the Delegates on the part of the United States to the

Congress of Jurists. In accordance with this request there are attached

hereto a copy of the letter from the Director General of the Pan American

Union, dated March 15, 1926, and a copy of the project of the Delegation of

Costa Rica referred to therein.

In connection with this project you are informed that although the

Government of the United States is most hospitable to the consideration of

measures tending to the maintenance of peace and stability in Latin

America and insuring a basis for beneficent cooperation it does not consider

that the establishment of a Permanent Court of American Justice would be

desirable. There would seem to be no reason why a permanent organization

of this sort should be established in America to rival the Permanent Court of

International Justice at The Hague, and the difficulty of establishing, in

view of the relations of the Latin American states, a satisfactory method of

selecting the judges of an American Permanent Court would be very great.

What would seem to be needed, in order to promote judicial settlement of

international controversies in this hemisphere, is an improved plan for

arbitral settlements. In this way controversies of which disposition could be

more advantageously made by an American tribunal could be referred to a

tribunal established for the purpose in accordance with the accepted

principles of arbitral procedure. It should be remembered in this connection

that the representatives of five of the Latin American Republics, to wit, the

Republics of Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador,

signed on February 7, 1923, a Convention for the establishment of a Central

American tribunal, with the provisions of which you are doubtless familiar.

It is believed that a similar arrangement would meet the requirements of

judicial settlement of controversies between all the Latin American States.

If, therefore, adequate measures are taken to add to the existing facilities an

appropriate plan for the arbitration of justiciable controversies, the proposal

of the Delegation of Costa Rica to the Fifth Pan American Conference,

providing for a Permanent Court of American Justice, would appear to be

suitably met.

[Here follows a paragraph relating to expenses to be allowed the delegates.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 284]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, May 11, 1927—noon.

17. The following message has been received by the United Press here from

its Rio de Janeiro service:2

“U. S. delegate James Brown Scott announced at International

Jurists conference here that the U. S. secretary of state would

propose a convention creating an inter-American arbitration

tribunal ‘to which all American nations would submit all

questions of whatever nature otherwise insoluble.’

He stated that arbitration should be most ample without

restrictions, except sovereignty and independence of litigant

nations, which would have option to use this or any other

tribunal.”

It is requested that you ascertain and report by cable whether Scott is quoted

accurately. Your attention is invited, for your own information in this

connection, to the following sentence contained in the instructions sent to

the American Delegates through the Embassy:

“You will, of course, take no position on any question which

might be construed as committing the Government of the United

States in any way whatsoever.”

No resolution whatever with a view to recommending a convention for

establishing a tribunal of inter-American arbitration has been taken by the

Secretary of State. If the matter were placed officially before the attention

of this Government, naturally it would receive serious consideration, but we

are not committed to the making of a recommendation of such a nature on

our own initiative at this time, and it cannot be permitted that the United

States delegates to the Commission of Jurists so commit this Government

by any declaration.

KELLOGG

[Document 285]

The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

[Received 3: p.m.]

22. Messrs. Brown Scott and Reeves have handed me the following

communication in relation to the subject of Department’s confidential

telegram 17, May 11, noon:

American delegates contemplate nothing more than plan for

arbitrary settlements based wholly on convention of February 7,

1923, establishing a Central American tribunal thus providing

‘adequate measures’ ‘to existing facilities’ in order to form ‘an

appropriate plan for the arbitration of justiciable controversies’ in

this hemisphere.

The American delegates have given notice that they will

introduce a plan but have not yet done so. The delegation

contemplates introducing plan in plenary session of Saturday

afternoon next, of which through” agreement with President of

Commission there will be neither discussion nor vote except

possible reference to forthcoming Habana Conference.”

MORGAN

[Document 286]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan)

Messrs. Scott and Reeves:

“Referring to your communication transmitted in the Embassy’s

May 12, 3 p.m., and having in mind the evident disposition as

reflected in recent press despatches to attribute unusual official

importance to the statements and proposals of the American

Delegates, the Department does not consider it practicable or

advisable for you to submit to the plenary session any plan such

as the one you have in contemplation. Your plan has not been

submitted and considered here, and from your statement it would

not even be discussed or voted upon by the Commission of

Jurists. The practical result of the proposed action would be to

involve this Government in an implied commitment in favor of

some plan which it has had no opportunity to examine and pass

upon, thereby limiting to a certain degree its freedom of action at

the next Pan American Conference. In these circumstances you

are instructed to refrain from introducing the plan.”

KELLOGG

[Document 287]

The Ambassador in Brazil (Morgan) to the Secretary of State

24. Messrs. Brown Scott and Reeves have handed me the following text for

transmission to the Department:

“In compliance with the Department’s telegram of May 13th, we

hasten to state that we shall refrain from introducing the plan. We

avail ourselves of the opportunity of expressing our appreciation

of the courteous language in which the Department’s instruction

is couched.”

MORGAN

[Document 288]

The Delegates of the United States to the International

Commission of Jurists (Scott and Reeves) to the Secretary of

State

WASHINGTON, June 10, 1927.

SIR: The undersigned, Delegates of the United States of America, to the

International Commission of Jurists created by resolution of April 26, 1923,

of the Fifth International Conference of the American Republics, held at

Santiago de Chile, to codify international law, public and private, have the

honor to submit their report as Delegates of the United States, on the nature

of the Commission, its procedure and labors, resulting in a recommendation

of twelve projects of public international law, and a convention of private

transmitted to the Sixth of the American Conferences, which is to convene

at Habana, January 16, 1928, for such consideration as that body shall be

pleased to give to them.

The word “codification” is used in a two-fold sense: strictly, as a statement

of the law actually in force; and popularly, as a statement, not merely of the

law in force, but such as it should be, in the opinion of those undertaking its

formulation and statement. The Delegates of the United States have

understood “codification” in its first and strict sense, and the sense in which

they believe that the Commission likewise understood it. The projects,

therefore, of public international law are in general, it is believed, an

acceptable statement of the practice, not only of any one Republic, but of

the American Republics, in their relations with one another. Whenever a

statement did not seem to be in accord with the law as understood in the

United States, the American Delegates called attention to that fact and

entered what is called a “reserve”. On one occasion they interposed their

reserve to an entire project—that on asylum—on the ground that the

practice of receiving political fugitives in a legation or embassy is contrary

to the practice of the United States of America.

In the matter of the conflict of laws—which the Latin American States

universally call “private international law”—the Delegates of the United

States entered a general reserve to the entire convention, on the ground that

the practice of the United States based, as it is, on domicile, is necessarily

so opposed to the practice of those countries accepting the principle of

nationality that it was better to refer the projected code of private

international law in its entirety to the Department of State, in order that the

appropriate authorities of the government might determine the extent to

which the United States might be able or willing to accord its approval.

The Delegates of the United States are of the opinion that there is no

provision in any one of the twelve projects of public international law, with

the exception of that on asylum, which is contrary to anything to be found

in the projects transmitted by the Pan American Union, and they believe

that they did not, at any time during the session of the International

Commission of Jurists, make or countenance any proposal which was

inconsistent with the provisions, in whole or in part, of the Pan American

Union projects, with which the officials of the Department of State are

familiar.

The International Commission of Jurists for the Codification of

International Law, Public and Private, formally opened its proceedings on

the evening of April 18, 1927, in the Monroe Palace, in the City of Rio de

Janeiro, the incomparable Capital of the United States of Brazil.

The Commission owed its immediate origin to a Resolution of the Fifth

Conference of the American Republics meeting in Santiago de Chile, in the

Spring of 1923, by virtue of which each of the twenty-one American

Republics was authorized and requested to appoint two jurists; and the

jurists thus appointed were to compose the International Commission which

was to meet two years later, in Rio de Janeiro, at a date to be fixed by the

Governing Board of the Pan American Union, composed of the diplomatic

representatives of the American Republics, which holds its regular monthly

sessions in the Pan American Building, in the City of Washington.

The date finally agreed upon by the Governing Board, in consultation with

the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Brazil, was April 16, 1927; and two days

later, April 18th, the Commission was, in fact, formally opened by His

Excellency Octavio Mangabeira, Minister of Foreign Affairs, in the

presence of the Diplomatic Corps accredited to Rio de Janeiro, and other

leading personalities of the Brazilian Capital.

The Commission chose as its President, the Honorable Epitacio Pessôa, an

ex-President of the Republic, who had also presided the first Commission

of Jurists, which had likewise met in Rio de Janeiro, in the summer of 1912.

The Brazilian Government appointed as Secretary General the distinguished

littérateur, Mr. Gustavo Barrosa, member of the Brazilian Academy of

Letters, and Correspondent of the Royal Society of Literature of England.

Of the twenty-one American Republics, all but Guatemala, Honduras,

Nicaragua, and San Salvador [Salvador], four of the five Republics of

Central America, were represented in the Commission. Of the seventeen

Republics taking part in the Commission, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil,

Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, Uruguay and Venezuela, were represented by two

delegates each, apparently on the theory of one for public, and the other for

private international law. Eight of the Republics (Chile, Costa Rica,

Ecuador, Haiti, Panama, Paraguay, Peru and Santo Domingo [Dominican

Republic]) had but a single delegate each. The two delegates of the United

States were appointed without special reference to one or the other of the

two branches of international law, and took part in the proceedings

concerning each branch.

Under a Convention adopted at Rio de Janeiro by the Third Pan American

Congress, meeting in that city in 1906, there had been appointed a first

Commission for the Codification of International Law, Public and Private.

It met in the summer of 1912, in the same city of Rio de Janeiro; and it

failed, owing to a lack of preparation. It adjourned within a few weeks after

its opening session, never to meet again, due, it is believed, to the outbreak

of the World War two years later. The second Commission succeeded

because of adequate preparation in advance of its sessions, with some thirty

projects of convention dealing with certain phases of public international

law, and a complete code of private international law to serve as the bases

of discussion; and when the Commission adjourned, on the evening of May

20, 1927, it had twelve draft conventions of public international law to its

credit: Fundamental Bases of International Law; States—Existence,

Equality and [Recognition; Status of Aliens; Treaties; Exchange of

Publications; Interchange of Professors and Students; Diplomatic Agents;

Consuls; Maritime Neutrality; Asylum; Obligations of States in Event of

Civil War; and Pacific Settlement of International Conflicts; and a complete

code of private international law.

Within recent years, in Europe, two peace conferences have been held at

The Hague, in which certain phases of international law were put in the

form of conventions. In the first, of 1899, three conventions and three

declarations were adopted in a session beginning May 18th and ending July

29th of that year, that is to say, in a session of approximately two and a half

months. In the Second Hague Peace Conference, of 1907, thirteen

conventions and one declaration were adopted. This Conference met from

June 15th to October 18th—a session of a little over four months. There

have been some conferences on private international law likewise held at

The Hague, which have put in conventional form some topics on the

conflict of laws. But hitherto, there has been no conference in Europe in

which international law both public and private has been considered, and

the labors of the various Hague Conferences on these two branches of the

law do not equal—if the results achieved in private as well as public

international law can be considered—the work of the Commission of Jurists

meeting in Bio de Janeiro in 1927.

The modern movement of the Americas in favor of codification is due to

gatherings of the American Republics commonly called Pan American

Conferences. The first of the series was proposed on November 29, 1881,

by Secretary of State Blaine, to consider how the Americas could be

spared the horrors of internecine wars by a timely resort to arbitration and

other peace-keeping agencies. On October 2, 1889, the Conference met in

Washington under Secretary Blaine’s presidency and adjourned April 18

taken toward codification. Upon the motion of the Brazilian delegation, a

convention was agreed to and signed on January 27, 1902, for the

codification of public and private international law by a commission of

seven persons of whom five should be publicists of the Americas, and two

of Europe.

When the Third Conference assembled four years later in Rio de Janeiro,13

no progress had been made towards the realization of what may be termed

this peculiarly American ideal. It was at the third of the Conferences, in the

City of Rio de Janeiro, that definite action was taken in behalf of

codification by a formal convention of eighteen of the American Republics,

and ratified by fifteen of those then and there represented, just as the

possibility of condification was to be demonstrated in Rio de Janeiro by the

International Commission of Jurists in 1927. The ratifying Republics

(Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic,

Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Salvador, United

States and Uruguay) pledged themselves by convention of August 23, 1906,

to the codification of public and private international law through a

commission of experts to be composed of a delegate from each of the

contracting Republics. However, when the fourth Pan American Conference

met in Buenos Aires in the summer of 1910, the Commission had not as

yet assembled. The action taken in Rio de Janeiro in favor of codification

was reaffirmed15 and the proposed commission was ultimately enlarged so

that two delegates instead of one from each, represented the contracting

Parties.

The Commission itself met in Rio de Janeiro in the summer of 1912, and

passed out of existence in the course of the same summer. The procedure to

be followed had not been proposed beforehand, and projects for discussion

had not been drafted and circulated among the interested Republics in

advance of the meeting. When the delegates from seventeen States met, the

Brazilian Government laid before them codes of public and private

international law prepared respectively by Dr. Epitacio Pessôa and Dr.

Lafayette Rodriguez Pereira. The Commission was unwilling to consider

the codification of either public or private international law in its entirety.

Although the first article of the convention stated that the Commission was

to meet, “for the purpose of preparing a draft of a code of private

international law and one of public international law, regulating the

relations between the nations of America,” the members declared

themselves in favor of partial and progressive codification of each of the

two branches of international law, and appointed a number of committees to

collect information from the American governments, and to prepare reports

on the subjects submitted to them for the consideration of the Commission

at a later session.

The outbreak of the war in Europe in 1914 which affected profoundly the

thought of the world and the relations of the American Republics—some of

which were eventually drawn into the conflict—put an end to the labors of

the first American Commission for the Codification of International Law.

However, codification was to be adjourned only for the moment. In the

Spring of 1923, some three years after the World War was officially

declared to be ended, eighteen of the American Republics met in

conference at Santiago de Chile, and in this fifth of the Pan American

assemblies, a resolution was voted in favor of reconstituting the

International Commission of Jurists, to be composed of two members from

each of the American Republics, to meet in Rio de Janeiro, to proceed anew

to the codification of public and private international law. The resolution

contemplated the partial and progressive codification of public international

law, and recommended to the Commission the projects of Mr. Alejandro

Alvarez as a basis for discussion. A code of private international law was

also to be prepared.

The Honorable Charles Evans Hughes was then Secretary of State of the

United States, and, as such, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Pan

American Union, as it was then organized. Deeply interested in the

codification of both branches of international law, he was anxious that

projects of both should be prepared well in advance of the meeting of the

Jurists in Rio; that the projects should be drafted by unofficial publicists of

repute, and transmitted by the Pan American Union to the various American

governments, and by them laid before the International Commission of

Jurists, for such consideration as its members should care to give to them.

Therefore, Secretary Hughes proposed to the Governing Board of the Pan

American Union, at its meeting of January 2, 1924, that the American

Institute of International Law be invited to prepare a series of projects on

public international law. The motion was unanimously adopted. The

American Institute was thereupon invited to prepare the projects. It did so,

and on March 2, 1925, Secretary Hughes was able to lay before the

Governing Board a series of some thirty projects on timely and important

phases of public international law. He advised that they be transmitted by

the members of the Board to their respective Governments, and by them

laid before the Commission to serve as a basis of discussion.

In presenting the projects in the four official languages of the Americas,

Secretary Hughes said: “At last we have texts and projects, the result of

elaborate study, for consideration. We have the inspiration and stimulus of

this action full of promise for the world. We feel that, thanks to American

initiative, we are on the threshold of accomplishment in the most important

endeavor of the human race to lift itself out of the savagery of strife into the

domain of law breathing the spirit of amity and justice.” And he thus

concluded his remarks: “I believe that this day, with the submission of

concrete proposals which take the question of the development of

international law out of mere amiable aspiration, marks a definite step in the

progress of civilization and the promotion of peace, and for that reason will

long be remembered. For in this effort we are not unmindful of the larger

aspects of the question, and it is our hope that the American Republics by

taking advantage of this opportunity may make a lasting contribution to the

development of universal international law.”

The success of the American Institute in framing projects of public

international law suggested to Secretary Hughes the feasibility of preparing

a code of private international law. He therefore proposed at the same

session of the Governing Board of the Pan American Union—the last [at]

which he was to preside—that the Executive Committee of the American

Institute be invited to prepare “a project or series of projects embodying the

principles and rules of private international law for the consideration of the

commission of jurists.” This motion was unanimously adopted by the

Board, and a special committee of the American Institute, which had

already been appointed by that body at its meeting in Lima in anticipation

of such a request, undertook the preparation of the desired code. The

distinguished publicist of Cuba, Mr. Antonio Sanchez de Bustamante y

Sirvén, laid aside the many important and pressing calls upon his time, to

prepare a code of private international law. This was done in the course of a

few weeks, approved with slight modifications by the committee of the

American Institute at a special meeting in Habana, laid before the

Governing Board of the Pan American Union on February 3, 1926, by Mr.

Hughes’ successor, Secretary of State Kellogg, [and] transmitted to the

Governments of the American Republics to be by them laid before the

International Commission of Jurists. Therefore when this body met in Rio

de Janeiro on April 16, 1927, it found itself in possession of thirty projects

of international public law, and a code of private international law of no less

than 435 articles.

The members of the International Commission of Jurists met in Rio de

Janeiro under very different conditions from those of its predecessor of

1912. It was ready to go to work, and it lost no time in getting to work. In

advance of the opening meeting the delegates already in Rio met informally

at the residence of Mr. Rodrigo Octavio, the second of the Brazilian

delegates, and himself a person of great and deserved distinction in the

domain of private international law. Mr. Epitacio Pessôa, who had been

President of the first Commission and, in the interval between the two,

President of the Republic of Brazil, was also present. This informal and

unofficial exchange of views great[ly] facilitated the future labors of the

Conference. It was there suggested that Mr. Pessôa should be asked to

preside over the Commission; that the rules of the first Commission with

sundry modifications and additions should be adopted, and that the

Commission should be divided into two sections, to be composed of

delegates from all of the Republics represented: Subcommission A, for

public international law; Subcommission B, for private international law;

that a Subcommission C, of five members, should be appointed to consider

the ways and means of continuing the work of codification after the

adjournment of the Commission; a Committee D, likewise of five members,

for the uniformity of international legislation. These suggestions proposed

by Mr. Victor M. Maurtua, delegate of Peru, met with unanimous approval.

It was also suggested by the members present, upon the motion of Mr.

Bustamante, delegate of Cuba, that Mr. Maurtua should respond in behalf of

the Commission to the address of welcome of the Minister of Foreign

Affairs of Brazil, at the formal opening of the Commission.

Saturday, the 16th of April, had been agreed upon for the opening session of

the Commission, but as this was a holiday, and as some of the delegations

would not arrive on or before that date, the 18th was proposed by the

Minister of Foreign Affairs. The members of the Commission met in the

Monroe Palace at four o’clock of the afternoon of the 16th. The delegations

of twelve countries, the quorum required for a regular meeting was present.

Mr. Pessôa made a report of the informal suggestions and the proposal was

adopted to have the formal opening take place on the evening of the 18th.

At five o’clock on the afternoon of Monday, the 18th, the delegates of

seventeen American Republics met in the Senate Chamber of the Monroe

Palace in a formal, which, however, the official minutes somewhat

inaccurately call a preliminary session. The suggestions of the informal

meeting of April 14th and of the regular session on the 16th were laid

before the members and approved. The proposal of Mr. Pessôa by Mr.

Bustamante as temporary President of the Commission was unanimously

adopted; the rules of 191221 as amended were likewise adopted; the

division of the Commission into subcommissions was agreed to, as were the

appointments of other committees. The appointment by several Republics

of a single delegate instead of two, as recommended by the resolution of the

Fifth Pan American Conference of Santiago, made it impossible for the two

Commissions to meet at one and the same time, as the one delegate would

be obliged to attend the session of each of the subcommissions. This cut in

half the working hours of each, and laid an undue burden on the single

delegates. It operated to the disadvantage of the Subcommission on public

international law, as the Subcommission on private international law was to

meet in the mornings, and that of public international law in the afternoons,

when the Plenary sessions of the Commission were to be held. One or other

had to suffer unless the plenary sessions should be in the evenings. This

was, however, looked upon with disfavor and, with the exception of the

formal opening, the plenary sessions were held in the afternoons at the

expense of public international law.

Upon the proposal of the delegation of the United States, both members of

the various delegations were allowed to register in and attend both

Subcommissions. This enabled them personally to take part in the sessions

of the Subcommission of public international law, and, by their presence, to

show their interest in the Subcommission of private international law. This

is believed to have been the first occasion on which official delegates of the

United States attended and took part in an official conference on the conflict

of laws, to give private international law the name by which it is generally

known in the English-speaking world.

At 9 o’clock on the evening of April 18th, the International Commission of

Jurists met in plenary and official session. Mr. Pessôa, its temporary

President, called the meeting to order and appointed a committee of three to

await his Excellency Mr. Mangabeira, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of

Brazil, and to escort him to the Chair. The Minister appeared and opened

the Commission with a gracious and earnest address of welcome, in which

he contemplated, indeed, predicted the success of its labors.

[Here follow extracts from Mr. Mangabeira’s address. For full text, see

On behalf of the Commission whose sessions were thus formally opened by

the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Maurtua, of Peru, responded in the

three-fold character of statesman, jurist, and philosopher. His address is too

long to be reported in this place, and it is dangerous to paraphrase in

English more than a few of its passages from a Portuguese print of a

Spanish original.

[Here follows a summary, with quotations, of Mr. Maurtua’s address. A full

text is printed in Bulletin of the Pan American Union, October 1927,

volume 61, page 957.]

At the conclusion of his address, Mr. Maurtua proposed as permanent

President, Mr. Epitacio Pessôa, senior Delegate of Brazil, and former

President of the Commission of Jurists of 1912. Elected without the

formality of a vote, he assumed the Presidency amid the applause of his

colleagues, and immediately delivered an excellent and admirably phrased

address, so clearly pronouncing his Portuguese that even the foreigners

divined its meaning, although they lost here and there a word, a phrase, or

even a sentence. The American delegates feel it their duty to reproduce a

paragraph or two in the text of this report, although the entire address is

given in the appendix.

[Here follow extracts from Mr. Pessôa’s address. For full text, see Bulletin

This was the atmosphere in which the official delegates of seventeen of the

American Republics met, and this was the spirit in which they labored day

and night, for the space of their sojourn in the most attractive, the most

hospitable, and the most sympathetic of cities and of countries, in order to

give to the Americas the inestimable benefit of a law known in advance,

agreed to in conference, and to be interpreted and applied if necessary in

tribunals of arbitration and courts of justice.

The Commission was now formally opened and ready to enter upon its

arduous labors. The Sub-Commission B. on Private International Law met

on the morrow at 10 in the morning; the Sub-Commission A. on Public

International Law, at 3 in the afternoon, and the process of codification of

the two branches began. Committee C. on the Ways and Means of

Continuing Codification after the Commission’s adjournment met later, and

presented its report. The Commission, and all of its sub-divisions and

committees adjourned on Friday, May 20, 1927, with codification in both

domains a reality instead of a dream, a hope, an aspiration.

What was the nature of the International Commission of Jurists? The

Commission was international, in the sense that it was composed of the

official representatives of some seventeen independent and sovereign

nations. It was continental, in that these nations were part of one and the

same continent, and the nations were the free and equal Republics of

America. Such was the outward aspect of the Commission. Looked at from

within, it was a body of experts in international law, public and private—

not a conference of diplomatists vested with political powers by the

Republics appointing them, but jurists representing what our Latin

American friends and neighbors so happily call the juridical conscience of

the Americas. Their purpose was to state international law, public and

private, in the form of articles—not to make law as a legislature, or to adopt

conventions which, when ratified by the treaty-making Powers of their

respective countries would become law for the High Contracting Parties.

Their task was humbler, but still honorable: to state in the form of articles,

principles of international law and the conflict of laws, to recommend them

to the favorable consideration of the Sixth Conference of the Americas, to

meet in Habana, January 16, 1928, in order that the diplomatic

representatives of the American Republics taking part in that conference

might, through the exercise of political power, invest them, in their original

or modified form, with the force of conventional law. The diplomatic

representatives, acting under instructions from the governments of their

respective Republics would bind their countries to the extent of their

instructions, and the countries would bind themselves and each to each, by

subsequent ratification of the conventions adopted by the Conference.

The Commission was therefore a meeting of the jurists possessing the

confidence of, and appointed by their respective governments for the

preparation of draft-conventions of public international law, and a code of

private international law, to be submitted to the Sixth Conference of the

American Republics, for such consideration as the Governments therein

represented might care to give to them. The Commission of Jurists could

not, therefore, bind the governments which they represented, nor could the

Delegation bind the government appointing it. This was evidently the idea

of the Conference of Santiago de Chile, which planned the Resolution

creating the Commission; it was the conception of the Government of the

United States as expressed in the commissions of its Delegates; it was the

opinion of all of the Delegates themselves expressed in the first plenary

session of the Commission, and at various times in the Sub-Commission.

It is, therefore, manifest that the Governments are not legally bound either

by the views expressed by their respective Delegates in the Commission, or

in the projects of convention of public law, or code of private law. Their

hands are free, but they have before them materials of public and private

international law upon and about which they may instruct their diplomatic

and therefore political Delegates to the forthcoming Conference of the

Americas at Habana.

I. THE SUB-COMMISSION A. FOR THE CODIFICATION OF PUBLIC INTERNATIONAL LAW

This Sub-Commission, composed at least of one, and in some cases of the

two members of the Republics which were represented by a delegation of

two persons, held its first meeting at 3 o’clock in the afternoon of Tuesday,

the 19th of April. As its members were taking their places at the long table

in one of the Committee Rooms of the Monroe Palace, in which the Senate

of Brazil meets, and which was placed at the disposal of the International

Commission of Jurists, the delegation of the United States proposed, on

behalf of the Sub-Commission, that Mr. Pessôa, who had registered in the

section of Public International Law, and who was present, be asked to

assume the Presidency of the Sub-Commission, just as in the morning the

Sub-Commission of Private International Law had requested Mr. Rodrigo

Octavio, the other Brazilian Delegate, to preside that Sub-Commission. Mr.

Pessôa yielded to the unanimous desire of his colleagues, and assumed the

Chair.

Thereupon, the American delegation proposed that a committee of five

persons, with the President as its Chairman, and ex-officio an additional

member, be appointed by the President to examine the projects of

international law, in order to determine those which might reasonably be

considered and passed upon in the limited time at the disposal of the

Commission, it was understood that it would adjourn at least before the

24th of May, at which time Messrs. Bustamante and Pessôa would be

obliged to repair to Europe in order to attend the sessions of the Permanent

Court of International Justice at The Hague, of which august tribunal they

have the honor to be members. It was felt that a small committee could

work more quietly and expeditiously than the Sub-Commission, composed

of the representatives of the seventeen Republics. After discussion, the

suggestion was adopted, and the President named the following members:

Mr. Scott, of the United States; Mr. [Carlos] Saavedra Lamas, of Argentina;

Mr. [Alejandro] Alvarez, of Chile; Mr. [Cesar] Zelaya, of Cuba; Mr. [Julio]

Bastos, of Uruguay. Mr. Reeves, of the American Delegation, and Mr. [Luiz

A.] Podestá-Costa, of Argentina, regularly attended the meetings of the

Committee, with the permission of its President.

The American Delegation further proposed that Mr. Pessôa’s Code of

Public International Law, as presented to the Commission of 1912, be

considered as before the present Commission; that Mr. Alvarez’ projects

likewise be considered as before the Commission. Mr. Pessôa assured the

members that he had no desire to force his Code upon the attention of the

Commission, and Mr. Alvarez finally stated that his project laid before the

Conference of Santiago had been merged in those of the American Institute.

The American Delegation, however, insisted, notwithstanding Mr. Alvarez’

declaration, that his projects in their original form be laid before the

Commission for its consideration, so as to carry out to the letter the

Resolution of 1923, under which the International Commission was

constituted. The Delegation also urged that Mr. Pessôa’s Code should be

considered by the Commission as before it, and note taken of its contents in

the deliberations of the Commission. These views prevailed, and the Sub-

Commission of Public International Law, taking as its basis the projects

submitted by the Pan American Union, had also before it the Code of Mr.

Pessôa, and the original projects of Mr. Alvarez.

The Commission thereupon adjourned, to meet at the call of the President,

when the Committee of five should have projects to report for its

consideration.

This Committee frequently, and indifferently, called “Special Committee,”

Committee of Examination” or simply, “the Committee”, met regularly in

the afternoons during the month in which the International Commission was

in session. At its first meeting, Mr. Pessôa indicated the topics which he

was inclined to believe could be profitably and adequately treated. They

were for the most part those to be found in his own Code of 1912, as well as

in the projects transmitted by the Pan American Union. In many instances,

he expressed himself as preferring the form of his Code to that of the

projects. To this, the Committee made no objection. The result was a

comparison of the drafts of 1912 and of 1924, and the amalgamation of the

two in the form of separate projects which Mr. Pessôa undertook to prepare

and lay before the Committee.

The consideration of some of the projects of the Pan American Union, he

proposed to defer for the moment; others of the projects, he suggested

should be combined and merged in a single project, so that while the final

product of the Commission’s work in public international law is set forth in

an even dozen of projects, these fairly embody the substance of thirteen of

the Pan American Union, or fourteen, if the project of extradition,

transferred from public to private international law, is to be included.

It should be said, in this connection, that two of the thirty projects—those

on the Pan American Union (No. 9) and aerial navigation (No. 20) were

withdrawn from consideration at the request of the Pan American Union, as

these subjects were being elsewhere and otherwise considered. At the

request of Mr. Bustamante, the subject of extradition (No. 17) was referred

to the Sub-Commission on private international law, as contained in his

draft code. The original projects transmitted by the Pan American Union

were thus reduced to twenty-seven. Of these twenty-seven, fourteen were

adopted in whole or in part.

Mr. Pessôa had expressed the opinion at the first session of the Committee,

that some of the projects should not be discussed; that others should be

deferred. With the consent of the Committee, the following were laid aside:

The Preamble (No. 1); the General Declarations (No. 2); Declaration of Pan

American Unity and Cooperation (No. 3); Fundamental Rights of the

American Republics (No. 8); National Domain (No. 10); Rights and Duties

of Nations in territories in Dispute on the question of Boundaries (No. 11);

Jurisdiction (No. 12); Diplomatic Protection (No. 16); Navigation of

International Rivers (No. 19); Pan American Court of Justice (No. 28);

Measures of Repression (No. 29); Conquest (No. 30).

It was, however, the view of the Committee that some of these might be

appropriately embodied in general declarations, such as the Declaration of

Pan American Unity and Cooperation; Fundamental Rights of the American

Republics; and the Declaration against Conquest. These were, as a matter of

fact, incorporated, with their general conceptions and juridical aspirations,

in a masterly report prepared by Mr. Maurtua, of Peru, and presented in

behalf of himself and Mr. [José Pedro] Varela, the majority of an informal

committee appointed by the President near the close of the Commission, to

draft a general declaration to precede the projects, and to explain their

nature, purpose, and significance. The opposition of Mr. Al varez, of Chile,

the third member, prevented a unanimous report; and because of the lack of

unanimity, the matter was dropped.

Under these circumstances, Mr. Pessôa was requested to prepare a report as

President of the Sub-Commission. He did so in a short and admirable

document which is to precede the texts of the projects actually adopted.

As a summary analysis of the projects of public international law as finally

adopted is essential to an understanding of the work of the Commission,

each project is briefly considered:

I. The Fundamental Bases of International Law. In this project an effort is

made to set forth what are usually termed the sources of international law,

their mutual and relative importance and validity, the nature of international

law and the character of its binding obligations, together with the relation of

public international law to the municipal legal system of each of the States

accepting and applying the law of nations. In this project, as in all of the

others, every effort was made to state general principles only, but to state

them clearly and concisely, leaving the necessary consequences to follow of

themselves. It is also to be observed with reference to this, as to every other

project, the Commission endeavored to declare the law, rather than to

attempt to make it.

The text of the Fundamental Bases of International Law is to a considerable

extent that of Project No. 4 of the Pan American Union.

II. States: Existence—Equality—Recognition. This project embodies four

important, indeed fundamental principles of international law: (1) the legal

equality of States; (2) the duty of non-intervention; (3) the doctrine of

unconditional recognition of new States and (4) the elimination of the

distinction between de jure and de facto governments fully in possession

and exercising the will of the State:23

“States are equal before the law, enjoy equal rights and have equal

capacity to exercise them. The rights of each are dependent not

upon the power which it possesses to ensure the exercise of them,

but solely upon the fact of their existence as a person of

International Law.” [Article II]

“No State may intervene in the internal affairs of another.”

[Article III]

“Recognition is unconditional and irrevocable.” [Article VI]

“A government is to be recognized whenever it fulfills the

following conditions: (1) Effective authority with a probability of

stability and consolidation, the orders of which particularly as

regards taxes and military service, are accepted by the inhabitants.

(2) Capacity to discharge pre-existing international obligations, to

contract others, and to respect the principles established by

International Law.” [Article VIII]

This project is also to a considerable extent the embodiment of propositions

III. Status of Aliens. The purpose of this convention is to vest in the States

the right under international law to establish, by means of municipal law,

the conditions under which aliens may enter and remain within their

territory. It recognizes the general principle, that aliens are to be entitled to

the civil, other than political rights of nationals, but that they may be

expelled by any and every State for “reasons of public order or safety,”

notice of the expulsion to be communicated as soon as possible to the

country to which the person so expelled belongs.

The convention is an amplification, with additional matter, of the principles

contained in Project No. 14 of the Pan American Union, and it is, in the

opinion of the American Delegates, an improvement on that Project.

IV. Treaties. This project has a double importance, in that it states general

practice, and at the same time lays stress upon certain tendencies which

have only recently taken definite form and effect. An example of this is to

be found in the very first article, declaring expressly what can not be too

well understood—that treaties are only to be made in accordance with the

municipal law of the contracting States. In like manner, Article 4 is a

guaranty against secret treaties.

Article 6, dealing with ratifications, assumes particular importance, in that it

recognizes and approves reservations in multilateral treaties as follows: “In

international conventions celebrated between different States, a reservation

made by one of them in the act of ratification, affects only the clause in

question and the State to which it refers.”

Article 15 is either a step in advance, or a statement of the most recent

theory and practice. “Obligations contracted by treaty shall be sanctioned in

cases of non-compliance as when diplomatic negotiations have failed, by

decision of an international Court of Justice or by an arbitral tribunal.”

This disposition renders effective the Hague Conventions. In Article 16 of

the Pacific Settlement Convention of the First Hague Peace Conference of

1899, arbitration is declared to be the most equitable and efficacious

means of interpreting and applying treaties and conventions, when

diplomacy has failed to reach an adjustment.

In the Second Hague Peace Conference, of 1907, the forty-four Powers

there represented, including all of the American Republics with the

exception of Costa Rica and Honduras, declared that the interpretation and

application of treaties and conventions could be submitted to obligatory

arbitration without reserves of any kind.

The present Article reaffirms in no uncertain terms the doctrine

unanimously proclaimed by the two Hague Peace Conferences, and

provides specific machinery for its realization. This article will be

considered later, in a different connection.

The final Article (No. 17) provides that, “Two or more States may agree

that their relations are to be governed by rules other than those established

in general conventions celebrated by them with other States.”

The convention on treaties is a happy combination of the provision

contained in Mr. Pessôa’s proposed Code of 1912, and Project 21 of the Pan

American Union, with the addition of Article 15, which is not contained in

either.

V. Exchange of Publications. This is peculiarly an American proposal,

providing for the interchange of publications of the Americas. It is

substantially Project No. 24 of the Pan American Union, and is the

realization of a long-standing aspiration. It is, in fact, with slight

modifications, the Convention of January 27, 1902, of the Second Pan

American Conference.

VI. Interchange of Professors and Students. This is Project No. 25 of the

Pan American Union and is the culmination of efforts extending over many

years. It is, with trifling changes, the Resolution on the Interchange of

Professors and Students, adopted by the Fourth Pan American Conference

meeting in Buenos Aires in 1910.

VII. Diplomatic Agents. This project is drafted in accordance with modern

theory and modern practice. Its theory is that the immunities of diplomatic

agents exist solely for the purpose of facilitating and regularizing the

official contacts between States. It rejects in toto the outworn and

unacceptable theory of extraterritoriality.

In addition, it embodies, it is believed, the accepted practice of the United

States and of the other American Republics. The Commission was

unanimous that there should be but two classes of permanent chiefs of

mission: the Minister Plenipotentiary and the Chargé d’Affaires. The

Commission felt that in the Americas, the State, and not an official of the

State, should be represented, and that therefore the Ambassador,

representing the President, and having personal access to the President of

another Republic not enjoyed as of right by the Minister Plenipotentiary,

was inconsistent with the democratic conditions of the New World.

Unwilling to change the law and practice in this respect, the Commission

unanimously adopted a recommendation to this effect, in the form of a voeu

to the forthcoming Sixth Conference of the Americas, to meet in Habana.

Article 24, which deals with specific immunities, contains in clause 3 a

somewhat novel suggestion, designed to meet novel but not altogether

unfamiliar conditions—freedom from customs duties on objects intended

for the diplomat’s personal use and that of his family, in a sum total limited

by the Government of the State to which he is accredited. The basis of this

admirable project was No. 22 of the Pan American Union, which, in turn,

with sundry provisions taken from American practice, was based upon

various resolutions of the Institute of International Law. It is believed that

the ultimate form of the present project is superior to any and all of its

predecessors.

VIII. Consuls. This project is believed to be of unusual merit. As in the case

of the project concerning diplomatic agents, that on Consuls is based upon

the resolutions of the Institute of International Law and upon modern theory

and practice, drawing a sharp distinction between diplomatic and consular

functions, and hence in the status respectively of these two types of

officials. No personal immunities are accorded to consuls who, however,

are protected for the purpose of the adequate exercise of their official

duties. The supremacy of municipal law over the consul is to be presumed

in absence of express stipulations to the contrary.

Attention is invited to certain specific provisions:

“Consuls shall exercise the functions that the law of their State

confers upon them, without prejudice to the legislation of the

country in whose jurisdiction they are serving.” (Article 10)

“In judicial affairs in which his compatriots are involved consuls

shall have the right of interference except as expressly provided

for by local legislation.” (Article 11)

“The consul can not compel his compatriots by force to comply

with his orders or decisions, but, in cases where this is necessary,

he shall have recourse to the competent local authorities.” (Article

12)

“Consuls are not obliged to appear as witnesses before the courts

of the State where they exercise functions: they shall, in

conformity with local legislation, give their testimony in the

building of the consulate or send it in writing to the authority

designated for that purpose. They shall nevertheless give it

personally in a trial in criminal prosecutions when the accused are

entitled to present them as witnesses for the defense.

“If the personal appearance of the consul should be indispensable

the territorial government, in case of refusal, can have recourse to

diplomatic measures.” (Article 17)

It will not escape notice that these provisions are an express confirmation of

the attitude of the United States in the well-known case of Dillon, French

Consul in San Francisco.

Article 22 abrogates all claims to consular asylum.

The immediate source of this project is No. 22 of the Pan American Union

with modification of form rather than of substance.

IX. Maritime Neutrality. This project is based upon the enlightened practice

of modern times. It is not original. Its basis is the Rights and Duties of

Neutral States in Maritime Warfare, drafted by the Second Hague Peace

Conference in 1907, ratified by the United States as well as by the other

leading maritime powers. It is superior to its predecessor or model, in that

it takes note of the experience had in the World War, and sets forth in

twenty-nine articles the law and the practice of the present day.

It was accepted by the Commission as such statement without reserve.

X. Asylum. The delegates of the United States deemed it to be their duty to

interpose a general reserve to the entire project on the express ground that it

was not only contrary to the long-established and well-known policy of the

United States, but also, in their opinion, opposed to the generally

recognized modern practice of the world at large in such matters.

As, however, it appeared that all of the countries represented in the

Commission, with the exception of the United States, were desirous of

recognizing the right of asylum for political refugees, as stated in the

convention, the American delegates did not oppose its discussion and

adoption by the Commission. Their desire was in this case as in all other

ways, to advance the work of the Commission without interposing

objections to the desires of the other delegations.

It is an original project of the Commission.

XI. Obligations of States in Event of Civil War. This project, also original

with the Commission, undertakes to define the duty which one State owes

to another with which it is at peace, with reference to civil war and

insurgency within the other. It is believed that this short project of but five

paragraphs summarizes the legislation and practice of the United States for

more than a century. It reads like a series of extracts from the Neutrality

Laws of the United States, particularly that of 1818.

XII. Pacific Settlement of International Conflicts. The purpose of this

project, in form and in substance that of Pan American Union No. 27, is to

gather in an ascending series into a single convention, the various forms of

pacific settlement, good-offices and mediation, commissions of inquiry,

conciliation and friendly composition, arbitration and judicial decision.

There is little or nothing new to be found in its 23 articles; whenever

possible the exact language of approved texts has been used, so that there

might be no doubt as to the acceptance of the project as a whole.

The articles relating to good offices, a word of advice to one or other or

both of the disputants by a third and disinterested party; and mediation,

similar to good offices, but bringing the process a step forward by

suggesting a solution, are taken from the Pacific Settlement Convention[s]

of the Hague Peace Conferences. The Commission of Inquiry is, in an

abbreviated form, the so-called Gondra Convention. It was adopted in

1923 by the Fifth Pan American Conference of Santiago de Chile, and it has

already been ratified by Brazil and the United States. It is based upon the

commissions of inquiry of the Hague Peace Conferences and Secretary of

State Bryan’s Treaties for the Advancement of Peace.

The advantages of Commissions of Conciliation have been much discussed

in recent years, but it is only yesterday that they have been given definite

form in official conventions.

The present project adopts the method of settling disputes in a conciliatory

manner, and makes of the Governing Board of the Pan American Union a

permanent Commission.

Friendly composition was much used in the past, but appears to have been

overlooked in recent years. It was, however, resorted to by Chile and the

United States for the settlement of the Alsop Claim by the King of England

acting as friendly compositor in 1911. Its usefulness has been made

manifest by the most Southern and Northern of the American Republics,

and its acceptance by the Commission recognized it as an adequate method

for classes of disputes where the settlement is desired to depend upon the

good faith of a single person in whose good judgment and sense of equity

the parties in controversy have confidence.

The project ends with a series of articles on arbitration based upon those of

the Hague Conventions, and the suggestion, that, in case of a desire to

resort to judicial settlement of their controversies, the parties in dispute may

refer their differences either to the Permanent Court of International Justice

at The Hague, or “to any other court of justice which may be constituted for

this purpose by the American States.”

The project is, with trifling modifications, the original text of Project 27 of

the Pan American Union, submitted to the various American Governments

and transmitted by the Union to the International Commission of Jurists. It

is to be presumed that it had been carefully considered by the Foreign

Offices of the American Republics, and that they approved of it, as no

amendment of a critical nature was suggested in any phase of its passage

through the Committee of Five, the Subcommission on Public Law, to its

final adoption by the plenary session of the Commission on May 20, 1927.

It was evidently a project in which the Governments of the Americas appear

to have taken a greater interest than in that of any other of the projects

transmitted to the Commission, for the Pan American Union recommended

by formal resolution the Commission to give preference to the project on

Pacific Settlement in case it should not have time at its disposal to consider

all of the projects. The preamble to the original project as transmitted by the

Pan American Union stated the purpose of the project:

“The American Republics in order to conserve the peace upon

which their civilization depends, and to avert war, which menaces

it, agree to have recourse for the settlement of all disputes

between them, when direct negotiations have failed, to the

measures regulated in the present convention.”

One of these measures was arbitration, and, according to the preamble, all

questions susceptible of arbitration might be submitted to an arbitral

tribunal constituted by the parties, provided only diplomatic means have

been tried and failed.

The Gondra Convention provided controversies between the American

Republics should be submitted to American Commissions of Inquiry,

composed exclusively of American members. The delegates of the United

States therefore stated in the plenary session of May 6, 1927, their intention

to submit a plan for an American Tribunal of Arbitration, for the adjustment

of American controversies in the form of an amendment to Article 25 of the

original project in order to promote arbitral settlement of international

controversies in this hemisphere. In the opinion of the American Delegates

the plan of the Commission of Inquiry in the Gondra Convention suggested

the improved plan for arbitral settlements. In this way, controversies of

which disposition could be more advantageously made by an American

tribunal could be referred to a tribunal established for the purpose in

accordance with the accepted principles of arbitral procedure.

The amendment which it was contemplated to submit for the consideration

of the commission was to have been based upon the Convention signed at

Washington, February 7, 1923, by the representatives of five of the Latin

American Republics for the establishment of a Central American

Tribunal.

Project No. 27 of the Pan American Union was not reached until the closing

days of the Commission, and when it was laid before the Subcommission

on Public International Law, May 19th, the day before the final

adjournment, the Delegates of the United States announced that they would

abstain from presenting the plan. The statement made by the American

Delegation in the plenary session of May 6th, and the statement made at

[next to] the final session of the Subcommission of Public International

Law, are attached hereto in the appendix to this Report, together with the

memorandum prepared! by the American Delegation, with a view to its

being presented as an accompaniment to the contemplated plan.

II. SUBCOMMISSION B. PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL LAW

Subcommission B. was formed to consider the code of the American

Institute on International Private Law, prepared by Mr. Bustamante,

although he himself always referred to it as that of the Institute, and

transmitted to the International Commission of Jurists by the Pan American

Union.

It is believed to be unnecessary in the present connection to rehearse the

various attempts, more or less successful, by which the Latin American

States have sought agreement upon this important branch of law. The

United States did not participate in any of the earlier conferences dealing

with this subject. Among the twenty Latin-American Republics there have

been serious divergences of position resulting from the acceptance by some

of them of the system of domicile, and reception on the part of the others of

a system based on nationality. The Code presented to the Commission for

its consideration is very largely based upon the system of nationality and it

was at once perceived by the American Delegates, that the projected Code

would be opposed by the representatives of those States almost wholly

south of the Equator which had adopted in their municipal systems the

theory of domicile. The opponents of Mr. Bustamante’s code, however,

were not prepared to present a substitute code based upon domicile,

although they did insist upon those portions of a code so based, known as

the Conventions of Montevideo of 1889. The American Delegates soon

became convinced that unless the Code as prepared by Mr. Bustamante was

adopted at least in substance by the Commission, all attempts at the

codification of Private International Law at Rio de Janeiro would prove

abortive; that thereby the Resolution of the Fifth Pan American Conference

would fail of execution, and that the forthcoming Sixth Conference would

fail to have before it, for its consideration, any constructive projects dealing

with the subject. The Delegates of the United States therefore determined to

support wherever possible, the Recommendations of the Commission by

which the projected code might be transmitted to Habana. This position was

set forth in a declaration made by the American Delegation on May 9th, as

follows:38

The delegation of the United States desires to have its vote

recorded in favor of the articles reported to this Plenary Session

from Sub-Commission B, and based upon the project of the Code

of Private International Law, prepared by the learned and very

distinguished delegate from Cuba, Mr. Bustamante.

In so recording its affirmative vote the delegation does not desire

to imply that the articles for which it votes are in accordance with

the laws of the various jurisdictions of the United States, forty-

nine in all. As a matter of fact and as is well known the

jurisprudence of the United States is based in general upon the

theory of domicile, while the project of the proposed code is

based largely upon the theory of nationality. The reason for this

affirmative vote is that the delegation of the United States desires

to further the work of codification of private international law. It

desires, furthermore, to make this recognition of what it believes

to be a constructive effort of very considerable value, and it

desires that, by the adoption of these articles, the forthcoming

Panamerican Conference at Habana may have before it, for its

mature consideration, a substantial basis for the discussion of

Private International Law.

In conclusion, the delegation of the United States desires to

express the hope that ultimately a code of private international

law may be proposed for the Americas, by which the opposing

principles of the two theories of domicile and nationality may be

reconciled. In this happy event it is to be hoped that the United

States may be able to join with her sister republics.

The clash between the adherents of the opposing theories of domicile and

nationality seems to have reached its height when Article 7 of the

Preliminary Title of Mr. Bustamante’s code came under discussion. Article

7 as originally drafted was as follows: “Each contracting State shall apply

to the nationals of the others the laws of an internal public order of their

domicile or of their nationality, according to the system adopted by the

State to which they belong.” Thereupon, Mr. Bustamante withdrew Article

7 as originally proposed and, after the whole of the code had been

substantially approved in the closing days of the Commission, proposed a

substitute for Article 7 as follows:

Each contracting State shall apply as personal law that of the

domicile or that of the nationality according to the system which

its domestic legislation may have adopted or may hereafter adopt.

It is to be observed that there seems to be no substantial difference between

the original and amended form, as it failed to satisfy the Delegates of the

States choosing a system of domicile, who were frank in the expression of

their desire to have the system adopted by them prevail universally in the

Americas.

There is, however, one portion of Mr. Bustamante’s code in which it is

believed the United States have an immediate and direct interest—namely

the title concerning extradition. In the opinion of the American Delegates,

this subject should have been retained by the Subcommission of

International Public Law, using Project No. 17 of the Pan American Union

as a basis of discussion collated with the draft in Mr. Bustamante’s code.

However, the provisions on the subject in his code seem generally to be in

accord with the law of the United States and their accepted practice; but in

order to reach a maximum of agreement, the Delegates of the United States

suggested that extraditable offenses should not be determined on the basis

of minimum punishment, but specifically listed as such in the various

treaties and conventions dealing with extradition. This suggestion was

adopted in Article 346.

The question of the extradition by a State of its own nationals aroused

considerable discussion. In Mr. Bustamante’s proposed code, Article 347

was as follows: “The contracting States are not obliged to hand over their

own nationals.” While the provision thus stated would leave each of the

contracting parties free to adopt its own policy in this respect, it was felt

that, in the interest of international justice, some obligation should be

imposed upon the State refusing to do so. Therefore the following clause

was added: “The nation which declines to hand over one of its own citizens

must try him.” Although the provision contained in Article 380, that, “In no

case shall the death penalty be imposed or executed for the offense upon

which the extradition is founded,” appears in certain extradition treaties to

which the Government of the United States is a party, the American

Delegation has some doubts as to the wisdom of its adoption of such a

general policy. In their opinion, the abolition of capital punishment, if

considered desirable, should be by direct enactment, rather than indirectly

by treaty arrangement.

III. SUBCOMMISSION C. ON WAYS AND MEANS FOR THE WORK OF CODIFICATION

The members of this Subcommission, five in number, met toward the end of

the session, under the Chairmanship of Mr. Maurtua, and submitted a report

on the subject-matter with which they had been entrusted. It was a

unanimous report, and unanimously approved by the Commission in

plenary session, May 16th. It is in itself a summary of ways and means, and

is perhaps shorter than an analysis of it would be; certainly, it is more

satisfactory. Therefore, it is printed in its entirety, and without comment:

The International Commission of Jurists, having in view the

necessity, demonstrated by experience, of permanently organizing

the

preliminary

work

for

formulating

and

developing

International Law in America, as well as the unification of

legislation, recommends that the Sixth Pan American Conference

approve the following plan:

1st. To make the International Commission of Jurists of Rio de

Janeiro a permanent body, and to provide for a stated, regular

session, every two years.

2nd. To organize two committees of examination, one at Bio de

Janeiro and the other at Montevideo, for International Public Law

and International Private Law, respectively, with the following

duties:

a) To present to the various Governments a list of

matters susceptible of being submitted to contractual

regulation. In this list will be included, besides the

matters initiated by the Committees, those which the

International Commission of Jurists judges proper to

indicate, on terminating each of its sessions.

b) To decide, in accordance with replies received, what

matters are generally considered ripe for discussion and

appropriate for legislation.

c) To submit to the various Governments the different

viewpoints from which matters selected may be

contemplated; to petition and obtain an indication along

general lines, of the opinion of each Government.

3rd. To entrust the Executive Council of the American Institute of

International Law with the duty of studying scientifically the

matters referred to in the above article, with the task of drawing

conclusions and presenting them with proper explanations duly

supported in reports, inasmuch as they are to serve as bases of

discussion by the International Commission of Jurists for the

definite formulation of the ante-projects intended for Pan

American Conferences.

Whenever possible, the above information shall be submitted to

the deliberations of the Institute at its biennial plenary sessions.

4th. To organize in Habana an office and a committee for

directing the studies of comparative legislation, and for the

unification of legislation.

5th. The three above mentioned Committees are to be formed by

the various Governments from the members of their respective

National Societies of International Law.

They shall communicate with the various Governments and with

the Executive Council of the Institute, through the Pan American

Union.

6th. The Pan American Union, in so far as its By-Laws permit,

shall cooperate in all the preliminary legislative work referred to

in the above article.

It will be observed that the report of Subcommission C. includes that of

Subcommission D. in the matter of universality of legislation.

GENERAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE LABORS OR THE COMMISSION

The Commission of Jurists was considered by all of its members as a body

of experts to put into the form of articles, certain topics of international law,

public as well as private; that the delegates were chosen for their supposed

familiarity with one or other of these branches, and that as jurists they were

not clothed with political powers. In an early plenary session of the

Commission39 this question was presented in an acute and concrete form.

Under date of April 27th, the following telegram was sent by Mr. Pedro

José Cepeda, Minister of Nicaragua in Mexico to the President of the

International Commission of Jurists:

Although the opinion of the world has passed a just judgment in

the case of Nicaragua, I beg you, in the name of my countrymen

sacrificed in ten months of a titanic struggle, to make an express

declaration which will condemn the unlawful policy of the

Department of State of the United States of North America,

which, inconsistent with the principles of President Wilson, does

not recognize that “small nations of the world …40 have the same

rights as the large nations, with respect to their existence and

integrity.”

Nobody is more authorized than this honorable assembly to make

such a vindication of international law, trampled under foot by

force.

I consider it unnecessary to give the history of the conflict, but

you will recall the imposition of Diaz as President of my country,

against the national will and the express provisions of our

Constitution. The blockade of our coasts frustrated the efforts of

the legal government to give assistance to our wounded soldiers;

and now the illegal use of North American marines who establish

arbitrary “neutral zones” which are nothing more than zones of

refuge for our defeated enemies, and places for recruiting bad

citizens who compromise the liberty of the country.

This congress, giving effect to the high principles of international

justice which inspired it, will condemn these acts.

In the name of the constitutional government of Nicaragua, I send

you a cordial greeting and my best wishes that the elevated views

and noble endeavors of the distinguished members of this great

congress may be fruitful of accord and peace for the great

Continental family.

On May 6th, the President of the Commission read the foregoing telegram

to the plenary session of that date, and his proposed answer in the following

terms:

I acknowledge receipt of your Excellency’s cablegram of the 27th

ultimo. In reply, I beg to inform you that the assembly being a

Commission of Jurists of an exclusively juridical character,

without power, quality, or political qualifications, it is not

permissible to express an opinion upon the subject contained in

your cablegram. I have the honor to present to your Excellency

the assurance of my high consideration.

The President’s proposed answer was unanimously approved as read by him

and it was immediately transmitted to its destination.

It was therefore not to be expected that political proposals or proposals with

a political implication would be presented and that, if they were, they would

not receive consideration. However, there were presented from time to time

propositions falling under one or other of the above categories. In each

case, the Commission refused to take favorable action, and contented itself

with referring them to the approaching Pan American Conference at

Habana, without recommendation. There are four instances which should be

specially mentioned:

1) In the Subcommission, on April 30th, and at the plenary session of May

9th, the proposition originally presented by the Dominican Delegate, and in

which the Mexican Delegation joined as a proposing party at the last

plenary session, of May 20th, in which projects were considered.

It is thus worded: “No State may in the future directly or indirectly, nor by

reason of any motive, occupy even temporarily any portion of the territory

of another State. The consent given to the occupying State by the State

occupied will not legitimatize the occupation and the occupant will be

responsible for all occurrences resulting from the occupation not only with

respect to the State occupied, but to third parties as well.”

2) At the same plenary session of May 9th, the Haitian Delegate presented a

proposition to the effect that treaties procured by pressure or menace of

armed force should be considered as intervention. He presented his

proposition in the last working plenary session of the Commission of May

20th, in the following form: “Any action carried out by a State, whether by

means of diplomatic pressure or by armed force, in order to force its will

upon that of the other State, constitutes intervention.”

3) The Argentine Delegation had already proposed in the same plenary

session of May 9th, to add, “or external” to the following text unanimously

adopted by the Subcommission of Public International Law: “A State may

not intervene in the internal affairs [nor in the external affairs] of another

State.”

In this condition of affairs, Mr. Reeves, on behalf of the American

Delegation made the following statement:42

I desire to make an observation concerning the amendments to

Santo Domingo.

The third article has been carefully expressed in general terms. If,

however, it is determined to depart from the general theory of this

project by introducing various details and particular cases, I shall

be obliged to call attention to two exceptions to the general rule:

1st, on grounds of humanity; 2nd, in self-defense. I do not desire

to seem unmindful of the legal basis upon which the United

States, on grounds of humanity intervened to stop a régime of

inhumanity in Cuba, as a result of which Cuba was freed. But I

hope that this will not be necessary because of the recognition and

acceptance of the general principles of Projects 1 and 2, and that

in the future there will be no opportunity for the recognition of

these exceptions.

The whole matter was referred back to the Subcommission for

consideration—the Delegation of the United States abstaining from the

vote.

4) A proposal of a somewhat similar nature by the Paraguayan Delegate is

as follows: “Intervention or any act of a State within the territory of another

State without a previous declaration of war, with the intent to decide by

force, material pressure, or moral coercion, internal or external questions of

the other State, will be considered as a violation of international law.”

The American delegation under these circumstances repeated on May 20th

the formal statement made in the plenary session of May 9th, whereupon

the following action was taken by the Commission in the plenary session of

May 20th, the last, as has already been remarked, in which it considered

projects, as appears from the official report presented by Mr. Pessôa in

behalf of the Commission:43

The Commission of jurists understood with regard to these

propositions [seven had been presented] that some of them did

not have that degree of maturity necessary for incorporation in the

codification, and others, being drafted in the terms in which they

were, might be considered as manifestations of a means of

obtaining the Commission’s views regarding pending American

political questions. For this reason the Commission decided to

transmit and to submit some of them for the consideration of the

Sixth International Conference to meet in 1928 in the city of

Habana.

There are two articles in the project on treaties, which should be considered

in this connection. There had been at various times proposals to exclude

intervention even with the consent of the States involved.

The American delegation took the position that no such act arising out of

the consent of a State could be considered as an act of intervention properly

so called and in the sense of Article 3 of the Project No. 2 on States, and

that, furthermore, any such attempt would be an unacceptable limitation of

the State’s sovereignty.

That this view prevailed appears from Article 17 of the project on Treaties,

providing in express terms that, “Two or more States may agree that their

relations are to be governed by rules other than those established in general

conventions celebrated by them with other States.”

There is a further example of an Article, although expressed in general

terms, which was considered to have a political implication. The Chilean

Delegate took exception to Article 15 of the project on Treaties as

submitted by the President to the Commission. It was as follows: “If one of

the States [parties to a treaty] fails wholly or in any respect to fulfill the

obligation which it has contracted, the other can exact the fulfillment or

consider the treaty as abrogated.” The Peruvian Delegation made no

objection to the article as drafted by the President, but, upon the insistence

of the Chilean Delegate, the Commission struck out the article, the

American Delegation expressing the hope that a substitute might be drafted

which would satisfy the opposing views of the Delegates in question. This

hope was realized, for in the last plenary session and as the last act, the

following substitute, drafted by the Peruvian Delegation, was unanimously

adopted: “Obligations contracted by treaty shall be sanctioned in cases of

non-compliance as when diplomatic negotiations have failed, by decision of

an international Court of Justice or by an arbitral tribunal.”

A source of difficulty which has already been mentioned in passing

deserves to be dealt with in some detail. Each of the twenty-one American

Republics was invited by the Resolution of Santiago de Chile, creating the

International Commission of Jurists, to appoint two delegates, no doubt in

the belief that in this way a specialist in each of two branches of

international science would attend and participate in the labors of the

Commission. In the event four or five of the Central American Republics

were not represented, and of the seventeen Republics sending delegates,

eight sent but one delegate each. This made it necessary for the single

delegate to attend the sessions of both Subcommissions and, on this

account, the remaining nine States each having two delegates were

generally represented in both Subcommissions by their two delegates. To

accommodate the eight States, each with one single delegate, the

Subcommissions were obliged to meet at different hours—an arrangement

which hampered the work of the Subcommission on Public International

Law, as, meeting in the afternoons, it was obliged to give way to the

meetings of the Committee of this Subcommission, for the plenary sessions,

as well as for certain social duties. Considering the encroachments thus

effected, the work of the Commission in the field of International Public

Law in agreeing upon a dozen conventions may properly be held to be an

eminently satisfactory achievement. On the other hand, the Subcommission

on Private International Law was enabled to devote on an average, three

hours in the morning of each day, with scarcely an interruption throughout

the five weeks of the Conference. This arrangement was not satisfactory to

the American Delegation, but it was impossible to secure any material

modification of it.

The difficulties due to diversity in language have been evident in all

international conferences. It is well known that the American Conferences

have four official languages: Spanish, Portuguese, French and English.

However, at formal Conferences arrangements are usually made for rapid

and accurate translation of the proceedings as they occur for such members

of the Conference as may, for one reason or another, request it. In the case

of a Commission such as the one under consideration, where discussion and

debate were informal and technical in nature, continuous translation would

have greatly interrupted the course of proceedings and materially curtailed

the exchange of views and limited its results. In the Subcommission of

Private International Law the basic text used was Spanish, although the

projected code of private international law was furnished to each

government and its representatives in each of the four official languages of

the Americas. The projects on public international law were likewise

transmitted by the Pan American Union in the four languages, but in the

various sections dealing with public law the President used Portuguese,

drafted the projects in Portuguese, and distributed them to the members in

Portuguese. In view of these facts the American delegation suggested that,

while the four languages were equally official, in case of doubt or

disagreement as to the meaning of a project, the language of the Capital in

which the Commission was sitting should be accepted as authoritative.

Courtesy as well as expediency suggested this, in the opinion of the

Delegates of the United States. The delegations which expressed

themselves as in accord with the American view were Argentina, Bolivia,

Brazil, Colombia and Peru. The result is four different versions which, if

the experience of international conferences is to be enlightening, will

disclose not unimportant divergences in meaning, with the requirement of a

knowledge of the four languages on the part of those who use them, and a

minute scrutiny of each version.

With these difficulties out of the way, the reasons for the success of the

Commission should be mentioned. The element which made for success

more than any other, and indeed all others, was the desire of success

constantly expressed by the Brazilian Government through its sympathetic,

courteous and broadminded Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Octavio

Mangabeira, from the opening session to his farewell banquet to the

Delegates, with which it closed. The Commission was thus surrounded with

a congenial atmosphere proceeding from his evidently sincere desire and

ambition that the meeting should justify the Americas in choosing the

Capital of Brazil as the seat of the Commission’s deliberations. The

hospitalities, official and private, tendered to the members of the

Commission were many and varied. They brought the delegates together

and enabled them in an atmosphere of friendly informality to learn each

other’s views and to appreciate those qualities of grace and courtesy which

are sometimes missing from official discussions. The American Delegates

could not fail to notice, what they were pleased to consider an implied

compliment to their country, in having the Commission meet in the Monroe

Palace, the official seat of the Brazilian Senate, where everything tended to

the comfort and convenience of the Commission and its members.

The Delegates of the United States believe themselves justified in calling

attention to another element making for success. The careful and

satisfactory preparation in advance of the Commission, due in large part to

private initiative. The American Institute of International Law, composed of

five publicists of each of the twenty-one American Republics, and of which

the American Delegates are themselves members, prepared at the request of

the Pan American Union the series of Projects of Public International Law

and the projected Code on the Conflict of Laws, which were transmitted by

the Governing Board of the Pan American Union a year or more in advance

of the meeting to the governments of the Americas for their consideration.

This was made possible by the munificence and far-sighted generosity of

the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, which enabled the

American Institute to hold its sessions and to prepare both the projects and

code, and which bore the entire expense of the printing and the distribution

of the preparatory work accomplished by the American Institute of

International Law and in the form in which it was laid before the

Commission by the Pan American Union.

The services of the American Institute were formally recognized by the

Commission of Jurists in plenary session by a vote of thanks46 and, in an

even more substantial way, by a resolution submitted by Subcommission C

on the ways and means of continuing the work of the International

Commission. The report of the Subcommission was unanimous; the

approval of the plenary session of the Commission, and the tribute were

therefore unanimous.

At half-past four o’clock on the afternoon of Friday, the 20th of May, the

International Commission of Jurists held its last and closing session. Its

distinguished President, Mr. Epitacio Pessôa, in the remarks with which he

opened the closing session, stated its success in unequivocal terms and

looked forward to a closer and more intimate association of the Americas in

the future.

“It is my desire,” he began, “that in this final session all those who are

interested in the codification of international law in America may find an

enumeration, at least a simple enumeration, of the work accomplished.

“The Commission of Jurists prepared a general convention of International

private law and, in addition, twelve projects of International public law,

having to do with the following subjects:

“Fundamental bases of international law; States—existence, equality,

recognition; status of aliens; treaties; exchange of publications; interchange

of professors and students; diplomatic agents; consuls; maritime neutrality;

asylum; and the pacific settlement of international conflicts.

“As the Commission will see, our efforts were not unproductive; to the

contrary, they give great promise for fruit from our labor. A general

convention of international private law and the twelve projects regarding

the important points of international public law—here you have that which

the Commission of Jurists was able to accomplish in this second session, in

the short space of one month during which it met.”

And of the future, he ventured to express the hope “that shortly we may be

able to reunite the Americas in a vast and majestic confederation of

interests, of aspirations and of common ideals, in the midst of which all

States, be they grand or small, may tranquilly live, prosper and progress in

an ambient of true independence, of justice and of liberty.”

After the applause with which his address was greeted, Dr. Leopoldo Melo,

of Argentina, Member of the American Institute, President of the Argentine

Society of International Law, and nominee of the Presidency of Argentina

by one of the political parties of that great and progressive nation, was

called upon to voice the appreciation of his fellow delegates. From Dr.

Melo’s carefully prepared address the American Delegates believe that at

least a few paragraphs of his calm and measured pronouncement should

find a place in their official report. They have ventured to select the

following extracts as showing how a statesman of the most southern of

American Republics speaking under a sense of political responsibility, as

well as principle, views the Commission and its labors:

[Here follow extracts from Mr. Melo’s address.]

Mr. Melo’s address was immediately followed by that of Mr. Garcia Ortiz,

principal Delegate of Colombia and its Minister Plenipotentiary to Brazil.

The American delegates deem it important to add, in this connection, that

he was Minister of Foreign Affairs of his country at the time when the

treaty between Colombia and the United States, signed in 1914 but only

ratified in 1922,48a reestablished those intimate, friendly and confidential

relations which should always exist between members of the great

American Family of Nations.

His address, of which but a few phrases may be quoted, made a most

pleasing appeal to his fellow delegates, and to the country in which they

had labored unceasingly for the codification of international law, public and

private, for the Americas.

[Here follow quotations from Mr. Ortiz’ address.]

The Minister of Foreign Affairs, who had appeared and graciously

consented to preside at the session, arose—in what is always an impressive

and solemn moment in international gatherings—to close the Commission.

His few words, spoken in behalf of the United States of Brazil, which he

has the honor to represent in its foreign relations, were instinct with regard

for the Delegations, with respect for the countries which they represented,

and with appreciation for the labors of the Commission, which he was to

adjourn sine die.

“In closing the second session of the International Commission of

American Jurists, I am pleased,” he said, “to declare publicly to you all the

approval which the Government of Brazil desired to be the first to voice,

and to express the gratitude of America for the most important services

which you have just rendered. The Government of Brazil congratulates

itself for having convoked this assembly which in adjourning today is,

however, not dissolved without having deserved the benedictions of the

friends of peace and of justice. Carry away and transmit, gentlemen, to the

nations of which you are the representatives, to their peoples and their

governments, the assurances of respect and of loyal friendship of the people

and government of Brazil. May my last words be in honor of America, the

last which shall echo and reecho in these halls and in this beautiful

manifestation of continental fraternity. To America! To its moral progress,

to its increasing economic prosperity, to its political greatness. To America!

To America, happy, industrious, pacific! To America, that it may the better

contribute to the advancement of humanity.”

On the evening of Saturday, May 21st, the Minister of Foreign Affairs

offered, on behalf of the Government of Brazil, a banquet to the Delegates

and the ladies accompanying them. In the course of the evening he took

advantage of the occasion to express in gracious and generous terms,

vibrating with an emotion which he did not attempt to conceal, the feelings

of regret and appreciation with which he and his government took leave of

their departing guests.

[Here follow extracts from Mr. Mangabeira’s remarks.]

It is customary in strictly official banquets offered by the Government of

Brazil to have the Presiding Officer toast the guests, and to request one of

them to respond with a toast to the President of the Republic. On this

occasion, the Minister of Foreign Affairs honored the American Delegation

with the request that Mr. Scott propose, on behalf of his colleagues, the

toast to the President. He did so in a few remarks, which he deemed

appropriate to the occasion, thanking the Brazilian hosts for their hospitality

and courtesy, for which he ventured to coin the expressions, Brazilian

hospitality and Brazilian courtesy, voicing appreciation of the attentions

lavished upon them by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, who, laying aside

his official duties, had anticipated the desires of his guests and satisfied

their most exacting requirements. And he ended by declaring that the

codification of the law of nations and of the conflict of laws had ceased to

be a dream, because of its realization by the Commission in the

incomparable capital of Brazil.

With those expressions of gratitude, of appreciation, and of a purpose

accomplished, the International Commission of Jurists passed into history.

What were the aims and purposes of the International Commission of

Jurists, which sat in Rio de Janeiro for the short space of a month? What

were the immediate, and what the implied results of their de liberations?

They have been stated in a masterly manner by Mr. Maurtua, the Delegate

of Peru, in a statement which is at once the envy and the despair of the

American Delegates. Therefore, they asked Mr. Maurtua’s permission to

include it in their official report to their Government. The permission was at

once and graciously granted, in plenary session. The statement therefore

follows in full.

“The International Commission of Jurists has been in session for

a month, in order to accomplish the mission confided to it by the

Pan American Conferences. The result of its deliberations

consists in twelve draft conventions of public international law, a

general convention of private international law, and a plan of

organization for the permanent and continuous workings of

American legislation.

“This result should still be viewed as an attempt to formulate the

law destined to regulate inter-American relations. Their

complexity, both in public and in private law, the supreme

importance of many of the legal relations regulated in the drafts,

the difficulties, some of them hitherto insuperable, in adopting

uniform rules or in developing certain essential but vaguely

enunciated principles, show that what has now been realized is

but the first stage, subject to correction, in an undefined journey

which is to be continued as time goes on. The significance of the

work done, then, lies not so much in its content as in what it

reveals of the possibility of formulating law in America, and of

the exigencies of this great undertaking in the future.

“This attempt of American jurists is the first one in the world

brought into an organic form by the mandate of the Governments

of a Continent. The first need, therefore, was that of determining

the program and methods to be followed, or the procedure

conducive to determining the subjects suitable for enactment, or

the content itself of the task, and the mode or modes of dealing

with them in order to reach satisfactory conclusions.

“In dealing with the preparation of international conventions, we

must constantly bear in mind the conditions controlling the States

in their acceptance of obligations with regard to each subject of

international law. Indeed, what makes each subject possible for

legislation is the certainty of such conditions and of their scope

and limits. Such is the prime fundamental basis which those who

prepare codification in America in the future are to build upon.

“But this governmental element which, in brief, is a fact or an

empirical point of legislation, is not sufficient. In order that this

work may acquire the excellence, the lofty spirit and the nobility

proper for international legislation in a group of young idealistic

nations like ours, which are aspiring to constitute on the continent

an exceptional region of justice, liberty and human welfare, it is

indispensable that the actual desire of the States, as the synthesis

of circumstantial or transitory national interests, be explained or

clarified at times, corrected at other times, and given in all cases,

so far as possible, the directions which are most generous and

most consistent with the conclusions of the international science

as the exponent of the most select thought and highest rectitude

among men. Such is the second constitutional basis for the

elaboration of American legislative work.

“These two bases have been laid down in the program which the

Commission of Jurists is presenting to the consideration of the

Governments and of the approaching Sixth Pan American

Conference.

“Because they have not hitherto existed, the International

Commission of Jurists has on some occasions hesitated, and on

others met serious inconveniences in reducing to concrete

contractual formulas given principles necessary in international

life.

“The main inconveniences have arisen out of the difficulties

inherent in distinguishing between pure law and law with political

tendencies calculated to bear an influence on existing questions in

controversy between American Republics. Those difficulties have

often been insuperable and have prejudiced, contrary to the desire

of the International Commission of Jurists itself, the sincere and

frank expression of great principles of law in all phases of their

application.

“In international conferences in Europe and America, the problem

of eliminating the influence of political questions has not been

difficult to solve because everything was limited to dealing with

subjects not connected with questions pending between the States.

But those who are engaged in formulating international law by

taking up its entire content and beginning with its fundamentals,

would not be able to subtract from the law its inevitable, political

content, without ignoring certain essential principles. Such an

omission would be inexcusable in the framework of international

legislation, and it would, in itself, carry an admission of the

political questions actuating their omission. In this way, we

should have in the defect precisely what was sought to be

avoided, at the cost of the very substance of all legal regulation.

This, as is seen, is a field sown with obstacles, and one which the

International Commission of Jurists has had to tread with

consummate prudence.

“Positive law, in general, takes its root in the conceptions of

natural reason and the human sentiment of justice. If it is to be a

law worthy of civilization, those elements should never be

ignored; nor should they be offended in any case; nor is it to be

permitted that its provisions should fail to be inspired by them in

the greatest possible degree. But positive law is not, domestically

or externally, nor can it be at any given moment, the natural law

or the finished expression of justice. This—justice—is a

progressive and perennial, but not precipitant realization by the

positive law, which in every stage of its formulation is

nevertheless subordinated to the complexity of human life,

involving the consideration and comparative control of factors of

different kinds and, inter alia, that of strong national interests

which yield only gradually to its influence, but fortunately

yielding more and more.

“In this way is sketched the explanation of how the American

jurists, through the possible formulas adopted in the draft

projects, accept and proclaim in all their amplitude the rights and

duties of nations in their purest and noblest meaning within the

full radius of action necessary for them as a reality in American

life.

“The human person within organized societies, and the States

within the Society of Nations, have only one law. The law of

persons springs from the individual conscience. The law of

nations springs also from their consciousness of nationality. They

are different aspects of human life and different areas of

application of a single law which has for its end justice, secure

and harmonious contacts, and reciprocal cooperation, assuring

general welfare.

“Nations, like persons, have the right to exist and to preserve their

existence. This right, like others, cannot be exercised absolutely

as it would be injuring in its name the very right to life and self-

preservation of innocent nations. Such a limitation is absolute and

essential, but it is of a kind different from that of the salutary

limitation of the right of independence.

“Independence is the affirmation of the legal personality of

nations. Its concept and function in the life of States is

irreconcilable with any control in its internal or external affairs

intended to be imposed upon them by any method of coercion by

a foreign will. Any nation invested with a right by international

law can demand that it be respected and protected by all other

nations because right and duty are correlative, it being incumbent

upon all to respect the right of each. This is the necessary equality

in law and in capacity to exercise the faculties which spring from

sovereignty and independence. But that independence is not

absolute. It is governed by the justice and cooperation necessary

in the legal community of nations.

“In America cooperation finds special circumstances. The

American nations hold common political ideals, and their history

and geography have created between them for a century,

commercial, social and spiritual bonds of a kind not different but

closer than with the rest of the world. Since the revolution of

independence a current of friendship and fraternity has been

flowing over the continent, passing boundaries in good fortune

and in bad. This situation would nevertheless not be sufficient to

produce a well-defined obligation of cooperation if those

circumstances did not create, as they have done, a state of things

in virtue of which the welfare of each American State, in its

democratic régime and in its external position, affects all States,

as they do affect them. There is the root of the foundation of the

American cooperation which imposes various and important

duties, and which ought to be organized in forms in which the life

of a continent can be expressed as a whole, without exceeding

respect for internal sovereignty and external independence of

States. The initial organization is constituted now by the

continental conferences, the Pan American Union, and the

International Commission of Jurists. There is, besides, a series of

organs for limited functions of continental cooperation. All this

comparatively incipient organization requires progressive, gradual

development, parallel with the growth of the spirit of solidarity

and with the ever louder and clearer affirmation of the American

legal consciousness.

“The duties derived from the law of cooperation do not have, nor

can they have, a contractual character, nor can they be executory

in law. But they are none the less necessary in the common life of

our Republics. They pertain, properly speaking, to the high-

minded and moral manner in which the rights are to be exercised.

Sovereignty, which is the internal phase of independence, implies

the duty of sincerely maintaining democratic and republican

forms, in order to insure stable order and a regime of guaranties

for all the inhabitants of the territory. The historical destiny of

America, in being built up by the efforts of all men of the earth

who are seeking liberty, work and happiness, demands of each

Republic the special duty of realizing that destiny within itself.

Independence, which is the external phase of sovereignty, implies

in its turn the duty of not withholding its aid in all the works of

continental coordination.

“The rights and duties which are expressed would not be

sufficient to assure legal tranquility and peace on the continent.

These are to repose upon inviolability of the territory of the

American Republics, upon respect for obligations of treaties

freely negotiated and accepted, and on the régime of international

justice to give the necessary sanction, with the exclusion of force,

to all the essential rights of nations. American law must be

founded on the reciprocal guaranty of territorial integrity. Every

future act of conquest should be condemned. Neither war, nor the

threat of war, nor the presence of armed force, constitutes a

legitimate mode of acquiring territory. In the wake of acquisitions

effected by such means, there would arise incurable insecurity.

“The history of America is free from the stain of popular hatreds

and rivalries among its nations. The territory of any one of them

exceeds its immediate needs and will exceed for many

generations its possibility of assimilation or of utilization. The

development of the unlimited riches embraced within each

Republic is a work of great enterprise, destined to absorb all its

energy and activity. Consequently, there is nothing which could

explain

any

aggression

whatever

prompted

by

malign

covetousness of foreign territory. For more than a hundred years

America has lived with its powerful right of extra-continental

territorial integrity. It will continue so to live, with this same

strong right as now affirmed by the voices of each and all of the

constituent Republics, because they possess the consciousness of

their own destiny and capacity for their responsibilities.

Moreover, it will be governed in the future by the powerful law of

inter-American territorial integrity. The relations of the American

Republics in this field being established among themselves and

with the rest of the world, they will be inspired by the strongest

desire for harmony, equity and justice, and in practice will

conduct themselves in foreign affairs and diplomacy under the

domination of truth and the most salutary influences of public

opinion.

“The enumerated principles are summed up in the following large

and solid legal bases: independence, realization of common

political ideals, territorial integrity, régime of international justice

in place of force, non-intervention, equality and cooperation.

Such are the advanced aims for American legislation. They are all

contained as principles in the draft projects of public international

law. Their regulation or their development, in their various

modalities, is not a work that can be realized at any one time, nor

at a given moment. It is a work of legal evolution. Nor is it an

exclusive function of official jurists called to present formulas

susceptible of immediate realization. On the basis of those

principles the Governments themselves, through the medium of

their diplomatic representatives, are the ones who should, in the

legislative sessions of the Pan American Conferences, trace out

the regulations and developments compatible with the state of

inter-American relations, with the exigencies of policy, with

national interests, with all the factors, in sum, which make up the

complexity of practical international life, which is always for

civilized nations a compromise between what ought to be and

what is, or between the ideal of law and of justice and the human

reality which is relative justice and imperfect law influenced by

the interests of the States.

“In private international law this same situation has in a certain

manner presented itself to the International Commission of

Jurists. The two doctrines of the laws of nationality and domicile

for governing personal relations are embodied in the legislation of

different American Republics. Each one of the groups considers

its system as a fact of transcendent public order affecting its

social, economic, and political constitution. There is no way for

the present of settling upon one uniform law.

“In this matter, therefore, the same as in public law, a compromise

with reality has been unavoidable. The Republics will continue to

apply as the personal law, what their domestic system prescribes.

Happily, that does not imply an impossibility of regulating private

international law in a vast field of legal relations which are not

affected by the applications of personal law. Neither does it imply

the necessity nor the convenience of renewing partial or sub-

regional concerts on the continent founded upon the system of the

two laws adopted for personal relations. Quite the contrary: the

common interest consists in keeping the work within the Pan

American concert until reaching, by a continuous effort of

reciprocal penetration, the solution of the divergence in a system

of legislative uniformity.

“All America should be viewed legally as a single field in which

the relations of individuals and of States are in play. The rivalry

of national laws should be settled by the selection of the most

adequate, in justice, for the relations to be dealt with. Relations

between States are also contests of laws and sovereignties which

should be regulated by laws superior to the individual

sovereignties which are the most adequate, because the most just,

to insure peaceful coexistence and the welfare of all the members

of the American international system. Here we have the integral

concept of American law. Its analytical formulas will be a

‘continuous creation.’ ”

The Delegates of the United States have avoided the mention of

personalities in the text of the report, in so far as this was possible,

believing that it would be invidious on their part to mention the names of

some Delegates, when all had contributed in various ways to the labors of

the Commission.

They feel, however, that they are unable to conclude their report without

referring to the unfailing kindness, courtesy and helpfulness of the

American Ambassador to Brazil, the Honorable Edwin V. Morgan.

Throughout the entire session of the Commission, he placed himself at their

disposal, and gave them the benefit of his large experience, to such an

extent that they deem it their duty to put on record a statement of their

appreciation and indebtedness, to which they can not give adequate

expression.

Respectfully submitted,

JAMES BROWN SCOTT

JESSE S. REEVES

HENRY M. CAMPBELL, Jr.

Secretary to the Delegation of the United States of America

[Annex 1—Translation]

Statement Made in the Plenary Session of May 6, 1927, by Dr. James Brown Scott of the American

Delegation

MR. PRESIDENT: The delegation of the United States has the honor to request

Your Excellency to bring to the attention of the members of the

Commission this communication, which the American delegation will

submit in the form of an amendment when the said Commission enters on

the discussion of project No. 27, of the Projects of Convention prepared at

the request, on January 2, 1924, of the Governing Board of the Pan

American Union to be submitted for the consideration of the International

Commission of Jurists and submitted by the American Institute of

International Law to the Governing Board of the Pan American Union,

March 2, 1925.

The project which the Delegation of the United States will submit for the

kindly consideration of the Subcommission on Public International Law

contemplates the establishment of a Permanent Inter-american Arbitration

Tribunal which would be able to guarantee effectively the rights of the

American Republics and to maintain unalterably peace and harmony in

their reciprocal relations without obliging them to resort in any case to

armed force.

The justification for the undertaking to resort to arbitration, which we shall

have the honor to bring to the attention of the Subcommission, is found

quite admirably expressed in the preamble of the Convention for the

Establishment of a Central American Tribunal, signed February 7, 1923, in

the preparation of which former Secretary of State Hughes took an active

part. The following is the text of the engagement as found in the first article

of the said Central American Convention.

“The Contracting Parties agree to submit to the International

Tribunal established by the present Convention all controversies

or questions which now exist between them or which may

hereafter arise, whatever their nature or origin, in the event that

they have failed to reach an understanding through diplomatic

channels, or have not accepted some other form of arbitration, or

have not agreed to submit said questions or controversies to the

decision of another tribunal.

“Nevertheless, the questions or controversies which affect the

sovereign and independent existence of any of the signatory

Republics cannot be the object of arbitration or complaint.”

There is no need to emphasize the importance of such a proposal, the

acceptance of which would guarantee for all time both the territorial

integrity and the political independence of each of the American Republics,

and which would maintain peace between them.

The proposal, which the American delegation will present in due time, is

not only in conformity with the aspirations and the best traditions of North

America, but also of each of the Latin American Republics.

235.

include the statement [proposición] of the Delegate of Peru, in the report

which the American Delegation will submit to its Government.” See

Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores del Brasil, Comisión International de

Jurisconsultos Americanos: Reunión de 1927, vol. I, p. 263.

[Document 289]

The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State

MANCHESTER, MASS., August 17, 1927.

[Received August 19.]

No. 489

SIR: The Committee of Experts for the Progressive Codification of

International Law set up by the League of Nations has communicated to the

Council of the League a report in which it is stated that the Committee have

decided to include in its list of subjects, the regulation of which by

international agreement would in their opinion be desirable, the following

questions:—

“Is it desirable to revise the classification of diplomatic agents

made by the Congresses of Vienna and Aix-la-Chapelle? In the

affirmative case, to what extent should the existing classes of

diplomatic agents be amalgamated, and should each State be

recognised to have the right, in so far as existing differences of

class remain, to determine at its discretion in what class its agents

are to be ranked?”

To this report is attached a report by a sub-committee proposing that

Ambassadors, Legates or Nuncios should be included in the same class and

designation with Envoys and Ministers Plenipotentiary, and that as the

substitution of the term “Public Minister” or “Minister Plenipotentiary”

might appear to be somewhat derogatory to existing Ambassadors, it would

be desirable that the title Ambassador should be used to designate the

representatives of the first three categories of the Regulation of Vienna as

completed by the Aix-la-Chapelle Protocol.

communicated to the Government of the United States.

of the League enquired inter alia whether His Majesty’s Government in

Great Britain consider the revision of the classification of diplomatic agents

desirable.

I have the honour, under instructions from His Majesty’s Principal

Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, to inform you that the Secretary

General of the League of Nations has been informed that His Majesty’s

Government do not consider it desirable that the present classification of

diplomatic agents should be revised. In informing you of the view taken by

His Majesty’s Government in Great Britain, I am to state that Sir Austen

Chamberlain believes that the view of the Government of the United States

will coincide with that of His Majesty’s Government and that they will send

to Sir Eric Drummond a similar reply to his enquiry.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 290]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)

WASHINGTON, December 16, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to refer to Your Excellency’s note of August 17,

1927, in which you state that His Majesty’s Government has informed the

[Document 291]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Switzerland (Wilson)

99. Please transmit to the Secretary General of the League of Nations in the

usual manner before December 31, the following communication:

The Secretary General of the League of Nations with a

communication dated June 7, 1927, was good enough to transmit

to the Secretary of State of the United States certain

questionnaires and reports prepared by the Committee of Experts

for the Progressive Codification of International Law54 and to

request the opinion of the Government of the United States as to

whether the regulation by international agreement of the subjects

treated in the questionnaires, having regard both to their general

aspects and the specific points mentioned in the questionnaires, is

desirable and realizable in the near future.

QUESTION NO. 8. With respect to the amended draft convention on this

subject submitted with the report of the sub-committee of the

Committee of Experts, it may be stated that the taking of

testimony relating to criminal cases in foreign countries by the

use of letters rogatory, with which Article I of the amended draft

deals, is a process for which no provision has been made by the

legislation of the Federal Government and one which under the

system prevailing in the United States can be employed, if at all,

only pursuant to the laws of the several states. It is not deemed

advisable to make commitments by international convention to

change the existing practice in this regard prevailing in the United

States. Moreover, evidence obtained in foreign countries through

letters rogatory could not be used in criminal cases in the United

States, since under the Constitution the accused must be

confronted by the witnesses against him.

With respect to the second Article of the revised draft it may be

stated that the Government of the United States is not prepared to

commit itself to serve summonses emanating with foreign courts

on witnesses or experts resident in the United States or to

surrender persons in custody, except through the process of

extradition.

It is the view of the Government of the United States that the

matter of the surrender of exhibits dealt with in the third Article

of the amended draft convention can be adequately provided for

in extradition treaties. Indeed, provisions for the surrender of

property in possession of fugitives are contained in some of the

extradition treaties of the United States. The list of treaties

appended to the report, as examples of judicial cooperation,

indicates that the subject as heretofore treated, is closely related to

extradition.

While conventions on the subject of judicial cooperation

doubtless serve a useful purpose among countries in close

geographic proximity to each other, it is not apparent that uniform

application of such agreements is necessary.

QUESTION NO. 9. The experience of the Government of the United

States has not revealed any considerable uncertainty regarding the

legal position and functions of consuls. Furthermore, this matter

has been the subject of numerous provisions in bilateral treaties. It

is the view of the Government of the United States that no

compelling necessity exists for the treatment of this subject by a

general international convention.

QUESTION NO. 10. The Government of the United States does not

consider it desirable to revise the classifications of diplomatic

agents

as

proposed.

No

circumstances

or

conditions

demonstrating the desirability of changing the classification have

been revealed nor is there reason to expect that the purposed

change, if made, would effect any material improvement.

The Government of the United States does not consider that the

regulation by multilateral international agreement of questions

eight and nine or the change of classification proposed in question

ten is desirable or attainable in the near future.

QUESTION NO. 11. The Government of the United States is inclined to

the view that an international agreement on the subject of

competence of the courts in certain classes of cases against

foreign states, would serve a useful purpose, and would therefore

be desirable and that there should be no insuperable obstacle to

the concluding of an agreement on that subject.

The Government of the United States thanks the Secretary

General for the report on “Effect of the most-favored-nation

clause” forwarded with the communication of June 7.

KELLOGG

[Document 292]

The Acting Counselor of the British Embassy (Chilton) to the

Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs (Marriner)

WASHINGTON, September 28, 1927.

DEAR MARRINER: A case has recently been brought to our notice by our Consul-

General in San Francisco of a British subject who, justly or unjustly, was

arrested and fined by the Oakland authorities for a disturbance of the peace.

Such cases are presumably of fairly frequent occurrence and would not as a

general rule be of any particular interest to us, but it so happens that the

transgressor happened to be an official of the International Labour Office of

the League of Nations who was on his way to Australia on leave and who,

in the course of his journey, subsequently attended the second session of the

Institute of Pacific Relations at Honolulu as an observer of the International

Labour Office.

In the course of certain complaints lodged with the Consulate-General, the

offender—or victim, as the case may have been—who had with him a card

of identification signed by the Director of the International Labour Office,

raised the question of his right to “the diplomatic privileges and

immunities” accorded to officials of the League of Nations under the

Covenant. He did not, however, attempt to press the matter at the time of his

arrest.

I should be very glad to have your views as to what privileges officials of

the League of Nations are entitled to in this country. I understand that in

certain circumstances League Officials are granted diplomatic visas by the

United States Government, but as far as I am aware the extent of such

privileges has never been defined.

Yours sincerely,

H. G. C HILTON

[Document 293]

The Chief of the Division of Western European Affairs

(Marriner) to the Acting Counselor of the British Embassy

(Chilton)

WASHINGTON, November 7, 1927.

DEAR CHILTON: I beg to refer to your letter of September 28, 1927, in which you

request to be informed regarding the privileges officials of the League of

Nations are entitled to in this country. You state that you understand in

certain circumstances League officials are granted diplomatic visas by the

United States Government.

As you are doubtless aware, under customary International Law diplomatic

privileges and immunities are only conferred upon a well defined class of

persons, namely those who are sent by one State to another on diplomatic

missions. Officials of the League of Nations are not, as such, considered by

the Department to be entitled to such privileges and immunities under

generally accepted principles of International Law but only under special

provisions of the Covenant of the League which can have no force in

countries not members of the League.

In the estimation of this Department the executive authorities of this

Government would not be warranted, under our law which is declaratory of

International Law, in according to officials of the League of Nations

diplomatic privileges and immunities in the United States since such

persons are not comprehended in the definition of diplomatic officers

contained in our Statutes.

I may add that such an official would customarily be given a diplomatic

visa on the basis of his diplomatic passport and accorded the courtesies

usually extended to holders of such passports. You will appreciate the fact,

however, that no assurance can be given that such a visa would be regarded

as entitling the holder to the privileges and immunities of a diplomatic

officer provided for in the laws of the United States.

Sincerely yours,

J. THEODORE MARRINER

[Document 294]

The Secretary of State to the Irish Minister (Smiddy)

WASHINGTON, January 22, 1927.

SIR: In compliance with the request made in your note of January 19, I

have the honor to inform you as follows concerning the exemption from

taxation and customs duties enjoyed by foreign diplomatic and consular

officers in the United States;

Ambassadors and Ministers accredited to the United States and the

members of their households, including secretaries, attaches, and servants,

are exempted from the payment of Federal income tax upon their salaries,

fees and wages, and upon the income derived by them from investments in

the United States in stocks and bonds and from interest on bank balances in

the United States. The income derived from any business carried on by

them in the United States would, however, be taxable.

Property in the District of Columbia owned by foreign governments for

Embassy and Legation purposes is exempt from general and special taxes or

assessments. Property owned by an Ambassador or Minister and used for

Embassy or Legation purposes is exempt from general taxes but not from

special assessments for improvements. The payment of water rent is

required in all cases, as this is not regarded as a tax but the sale of a

commodity.

Under a recent ruling of the Treasury Department of the United States all

foreign consular officers and the employees of foreign consulates in the

United States who are nationals of the State appointing them, on the basis

of reciprocity, are exempted from the payment of Federal income taxes on

the salaries, fees and wages received by them in compensation for their

consular services.

The taxes on the sale of automobiles and jewelry provided for in Sections

manufacturers of automobiles and upon the vendors of jewelry. In the

collection of such taxes the Government looks to the manufacturer and to

the vendor for the payment of the tax and not to the purchasers of the

articles. For this reason and the further reason that the price of the article

sold is a matter of negotiation between the vendor and the purchasers, the

appropriate authorities of this Government have taken the position that no

exemption from the payment of these taxes can be granted to the

manufacturer or vendor by reason of the fact that the sale is made to a

diplomatic representative of a foreign government.

The members of foreign diplomatic missions and foreign consular officers

in the District of Columbia are exempt in the District from the payment of

personal property taxes on automobiles and other personal property, either

tangible or intangible, owned by them. They are furnished identification

tags and operators’ permits for their automobiles, without charge, provided

the applications made therefor bear the seal of the mission and the seal of

the Department of State. It is understood that automobiles bearing District

of Columbia tags are permitted to enter the several States without obtaining

additional tags. Members of foreign diplomatic missions in the United

States and foreign consular officers stationed in the District of Columbia are

accordingly not required to pay the fees ordinarily charged other owners of

automobiles in this country.

The fees and taxes for automobiles and other property to be charged foreign

consuls in the several States of the United States, in the absence of

applicable treaty provisions, are subject to regulation by the States in which

the consuls are stationed.

By an order dated July 8, 1921, the Collector of Taxes of the District of

Columbia was authorized to issue dog licenses to foreign legations without

charge.

provide for the granting of customs courtesies and the exemption from the

payment of customs duties, to diplomatic and consular officers of foreign

countries and outline the procedure to be followed by such officers in

requesting these courtesies.

Under these regulations foreign ambassadors and ministers, and the

secretaries and other attaches of foreign embassies and legations, and their

families, are entitled to the free admission of their baggage and effects on

their arrival in this country, whether they are stationed in the United States

or are en route to missions in other countries. Subsequent to their arrival in

the United States they are permitted to import, without the payment of duty,

merchandise of any characer, if intended for their use or for the use of their

families.

Foreign consular officers and their families are accorded the privilege of the

free entry of their personal and household effects at the time of their arrival

in the United States to take up their official duties or upon their return to

their posts in the United States after leave of absence. The baggage and

effects of foreign consular officers are subject to such scrutiny by customs

officers as may be necessary to ascertain whether or not intoxicating liquors

or other legally proscribed commodities are contained therein.

Supplies intended for official use of foreign embassies and legations and

foreign consulates in the United States, such as office furniture and office

material, may be entered free of duty. Exhibits of the products of foreign

countries, if forming a part of the permanent exhibitions in the consulates

may also be admitted free of duty.

The granting of these customs exemptions to diplomatic and consular

officers of foreign countries is conditional upon the granting of similar

exemptions to American diplomatic and consular officers by these

countries.

Any material imported by a foreign government to be used in constructing

an embassy or legation building is exempted from the payment of customs

duties.

The above statement, although not exhaustive, describes some of the more

important immunities and exemptions accorded foreign diplomatic and

consular officers in the United States. If information is desired in regard to

any particular immunity or exemption not referred to herein, the matter will,

upon request, be given further consideration.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

J. BUTLER WRIGHT

[Document 295]

The Egyptian Chargé (Kamel) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, January 14, 1927.

No. 1332

The Charge d’Affairs ad-interim of Egypt presents his compliments to His

Excellency the Secretary of State and has the honour to inform him that the

Egyptian Government are considering buying a house in Washington for the

Legation.

Before deciding definitely on the matter, the Egyptian Government should

like to know if the Laws of the United States restrict in any way the right of

Foreign Governments to own property.

The Charge d’Affairs ad-interim of Egypt avails himself of this opportunity

to express to His Excellency the Secretary of State the assurances of his

highest esteem.

[Document 296]

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Chargé (Kamel)

The Secretary of State presents his compliments to the Chargè d’Affaires ad

interim of Egypt and has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of his note of

January 14, 1927, asking if the laws of the United States restrict in any way

the right of foreign governments to own property.

The Secretary of State has the honor to inform the Chargé d’Affaires ad

interim of Egypt that the Government of the United States places no

restrictions on the owning of property for Embassy or Legation purposes by

foreign governments in the District of Columbia. It may be stated, however,

that real property in the District of Columbia is subject in general to the

laws of real property in force in the District notwithstanding that it may be

owned by a foreign government.

The Commissioners of the District of Columbia have informed the

Department that the following rules regarding exemption from taxation

under international usage have been adopted by the Commissioner under

the advice of the Corporation Counsel of the District of Columbia:

“Property owned by foreign governments and used for legation

purposes is exempt from general and special taxes or assessments.

Property owned by a minister and used for legation purposes is

exempt from general taxes but not from special assessments for

improvements.”

There are also expenses incident to the property not in the nature of the tax

which of course should be paid by the foreign government.

WASHINGTON , January 25, 1927.

[Document 297]

The Acting Secretary of State to Diplomatic and Consular

Officers

WASHINGTON, August 30, 1927.

Diplomatic Serial No. 650

G. I. Consular No. 1053

SIRS: In an opinion handed down on June 7, 1926, in the case of Berizzi

Brothers Company, Appellant, vs. The Steamship “Pesaro” the Supreme

Court of the United States held that a ship owned and possessed by a

foreign government and operated by it in the carriage of merchandise for

hire is immune from arrest under process based on a libel in rem by a

private suitor in a Federal District Court exercising Admiralty jurisdiction.

You are therefore directed to cancel the text under subtitle numbered one,

Suits Against Shipping Board Vessels in Foreign Courts, of General

cancel the title itself.

The Decision of the Supreme Court referred to above has not changed the

general policy of the Department of refraining from claims of immunity in

the courts of foreign countries for vessels owned by the United States

Shipping Board, and you should not endeavor to obtain immunity for

Shipping Board vessels unless you receive express instructions from the

Department to take such action in a particular case.

You are instructed to make a marginal notation under the subtitle, Suits

Against Shipping Board Vessels in Foreign Courts, of General Instruction,

Consular, No. 871, referring to this instruction.

W. R Castir

ene. 9

Rules of precedence as between certain

officers of the United States

Precedence as Between Certain Officers of the United States

The White House , August 10, 1927.

[Document 298]

Precedence as Between Certain Officers of the United States

The following rules of precedence will henceforth be observed as between

(1) Ambassadors, Ministers, and officers of the Foreign Service of the

United States; (2) officers of the United States Army; (3) officers of the

United States Navy and Marine Corps; and (4) Foreign Commerce officers

of the United States. Previous executive orders inconsistent herewith are

rescinded.

1. In the country to which he is accredited, the chief of the diplomatic

mission takes precedence over all officers of the Army, Navy, or Foreign

Commerce Service.

2. In diplomatic missions the following ranking will be observed:

Counselors take place and precedence next in succession after the Chief of

Mission.

Military and Naval attachés take place and precedence next in succession

after the Counselor, or at a post where the Department of State has deemed

it unnecessary to assign a Counselor, after the senior first secretary. Military

and Naval attachés take precedence as between themselves according to

their respective grades and seniority therein.

Commercial attachés rank with but after Military and Naval attachés.

Assistant Military and Naval attachés take place and precedence next after

second secretaries. Assistant Military and Naval attachés take precedence as

between themselves according to their respective grades and seniority

therein.

Assistant Commercial attachés rank with but after Assistant Military and

Naval attachés.

In the absence of the titular head of the mission, the senior diplomatic

officer will act as Chargé d’Affaires ad interim, unless otherwise directed

by the Secretary of State, and as such will take precedence over all

members of the staff of the mission.

At ceremonies and receptions where the members of the mission take

individual position, in the lists furnished foreign governments for inclusion

in their diplomatic lists, and in the Register of the Department of State,

place and precedence will follow the ranking indicated in the paragraphs

above.

At ceremonies and receptions where diplomatic missions are present as a

body, the Military, Naval and Commercial attaches will form distinct

groups, and follow in that order the diplomatic personnel of the mission.

3. In international conferences at which the American delegates possess

plenipotentiary powers, the senior Counselor of Embassy or Legation

attached to the delegation, takes place and precedence immediately after the

delegates, unless otherwise instructed by the Secretary of State.

4. As between officers of the Departments of State and Commerce:—

(a) The senior Foreign Commerce Officer functioning in a

consular district in which there is no diplomatic mission, shall

rank with but after the senior Foreign Service Officer functioning

in that district.

(b) Foreign Commerce Officers in a consular district, other than

the senior officer, shall rank with respect to the Foreign Service

Officers in the Consular District other than the senior officer as

follows:

(1) Foreign Commerce Officers of Class I, with but

after Foreign Service Officers of Classes I and II;

(2) Foreign Commerce Officers of Class II, with but

after Foreign Service Officers of Classes III and IV;

(3) Foreign Commerce Officers of Class III, with but

after Foreign Service Officers of Classes V, VI and VII;

(4) Foreign Commerce Officers of Class IV, with but

after Foreign Service Officers of Classes VIII and IX,

and unclassified Officers of the first grade;

(5) Foreign Commerce Officers of Class V, with but

after unclassified Foreign Service Officers of the

second and third grades.

(c) In the absence of the Foreign Service Officer in charge of a

consular district, the Foreign Service Officer acting shall enjoy

the precedence regularly accorded the former, and in the absence

of the ranking Foreign Commerce Officer, the Officer acting shall

enjoy the precedence of the ranking Foreign Commerce Officer.

5. In the districts to which they are assigned, Foreign Service officers in

charge of Consulates General take place and precedence immediately after

Brigadier Generals in the Army or Marine Corps, and hold rank

intermediate between Bear Admirals and Captains in the Navy.

In the Districts to which they are assigned, Foreign Service officers in

charge of Consulates take place and precedence immediately after Colonels

in the Army or Marine Corps and Captains in the Navy.

CALVIN COOLIDGE

THE WHITE HOUSE , August 10, 1927.

Argentina:

[Document 299]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

BUENOS AIRES, September 20, 1927.

No. 18

SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction No. 68 of

August 18, 1926, relative to a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and

Consular Rights of which the central principle would be an unconditional

most-favored-nation clause, which would replace the Treaty of Friendship,

Commerce and Navigation of 1853 originally entered into between the

Government of the United States and the Argentine Confederation. The

Department of State further informed the Embassy on June 21, 1927, of the

attitude adopted by various South American countries towards this subject.

The Embassy had made various oral requests of the Ministry for Foreign

Affairs relative to the development of Argentine opinion upon the

advisability of entering into negotiations for such a Treaty. The utter failure

of the legal division of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs to place the

question upon its proper basis is set forth in Embassy’s Despatch No. 351 of

The Embassy is now in receipt of a note with an enclosed protocol from the

Ministry for Foreign Affairs dated September 8, a copy and translation of

which are transmitted herewith. The salient features appear: 1, the reference

to the reported visit of American Commissioners to investigate the cost of

production (of flaxseed and corn, is to be understood), and 2, the desire of

the Argentine Government to sign a protocol allowing either party signatory

to the Treaty of 1853 to denounce that Treaty at any time upon a

notification of six months.

The appended protocol should be taken, I believe, as an indication that the

Argentine Government is not at this moment desirous of entering into

negotiations for a new Treaty containing an unconditional most-favored-

nation clause. Their expressed wish to place in the Treaty of 1853 an

addition granting this right of denunciation might prove detrimental to the

United States, should it be ratified, inasmuch as it would provide an avenue

of attack to those nations which are in active commercial competition with

the United States, by enabling foreign pressure to bring about an abrogation

of the Treaty.

I have the honor to call the Department’s attention to the Embassy’s

annual report of the Argentine Embassy at Washington, which contains

pertinent facts concerning the attitude to be adopted at this time by

Argentina regarding negotiations for a new Commercial Treaty with the

United States.

I have [etc.]

ROBERT WOODS BLISS

[Enclosure—Translation]

The Argentine Minister for Foreign Affairs (Gallardo) to the American Chargé (Cable)

BUENOS AIRES, September 8, 1927.

Mr. CHARGÉ D’AFFAIRES: As I had the pleasure of informing the Embassy under your

worthy charge in my note of December 2 last, my Government has

considered with the greatest care the American proposal of September 17

with reference to the negotiation of a new Treaty of Commerce between the

United States and the Republic.

The desire of the American Government to direct its commercial policy in

accordance with modern principles is shared by the Argentine Government.

Without doubt you know the statements which the commercial and

industrial organizations of Argentina have made on separate occasions

requesting a complete revision of our system of treaties, which according to

these petitions should begin with the general denunciation of all the

conventions now in force.

The legislature has supported these desires of the public and in obedience

thereto has appointed a parliamentary commission whose duty it is to study

the conventions now in force and to give advice with respect either to the

approval or alteration of the principles upon which they are based.

Although the commission has not at this date rendered a definite report, the

Executive Power believes that, whatever may be its future decision, the

moment has arrived to prepare the ground for the modifications which will

certainly be suggested, and above all to create the diplomatic resources

which would provide the means to readjust the treaties questioned by public

opinion and fortunately rejected even from a theoretical standpoint, as

inefficient and obsolete, by certain of the contracting States with whom we

are bound by them, as for example in the present instance by the American

Foreign Office, which offers the new formula referred to in the above

mentioned note of September 17, 1926.

In view of the foregoing and with the desire to obviate unavoidable

differences of interpretation which the new forms of international

commerce and its official control might advance with respect to the

enforcement of the Treaty of Commerce of 1853, as for instance, the

opinion which I presented to the Embassy under your worthy charge in the

Memorandum of July 19 last, with reference to the reported visit to the

Republic of an American commission to investigate the cost of production,

I have the pleasure to request you to enquire of your Government the views

which it might entertain in regard to the signing of an additional protocol

similar to the one which accompanies this note.

Please accept [etc.]

ANGEL GALLARDO

[Subenclosure—Translation]

Draft of a Proposed Additional Protocol

In order to complete the Treaty of Friendship Commerce and Navigation

between the Argentine Federation and the United States of America, of July

Angel Gallardo, and the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of

[Document 300]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State

[Received 1: p.m.]

39. Press announces President by Cabinet resolution has directed the

expenditure of 32,000,000 gold pesos for construction of two cruisers, three

submarines, two destroyers and two gunboats. Funds apparently to be taken

from unexpended balance alleged to have been left over after purchase of

naval units appropriated for in 1909. Constitutionality of President’s

authorizing this and other large expenditures without approval of Congress

now in recess is seriously questioned. Naval attaché is following

developments closely and will continue to keep Navy Department

informed. Representative of Fore River Shipbuilding Corporation arrived

here recently on this matter and will continue to receive all proper

assistance from Embassy.

JAY

[Document 301]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Jay)

Electric Boat Company of New York is competing before an Argentine

Commission in Paris for an order for three submarine torpedo boats of

about nine hundred tons each. It is proposed to build them at works of

Cockerill Company in Belgium but from designs and under superintendence

of Electric Boat Company which would also furnish certain parts.

Strong foreign competition is reported. You should seek an early

opportunity informally to request the appropriate authorities that American

firms be given an equal chance to compete for this business and that their

offers receive consideration equal to that accorded any other foreign

companies.

KELLOGG

[Document 302]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State

[Received 2 p.m.]

informally but actively with Minister for Foreign Affairs competition for

submarines. He assures me our bids will receive equal opportunity and be

examined strictly on their merits regardless of any foreign political

considerations. Minister who was most friendly did not deny my tentative

suggestion that Italian Government was pressing matter, but repeated his

assurances that no favoritism would be shown.

I had just heard former Italian naval attaché here was attached to chief of

Argentine Naval Mission in Europe during latter’s visit to Italy and

followed him on his further journeys. Also learned Italian Embassy here has

urged building of submarines in Italy.

Our naval attaché will take first opportunity for appropriate action with the

Ministry of Marine.

JAY

[Document 303]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Argentina (Jay)

[Paraphrase]

particularly to the statements concerning American bids which were made

to you by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, I now understand that the

Government of Argentina is on the point of awarding contracts for the

construction of two destroyers, three submarines, and two cruisers

amounting in all to about 12½ million dollars, and that a new program for

95 million dollars is also contemplated. I am informed that heretofore most

of this work has been done for Argentina by the Bethlehem Steel and

Shipbuilding Company and in an entirely satisfactory manner. I am further

informed that it is not the intention of the Government of Argentina to give

any opportunity to that company or to other American shipbuilders to bid,

but that business is being carried on with Italy, England, and France

exclusively. Because of the attitude which I have always taken in not raising

objection to and, as a matter of fact, in encouraging American bankers to

lend money to Argentina, and because of the relations which exist between

the two Governments, I feel very strongly that Argentina should grant

American shipbuilders an equal opportunity to bid on and receive these

contracts. Kindly present this subject informally, but in no uncertain terms,

to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and any other authorities you deem best.

KELLOGG

[Document 304]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

BUENOS AIRES, October 19, 1926—noon.

[Received 5 p.m.]

reach the Department within a few days. In it was enclosed a translation of

the new naval appropriation act finding an expenditure of 75 million

Argentine gold pesos to be spread over the next 10 years.

[Document 305]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Jay) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 6: p.m.]

by exertive friendship with the Minister of Marine this morning learned the

following:

In August the Ministry of Marine telegraphed Johnston of the Bethlehem

Steel Company to contact the Argentine Naval Mission in New York. The

Minister of Marine read cablegrams from Admiral Galindez, chief of the

Naval Mission in Europe, quoting bids from Cramps and New York

Shipbuilding Company. I make the suggestion that Department verify the

above. The Minister of Marine added that the Argentine Mission in the

United States had been instructed last week once more to ask tenders from

Bethlehem. In view of the above I shall not make further representations to

the Government of Argentina unless the Department instructs me otherwise.

At official luncheon today I found opportunity to express both to the

Foreign Minister and to the Minister of Marine my confidence that

American interests will receive equal treatment.

JAY

[Document 306]

Memorandum by the Economic Adviser (Young) of

a

Conversation With Mr. Hugh Knowlton of the International

Acceptance Bank

[WASHINGTON,] January 7, 1927.

SUBJECT: PROPOSED LOAN TO ARGENTINA FOR NAVAL CONSTRUCTION

Mr. Knowlton stated that the Argentine Government was in course of

realizing a naval program calling for an expenditure of some 75 million

dollars over a period of years; that it was now contemplated to raise a loan

of 15 million dollars to finance the building of certain vessels; that the

bonds in question would be six per cent bonds, with a one per cent

cumulative sinking fund running for thirty-three years.

The business had been brought to the attention of the International

Acceptance Bank through the Argentine branch of the French firm of Louis

Dreyfus. I inquired where the proposed naval construction would be carried

out. Mr. Knowlton stated that he did not know definitely, but that there had

been some discussion of having part, at least, done in France or Italy. Mr.

Knowlton would be prepared to specify that a part of the construction be

carried out in the United States. He inquired whether the Department would

desire a preference for American firms. I replied that it is not the ordinary

practice of the Department to suggest any preference, but that we always

hoped that in the case of construction work of any sort American firms

would have the fullest opportunity to compete freely, and that as to

construction work in general the Department was always glad to see the

work done by American firms. Mr. Knowlton stated that he would be

prepared in any case to stipulate that American firms should have the fullest

and freest opportunity to compete for any proposed work.

In reply to his inquiry whether the Department would object to a loan for

naval construction by Argentina, as such, I stated that I was not prepared to

express any views without consideration, but that I would take up the matter

promptly and communicate with him.

A[RTHUR] N. Y[OUNG]

[Document 307]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (White) of a

Telephone Conversation With Mr. Hugh Knowlton of the

International Acceptance Bank

[WASHINGTON,] January 14, 1927.

SUBJECT: PROPOSED LOAN TO ARGENTINA FOR NAVAL CONSTRUCTION

I called Mr. Knowlton on the telephone and referred to his conversation

with Dr. Young, particularly to his statement to Dr. Young that he would be

prepared to stipulate that American firms have the fullest and freest

opportunity to compete for any proposed work. In the event, I said, that Mr.

Knowlton should write us a formal letter and state that such a stipulation

had been made and that an equal opportunity would be accorded American

firms to bid, the Department would reply stating that it would have no

objection to the proposed financing. I might add also that the Department of

course would be very glad to see some of the work go to American firms.

Mr. Knowlton stated that since his conversation with Dr. Young he had

telegraphed to his representatives in Buenos Aires inquiring whether

American firms would be accorded a free and equal opportunity to bid. The

reply had been unsatisfactory, stating that no such assurance would be

given. Mr. Knowlton said that he would telegraph again and make his

inquiry clear. There might have been some misunderstanding.

I stated that I would be glad to have him do so. It seemed to me impossible

that such a stipulation would not be granted by the Argentine Government. I

also stated that it was the Department’s practice in connection with loans

the proceeds of which were to be used for construction work to ask that the

bankers concerned should see that there was nothing in the contract which

would preclude American concerns from bidding for the work in question.

Mr. Knowlton stated that he would let me know what further reply he

received from the Argentine.

F [ Rancis] W [ure]

[Document 308]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Argentina (Cable)

9. Bethlehem Steel Company states that further difficulties are being

encountered in getting contracts for Argentine naval construction. It appears

that contracts are to be awarded to Italy for cruisers, to England for fast

destroyers and to France for submarines. It is stated that although the bids

of the Bethlehem Steel Company were higher than those of foreign

competitors the Argentine Government has hitherto always found this

added expense justified by superior workmanship. If contracts were

awarded to lowest bidder all would go to Italy whereas company considers

that they are evidently to be divided for political reasons between Italy,

England, and France. It seems to be the intention nevertheless to finance

this construction in the United States. The Company points out that other

countries have taken the position that when they make loans in similar

circumstances their nationals must receive the contracts.

If you are satisfied that the foregoing information regarding the allocation

of the construction in question is substantially correct, and that there has

been in fact an unwarranted discrimination against American interests,

particularly if margin by which British and French bids exceed Italian bid is

comparable to margin by which American bid exceeds the Italian bid, you

may express to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the hope of this

Government that an equitable share will be accorded to American firms.

You may add that if it is contemplated to arrange for the necessary

financing in this market it would undoubtedly give rise to difficulties unless

at least a fair share of the construction should be placed here. See the next

go to Europe it would be a matter of keen regret to this Government.

GREW

[Document 309]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Argentina (Cable)

[Paraphrase]

Department of present status of matter. Representative of Bethlehem

interests in Washington states that he has good reason for believing that the

board which is supposed to receive and report upon all tenders did not even

pass upon his company’s bids.

GREW

[Document 310]

The Chargé in Argentina (Cable) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 5: p.m.]

the Foreign Minister on March 4, I informed him of the attitude set forth in

Department’s 9, March 1. The Foreign Minister said that as yet President

Alvear had signed no contract, but that he would not fail to invite the

attention of the President and Minister of Marine to the substance of our

conversation. Since the Government has been informed of the attitude of

the United States, it does not appear for the present that any further steps

can be taken. Mr. Hill, the vice president of the Bethlehem Steel Company,

who is now here, is fully aware of all measures taken by the Embassy.

CABLE

[Document 311]

The Chargé in Argentina (Cable) to the Secretary of State

BUENOS AIRES, April 7, 1927.

[Received April 27.]

No. 261

SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s telegrams No. 41 of

correspondence relative to the purchase by the Argentine Government of

various naval units comprised in the forthcoming naval programme

authorized by this Government.

The situation at present I understand is as follows:

The Bethlehem Steel Company has been unsuccessful in arriving at an

understanding with the Argentine Government. This may be put down to

several reasons, the primary one of which is the cost of manufacture in the

United States. It has been decided, and this is from an authoritative source,

that the light cruisers will be built in Italy and the flotilla leaders in Great

Britain. The building programme has not been completely contracted for so

that there is an opportunity of Bethlehem coming to an understanding either

for future units or possibly destroyers.

I am led to understand that the allegations made by the American

companies some four months ago are not without foundation, as it was the

original intention of Admiral Domecq Garcia, the Minister of Marine, and

Admiral Galindez, who is Chief of the Naval Mission in Europe, to award

the complete construction to Italy. … Pressure brought to bear on the basis

of the slogan “Buy from those who buy from you” brought about the

tentative awarding of the flotilla leaders to Great Britain. From what I

[Document 312]

The Chargé in Argentina (Cable) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

[Received 8: p.m.]

have been signed up to the present time, yet it may be stated with

confidence that Italy will secure the light cruisers and England the sloops

and flotilla leaders. It is said that the French Government will construct the

submarines. I have pointed out to the Under Secretary that if such should be

the case, it would be contrary to the report of the naval board which

recommended the Holland type submarines.

The Electric Boat Company representative informs me that his company is

in a position to construct vessels under its own patents in French yards. This

may be the Argentine Government’s plan, since it would satisfy President

Alvear’s desire for France to have part of the construction program and it

would eliminate the accusation that the United States is being discriminated

against.

I have been informed that the Government of Argentina has requested

tenders for a loan of $15,000,000 in New York and London. Such an

amount would cover the units of the present program. The London terms

will be accepted if they should be practically as favorable as those of New

York.

CABLE

[Document 313]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)

WASHINGTON, June 14, 1927.

No. 2322

SIR: The Department has been informed by Mr. C. S. McNeir, Washington

representative of the Electric Boat Company of Groton, Connecticut, that

his principals have virtually succeeded in obtaining a contract for the

construction of three submarines for the Argentine Government. There was

strong competition for this business from firms in certain other countries

and it is understood that considerable influence was used in their behalf, but

the Department was able, through the Embassy at Buenos Aires, to obtain

due consideration for the bid of the American company.

It now appears that by the terms of the contract the submarines are to be

built in France under American patents, and that the matter has reached the

point where it is necessary for the Electric Boat Company to come to an

agreement with the Argentine Government as to the French yard which is to

carry out the construction. The first yard selected by the Electric Boat

Company has been rejected on account of alleged lack of experience in the

construction of submarines, and it is confidentially stated by Mr. McNeir

that the French Government is making recommendations to the Argentine

Government as to the yard to be employed.

In this situation the Electric Boat Company has instructed its Paris

representative, Captain Paul Koster, that it may ultimately be necessary to

enlist the support of the French Government with regard to some yard

which is considered satisfactory to the company, and has advised him to

consult you when that time comes. Should he do so, you are authorized to

render him such assistance as may be consistently possible through

informal representations to the appropriate French authorities.

[Document 314]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Argentina (Cable)

Boat Company states that Señor Ribero its representative in Buenos Aires

reports that the submarine contract is about to be awarded to Italian firm.

Department understood that the matter had been definitely decided in favor

of construction by Electric Boat Company under American patents in

France and still hopes that such is the case. Please make informal inquiry of

appropriate authorities expressing Department’s continued interest. Cable

exact status.

KELLOGG

[Document 315]

The Chargé in Argentina (Cable) to the Secretary of State

[Received 9: p.m.]

Ribero, had interview with Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

stressing Department interest and informed him at Ribero’s suggestion that

Electric Boat Company fully capable of completing contract. He stated that

he would inquire into the matter and communicate with me informally. So

far no reply received.

[Paraphrase.] Yesterday I was informed … that it was practically decided to

award the contract to an Italian company of Taranto which is operated by

Germans. This company constructs double-hulled ships of the same type as

the Holland and considered by some to be superior. A report which was

submitted by Lieutenant Commander Teisaire of the Naval Mission in

Europe, who received his original submarine instruction at the Electric Boat

Company’s plant, that this type was preferable for their purposes, has

caused the board of Admirals to reverse their original decision. … As yet

the contracts have not been let. [End paraphrase.]

CABLE

[Document 316]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Argentina (Cable)

[Paraphrase]

to request an audience with the President and tell him that the Department,

with a desire to insure full and careful consideration of the Electric Boat

Company’s proposition, sincerely hopes that no decision will be made until

the company has had the opportunity to present evidence of the

arrangements made by it in France on the understanding that the matter had

been decided virtually in the company’s favor.

The delay is partly desired in order that the Electric Boat Company may

have time to enlist the support of the Government of France. Because of

President Alvear’s well-known disposition to favor France, the company

believes this may be effective.

KELLOGG

Department that the Government of Argentina had agreed to postpone the

[Document 317]

The Ambassador in Argentina (Bliss) to the Secretary of State

BUENOS AIRES, October 17, 1927.

[Received November 10.]

No. 37

SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Embassy’s telegram No. 39, of May 21,

1926, and subsequent correspondence concerning the Argentine naval

construction program, and, for the Department’s information, to submit the

following report concerning the various contracts which have already been

let.

Two scout cruisers, nominally of approximately 8,000 tons, have been

awarded to the Orlando Company, at Leghorn, in Italy. The keels of these

vessels were laid on October 12. Two destroyer leaders were bought

outright from Spain. It is understood that these ships, which are not yet

completed, are being constructed in that country by the Sociedad Española

de Constructores Navales. The actual, but not nominal, head of this

company, which is supposedly a subsidiary of Armstrong and Vickers, is Sir

Philip Watts. J. Samuel White and Company, of Cowes, will build three

destroyer leaders. Two sloops and two tugs are to be constructed by

Hawthorn, Leslie and Company; and the contract for the construction of

three submarines has been awarded to Tossi, of Taranto, Italy.

The failure so far of the two American concerns most actively engaged in

attempting to obtain contracts, i. e., the Electric Boat Company for

submarines and the Bethlehem Steel Corporation for other units, may be

explained as follows: it would undoubtedly appear that Admiral Domecq

Garcia, the Minister of Marine, and Admiral Galindez, Chief of the

Argentine Naval Commission in Europe, desired to have the complete naval

program constructed in Italy. For various political reasons, however, the

British and Spanish naval construction firms received contracts, although I

understand that it was distinctly against naval opinion to purchase the two

flotilla leaders from Spain. I am also led to believe that Sir Malcolm

Robertson, the British Ambassador, interested himself extremely in the

allotment of the various units to Great Britain and pointed out that as his

country is Argentina’s best customer, and the largest ship-building nation in

the world, it should receive due consideration.

Even before presenting my letters of credence, I had a conversation with Dr.

Gallardo, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, on behalf of the Electric Boat

Company, recommending to the earnest consideration of the Argentine

Naval authorities its proposition to build three submarines in France for the

Argentine Navy. Before his departure for Europe, I talked with him again

on the subject and also took it up later with Dr. Sagarna, Acting Minister for

Foreign Affairs, and with Admiral Domecq Garcia, the Minister of Marine.

In view of the letting of the contract to the Tossi Company, I personally do

not believe that the Electric Boat Company have any further opportunity of

obtaining the units which are to be constructed in the future, unless they

should adopt different means of approach.

As far as it has been possible to learn, the bid made by the Electric Boat

Company exceeded that of the Tossi Company. It has been reported that

Signor Mussolini, at the request of the head of the Argentine Naval

Commission in Europe, intervened with the Italian company, with the result

that its price for the submarines was reduced from £218,000 to £208,000 for

each vessel.

The Bethlehem Steel Corporation have, I believe, a fair chance to gain the

contract for the four river gunboats, inasmuch as Mr. Hill, Vice President of

the Corporation, who is now in Buenos Aires, has made a tender which has

appealed to the Argentine Government. He has offered to assemble one of

these units in Argentina, with Argentine workmen, only the direction to be

controlled by the Bethlehem Steel Corporation. As this would be the first

naval unit of any importance to be built in South America, it would

naturally be a subject of local pride, and there is a reasonable expectation,

therefore, that the Bethlehem Steel Corporation will be able to obtain the

contract by this means.

The appropriation calls for $35,000,000 gold to be spent during the first

three years, $20,000,000 during the next three, and $20,000,000 during the

last four. Of the complete program there remain to be ordered one light

cruiser, one destroyer leader, three submarines and various smaller craft for

river work which are not specifically named in the bill.

Whether or not American firms will be able to obtain orders for these units

depends principally upon whether they can reduce their cost of production

sufficiently to enable them to approximate the prices of their European

rivals.

I have [etc.]

ROBERT WOODS BLISS

Australia:

Representations by the Australian Government regarding

entry of Australian businessmen into the United States

(Documents 318-320)

[Document 318]

The Commissioner for Australia (Denison) to the Secretary of

State

NEW YORK, 14 January, 1927.

[Received January 15.]

DEAR MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: In connection with the recent visit of the Right Hon. S.

M. Bruce, Prime Minister of Australia, to Washington, when he had the

pleasure of an interview with you, the question of the position of Australian

business men visiting the United States of America was discussed in the

presence of His Excellency the British Ambassador, and myself, who

accompanied Mr. Bruce. At the close of that interview you suggested that I

should furnish you with a report on the existing position for your further

consideration. I now have the honour of submitting same herewith.

It should be noted that the entrance of Australian citizens is controlled by

certain regulations of the Bureau of Immigration, United States Department

of Labor. These regulations may be defined broadly as:—

(a) Entrance under the quota allotted to the Commonwealth of

Australia.

(b) Entrance as transients,

(c) Entrance of persons who visit the United States as students.

(d) Entrance as persons engaged in commerce, and who are

granted liberty to remain in the country for a limited period

(generally from three to six months), with the privilege of

applying to the Bureau of Immigration for an extension of time.

The most embarrassing feature of these regulations is centred in the

experience of Australians who enter for the purpose of extending their

financial, commercial and industrial activities, and which are usually of

mutual benefit to Australia and the United States.

It may be pointed out that American citizens are free to enter Australia, and

to establish business offices in any part of the Commonwealth. There are no

restrictions, and, consequently, full advantage is taken of this opportunity to

engage in the ever-increasing trade as between the United States and

Australia. One of the many instances which might be cited for the purpose

of emphasizing this feature, is the trade in automobiles and motor trucks.

Australia today imports more American-made automobiles than any other

country in the world, and in this activity alone there are a great many

Americans who are engaged in American offices established in Australia.

On the other hand, if an Australian business house desires to extend its

operations to the United States, a representative of the firm must enter this

country either under (a) the Australian quota, or (d) as a temporary visitor.

The annual quota for Australia is so limited that the opportunity to enter

through that channel (a) is denied to many Australian business men. whilst

the regulation which classes them as visitors (d) leaves no freedom to

establish and maintain proper business offices with continuity of operations

by those who are best qualified with a knowledge of the business.

It is desired to urge that consideration be given to the wish of the

Government of the Commonwealth of Australia that the concessions

granted to business men of the United Kingdom, who establish offices in

the United States, be extended in like manner to citizens of Australia.

The privilege enjoyed by British citizens was made possible under the

Treaty between the United States of America and Great Britain, proclaimed

and navigation between the respective countries, and to ensure full liberty

on both sides in connection with the commerce of the two countries. Its

purport is that the merchants and traders of Great Britain and the United

States shall enjoy the most complete protection and security for their

commerce in such a manner as to render the same reciprocal, beneficial and

satisfactory. The Treaty definitely limits its operation to “all the Territories

of His Britannic Majesty in Europe.” The words “in Europe” isolate

Australia, a country virtually unknown (at least in a trading sense) in 1815,

when the Treaty was proclaimed as between Great Britain and the United

States.

It is desired to learn whether (a) the Government of the United States of

America is able, and would be willing, to extend to citizens of the

Commonwealth of Australia the privileges granted to British citizens under

the Treaty of 1815, or (b), in the event of it not being possible to effect such

an extension under that Treaty, would be agreeable to negotiate a special

Treaty with the Commonwealth for a similar purpose.

The consideration of this matter on the part of the United States Department

of State will be greatly appreciated by the Government of the

Commonwealth, and I will welcome any advice you may be kind enough to

offer, with a view to bringing about the much-desired change in the status

of Australian citizens who are so vitally affected by this matter.

I have [etc.]

HUGH R. DENISON

Acts of the United States of America vol. 2, p. 595.

[Document 319]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)

WASHINGTON [, February 26, 1927.]

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a communication,

dated January 14, 1927, from the Honorable Hugh R. Denison,

Commissioner of Australia, relating to the entry of Australian citizens into

the United States, and to a recent discussion of the subject at the

Department. Mr. Denison sets forth clearly the present status of Australian

business men desiring to extend their commercial affairs in the United

States and points out the restrictive features of the Immigration Act of

He desires to learn whether (a) the Government of the United States is able,

and would be willing to extend to citizens of the Commonwealth of

Australia the privileges granted to British citizens under the Treaty of 1815,

or (b), in the event of it not being possible to effect such an extension under

that Treaty, would consider the negotiation of a special treaty with the

Commonwealth for a similar purpose.

The Department considers that the Treaty of 1815 with Great Britain relates

to trade and commerce with British possessions in Europe and that its

provisions are not applicable to any of the component parts of the British

Empire overseas.

As to the possibility of the negotiation of a treaty with the Commonwealth

of Australia for the purposes defined in Mr. Denison’s communication, I

beg to invite your attention to the wording of Section 3 (6) of the

Immigration Act of 1924, which reads as follows:

“an alien entitled to enter the United States solely to carry on

trade under and in pursuance of i a present existing treaty of

commerce and navigation.”

That provision became effective on May 26, 1924, and hence would not

apply to a treaty concluded subsequently. In view of this situation I am not

prepared at present to discuss this aspect of the subject but the Department

is deeply interested and I shall be glad to communicate with you at a later

date in regard to it.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 320]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

undated

MEMORANDUM RE ENTRY OF AUSTRALIAN BUSINESS MEN INTO THE UNITED STATES

On December 30, 1926, the Prime Minister of Australia, The Eight

Honourable S. M. Bruce, had the honour of an interview with the Secretary

of State at Washington, when the question of the disabilities attaching to the

entry of Australian business men into the United States outside of the quota

was discussed.

The Prime Minister was accompanied at that interview by His Excellency

the British Ambassador and the Commissioner for Australia in the United

States.

At the close of the interview the Honourable the Secretary of State

requested that a statement of the position from the Australian point of view

should be prepared and sent to him by the Commissioner for Australia.

Under date of January 14, 1927, a communication was duly forwarded to

the Secretary of State, setting out clearly the position existing at present,

and asking (a) whether the Government of the United States of America is

able and would be willing to extend to citizens of the Commonwealth of

Australia the privileges granted to British citizens under the treaty of 1815,

or (b) in the event of it not being possible to effect such an extension under

that treaty, the Government of the United States would be agreeable to

negotiate a special treaty with the Commonwealth for a similar purpose.

Subsequent to receipt of this letter the British Ambassador was given to

understand semiofficially that the matter was under consideration, but that

the Department was not in a position to give a definite opinion thereon until

it had been ascertained whether Congress would be prepared to amend

Department of State, Washington, intimating:

(1) that the Department considered that the treaty of 1815 with

Great Britain relates to trade and commerce with British

possessions in Europe, and that its provisions are not applicable to

any of the component parts of the British Empire overseas;

(2) that as regards the possibility of the negotiation of a treaty

with the Commonwealth of Australia for the purposes defined in

the communication of the Commissioner for Australia, dated

did not apply to a treaty concluded subsequently.

It was further added that in view of this situation the Secretary of State was

not prepared at that time to discuss that aspect of the subject, but that the

Department was deeply interested and would be glad to communicate with

the British Ambassador at a later date in regard to it.

Since then no further communications appear to have passed between the

parties in reference to this matter, but a letter has now been received by the

Commissioner

for

Australia

from

the

Prime

Minister

of

the

Commonwealth, asking that this matter should be reopened in view of the

fact that the officials of the State Department appear to recognise that

Australia in this matter is under a disability that should be removed as early

as possible.

It should be noted that the annual quota for Australia, which is at present

the only means by which Australian business men may enter the United

States for any extended period in connection with their business, only

numbers a hundred and twenty-one and is at the present time filled by

applicants for at least two years ahead.

It should be further noted that business between the United States of

America and Australia is steadily increasing from year to year, and now

amounts to very considerably over 250 million dollars per annum.

There is no restriction of any kind on American business men entering the

Commonwealth of Australia and staying in that country as long as may be

necessary for them to conduct and complete their business; and at the

present time there are considerably over one thousand American citizens

resident in the Commonwealth of Australia taking part in such business

relations.

It is now desired to learn whether there is any possibility of this matter

being brought before Congress during the session about to commence, with

a view of obtaining some amendment of the Immigration Act of 1924

which will permit Australian business men to enter for bone fide business

purposes without restriction as to the length of their stay in the United

States, and also whether any further information is required from Australia

in connection with this matter.

Austria:

[Document 321]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, August 30, 1927.

[Received September 19.]

No. 1508

I have the honor to report, that I anticipated that during the second half of

1927 the Federal Government would seek to float another loan for strictly

productive investment purposes. This prophecy is now in the process of

fulfillment. I do not cite it as an evidence of perspicacity. The facts upon

which it was based were more or less common property.

Before the Austrian Government can contract a new federal loan or pledge

its revenues for such a loan, the consent of three organs is necessary, to wit:

(1) The Austrian Control Committee, made up of representatives

of the States guaranteeing the external reconstruction loan of

(2) The Reparation Commission;

(3) The States having prior liens on Austria because of relief

credits, among whom is the United States.

There have been persistent rumors that the Chancellor will go to Geneva to

attend the September League meeting in connection with the new loan. He

tells me today that the rumor is unfounded. He at no time has considered

such a possibility. He is going to Germany very shortly to deliver some

lectures, to be absent about a week, but Switzerland is not on his itinerary.

Dr. Schüller, of the Foreign Office, who is now in Switzerland on leave,

will be in Geneva and it is considered quite probable that he will undertake

to discuss the matter of a new federal loan with the Financial Committee of

the League and seek to enlist its cooperation or goodwill. The Austrian

Control Committee will meet in the middle of October in London and there

the serious work will really begin. Minister of Finance Kienböck will be on

hand. The Chancellor tells me that he is not yet decided whether he will go

or not.

Assuming that the Control Committee will be sympathetic, as it is hoped,

the next appeal will be to the Reparation Commission and to the relief

Joint Resolution of Congress, approved April 6th, 1922, authorizing for a

period not to exceed twenty-five years the extension of the time for the

payment of the principal and interest of the debt incurred by Austria for the

purchase of flour from the United States Grain Corporation. I also enclosed

the notice of the action of the Secretary of the Treasury pursuant to the

authority conferred under this Resolution and the relevant Decision of the

Reparation Commission, No. 2400. In this connection the question may

presently arise as to what affirmative action must be taken by the United

States as one of the relief credit nations in order to facilitate a new Austrian

federal loan. In the event it should be deemed advisable to take any action

whatever, will a new enabling act of Congress be necessary or may the

Secretary of the Treasury, under authority of the Joint Resolution herein-

before referred to, subordinate the lien of the Austrian Relief Bond Series B

of 1920, issued to and held by the United States of America on account of

food purchased from the United States Grain Corporation for relief

purposes, to a new Austrian federal loan providing said new loan matures

within the twenty-five year period mentioned in the Joint Resolution, No.

mature within this period just mentioned.

As to the amount of the new loan, assuming that the necessary permission

can be obtained, I find on reference to my despatch No. 1076 of June 16th,

1926, that an additional loan of 200,000,000 schillings was then

contemplated. The new investment program is more ambitious. It is

proposed not only to continue the electrification of the railroads, which is

now underway, and the further extension of underground cables for

telephones, but also to reconstruct federal public highways, which are in a

bad state of repair, and to extend quasi-public utility agricultural

[Document 322]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

[Paraphrase]

54. The Chancellor has officially and urgently requested me to report that

he would appreciate very much an early reply to the question on pages 3

urgency of the request are connected with the meeting of the Austrian

Control Committee in London on October 11th. Further details are given in

my despatch of this date.

WASHBURN

[Document 323]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, September 20, 1927.

[Received October 1.]

No. 1532

SIR: Supplementing my telegram No. 54 of today, 10 a.m., I have the honor

to report that the Chancellor asks me officially and urgently to lay before

my Government the request of the Austrian Government for an early

answer to the question as to what action is necessary for the United States

to subordinate its relief credit lien to a proposed new Austrian Federal

Loan.

1. May the Secretary of the Treasury under authority of the Joint

Resolution of Congress approved April 6, 1922, (U. S. Stat. Vol.

Austrian Relief Bond Series B of 1920, issued to and held by the

United States of America on account of food produced

[purchased?] from the United States Grain Corporation for relief

purposes, to a new Austrian Federal Loan, providing such new

loan matures within the twenty-five year period mentioned in the

Joint Resolution just referred to; or

2. Will a new enabling act of Congress be necessary to enable the

Secretary of the Treasury, in his discretion, to take the desired

action?

the 30th ultimo, to which reference is hereby made.

The reason for the Chancellor’s urgency is this: It seems to be confidently

anticipated that favorable action will be taken by the Austrian Control

Committee, which is scheduled to meet in London on October 11. Speedy

action seems also to be awaited from the Reparations Commission. It is

further my understanding, confirmed by the Chancellor, that the Relief

Credit states, save the United States, have established a Relief Credit

Committee composed in the main of their accredited ambassadors and

ministers in London, and it seems to be expected that this Committee will

act as a unit, and with a minimum of delay. These three organs just

mentioned are referred to on page two of my despatch under reference.

If the Secretary of the Treasury has ample authority to act under the Joint

Resolution of April 6, 1922, the Austrian Government will seek a twenty

year loan to bring it within the twenty-five year period mentioned in the

Congressional Joint Resolution. If further Congressional action be

necessary, the Austrian Government will seek a thirty year loan. It therefore

greatly desires to have its proposals definitely matured and ready for

submission first to the Austrian Control Committee around the middle of

October. In other words, its election for a twenty or thirty year bond term

will hinge upon the answer to the question as to whether or not the

Secretary of the Treasury may act under the Joint Resolution of April 6,

1922. It is recognized here that an application to Congress for a new

enabling act would inevitably involve a delay which it is desired to avoid if

possible. All this, of course, is predicated upon the theory that the other

interested creditor nations enumerated in the proviso of the before

mentioned Joint Resolution, in so far as their assent is now necessary, will

take early favorable action. I am told that no difficulties are anticipated and

that the way has been already prepared. In any event the attitude of the

other creditor states will presently be disclosed. There is a little anxiety

here, inasmuch as separate action must be taken by the United States, lest

delay in Washington may result in Austria not being able to float a loan at

the most propitious moment. It is represented to me that M. Dubois, the

Swiss Chairman of the Finance Committee of the League, has intimated to

Austrian experts that he has already broken ground with the firm of J. P.

Morgan & Co., and there is a feeling of optimism here that the Morgan firm

is disposed to take a large participation share in the flotation syndicate to be

formed. I am not in a position to express an opinion as to whether this

optimism is justified. I do know that the Austrian Minister at London,

Baron Georg Franckenstein, is about to go to the United States as a guest of

members of the Morgan firm (Messrs. Morgan and Lamont, as the

Chancellor tells me). The story, as I hear it, is that Mr. Montagu Norman

… established contacts for him with Mr. Morgan and his partners. The

invitation followed. The Austrian Minister sails tomorrow, I believe, for a

three weeks’ visit, and will be in the United States at an opportune moment

around the middle of October, when it is anticipated that the necessary

sanctions will have been obtained or assured. Franckenstein, so Dr. Seipel

informs me, does not go to the United States with any power of attorney

whatever. There have been printed reports this last week (the Stunde had an

article on Thursday the 15th, and the Neues Wiener Journal on Friday the

16th) to the effect that an “Austrian personality”, whose identity does not

seem to have been discovered, is about to sound the big New York banks in

the matter of a federal loan. The Neues Wiener Journal says that

negotiations are pending for a 120 million dollar loan for Austria, a 50

million dollar loan for Bulgaria and a 45 million dollar loan for Greece.

In this connection, the investment program referred to on page 4 of my

before mentioned despatch No. 1508, which will be presented to the

Austrian Control Committee on October 11, is herewith enclosed. This

document contains:

I. An expose of the Austrian Federal Household for the years

II. Investment requirements for the years 1928–32;

III. An analysis of the Reconstruction Loan;

IV. A table showing the amount of bonds issued in liquidation of

outstanding obligations.

This exhibit can hardly be further profitably summarized, but it should

prove a useful aid to the State and Treasury in passing upon questions

relating to the new proposed loan. It will perhaps be helpful in any

exhaustive study of this matter, to compare annex I (Expose of the Austrian

Federal Household for the year[s] 1923–27) with some of the tables given

Control. Exhibit 1 is so far a confidential document. It is not desired that

[Document 324]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)

WASHINGTON, September 24, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to inform you that the Department of State has received

a confidential telegram from the American Minister at Vienna reporting that

the Austrian Chancellor had officially and urgently asked him to telegraph

requesting an early reply to his request reported on pages three and four of

the Minister’s despatch No. 1508 of August 30; namely, that the competent

law officers of the American Government should investigate in a

preliminary way the question as to what action is necessary by the United

States to subordinate its existing lien to a contemplated new Austrian

Federal loan. The Minister added that in a despatch dated September 20 he

was reporting the detailed reasons for the Chancellor’s request which are

connected with the meeting of the Control Committee in London on

October 11.

information and for such comment as you may care to make. You will note

that the Austrian Chancellor’s present request is for an interpretation of the

authority of the Secretary of the Treasury under the Joint Resolution of

Congress, approved April 6, 1922, authorizing the extension for a period of

not to exceed 25 years of the time for the payment of the principal and

interest of the debt incurred by Austria for the purchase of flour from the

United States Grain Corporation.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

Assistant Secretary

[Document 325]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, October 17, 1927.

[Received October 31.]

No. 1573

and my despatch No. 1532 of the same date, I now have the honor to

enclose the original, with copies, of a communication received on the 14th

instant from the Chancellor, embodying a formal request to the Government

of the United States of America to grant the suspension of the lien and the

postponement up to the 31st of December, 1957, of the payments due for

the Relief Credit accorded to Austria in the amount of about 24 million

dollars, plus interest. It will be observed that the request is for a thirty-year

suspension, which would of course require congressional sanction.

Nevertheless Dr. Schüller told me the day before his departure for London

that whilst he proposed to proceed upon the theory that the new bond issue

would mature in thirty years yet it still remained true that if it were found

that our Secretary of the Treasury could act without further authority under

the Joint Resolution of April 6, 1922, he would strongly urge that

negotiations be conducted on the twenty-year basis.

The annex referred to in the Chancellor’s letter was transmitted with my

despatch under reference.

I have [etc.]

ALBERT H. WASHBURN

[Enclosure]

The Austrian Chancellor (Seipel) to the American Minister (Washburn)

EXCELLENCY: The “Comité de Contrôle des Etats garants pour la reconstruction

de l’Autriche” (Committee of Control of the Guarantor States for the

Reconstruction of Austria) have at the request of the Austrian Government

consented in their meeting held in London on October 12th, 1927, to the

conclusion on the part of the Austrian Republic of an investments loan to

yield an amount of 725 million Schillings.

This decision was based on a statement of the Austrian Government on

Austrian revenue and expenditure during the years 1923–1927; on the sums

required for capital expenditure (investments) from 1928 to 1932; and on

the actual state and the use made of the Austrian Government Guaranteed

Loan 1923–1943. I have the honour to annex to these presents three copies

of the said statement for information.

The following points of the contents of the statement seem to me to require

special mentioning:

The current administration of Austrian Federal Finance resulted in a deficit

only in the first year of reconstruction, i. e. in 1923, while in the subsequent

years fairly considerable surpluses were obtained. Therefore, the total

deficit shown in the years from 1924 onwards, represents such part of

capital expenditure only as was not covered by ordinary revenue, and,

consequently, had to be defrayed out of the yield of loans. Thus Austria

succeeded, thanks to the magnanimous support it received from all the

nations participating in the work of its reconstruction, to save its finances

from utter ruin and to establish the permanent equilibrium of the budget.

Moreover, a large portion of the purely productive capital expenditures was

covered by current revenue, so that the proceeds of the reconstruction loan

set apart for such capital expenditure, will be sufficient up to the first

months of 1928. Now, as is also shown by the enclosed statement on the use

of the said loan, the sums disposable under this heading are almost

exhausted. Only a sum of approximately 26 million Schillings is left for

capital expenditure in 1928. The great works of reconstruction Austria

undertook with the help of funds drawn from the reconstruction loan, in the

first place the installation of electric traction on the Federal Railways, and

the laying of long distance telephone cables, both of them works of highest

importance to making Austria’s balance of payments active, must be

continued and completed, if the result aimed at, namely to secure for

Austria’s economy a permanent adequate position in the ensemble of the

various European economies, is to be attained.

My Government therefore finds itself obliged to proceed to the issue of an

investments loan for which the basis is given through the said decision

taken by the Committee of Control in accordance with Article 7 of Protocol

To be able, however, to contract the loan under suitable conditions, Austria

requires her assets to be freed from the lien imposed upon them under the

terms of Article 197 of the Treaty of St. Germain14 for purposes of

reparation, as well as under the terms of the relief bonds issued by Austria

for the relief credits granted to it. Likewise a further postponement for this

purpose is required of the payments to be made in accordance with the

stipulations of these bonds.

My Government has at the same time addressed to the Reparation

Commission the request to defer in favour of the intended loan and for a

the assets and revenues of Austria by virtue of Article 197 of the Treaty of

St. Germain. It now ventures to ask also the Government of the United

States of America to grant the suspension of the lien, and the postponement

up to 31 december, 1957, of the payments due for the relief credit granted to

Austria to the amount of about 24 million Dollars plus interest.

In view of the nature of the proposed investments my Government deems it

indispensable that the loan to be contracted should be for 30 years at least,

lest in the next few years that are devoted to further reconstruction work,

Austrian economy be charged with too heavy obligations for the repayment

of the loan.

In bringing the above request of my Government to your knowledge, I

should be greatly obliged if Your Excellency would kindly forward it to the

Government of the United States and advise me, at the earliest possible

date, of the decision taken by them in the matter.

I avail myself [etc.]

SEIPEL

[Document 326]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)

WASHINGTON, October 18, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to transmit for your information a memorandum

report15 of a conversation in which the Austrian Minister indicated that his

Government wishes to know whether the Secretary of the Treasury has

power without further authorization by Congress to extend for an additional

period of five years the time of payment of the debt incurred by Austria for

the purchase of flour from the United States Grain Corporation.

I am transmitting to you this informal inquiry in view of your possible

interest in considering it jointly with the cognate inquiry of the Austrian

Chancellor communicated to you by this Department’s letter of September

I have [etc.]

[Document 327]

Mr. R. C. Leffingwell of J. P. Morgan & Co. to the Secretary of

State

NEW YORK, October 18, 1927.

[Received October 19.]

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Confirming my statement over the telephone, the Austrian

Government has in contemplation the flotation of a loan or loans in the

amount of 775,000,000 schillings or about $110,000,000. The purpose of

the loan is to provide funds which, with some contribution from current

revenues, are estimated to suffice for the completion of a five year program

for the electrification of the Austrian railways (which was set under way

from the proceeds of the Austrian reconstruction loan of 1923 and from

budget surplus), for the erection of telephone cables and the improvement

of highways, etc. It is intended that the loan be offered in this country and

in England and in the important Continental markets to evidence

international solidarity in behalf of Austrian reconstruction.

We have been asked by the Austrian Government to issue the loan in this

country and we have indicated our willingness in principle to study the

matter, but it is still in its preliminary stages and nothing has been settled.

The loan has already received the tentative approval of the Committee of

Guarantor States which guaranteed the Austrian loan of 1923. The Trustees

of that loan have been informed of the project and have expressed their

wish to be kept advised. We understand the proposal will also be submitted

to the Reparations Commission.

It is proposed that the new loan be secured by a second lien, subject only to

the loan of 1923, on Austrian customs and tobacco receipts and on such

other revenues as may be necessary, and that reparations and relief claims

be subordinated to it and postponed until after its repayment, as in the case

of the loan of 1923.

There will doubtless be presented to you by the Austrian Government in

due course, if indeed it has not already been done, a request that, as in the

case of the loan of 1923, Congress subordinate the relief lien of the United

States to the second charge now proposed to be granted and postpone its

relief claim for a period extending beyond the maturity of the new loan,

which would be say twenty-five or thirty years from the date of issue. There

will also arise the usual question whether for any reason the Department of

State interposes any objection to the proposed loan.

I do not mean by this letter to ask for a ruling from the Department of State

on a question which will thus be presented to it through official channels.

My purpose in telephoning you, and in writing you in this detailed manner

in accordance with your request, is only, as always, to keep the Department

promptly advised of foreign loans in contemplation.

For convenience of reference I enclose a copy of the decisions taken last

week by the Committee of Guarantor States and the Trustees of the loan of

announcement of the Secretary of the Treasury concerning his action

R. C. LEFFINGWELL

[Enclosure 1]

The President of the Committee of Guarantor States (Alberti) to the Austrian Minister of Finance

(Kienböck)

OCTOBER 12, 1927.

SIR: The Committee of Guarantor States have considered the request of the

Austrian Government for their approval under the Geneva Protocol II, of a

new Austrian Loan for productive capital works. They have had the

advantage of receiving in addition to the written memoranda furnished to

them, verbal explanations from the representatives of the Austrian

Government. They have also had the advantage of consultation with the

Trustees of the Austrian Guaranteed loan 1923.

The Committee have been informed that the Austrian Government do not

propose to raise any other foreign loan during the period of five years

covered by the present loan programme; and that it is the intention of the

Austrian Government to apply to the proposed loan, some part of which

will be raised in Austria itself, the principle recommended in 1924 by the

Financial Committee of the League of Nations that revenue producing

undertakings such as the post, telegraphs and telephones, and the railways,

will recoup to the Austrian Treasury the charges for interest and

amortization on such part of the proceeds of the loan as may be allocated to

them.

They understand that the Austrian Government will further make available

for productive investments during the five years 1928–1932 inclusive

certain sums out of the current Budget revenue.

The Austrian Government will further make such written application to the

Trustees of the guaranteed loan 1923 as may be necessary under the terms

of the general bond of that loan: and they propose in due course to apply to

the Reparations Commission and the States holding Austrian relief bonds

for the necessary assents of those authorities.

In these circumstances the Committee of Guarantors acting on behalf of the

States whom they represent, raise no objection in principle to the issue by

the Austrian Government of a loan for an effective sum not exceeding

725,000,000 shillings for the revenue producing purposes of the Post Office

and Railways indicated in the statement submitted to the Committee, and

have authorized their President, when the actual terms of the issue are

communicated to him by the Austrian Government, to give on behalf of the

Committee their final approval under Article 7 of the Protocol.

[MARIO ALBERTI, M. P.]

[Enclosure 2]

[Document 328]

The Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, October 21, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Receipt is acknowledged of the letter of Assistant

therein that the Austrian Government wishes to know whether the Secretary

of the Treasury has power, without further authorization by Congress, to

extend for an additional period of five years the time of payment of the debt

incurred by Austria for the purchase of flour from the United States Grain

Corporation.

If such authority is vested in the Secretary of the Treasury it must be

Stat. 491. By the terms of this Resolution the Secretary of the Treasury was

authorized “to extend, for a period not to exceed twenty-five years, the time

of payment of the principal and interest of the debt incurred by Austria for

the purchase of flour from the United States Grain Corporation and to

release Austrian assets pledged for the payment of such loan, in whole or in

part, as may in the judgement of the Secretary of the Treasury be necessary

for the accomplishment of this Resolution: …” By virtue of this authority

the time of payment of the debt was extended to June 1, 1943, and the lien

given the United States by Austrian Relief Bond No. 1, Series “B” of 1920,

which it holds, was subordinated to the Austrian Government guaranteed

twenty-five year loan maturing in 1943.

In response to my request of the Attorney General for his opinion as to

whether under the Joint Resolution the Secretary of the Treasury might in

his discretion further subordinate to the proposed new Austrian Federal

Loan the lien given the United States by the terms of the Austrian Relief

Bond No. 1, Series “B” of 1920, he stated that “the Secretary of the

Treasury has no power to act further under this Resolution . . . .” A copy

of the opinion of the Attorney General, dated October 15, 1927, was

[Document 329]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria

(Washburn)

opinion of law officers of this Government, the Secretary of the Treasury

has no power to act further under the Joint Resolution approved April 6,

1922, and a new enabling act of Congress would be necessary to enable him

to take the suggested action.

OLDS

[Document 330]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, October 29, 1927.

[Received November 14.]

No. 1585

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of the Department’s telegram

me in substance that in the opinion of the Attorney General the Secretary of

the Treasury has no power to act further under the Joint Resolution

approved April 6th, 1922 and that a new enabling act of Congress will

therefore be necessary to enable him to take the action desired by the

Austrian Government. I am today advising Chancellor Seipel in the sense of

the foregoing. Especially in view of the formal request contained in my

despatch No. 1573 of the 17th instant, it is superfluous to emphasize the

desire of the Austrian Government for a new congressional enabling act and

I am taking it for granted that the Department will at the proper time take

appropriate action.

The decision set forth in the Department’s telegram under reference makes

it certain that the new loan will be on a 30-year basis, though Minister of

Finance Kienböck told me only yesterday that if the Secretary of the

Treasury were free to act under the Resolution of 1922 and cared to exercise

his discretion, a shorter term would be most seriously considered. The

Austrian Government had not definitely committed itself, though the

discussions in London and Paris had proceeded on the 30-year theory. Dr.

Kienböck intimated that he expects shortly favorable action from the

Reparation Commission and that the negotiations with the Relief Credit

Committee, acting for the Relief Credit states, of which the Englishman,

Leith Ross is chairman, vice Niemeyer, are proceeding satisfactorily. I will

of course keep the Department informed of developments.

In this connection I am enclosing herewith translations of two articles from

the “Wiener Boersen-Kurier” of the 17th and 24th instant dealing with the

loan flotation.

I have [etc.]

ALBERT H. WASHBURN

[Document 331]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)

WASHINGTON, November 28, 1927.

SIR: With reference to this Department’s letter of November 18, which

transmitted a copy of the formal request of the Austrian Government to the

United States Government22 to grant postponement up to December 31,

1957, of the Austrian bond held by the United States Treasury, I have the

honor to transmit for your information a copy of despatch No. 1585, dated

enclosures, regarding the contemplated new Austrian loan.

You will note the Minister’s statement that he is taking it for granted that

the Department will at the proper time take appropriate action to obtain a

new Congressional Enabling Act. The Department’s only communication to

the Minister on the matter has been that quoted in the Department’s letter to

you of November 18 to the effect that a new Enabling Act of Congress

would be necessary.

I should be pleased to receive any comment you may care to make on this

matter.

I have [etc.]

[Document 332]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, November 30, 1927.

[Received December 16.]

No. 1629

SIR: I have the honor to report that I have recently had conference with the

Chancellor and Dr. Schüller, and I am enabled to state that the Austrian

Government is on the verge of abandoning that part of its request contained

in the Chancellor’s letter to me transmitted with my despatch No. 1573 of

December, 1957, of the time of payment of the principal and interest of the

debt incurred by Austria for the purchase of flour from the United States

Grain Corporation, leaving only to be dealt with by congressional resolution

its request for the release of Austrian assets pledged for the payment of said

debt, so as to subordinate them to the new contemplated federal loan. In

stating this amended desire of the Austrian Government I have followed

rather the phraseology found in the Joint Resolution of Congress approved

April 6th, 1922, a copy of which was transmitted with my despatch No.

Schüller is leaving today for London to attend the sessions of the Relief

Credit Committee which meets on the 2nd proximo, and he will there make

his amended announcement in harmony with the foregoing. The Austrian

Government now has to all intents and purposes a postponement of its

various relief credits until 1942 and upon further reflection it apparently

deems it more prudent not to complicate matters by asking for a further

postponement until 1957, as contemplated by the Chancellor’s letter above

mentioned. It does desire that Austrian assets pledged to the relief credits be

released and subordinated in the manner indicated.

Secondly, Schüller has been authorized formally to state to the Relief Credit

Committee in London that as soon as the new federal loan has been floated

the Austrian Government desires to take up the question of entering into a

general funding arrangement for the entire relief credits which amount to

about £25,000,000. All the outstanding relief credit bonds provide that the

terms of payment shall be the same in all cases and Austria must therefore

make the same arrangement with the United States as is made with the other

relief credit states. Schüller says that it is to the advantage of Austria to take

up the question of a debt settlement at an early date and not wait until 1942.

He has stated this to me before, as I have elsewhere reported. It is obvious

that he hopes to eliminate or greatly curtail the payment of interest which is

now technically running. Austria anticipates, as I gather, that her situation

lays the foundation for the hope that she will receive at least as favorable

treatment from the United States as Italy did. It is plain to me that the

Austrian Government is especially anxious that the relief credit debt

settlement shall not be harnessed up in any way with the new loan. If, as the

Chancellor explained to me, the two matters were considered together, the

Austrian public would deem the conditions too onerous. They would lump

the interest and amortization charges of the new loan and the relief credit

settlement together. Schüller goes so far as to say that the new loan would

have to be abandoned. There have been apparently some disquieting

rumors, traceable to banking circles in London and Vienna, to the effect that

our Treasury Department or Congress might stipulate a relief credit

settlement before taking favorable action upon the desired release of

Austrian assets. Schüller does not want to appear to be forced into making

an arrangement which he asserts his government desires to make

voluntarily.

It is my understanding that Minister Prochnik has not been advised by cable

of these developments, though he has recently had some telegraphic

instructions about the disposition of alien property. I am therefore taking the

precaution of briefly informing the Department of the existing situation by

wire.

The government here seems to regard it as assured that J. P. Morgan &

Company will undertake to float the new issue and that it will be the only

firm with which the Austrian Government will directly deal, though a

syndicate will doubtless be formed. I get the impression that the advice of

Morgan and Montagu Norman will be followed throughout.

I have [etc.]

ALBERT H. WASHBURN

[Document 333]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

abandons its request for extension until 1957 of time of payment of

principal and interest, leaving only its request that assets pledged for

payment of the United States Grain Corporation Loan may be subordinated

[Document 334]

The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, December 6, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: The Federal Government of Austria after having with the proceeds

of a loan, the so-called League of Nations Loan, successfully completed the

reconstruction of its public household and finances, by stabilizing the

country’s currency, balancing the budget and accomplishing other measures

provided for in an exhaustive restoration plan, is now anxious to likewise

restore with the aid of a second loan private economics and business to a

state of normalcy. In fact, my Government realize that the latter is an

essential requisite for assuring a lasting duration of the first success.

Before the first referred to loan could be issued it was necessary that all

countries holding a first lien on Austria’s assets for relief credits defer this

lien for a period of 20 years (the time fixed for the repayment of the said

loan).

Also the United States of America, as Your Excellency are aware of,

deferred with authorization of Congress (Lodge Resolution) their lien for

twenty years, beginning from 1923.

As long as the relief credits are still outstanding against Austria, a similar

action would be required to enable the issue of a second loan. With other

words the Federal Government of Austria face the necessity of approaching

the creditor nations again with a request for a further 10 year extension of

the aforementioned period of deferment.

My Government, however, came to the conclusion that a settlement of the

relief credits would be preferable to a further extension of the lien and is

proposing to all creditor nations the following funding plan, which I am

likewise authorized to submit to Your Excellency.

This plan in its original construction provides for a refund of the relief

credits (capital and interest) within forty years (beginning 1928) on a rising

scale (with lowest equal yearly instalments in the first five years and

highest equal yearly instalments in the last 25 Years).

But certain technical difficulties necessitated a change in this original plan.

An opinion rendered by experts considers payments on relief credits prior to

1943 as contrary to the wording and spirit of the agreement entered upon by

the Austrian Government in connection with the League of Nations Loan.

To overcome this technical obstacle, the Federal Government of Austria

propose, that a debt funding would be agreed upon along the

aforementioned line, that actual payments, however, would not be made

before 1943, and that from this time on the whole debt (capital and interest)

should be paid in 25 equal yearly instalments, and that these instalments

should also include an amount corresponding to the loss on interest which

the creditors suffered by non-payment of agreed upon instalments due prior

to 1943.

Your Excellency would greatly oblige me by notifying me at your earliest

possible convenience whether in principle the Government of the United

States would accept to enter negotiations for a settlement of relief credits

along aforementioned lines.

Accept [etc.]

EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 335]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)

WASHINGTON, December 8, 1927.

SIR: With reference to this Department’s letter of November 18,25

transmitting a copy of the formal request of the Austrian Government to the

Government of the United States26 to grant the suspension of the lien and

the postponement up to December 31, 1957, of the payments due for the

relief credit accorded to Austria, I have the honor to transmit for your

the American Minister at Vienna, reporting that the Austrian Government

abandons its request for extension until 1957 of the time of payment of

principal and interest, leaving only its request that the lien of the relief bond

be subordinated to the contemplated new Austrian loan.

p.m., from the American Embassy at Paris, reporting that the three

Austrian questions mentioned in the Embassy’s telegram No. 442 of

November 22, 1927, were not discussed in the meeting of the Reparation

Commission December 3, but were adjourned to the next meeting, which

will be held on January 14, 1928. A copy of the Embassy’s telegram No.

I have [etc.]

[Document 336]

Mr. R. C. Leffingwell of J. P. Morgan & Co. to the Under

Secretary of State

NEW YORK, December 14, 1927.

[Received December 15.]

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: Referring to my letter of October 18th to Secretary Kellogg

and to Assistant Secretary Castle’s reply of October 22nd, and to my talk

with you the other day, all about Austria, this is just a line to remind you

that discussions are going on in London between the Austrian Government

and the European Relief Creditor States, and I understand the suggestion

has been made by the Austrian Government that the Department of State

might wish to be represented.

Very truly yours,

R. C. LEFFINGWELL

[Document 337]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, December 14, 1927.

[Received December 29.]

No. 1656

SIR: Supplementing my despatch No. 1629 of the 30th ultimo, I have the

honor to report as of today the following developments in relation to the

flotation of the projected new federal loan. I have been privileged to see

some of the confidential files of the Foreign Office in preparing this report.

It became apparent upon the occasion of the meeting of the Relief Credit

Committee in London on the 2nd instant, that Austrian official circles had

been unduly optimistic and had underestimated some of the obstacles

standing in their path. It there developed that the Dutch representative

stated flatly that his government desired that some plan for the amortization

of and payment of interest on the old relief credits be made as a condition

precedent to any action on its part. This was just what Schüller wanted to

avoid, as stated on page 3 of my despatch under reference.

As an offset to this request, the bankers (Montagu Norman and Morgan

were specifically mentioned) raised the contention that the Austrian

Government could not be required to arrange for any relief credit settlement

prior to 1943 when the long term reconstruction loan matures. It was

asserted that an earlier settlement would contravene the announcement

made in the bankers’ prospectus at the time the loan just mentioned was

floated in 1923, and that the prospectus was based upon the bond contract. I

have examined the American prospectus, a copy of which I have in my

files, and it does not seem to me to substantiate this contention. The Foreign

Office tells me that this was also the opinion of the Austrian Government

and Schüller so stated to the bankers, whereupon they replied that if an

earlier settlement was not strictly against the letter of the reconstruction

bond, it was against its spirit. Inasmuch as the bankers’ views quite

naturally carry very great weight as intimated in the concluding paragraph

of my before-mentioned despatch No. 1629, the predicament which arose

was embarrassing. Furthermore, one of the less influential opposition

papers, “Der Montag”, printed a sensational story on the 5th instant, which

attracted some attention, to the effect that the loan had gone on the rocks,

mainly because of the opposition of Czechoslovakia. In point of fact,

Czechoslovakia is not interested in the relief credits, because it extended

none. The Czech Minister here denies that his government is unfriendly. It

is nevertheless true that the Austrians believe that the Czechs have been

throwing cold water on the loan proposal. Two reasons are given: first, it is

said that the electrification of the railways is against Czech interests as it

would make Austria less dependent upon Czech coal and, secondly, some

proceeds of the new loan were to be devoted, it was announced, to the

improvement of Austrian dairies, the Austrian market for milk from

Southern Moravia thereby being lessened.

Italy’s attitude also created some uneasiness. (See in this connection my

suddenly left London for Rome for further instructions after the meeting on

the 2nd.

Dr. Schüller advised his government from London of the situation and the

Relief Credit Committee took an adjournment until Monday, the 12th. The

result of all this was that after a Cabinet council Schüller was instructed by

telegram on Thursday, the 8th, to make a relief credit settlement proposal.

The entire relief credits expressed in Austrian currency amount to

848,000,000 schillings. (This is approximately the equivalent of the

interest on this amount from now in 1927 up to 1943, the before-mentioned

date of maturity of the reconstruction loan, is figured at 152,000,000

schillings, making the total amount due in 1943 approximately 1,000

million schillings. Schüller was authorized to propose that beginning in

1943 the Austrian Government would undertake to pay the amount just

mentioned in twenty-five annual instalments of 40,000,000 schillings each.

The Austrian Government desires to reserve the right to pay, beginning in

1929 and up to 1943, something on account. It is provisionally proposed, if

this right be utilized, to pay at first 10,000,000 schillings annually and

subsequently 15,000,000 if the federal finances justify it. In the event

payments are thus anticipated, interest at the rate of 8 per cent is to be

deducted from the before-mentioned 1,000 million schillings due as of

1943. It is figured out that the estimated interest of 152,000,000 schillings

would be greatly reduced and of course the annual instalment beginning

from 1943 would be substantially cut down. As I have heretofore reported,

the Austrian Government hopes ultimately to avoid paying interest on its

relief credits, taking into account their intrinsic character. I think there is

some question however whether any advance payments will ever be made.

It is hoped nevertheless, by a proposal of this kind, to meet the bankers’

views. The Chancellor said to me significantly on Monday that the position

of the bankers was helpful to his government.

The fact that the Schüller telegram had been sent was communicated to me

on the evening of the 8th by the Finance Minister, Kien-böck. I promised

however that I would not cable any statement of the situation, which was

given me in the strictest confidence, and indeed there was no reason for

doing so as it was anticipated that something definite would transpire at the

adjourned Relief Credit Committee meeting on Monday, the 12th. This

anticipation was realized. The Committee took cognizance of the relief

credit settlement proposal as made by Schüller, and stated that it would be

transmitted to the various governments represented on the Committee for

action. I expect to be able later to transmit the exact formula of this

proposal; something, as I understand, that was left to Schüller’s discretion.

The Committee further passed a resolution authorizing the subordination to

the projected new federal loan for a period of thirty years of the Austrian

assets or securities pledged for the repayment of the relief credits. This last

action was taken by the Committee although the Dutch and Swiss delegates

were without authority to vote affirmatively for the resolution. The

Committee apparently had reason to believe that the written assent of the

Dutch and Swiss governments would be presently forthcoming. …

Apparently the fear expressed to me by Dr. Kienböck that parliamentary

assent of other countries than the United States might be found to be

necessary, proved to be groundless.

[Document 338]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)

WASHINGTON, December 23, 1927.

SIR: With reference to this Department’s letter of December 8 and to

previous correspondence regarding the Austrian relief indebtedness to the

United States and the proposed flotation of a new Austrian loan, I have the

honor to transmit herewith a copy of a note of December 6, 1927, addressed

to the Department by the Austrian Minister at Washington. I also transmit a

Minister at Vienna on the same subject.

The note of the Austrian Minister makes the specific proposal that an

agreement be made at this time for the funding of the relief debt; that actual

payments should not begin until 1943; and that from 1943 “the whole debt

(capital and interest) should be paid in 25 equal yearly instalments, and that

these instalments should also include an amount corresponding to the loss

on interest which the creditors suffered by non-payment of agreed upon

instalments due prior to 1943”. The Austrian Minister stated in conversation

on December 5 that the proposed funding of the relief debts was on the

supposition that the relief debt creditors will raise no objection to the new

loan, and will give it precedence until it is paid off in 1958. The note,

however, does not raise this question but inquires only “whether in principle

the Government of the United States would accept to enter negotiations for

a settlement of relief debt credits along aforementioned lines”.

Despatch No. 1629 of November 30 indicates that at that time the Austrian

Government desired that the funding of the relief credit bonds and the

subordination of the lien of these bonds to the new Federal loan be not

considered together. It was apparently the intention of the Austrian

Government to propose to the International Relief Bonds Committee

meeting at London that the relief creditors subordinate the lien of their

bonds and that as soon as the new loan has been floated the question of

entering into a general funding arrangement for the relief credits be taken

up.

On December 14 the Department was informed by Mr. Leffingwell of J. P.

Morgan and Company that discussions were going on in London between

the Austrian Government and the European Relief Creditor States. It will be

remembered from Reparation Commission Annex 3258 B–1, a copy of

which was transmitted to you by a letter of October 21, 1927, that an

International Relief Bonds Committee, representing the Governments of

Denmark, France, Great Britain, Holland, Italy, Norway, Sweden and

Switzerland met in Treasury Chambers, London, and, on or about July 14,

1927, agreed with the Austrian Government to replace the bonds of Relief

5% interest. You will recall that a secretary of the American Embassy at

London attended meetings of this Committee during the last half of 1924.

The Department, however, has since that time not been in direct touch with

the proceedings of the Committee. It may be noted, in passing, that the

settlements which this Committee has negotiated with relief debtors have

been much more favorable to the creditor governments than the settlements

which the United States has negotiated with its debtors.

The Department has orally assured the Austrian Minister that his formal

proposal for the funding of the relief debts would be given prompt

consideration by this Department and by the Treasury Department. In this

connection, you will note the statement of the Austrian Minister that his

Government has made the same proposal to the governments of the eight

other relief creditor States.

Since substantial unanimity of action on the part of these governments will

be required if the proposed funding is to be carried out, there is no occasion,

pending further developments, to consider making at this time any

affirmative commitment regarding the eventual attitude of this Government.

This Department, however, feels that, if you concur, the Austrian Minister

might now be informed that this Government is in principle disposed to

consider at this time an arrangement for payment of the relief obligation

commencing in 1943, but that it desires a more specific statement of the

proposal before a further expression of views can be given him. Before

[Document 339]

The Under Secretary of State to Mr. R. C. Leffingwell of J. P.

Morgan & Co.

WASHINGTON, December 23, 1927.

DEAR MR. LEFFINGWELL: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of

December 14 stating that discussions are going on in London ‘ between the

Austrian Government and the European Relief Creditor States. With

reference to your statement that the suggestion has been made that this

Government might wish to be represented in these discussions, I may say

this Department has received no suggestion from the Austrian Government

or from any of the Creditor States that it should participate in or keep in

touch with these discussions.

Thanking you [etc.]

ROBERT E. OLDS

[Document 340]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, December 28, 1927.

[Received January 23, 1928.]

No. 1664

SIR: With further reference to my despatch No. 1656 of the 14th instant, in

relation to the projected new federal loan, I have the honor to report that

following Dr. Schüller’s return to Vienna at the end of last week I had a

brief conference with him on Saturday last and a more extended one today.

As a result, I find that the facts reported in my despatch under reference

were, in the main, correct. They were supplied to me by a Minister

Plenipotentiary attached to the Foreign Office who was acting in Schüller’s

absence.

The latter tells me that at the first meeting of the International Relief Bonds

Committee on the 2nd instant, he announced the willingness of his

government to proceed promptly to some funding arrangement for the old

relief credits, but again emphasized Austria’s great desire, as I have

heretofore reported, to disassociate this funding arrangement from the new

loan negotiations. The various members of the Committee, according to

Schüller, expressed their sympathetic understanding with this attitude, but

added in substance: “You state that you are willing to make some funding

proposal. Can’t you give us some hint of what this proposal is to be before

we take action on your request to subordinate to the new loan the securities

pledged to the old relief credits?” Furthermore, the position of the Dutch

representative, set forth on page 2 of my despatch under reference, was not

lost on Schüller. He thereupon outlined his idea of a funding proposal, a

synopsis of which he cabled Minister Prochnik. He assumes that Prochnik

promptly got in touch with the Department. The International Relief Bonds

Committee took the adjournment until December 12th, as I have already

reported, and Schüller advised his government of what he had done. The

result was his telegram of instructions of December 8th, to which allusion

was made on page 3 of my despatch No. 1656. These instructions

practically embodied Schüller’s recommendations. He thereupon made his

formal proposal on December 12th, and on December 13th he transmitted it

in writing to Prochnik. This time he did not telegraph the latter and

presumably the Minister’s advices reached Washington almost coincidently

with my before-mentioned despatch No. 1656 of December 14th.

Pursuant to the promise made on page 5 of the despatch just referred to, the

following is a copy of the Austrian Government’s formal funding proposal

submitted as an aide memoire to the International Relief Bonds Committee

on December 12th:

“The Austrian Government submit the following proposal:

They undertake the obligation of paying from 1943 onward

during 25 years 40 million schillings annually, that is to say a

total of 1000 million schillings.

The Austrian Government reserve the right to pay from 1929

during five years 10 millions annually and then during ten years

15 million schillings per annum, these sums with 8% compound

interest until 1943 to be deducted from the sum of 1000 million

schillings.

After having paid off in this way 200 million schillings before

25 years.”

In my despatch No. 1656 (page 2) I alluded to the contention of the

bankers, Montagu Norman and Morgan, that the Austrian Government

could not be required to arrange for any relief credit settlement prior to

1943. This contention, I ascertained upon enquiry, is based upon these

statements in the prospectus published by the American bankers when the

reconstruction loan was issued:

“By the concerted action of the principal nations of the world,

including the United States of America, claims against Austria for

relief bond charges have been subordinated to this Loan, and

claims for reparation charges have likewise been subordinated by

the Reparations Commission.

The Reparation Commission, by their Decision dated February

20, 1923, have suspended for the purpose of the Guaranteed

Loan, for the period of 20 years and for such further period as

may be necessary until the full repayment of the Loan, the lien for

reparation charges on any revenues which may be pledged as

security for this Loan.

By the concerted action of the principal nations of the world,

including the United States of America by a joint Resolution of

Congress approved April 6, 1922, liens against Austrian assets

created after the Armistice in respect to relief credits, have also

been postponed for the period of twenty years.”

Before submitting his aide memoire, Schüller took the precaution of

submitting it to the bankers. Norman gave his approval immediately and

Morgan, upon the plan being referred to him in New York, after some days

did the same.

I gather that, while members of the International Relief Bonds Committee

gave expression to their own opinion approving the Austrian proposal as a

basis of negotiation, it was intimated that some alterations would probably

be asked for by the governments interested. In fact, I have been permitted to

glance through an informal aide memoire on this subject which is regarded

as a confidential document. Objection was made to supplying a copy to the

Reparation Commission on the ground that it was a part of the proceedings

of a secret session. The main points of this informal aide memoire are:

1. The International Relief Bonds Committee accepts in principle

the proposal of the Austrian Government with the understanding

that the arrangement will not give rise to any objection by the

trustees of the League loan.

2. The total sum to be paid back should approximate 1,250

million schillings and not 1,000 million as proposed. (In this

connection, I may say that Schüller informs me that he arrived at

the sum of 1,000 million schillings by adding to the 848 million

total amount of the principal of the relief credits, the accrued

interest up to the present time at a low rate of interest. This differs

from the understanding of Minister Wildner as reported by me at

relief credit bonds, as I understand, carry interest at the rate of 6

per cent, and Schüller admits that on this basis the total amount

due would more closely approximate the 1,250 million schillings.

He asserts however that the idea of paying any interest upon

credits of this character arising out of supplies furnished in time

of dire need to feed a starving population is repugnant and that it

was never really contemplated that interest would be exacted. He

ventures the opinion that Secretary Hoover, having charge of the

relief credit operations, never seriously believed in the repayment

of the principal, to say nothing of the interest.)

3. The payment of 10 million schillings annually for five years,

beginning in 1929, appears to be satisfactory, but for the second

period of five years an increase of payments from 15 million to

20 million was suggested. There was some further suggestion that

beginning in 1943 the period of annual instalments should, if

necessary, be somewhat extended so as to provide for the

payment of 1,250 million schillings instead of 1,000 million.

4. Annuities should be made payable in gold schillings.

5. Relief debts should retain their full priority over reparations as

now provided.

The Austrian aide memoire and the counter aide memoire of the

International Relief Bonds Committee are regarded as only affording a basis

for negotiation. The Austrian Government does not believe that it will be

required in the end to pay 1,250 million schillings. Schüller, as I have

heretofore reported, feels that his government should get in principle from

the United States as favorable treatment as the United States accorded Italy.

This, he realizes, is hardly possible because the relief credit settlements

must all be on the same basis. The Austrian actuaries have figured out that

Italy will pay back in the end about 26 per cent of what she would have

been required to pay on any normal interest funding arrangement, whereas

the proposal of the Austrian Government as made in the before-mentioned

aide memoire means, so the actuaries figure, that Austria obligates herself

to pay 37 or 38 per cent of the amount for which it would be liable taking

into account the 6 per cent rate of interest. On the basis of the Austrian

proposal the United States would stand to recover about $28,000,000 on

account of the approximately $24,000,000 Grain Corporation loan, whereas

on the basis of the informal counter proposal of the International Relief

Bonds Committee the United States would in the end recover, as I

understand, from $32,000,000 to $34,000,000. Having the Italian precedent

in mind and taking into account the intrinsic character of the original loan,

the Austrian Government hopes that the United States will not prove to be a

hard creditor and will not enhance the difficulties of settlement.

I am enclosing a copy of the resolution of release of securities passed by the

International Relief Bonds Committee. It requires a little elucidation. The

incorporated. As to the clause relating to legislative approval, Schüller

assures me that in the protocol of the proceedings, in response to his

enquiry for information, it transpired, upon roll call, that legislation to

subordinate securities to the new loan was not required, but only legislative

approval of a proposal to postpone beyond 1943 the payment of the

principal and interest on relief credits. Legislative sanction therefore does

not here come into question, the Austrian Government having abandoned its

original request for postponement until 1957.

As to the final paragraph relating to the views of the Netherlands and Swiss

governments, the concurrence of these governments has since been

obtained, as is evidenced by a communication of the International Relief

Bonds Committee dated December 20th, addressed to the Austrian Minister

in London, a copy of which is herewith enclosed.

There is further enclosed, as of possible interest to the Department and to

complete its file of official action thus far taken, a copy of the resolution of

the Control Committee (translated from German), dated London, October

12th, 1927. There is finally enclosed a copy of the letter, dated October

12th, 1927, addressed to the Austrian Minister of Finance by the Committee

of Guarantor States. The resolution of the Control Committee (enclosure

3) states that the Committee has been informed that the Austrian

Government intends “to continue to comply with the recommendations of

the Control Committee of the League of Nations of the year 1924

concerning the interest on the investment sum to be obtained through the

post and railway administration.” This rather obscure allusion really refers,

I am advised, to Par. 6 of Annex I of the Joint Report by the League

Financial Committee and the Commissioner General (Dr. Zimmerman),

“The Austrian Government, in agreement with the Financial

Committee, and with the Commissioner General, declares its

willingness to adopt the following measures, and pledges itself:38

6. To take all necessary steps to ensure that, when the State

supplies State undertakings (‘Betriebe’) with money for carrying

out investments, the State undertakings in question shall pay to

the State reasonable interest and amortisation charges on such

loans.”

The findings of the Financial Committee embodied in Annex I were

reported to the Department by F. S. Report No. 48 of September 17th,

in relation to this Par. 6:

“The Budget before Parliament contains provisions to redeem the

pledge in Point 6, especially with reference to the State Railways

and Posts. (Point 6. To take all necessary steps to ensure that,

when the State supplies State undertakings (‘Betriebe’) with

money for carrying out investments, the State undertakings in

question shall pay to the State reasonable interest and

amortisation charges on such loans.)”

Because of the interruption in the courier service and also on account of the

fact that the pouch leaving the 1st proximo goes via the Southern Route to

Constantinople, I am proposing to transmit the enclosures herein contained,

with explanations, by open mail. There will be duplication to this extent,

but it may be desirable for the Department to have this information at an

early date and I cannot assume that it is being otherwise advised. The

documents in question, I know, were not sent to Minister Prochnik.

I have [etc.]

ALBERT H. WASHBURN

[Enclosure 1]

[Annex 3271–J]

The Secretary of the International Relief Bonds Committee (Leith Ross) to the Austrian Minister

in Great Britain (Franckenstein)

LONDON, 12 December, 1927.

SIR: The Relief Bond Committee, representing the Governments of

Denmark, France, Great Britain, Italy, Norway and Sweden, having referred

to their respective Governments the request of the Austrian Government for

the suspension of the first charge enjoyed by the Relief Bonds in favour of a

development loan or loans for a sum not exceeding 725 million schillings

which the Austrian Government propose to issue, have the honour to inform

you that the Government[s] which they represent would be willing, subject

to such approval by their respective legislatures as may be required, to

consent in principle to the release from the prior charge in favour of the

Relief Bonds, for the period of the new Loan, not exceeding 30 years, of

such securities as may be necessary for the development loan or loans now

in question, not exceeding 725 million schillings, without, however,

prejudicing the priority over reparations to which Relief Bonds are entitled,

provided that:

(1) Similar consent is obtained from any other Powers interested

as holders of Austrian Relief Bonds;

(2) Consent is also obtained from the Reparation Commission for

the release of the securities in question from the charge for

reparation and other Treaty Costs:

(3) The specific securities which it is desired to release are, in due

course, submitted to the Chairman of the Committee who is

authorised to approve them.

A further communication will be addressed to you in regard to the views of

the Netherlands and Swiss Governments.

I have [etc.]

F. W. LEITH ROSS

[Enclosure 2]

The Secretary of the International Relief Bonds Committee (Leith Ross) to the Austrian Minister

in Great Britain (Franckenstein)

LONDON, 20 December, 1927.

SIR: With reference to my letter of the 12th instant, on the subject of the

Austrian Government’s request for the suspension of the first charge

enjoyed by the Relief Bonds in favour of a development loan or loans for a

sum not exceeding 725,000,000 schillings which the Austrian Government

propose to issue, I now have the honour to inform you that the Netherlands

and Swiss Governments have notified their willingness to assent to the

release from the prior charge in favour of the Relief Bonds of such

securities as may be necessary for the development loan or loans now in

question for the same period and subject to the same conditions as have

been laid down by the other creditor governments represented on the

International Relief Bonds Committee.

I have [etc.]

F. W. LEITH ROSS

[Enclosure 3—Translation]

Resolution of the Control Committee, Dated London, October 12, 1927, Concerning the

Contraction of an Austrian Investment Loan of 725 Million Schillings

The Committee has taken due note of the proposals of the Austrian

Government and of the declarations of the Austrian representatives; it has

been informed that the Austrian Government will during the coming five

years not contract any other foreign loan and that it intends in the case of

the proposed loan, of which a part will be floated in Austria itself, to

continue to comply with the recommendations of the Control Committee of

the League of Nations of the year 1924 concerning the interest on the

investment sum to be obtained through the post and railway administration.

The Committee takes due note that the Austrian Government intends to use

certain sums from current receipts for productive investments, for instance

for roads and other investments. The Austrian Government will, should

need arise, address itself to the trustees in accordance with the general

bond, and contemplates approaching the Reparation Commission and the

Relief Powers. The Control Committee does not protest in principle against

the contraction of a loan with proceeds not exceeding 725 million schillings

for profit-yielding purposes of post and railways, according to the Austrian

proposals. The Committee has authorized its president, after the concrete

loan terms have been communicated to him to give the definitive consent.

[Document 341]

The Austrian Minister (Prochnik) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, December 28, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: Further advice received from my Government on the progress of

negotiations conducted in London with a view of deferring the liens held

against Austria by various nations for relief credits in order to pave the way

for a new Government loan, necessitates some modification of the proposal

submitted to Your Excellency with my note ddo. December 6th, 1927, No.

In said note (par. 5) I stated that my Government came to the conclusion

that a settlement of the relief credits would be preferable to a further

extension of the lien.

In the meantime, however, the other creditor nations have with the consent

of the relief committee deferred their liens for relief credits for a period of

30 years beginning from the date of issue of the loan.

This deferment of lien does in no way alter the resolution of the Austrian

Federal Government to settle the relief credits in conformity with a plan

outlined in my previous note. The pertaining negotiations are progressing

favorably although final settlement may experience some delay.

In view of the aforementioned facts I have the honor to solicit Your

Excellency’s kind intermediary in causing an appropriate legislation to be

recommended to Congress authorizing the Government of the United States

in terms similar to those adopted in the so-called Lodge-Resolution to

likewise defer for a period of 30 years beginning from the date of issue of

the loan the lien for relief credits extended to Austria.

On the same occasion I would appreciate an early notification as to whether

or not the Government of the United States is willing to enter into

negotiations for a settlement of Austria’s relief debts along the lines

indicated in my previous note.

In connection therewith I am in a position to state that my Government,

although not being able—for reasons mentioned before—to enter into an

agreement stipulating for payments to be made prior to 1943, could and will

reserve a right to commence payments on January 1st, 1929.

In fact my Government is contemplating to start the first payments on the

relief debts on the last mentioned date.

Accept [etc.]

EDGAR PROCHNIK

[Document 342]

Mr. R. C. Leffingwell well of J. P. Morgan & Co. to the Under

Secretary of State

NEW YORK, December 29, 1927.

[Received December 31.]

DEAR MR. SECRETARY: I received your letter of December 23rd and we have cabled

to our London partners to inform Baron Franckenstein, whose intention it

was long since to ask the Department whether it wished to be represented in

the discussions.

I have no doubt that the Department will receive first hand information

from the Austrian Government in due course, but, in view of Assistant

Secretary Castle’s letter of October 22nd, I am writing to post you briefly

concerning developments since my letter of October 18th to Secretary

Kellogg was written.

As I mentioned to you when you were in town, the European Relief

Creditor States, though willing to subordinate their lien to that of the

proposed new loan, are unwilling to postpone their claim until after the

maturity thereof. The Austrian Government, on the other hand, is anxious to

stop accumulation of interest on the relief claims, for the European Relief

Creditors are taking bonds from the Austrian Government for such interest.

As I understand it, the Relief Creditors’ Committee now have before them a

proposal of the Austrian Government to pay for 25 years from 1943

onwards 40,000,000 schillings per annum, i. e., a total of 1,000,000,000

schillings; the Austrian Government reserving the right, however, at its

option, to anticipate these payments in part by paying for five years from

per annum, the sums so paid, with 8% compound interest until 1943, to be

deducted from the total of 1,000,000,000 schillings. If prepayments as

outlined above to the aggregate of 200,000,000 schillings were made prior

[Document 343]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Treasury (Mellon)

WASHINGTON, January 7, 1928.

SIR: With reference to this Department’s letter of December 23, 1927,

regarding the Austrian relief indebtedness to the United States and the

proposed flotation of a new Austrian loan, I have the honor to transmit for

from the Austrian Minister at Washington.

You will note that the Austrian Minister requests that there be

recommended to Congress appropriate legislation authorizing the

postponement of the relief credit lien for a period of thirty years from the

date of issue of the contemplated new Austrian loan. The Minister also

requests an early reply to his previous inquiry whether the Government of

the United States is willing to enter into negotiations for a settlement of

Austria’s relief debt along the lines indicated in his note No. 2423/70 of

December 6, 1927.

I also transmit herewith a copy of a letter, dated December 29, 1927, from

Mr. R. C. Leffingwell of J. P. Morgan and Company, regarding discussions

in progress between the Austrian Government and the European Relief

Creditor States. This letter gives further information as to the nature of the

arrangement which the Austrian Government appears to contemplate. The

first paragraph of Mr. Leffingwell’s letter indicates that the United States

may be invited to keep in touch with the discussions understood to be

proceeding at London.

The Department will be glad to have your reply to its letter of December 23

and the present letter at your earliest convenience. I suggest that, if you

concur, this Department now inform the Austrian Minister in the sense

indicated in the Department’s letter of December 23, pointing out that the

consideration by this Government of the proposal to defer the lien would be

facilitated by the receipt of more specific information as to the proposal for

funding the relief debt, since this Government would like to consider both

subjects at the same time.

I have [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

Assistant Secretary

[Document 344]

The Minister in Austria (Washburn) to the Secretary of State

VIENNA, July 23, 1927.

[Received August 8.]

No. 1477

SIR: I deem it proper to acquaint the Department with the fact that early in

the current week I took occasion, in alluding to the deplorable incidents

arising out of the recent rioting in the City of Vienna, to express to the

Chancellor the sympathy of the Government of the United States and to

congratulate the Austrian Government upon its success in speedily restoring

order. Similar statements, I have the honor to report, were made by most of

my colleagues in the name of their respective governments and I assumed

that such action on my part would meet with the approval of the

Department.

In common with other Legations, I have also the honor to state, I received a

formal notice from the President of Police of the interment on Thursday of

the police officers killed in line of duty during the insurrectionary outbreak.

Specific inquiries came from several of my colleagues, notably from the

English and Italian Legations, as to whether I intended to be present at the

obsequies. This decision was not so easy to make. I felt that the

Government of the United States has special reason to be grateful to the

Police Direction for so assiduously guarding American officials here in

Vienna on account of the Sacco-Vanzetti incident—I have voiced my

personal gratitude on several occasions. Nevertheless, the notice or

invitation did not emanate from the Federal Government and it seemed to

me that the presence of foreign diplomats might be construed as undue

meddling in an internal matter. This, I ascertained upon talking with him,

was also the view of the Belgian Minister, Le Ghait, the Dean of the Corps.

The Italian Minister was especially anxious to know my final decision—

perhaps because it is generally recognized, I think, that my relations with

Police President Schober are extremely cordial. I may possibly be

exceptional—I do not know—in having been able to see him at all times

during the recent trouble. In any event, I got the impression that had the

American Legation been represented, the Italian Legation would have been

also. If the representatives of Republican America and Fascist Italy had

been conspicuous by their attendance, I can imagine the comment of the

radical press. My decision was mainly influenced however by the

circumstance that the Federal Government itself neither expressly nor

impliedly intimated its desire in the matter.

The foregoing is submitted for the Department’s information and possible

comment.

I have [etc.]

ALBERT H. WASHBURN

[Document 345]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Austria

(Washburn)

WASHINGTON, August 15, 1927.

No. 609

stating that you have congratulated the Austrian Government upon its

success in restoring order after the recent riots in Vienna, and that you

received formal notice from the President of Police of the date on which

interment of the police officers killed in the outbreak would be made but,

after consultation with some of your colleagues, did not attend the

obsequies.

In reply you are informed that your action, as stated above, is approved.

W. R. CASTLE, Jr.

Bolivia:

[Document 346]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell)

WASHINGTON, August 19, 1927.

No. 308

SIR: This Government has, as you are aware, entered upon the policy of

negotiating with other countries general treaties of friendship, commerce

and consular rights, of which the central principle in respect of commerce is

an unconditional most-favored-nation clause governing customs and related

matters. This policy was inaugurated pursuant to the principles underlying

treatment for American commerce will be maintained in all countries.

Besides the provisions relating to commerce, these treaties include

provisions relating to rights of nationals of each country in the other

country, to protection of property and to rights and immunities of consuls.

This Government now desires to enter into such a treaty with Bolivia.

The first treaty to become effective expressing the present policy of this

Government was the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Bights

with Germany, signed December 8, 1923; ratifications of which were

United States with Hungary, Esthonia and Salvador, of which those with

Esthonia and with Hungary have been brought into force by exchange of

ratifications.

A treaty containing the unconditional most-favored-nation clause was

signed with Turkey on August 6, 1923. About a dozen other treaties

containing such a clause are in process of negotiation. Modi mvendi based

upon the same principle, entered into with the following countries, are in

force—Brazil, Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, Finland, Greece,

Guatemala, Haiti, Latvia, Lithuania, Nicaragua, Poland (including Danzig),

Rumania and Turkey.

You are requested, unless you perceive objection, to inquire whether it

would be agreeable to the Government of Bolivia to proceed to the

negotiation with the United States of a similar treaty. A special draft of

treaty will, of course, be prepared for presentation to Bolivia if this proposal

is acceptable to the Bolivian Government. That certain departures from the

text of the German treaty should be made is probable, but the views of both

countries in respect of this matter may appropriately be exchanged during

the course of negotiations.

It would be gratifying if, among its early treaties embodying this principle,

the United States could celebrate a general commercial treaty with Bolivia.

Such treaty would supersede the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, Commerce

and Navigation which was concluded by the two countries on May 13,

1858. You should in this connection keep particularly in mind that a most-

favored-nation clause with a condition such as that contained in Article II of

the Treaty of 1858 would not now be acceptable to this Government.

For your confidential information, though the Department, in proposing a

treaty with Bolivia, is influenced chiefly by its policy of concluding with

other countries generally treaties containing the unconditional most-

favored-nation clause, you are nevertheless desired to use especial diligence

in seeking a favorable response from the Bolivian Government, thus

forestalling any efforts that other countries may be planning to make for the

purpose of interposing in South American arrangements based upon special

privilege—a policy wholly antagonistic to the policy of equality of

treatment which the United States is undertaking to promote. You may

recall in this connection that in 1923 this Government renounced the

preferential customs treatment which certain American products had been

receiving in Brazil and requested instead a pledge of equal footing with

other countries in the Brazilian market.

For your further confidential information and guidance, it was some time

ago suggested to the Department that there was a movement on the part of

[Document 347]

The Minister in Bolivia (Cottrell) to the Secretary of State

LA PAZ, September 26, 1927.

[Received October 18.]

No. 1403

SIR: With reference to the Department’s Instruction No. 308, of August 19,

1927, in regard to the United States celebrating a general commercial treaty

with Bolivia that would supersede “The Treaty of Peace, Friendship,

Commerce and Navigation”, which was concluded by the two countries on

May 13, 1858, I have the honor to report, upon discreet inquiry, that Bolivia

would not at this time have any objection to such a treaty, so far as is known

by the President and his Cabinet.

Just at this time, however, the Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship is

regarded as hardly in position to take up such a matter immediately. Dr.

Alberto Gutierrez, the Minister of Foreign Relations and Worship, and to

whom the President has delegated consideration and action upon

international affairs, is critically ill and has not been in the Ministry for

more than two months.

Dr. Tomas Manuel Elio, the Minister of Hacienda and Industry, is

temporarily in charge of the Portfolio of Foreign Relations. Dr. Alberto

Cortadellas is Sub-Secretary and is in reality despatching all the work of

this Ministry.

I am informed that if Dr. Gutiérrez does not recover soon, that a new

Minister will be appointed and then the Bolivian Government will be

pleased to consider the foregoing matter. Among those spoken of as the

successor of Dr. Gutiérrez, in case he does not become physically able to

assume his duties, is Dr. Daniel Sanchez Bustamente, the Bolivian Minister

to Chile, and at present in Buenos Aires as President of the Mission that is

seeking to arbitrate the boundary question between Bolivia and Paraguay as

to the Chaco.

As has been reported to the Department, Germany recently negotiated a

treaty with Bolivia along the lines of the treaty that obtained before the

World War, with certain modifications which can be regarded as bringing it

up to date.

I will keep in close touch with the situation, as regards Instruction No. 308,

and will keep the Department fully informed.

I have [etc.]

JESSE S. COTTRELL

force of the treaty of friendship and commerce of July 22, 1908; League of

Nations Treaty Series, vol. LXXIII, p. 95.

Boundary dispute with Paraguay. (See

under General.)

Canada:

[Document 348]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Great Britain

(Houghton)

[Paraphrase]

238. As the British Government has appointed a Minister for the Irish Free

State and has expressed its intention of appointing a Minister for Canada,

the Government of the United States desires to appoint a Minister to each of

these countries. You are instructed to confer with Mr. Chamberlain and

determine if such appointments would be acceptable to the British

Government. Also endeavor to ascertain the desires of the British

Government as to whom the Minister will be accredited and to whom his

credentials should be presented. The following is for your information. The

President has power to make the appointment without legislation but we

must have an appropriation from Congress. Since this is the short session

we desire to secure the appropriation as soon as possible.

KELLOGG

[Document 349]

The Chargé in Great Britain (Sterling) to the Secretary of State

LONDON, January 10, 1927.

[Received January 22.]

No. 1569

1927, I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy, in triplicate, of the Note

referred to therein from the Foreign Office, with regard to the appointments

of Ministers from the United States to Canada and the Irish Free State.

I have [etc.]

F. A. STERLING

[Enclosure]

The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs (Chamberlain) to the American Chargé

(Sterling)

LONDON, 6 January, 1927.

SIR: Mr. Houghton3 was good enough to inform Sir William Tyrrell4 last

month, on instructions from the United States Government, of the intention

of the President of the United States of America to appoint United States

Ministers at Ottawa and Dublin in view of the appointment of His Majesty’s

Ministers at Washington to represent the interests of Canada and the Irish

Free State, and His Excellency enquired whether these appointments would

be agreeable.

[Document 350]

The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, January 24, 1927.

No. 49

SIR: I have the honour to refer to your note of December 4th last, notifying

me that the appointment of the Honourable Vincent Massey as His

Majesty’s Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to represent

the interests of the Dominion of Canada in the United States will be entirely

agreeable to the United States Government.

In this connection, I have the honour to state that Mr. Massey has now

advised me that he proposes to arrive at Washington at the end of the

second week in February and is desirous of presenting his letters of

credence on any day between the 15th and 19th of February. I should

accordingly be most grateful if you would be so good as to notify me at

your earliest convenience on what date it will be convenient for the

President to receive Mr. Massey for the presentation of his credentials. At

the same time, I have the honour to inform you that the Government of

Canada are desirous that I should accompany Mr. Massey to the White

House on this occasion.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 351]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)

WASHINGTON, January 29, 1927.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt on the 26th instant of

Your Excellency’s note No. 49 of January 24th, in which, referring to my

note of December 4th last with reference to the appointment of the

Honorable Vincent Massey as His Majesty’s Envoy Extraordinary and

Minister Plenipotentiary to represent the interests of the Dominion of

Canada in the United States, you inform me that Mr. Massey proposes to

arrive in Washington at the end of the second week of February, and is

desirous of presenting his letters of credence to the President on any day

between the fifteenth and the nineteenth of February. You also inform me

that the Government of Canada is desirous that you should accompany Mr.

Massey to the White House upon this occasion.

In reply I have the honor to inform you that the President will be glad to

receive the appointed Minister of Canada, accompanied by Your

Excellency, at three-thirty o’clock on the afternoon of Friday, February

eighteenth, at the White House.

I shall of course expect to have the pleasure of Your Excellency’s

presentation of Mr. Massey to me so soon as shall be mutually convenient

after his arrival in Washington, and to receive from him at that time a copy

of his letter of credence and a draft of the remarks which he purposes to

make to the President—unless I shall have been sooner favored with the

remarks through Your Excellency’s courtesy.

Pursuant to the understanding reached between you and Mr. Wright,

Assistant Secretary of State, in conversation on the twenty-fifth instant, Mr.

Wright will call for Mr. Massey a few moments before the appointed time,

for the purpose of escorting him to the White House, together with such

members of his staff as he may desire to present. In further accord with that

understanding, it is expected that Your Excellency will join the Minister and

Mr. Wright at the White House; that the presentation to the President of the

Minister, accompanied by Your Excellency, will be made by Mr. Wright,

and that no member of Your Excellency’s staff will be present.

In view of the fact that the procedure set forth differs from that followed in

the presentation of the present Minister Plenipotentiary of the Irish Free

State, in that Mr. Smiddy was not accompanied by Your Excellency, it is

understood that neither Mr. Smiddy’s case nor that of Mr. Massey shall be

deemed to establish a precedent, but that the determination of whether or

not the Ambassador shall accompany future Ministers of Dominions of the

British Empire when presenting to the President letters of credence from

His Britannic Majesty in a Plenipotentiary capacity shall be governed by the

desire of the respective Dominion or its representative, which shall be

communicated to the Department of State by the British Embassy.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 352]

The Canadian Chargé (Beaudry) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, September 1, 1927.

No. 230

SIR: I have the honor to refer to the note which you addressed to Mr. Chilton

on December 7th, 1926, regarding the publication of certain

correspondence relating to the diversion of water from Lake Michigan by

the Sanitary District of Chicago.

His Majesty’s Government in Canada has noted that the Government of the

United States considers that the reference in the Report of the Joint Board

of Engineers on the St. Lawrence Waterway Project10 to the limited effect

on lake levels of the diversion of water through the Chicago Sanitary Canal

greatly alters the understanding of the situation, and that it might

accordingly be considered undesirable to publish the correspondence in

question.

I have been instructed to inform you that His Majesty’s Government in

Canada has not been under any misapprehension as to the extent to which

the abstraction of water through the Chicago Sanitary Canal has lowered the

levels of the Great Lakes and that it has been fully advised that this

lowering has been in the neighbourhood of six inches. The papers which

His Majesty’s Government in Canada desires to publish incorporate its

viewpoint with respect to the general principle of abstracting water from the

Great Lakes System and diverting it into another watershed, and include the

protests of the Government of Canada against the abstraction, submitted on

behalf of the people of Canada generally, as well as the protest of the

Government of Ontario, submitted on behalf of the people of that Province.

Any reference in the report of the Joint Board of Engineers as published, as

to the actual effect of the withdrawal of water through the Sanitary Canal,

does not in any degree whatsoever affect the viewpoint of His Majesty’s

Government in Canada as expressed in this correspondence.

His Majesty’s Government in Canada desires to take this opportunity of

pointing out that if any misapprehension exists in the United States or in

Canada as to the degree of lowering occasioned by the Chicago abstraction,

the publication of these papers will go a long way towards removing such

misunderstanding.

With reference to the suggestion that His Majesty’s Government in Canada

enter upon a further discussion of the practical question of providing

compensatory works as recommended by the Joint Board of Engineers, it

may be pointed out that the installation of compensatory works for the

restoration of lake levels will in no way recoup to the Great Lakes System

the power which is lost to that system by the water abstracted therefrom

through the Sanitary Canal. While recognizing the marked advantages

which may be gained by the construction of suitable compensating works,

His Majesty’s Government in Canada would not be prepared to enter upon a

discussion of any plans for the construction of such works, if this course

involved an assumption that the present abstraction is to continue.

With reference, however, to the question immediately under consideration,

His Majesty’s Government in Canada observes nothing in the Report of the

Joint Engineering Board, including Appendices, which would render

inadvisable the publication of the papers in question. On the contrary it is

considered that the release of these papers would have a marked effect in

clarifying public opinion on the question in both countries.

I have the honour therefore to enquire whether the Government of the

United States would not be prepared to publish the correspondence listed in

Mr. Chilton’s note of November 16th, 1926, together with subsequent

correspondence, at such early date as may be found convenient to both

Governments.

I have [etc.]

LAURENT BEAUDRY

[Document 353]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, October 17, 1927.

SIR: In further reply12 to your Legation’s note, No. 230, of September first, I

have the honor to inform you that this Government raises no objection to

the publication of the correspondence referred to therein, relating to the

diversion of water from Lake Michigan at Chicago.

This Government has not failed to recognize the importance of the

contentions made by the Canadian Government relating to the abstraction

of water from one watershed and the diversion of it into another. In my note

of July 26, 1926, I informed the British Ambassador that this Government

was not prepared to admit the conclusions of law stated in his notes of

advisable to enter into a discussion of this legal question in view of the fact

that the issues involved in certain cases which were then and are still

pending in the Supreme Court of the United States are closely parallel to the

questions presented in the Ambassador’s notes. For this same reason I do

not now desire to enter into a discussion of this question at the present

moment.

This Government, however, has heretofore indicated that it is prepared to

enter into discussions and negotiations with Canada covering the whole

question of preservation of lake levels in the mutual interest of the two

countries.

This Government is glad to note the agreement by the Government of

Canada with the conclusions of the Joint Board of Engineers that the

diversion at Chicago has affected lake levels less than six inches. It also

notes the feeling on the part of the Canadian Government that lake levels

could be dealt with, so far as navigation is concerned, by compensating

works as recommended by the Joint Board of Engineers. It would appear in

this connection that the question as to the practical results of diversion in its

effect on navigation could be entirely remedied.

As to the observation by the Canadian Government that the installation of

compensatory works to restore lake levels would not recoup to the Great

Lakes System the power lost to the system by the diversion at Chicago, I

would, without in any way admitting the principles of compensation, call

attention to the fact that Canada now receives 36,000 second feet at Niagara

as against 20,000 cubic feet per second on the American side for power

purposes. I would further observe that without development of the lower St.

Lawrence this question does not arise in that connection.

I again wish to point out that all these problems appeal to the American

Government as matters that may be settled by practical engineering

measures which might be adopted pending further discussion of the

principles involved.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 354]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, April 13, 1927.

SIR: For more than one hundred years, the Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence

River have furnished a common highway and transportation outlet for the

population in the interior of the continent in both the United States and

Canada. The waterway has been the subject of several treaties and

conventions between the two countries. Its development has been a matter

of continuous effort on the part of both countries.

Pursuant to reference made to the International Joint Commission by both

governments under authority of the treaty of January 11, 1909, that

commission made investigation of the feasibility of improving navigational

facilities of the St. Lawrence River between Montreal and Lake Ontario so

as to transform that section into an ocean shipway. The Commission

submitted its report, signed on December 19, 1921, to your Government

and to the Government of the United States after taking into consideration

the existing characteristics of the waterway and its projected development,

as well as the essential economic factors. It earnestly recommended to both

governments the making of a treaty for a scheme of shipway improvement

of the river between Montreal and Lake Ontario. It suggested, however, that

before final decision be made, the engineering features should receive

further consideration and study. Delays naturally ensued due to the

problems of reconstruction resulting from the war.

On March 14, 1924, the President of the United States appointed the St.

Lawrence River Commission18 . under the chairmanship of the Honorable

Herbert Hoover, Secretary of Commerce, to consider the whole project in

its economic and national aspects and to express an opinion as to whether

the project should be undertaken and the Government of Canada on May 7,

1924, appointed a national advisory committee under the chairmanship of

the Honorable George Perry Graham, Minister of Railways and Canals.

Through the arrangements brought about by these committees the two

gave instructions to a Joint Board of Engineers designated by them to

review and extend the engineering plans as recommended by the

International Joint Commission in 1921.

This Joint Engineering Board made an elaborate resurvey of the lake and

river systems both as to navigation and power, and filed with each

government an exhaustive report upon all its engineering aspects. The

representatives of the two countries differed as to a few details but from the

report it clearly appears that the improvement of the waterway for

navigation and power purposes is both feasible and advisable.

The St. Lawrence River Commission appointed by the President to advise

this Government on the subject recently undertook an examination of all of

the economic as well as engineering facts bearing upon the proposed

development and has made a complete report covering all aspects. It

concluded that the construction of the ship-way at proper depths would

relieve the interior of the continent, especially agriculture, from the

economic handicaps of adverse transportation costs which now operate to

the disadvantage of many states and a large part of Canada, would serve the

industrial well being of both countries in the development of their power

resources, and would tend largely to the increase of prosperity and the

stimulation of industry. The Commission recommended that negotiations

should be entered into with your Government in an endeavor to arrive at an

agreement as to the speedy development of this waterway.

The Government of the United States adopts the recommendations of the

St. Lawrence Commission. It appreciates the advantages which will accrue

equally to both countries by the opening of the waterway to ocean shipping.

It feels that the necessary increase in railway rates due to the war, and the

modern practices respecting the generation and transmission of

hydroelectric power have increased the importance and practicability of

early development, and believes that the factors which influence its

conclusions must have equal application to, and influence upon, the

Dominion of Canada.

[Document 355]

The Minister in Canada (Phillips) to the Secretary of State

OTTAWA, July 13, 1927.

[Received July 19.]

No. 15

to transmit herewith as a matter of record a copy of Mr. Mackenzie King’s

note on the St. Lawrence waterway, dated July 12, 1927, in reply to your

note to the Canadian Minister at Washington of April 13, 1927. There is

likewise enclosed a copy of a personal letter from Mr. Mackenzie King20 on

the subject of the publication of the two notes.

I have [etc.]

WILLIAM PHILLIPS

[Enclosure]

The Prime Minister of Canada (Mackenzie King) to the American Minister (Phillips)

OTTAWA, 12 July, 1927.

SIR: The Government of Canada has received and considered carefully the

note of the Secretary of State of the United States to the Canadian Minister

at Washington of April 13th, 1927, on the St. Lawrence Waterway.

It shares the appreciation felt by the Government of the United States of the

importance of the problem of the development of the St. Lawrence and of

the aid in the solution of the engineering aspects of this problem afforded

by the reports of the International Joint Commission and of the Joint Board

of Engineers appointed by the two Governments in 1925.

[Document 356]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, February 26, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to invite your attention to the conditions which cause

the periodic overflow of the Roseau River in the State of Minnesota and the

Province of Manitoba.

As you know, the Roseau River has tributaries in both the United States and

Canada. The main stream, after flowing through the northwestern part of

the State of Minnesota, passes into Manitoba and flows through the

southern part of that province before emptying into the Red River. In the

natural state of the stream the fall is slight and the channel is inadequate to

carry the water originating above Roseau Lake. The construction of

drainage ditches in Minnesota and Manitoba has increased the volume of

water discharged into the main stream of the Roseau River and has

subjected the riparian property to inundation at times of increased rainfall. I

am informed that the State of Minnesota has deepened and improved the

channel of the Roseau River at various times in the past twenty years and

has thus increased the capacity of the channel to the maximum which can

be reached until the fall in certain Canadian reaches of the river is

increased. Even with the improvements that have been made, land in the

United States for a considerable distance from the river is subject to

periodic flooding by the waters of the Roseau River.

I understand that surveys are now being made in Manitoba with a view to

the ditching of additional drainage into the Canadian tributaries of the

Roseau. It is also my understanding that other surveys are being conducted

in Canada with a view to the construction of dikes along the banks of the

river. Both of these proposed improvements, if carried out, would further

aggravate the situation as to flooding in the United States.

In the view of this Government the question of the improvement of the

Roseau River in such a manner as to protect riparian owners is of sufficient

importance to justify the United States and Canada in referring it to the

International Joint Commission for investigation and report under the

provisions of Article IX of the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909. I have

the honor, therefore, to inquire whether the Canadian Government would be

disposed to join this Government in referring the entire problem of

improvement of the Roseau River drainage system in the interests alike of

the people of Minnesota and Manitoba to the International Joint

Commission with instructions to make an investigation and submit a report

and recommendations to the Governments. This Government suggests that

if the Canadian Government would be willing to join the United States in

such a reference to the Commission, it might be desirable for the two

Governments to designate engineers, one by each Government, to confer

and submit a draft of the terms of reference.

Accept [etc.]

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 357]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Chargé (Beaudry)

WASHINGTON, April 1927.

SIR: In further reference to the matter of the improvement of the drainage of

the Roseau River valley, which was referred to in my note of February 26,

last, and in the Minister’s note of acknowledgment thereto of March l, I

beg to inform you that reports have been brought to the attention of the

Department that action is being taken in Canada to obtain appropriations for

proceeding during the present season with works of drainage and diking

along the Roseau River.

Residents of the part of the Roseau River valley which lies in the United

States are very earnest in their desire that no works shall be undertaken in

Canada which will aggravate the flood conditions that hitherto have

prevailed in the United States, and that, if possible, a system of drainage

control shall be developed which will greatly reduce or remove these flood

conditions.

In view of the above mentioned reports I desire to refer to the proposal

made in my note of February 26, last, that the entire problem of the

improvement of the Roseau River system be referred by the Governments

of the United States and Canada to the International Joint Commission for

investigation, report and recommendations, and that each Government

designate an engineer to confer and submit a draft of the terms of reference.

This Government would be grateful if the views of the Canadian

Government in regard to these proposals were made known to it at an early

date.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 358]

The Canadian Minister (Massey) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, 1 November, 1927.

No. 269

SIR: With reference to your note of April 2nd. 1927 and previous

correspondence concerning the improvement of the drainage of the valley

of the Roseau River, I have the honour to inform you that no decision has

yet been arrived at by His Majesty’s Government in Canada with regard to

the proposed reference to the International Joint Commission of the entire

problem of this improvement, inasmuch as the question is still under

discussion with the authorities of the Province of Manitoba.

2. The operations for the improvement of the river, which are now being

carried on in conjunction by the Federal and Provincial Governments, will

not prejudice the aspect of the question in which the Government of the

United States is mainly interested, and are not believed to be contrary to the

spirit or provisions of the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909, particularly to

the provisions contained in Article 4 of that Treaty. The competent

authorities of His Majesty’s Government in Canada have had in mind in

working out the present scheme of improvement that the excavated material

should be so disposed in dikes on each side of the channel that the surface

channel or flood way capacity of the river could be increased to receive the

additional flood waters from Minnesota, if this action should prove to be

necessary at a future date on a recommendation of the International Joint

Commission accepted by the Governments of Canada and of the United

States.

I have [etc.]

VINCENT MASSEY

[Document 359]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, December 12, 1927.

informing me that no decision has yet been reached by the Canadian

Government with regard to this Government’s proposal that the entire

problem of the improvement of the drainage of the valley of the Roseau

River be referred to the International Joint Commission for investigation,

report and recommendations.

This Government has given careful consideration to the views expressed in

your note. I have to inform you, however, that the information which has

been furnished me from sources in the United States is that the execution of

the present plans for the improvement of the Roseau River in Canada will

have an effect contrary to that which the Canadian authorities have in mind.

I am informed that the carrying out of these plans would result in extensive

damage by flooding to some eighteen townships in Roseau County, and to a

large area in Kittson County, Minnesota. In view of this information, it

would seem, that contrary to the views expressed in your note, the

construction of the works will prejudice the aspect of the question in which

this Government is mainly interested, and that it will be contrary to the

spirit and provisions of the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909. If the

information which has been furnished me is correct, it would seem

desirable that the execution of the plans should be deferred until approval

thereof has been obtained from the International Joint Commission under

Article IV of the Treaty.

In view of this conflict of views as to the effect which the execution of the

present plans will have, I am strongly of the opinion that the matter is also

within the letter and the spirit of Article IX of the Boundary Waters Treaty

and suitable for reference to the Commission under that Article by either or

both Governments. I, therefore, have the honor to renew the proposal made

in the Acting Secretary’s note of February 26, 1927, and repeated in his

note of April 2, 1927, that the entire problem of the improvement of the

Roseau River system be referred by the Governments of the United States

and Canada to the International Joint Commission for investigation, report

and recommendations, and that each Government designate an engineer to

confer and submit to them a draft of the terms of reference.

I further request that all action relative to the carrying out of the present

plans for the improvement of the Roseau River be suspended until the

International Joint Commission shall have made an investigation and report

under such a reference.

This Government would be grateful if the views of the Canadian

Government in regard to these proposals were made known to it at an early

date.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 360]

The Assistant Secretary of Labor (White) to the Assistant

Secretary of State (Carr)

WASHINGTON, April 22, 1927.

MY DEAR MR. CARR: Enclosed find copy of General Order No. 86, outlining land

border crossing procedure, which may be of interest to your Department,

particularly, as it may greatly increase the applications for non-quota visas

at some of your consulates. I am informed this phase of the question was

discussed with you several weeks ago by Mr. Husband.

Sincerely yours,

ROBE CARL WHITE

[Enclosure]

General Order No. 86 of the Department of Labor

WASHINGTON, April 1, 1927.

SUBJECT: Land border crossing procedure.

1. Hereafter aliens residing in foreign contiguous countries and entering the

United States to engage in existing employment or to seek employment in

this country will not be considered as visiting the United States temporarily

as tourists, or temporarily for business or pleasure, under any provisions of

the Immigration Law which exempt visitors from complying with certain

requirements thereof; that is, they will be considered as aliens of the

“immigrant” class.

2. However, the following aliens of the said “immigrant” class residing in

foreign contiguous countries and who are now enjoying the border crossing

privilege may continue so to enjoy it upon the payment of head tax,

provided such head tax was assessible on aliens entering permanently at the

time of original admission and, provided further, that they are not coming to

seek employment.

A. Aliens whose original admission occurred prior to June 3,

1921.

B. Natives of nonquota countries whose original admission

occurred prior to July 1, 1924.

C. Natives of quota countries whose original admission occurred

time of such admission had resided in the Dominion of Canada,

Newfoundland, the Republic of Cuba, the Republic of Mexico, or

countries of Central or South America, or adjacent islands, for a

period of one year.

D. Natives of quota countries whose original admission occurred

time of such admission had resided in the Dominion of Canada,

Newfoundland, the Republic of Cuba, the Republic of Mexico, or

countries of Central or South America, or adjacent islands, for a

period of five years.

3. Aliens of all nationalities of the “immigrant” class whose original

admission occurred subsequent to June 30, 1924, will be required to meet

all provisions of the Immigration Laws applying to aliens of the

“immigrant” class. Aliens of this class already enjoying the border crossing

privilege, however, will be granted a reasonable time, not to exceed six

months from June 1, 1927, within which to obtain immigration visas and

otherwise comply with the laws.

4. Aliens who have already complied with the requirements of the

Immigration Laws and this General Order may be permitted to continue to

enjoy the border crossing privilege.

5. Aliens who have complied with the requirements of this General Order

governing permanent admission will be considered as having entered for

permanent residence.

6. The use and issuance of identification cards to all classes of aliens

entitled to same will continue as heretofore.

7. Identification cards held by or issued to aliens of the “immigrant” class

shall be rubber-stamped as follows:

IMMIGRANT

Dated this . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . ., 192 . ., at . . . . . . .

Immigrant Inspector.

8. Identification cards held by or issued to aliens of the “nonimmigrant”

class shall be rubber-stamped as follows:

NONIMMIGRANT

Dated this . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . ., 192 . ., at . . . . . . .

Immigrant Inspector.

9. To insure uniformity stamps furnished by the bureau, only, shall be used

and blank spaces, including that for signature, shall be filled in by the use of

indelible pencil.

10. All identification cards heretofore issued, held by aliens who can not, or

do not, meet the requirements of law, regulations and this order, will be

taken up and canceled upon an incoming trip of the holder and appropriate

action taken.

11. The work of validating outstanding cards should proceed slowly,

systematically, steadily and persistently, and in such a manner as to avoid

confusion, congestion, interference with proper routine administration and

the giving of just grounds for complaint upon the part of the traveling

public.

12. The status of holders of identification cards shall be inquired into

periodically, preferably every six months from date stamped, where

practicable, but in any event not less frequently than once a year. When

inquiry has been so made, it will be evidenced by a notation to show date of

such inquiry and initials of the officer upon the reverse of the card. When

the holder of a “nonimmigrant” identification card qualifies as an

“immigrant,” a new identification card shall be issued, stamped to show the

correct status.

GEORGE J. HARRIS

Acting Commissioner General

APPROVED:

ROBE CARL WHITE

Assistant Secretary

[Document 361]

The Canadian Minister (Massey) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, 23 April, 1927.

No. 100

SIR: I have the honour to draw your attention to reports which have recently

been circulating in the Press to the effect that the Government of the United

States intends to make drastic changes in the regulations now applicable to

persons living in Canada, and crossing daily to the United States to work,

especially in the area of Detroit.

In view of the long period during which the present practice has been

followed, of the reciprocal character of the existing arrangements and of the

serious dislocation which would result from any important alteration, I am

instructed to request that, before any decision on this matter is taken or

announced, an opportunity should be given for a conference to be held as

soon as possible, between representatives of the Governments of the United

States and of Canada. I am instructed to inform you that representatives of

the competent authorities of the Canadian Government are prepared to

come to Washington for such a conference at the earliest convenient date.

I have [etc.]

VINCENT MASSEY

[Document 362]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, May 10, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to refer to your notes dated April 23 and April 27,

1927, in which you suggest a conference for the purpose of discussing the

effects of a recent General Order of the Department of Labor pertaining to

border-crossing privileges between Canada and the United States.

I am very glad to inform you that a conference will be held in the

Officials of the Department of Labor will be present and I shall be very glad

if you can attend and bring with you anyone whom you may desire to have

present.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

WILBUR J. CARR

[Document 363]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Visa Office (Du Bois) of a

Conference Held May 12, 1927, Regarding Canadian Border

Travel Difficulties

At 10: a.m., by invitation of the Secretary, the following officials met in

the Diplomatic Room of the Department:

The Secretary

The Minister of Canada

Assistant Secretary Wilbur J. Carr (State)

Assistant Secretary Robe Carl White (Labor)

Mr. Wrong, Secretary, Canadian Legation

Mr. Jolliffe, Commissioner of Immigration of Canada

Mr. Flournoy, Assistant to the Solicitor

Mr. du Bois, Chief of the Visa Office.

The Secretary made an introductory statement to the Conference in which

he pointed out the importance of maintaining the traditional friendly

relations which had always existed with Canada. He hoped the conferees

would discuss any and all questions arising from travel difficulties on the

Canadian border in the friendliest spirit and he wanted the Conference to be

sufficiently broad in scope to cover any question on which difficulties

might arise with a view to their solution in a way that would maintain our

friendly relations with Canada.

The Secretary stated further that he hoped the work of the Conference

would iron out all difficulties; that he would personally discuss its results

with the Secretary of Labor at which discussion he invited the Minister of

Canada to be present.

Since it was Diplomatic Day, the Secretary then excused himself and the

Conference proceeded informally, presided over by Assistant Secretary

Carr.

The Canadian Minister read a prepared statement outlining the widespread

adverse effect Labor’s General Order No. 86 has had on the sentiment and

economic structure in Canada. He said it is being taken up editorially and

by the man on the street in cities far removed from the border and has

become, in fact, an acute international issue. He exhibited a copy of the

Border Cities Star which bore a full front page editorial under one-inch

headlines, “An Unfriendly Act of a Friendly Nation” and presented other

clippings similar in tone from Quebec and other interior cities.

Mr. Wrong went further into details and suggested that under Labor’s own

definition—”an alien who, having a fixed domicile in some other country

which he has no intention to abandon, comes to the United States for a

temporary period only”—the border-crossers were in the category of non-

immigrants.

Mr. White outlined the position of the Department of Labor at some length.

He said that ever since July 1, 1924, Labor had been seeking a means to

curtail the border-crossing privileges and was now driven by pressure from

organized labor to a definite announcement of its program of control of

border crossing by workers. He said these people who entered the United

States solely for purposes of work and took the places of American workers

were not contemplated by Congress as coming within the non-immigrant

class.

The discussion then became general and centered around the number of

persons who, under Labor’s Order, would be required to present quota

immigration visas. It was submitted by the representatives of Canada that

these persons caused them the greatest concern since they were over 90%

British-born and as much the responsibility of the Canadian Government as

native-born Canadians. Each group had certain statistics which seemed to

indicate that between 4000 and 6000 such persons were involved. It was

pointed out that while this number was but a drop in the bucket as far as the

American labor market was concerned, each individual, when thrown out of

employment and forced to stay in Canada would become the nucleus of

unfriendly feeling against the United States.

The time within which these people might hope to receive visas under their

respective quotas was discussed. Our system of allotment proportional to

demand was explained and also the fact that obligations had been created in

very large numbers both in England and in Canada by registrations on the

part of prospective quota immigrants who had not hitherto enjoyed any

border crossing privileges and who could not be set aside in favor of those

who had. Statistics were adduced to show that a six-months period for the

production of quota visas could not be considered as meeting the situation

in the slightest degree.

Mr. White pointed out that the six-months period was not expected by

Labor officials to be an adequate period, but rather to be a period in which

the situation would clarify itself; the definition of a period (any period) after

which quota visas must be produced being the only actual curtailment in the

number of foreign workers enjoying employment in the United States, and,

consequently, the only actual benefit accorded to the A. F. of L. He stated

that it was also conceived as a period of readjustment—a period during

which due notice having been served, non-Canadian border crossing

workers would secure employment on the Canadian side of the border.

The Conference adjourned at 12: p.m. after agreeing that notices to the

press should be limited to the statement that this was a preliminary session

only and no announcement of its results could be made.

Tentatively, with the understanding that Mr. White would discuss them with

the Secretary of Labor, the following three points were agreed upon a$

being the lines along which a solution might be reached:

1. Cease, as from the date of General Order No. 86, from the

creation of further border-crossing privileges.

2. Continue in effect the privileges hitherto granted until the

individuals in each class involved may either bring themselves

within the Act of 192425 or otherwise adjust their situations.

3. The Departments concerned will report the situation to

Congress when it convenes with a view to ascertaining whether it

is disposed to grant any further measure of freedom in travel

across our land borders than is permitted by the present law.

[Document 364]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, May 28, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to refer to your notes dated April 23 and April 27,

1927, and to a conference at the Department on May 12, in which you so

ably presented the difficulties in which certain citizens of Canada will find

themselves as a result of General Order Number 86 of the Department of

Labor which relates to the daily crossing of the Canadian boundary to

employment in the United States. I wish to assure you at the outset of the

sincere desire on the part of this Government to continue the traditional

freedom of mutual travel between Canada and the United States just a$

fully and completely as the provisions of the laws of this country relating to

immigration will permit.

While it is realized that the law upon which General Order Number 86 is

based, mandatorily modifies a long established practice, I should appreciate

it if you would note that every effort was made in drafting that order to

afford the most generous treatment possible under the law to all persons

who acquired border crossing privileges before the effective date of the

present Immigration Act of 1924. Further, every possible opportunity will

be given to native-born Canadians to acquire legal status in the United

States by the presentation of a non-quota visa and the single payment of the

head tax in accordance with provisions of our immigration laws which are

mandatory. The border-crossing privileges hitherto accorded such persons

will be continued during such period as is necessary for them to obtain non-

quota visas.

We are agreed, I think, that the main difficulty lies with the Canadian

residents who are not native-born Canadians and who have acquired border-

crossing privileges since the quota system became effective. It is

appreciated that such persons are none the less the responsibility of your

Government even though our immigration law, which, unlike Orders in

Council, may not be modified except by act of the Congress, gives them a

less favorable status than persons born in Canada. You will doubtless recall

that the Immigration Act of 192127 placed foreign born persons who had

resided in Canada one year upon an equality with natives of Canada with

respect to entry into the United States; the same Act as extended and

modified by the Act of 192228 increased the necessary period of residence

to five years; while the Immigration Act of 1924 denied the non-quota

privileges to Canadian residents born outside of Canada and made them

chargeable to the quotas of the countries in which they were born. It is

among the non-Canadian born who are quota aliens that the Order will

cause some hardship. The number involved is not yet accurately known and

the competent authorities express the belief that it will be found to be

comparatively small. It is recognized nevertheless, that many persons

within this class, through their inability to obtain quota visas within the

prescribed period, will, under the terms of the Order, be forced to relinquish

employment in the United States which in certain cases they have enjoyed

for a number of years. This would, I admit, constitute a hardship which I

sincerely regret. I am sure you will appreciate that the large number of prior

applicants whose desire to emigrate to the United States has been on record

for some time at the Consulates in Europe and elsewhere and who must

receive visas within the limited national quotas can not be deprived of the

priority rights gained by such registration in favor of a particular group in

any border city. Apart from the consideration that the law does not permit

the creation of preferential classes in the discretion of the executive, fair

dealing dictates that the obligations created by prior applications be

scrupulously met.

In order to make sure that no unnecessary hardship shall be imposed upon

persons in this category, consuls in the border cities have been directed to

assist them in every possible way to obtain immigration visas under the

provisions of the immigration law. The consuls will at once undertake the

classification and listing of such persons in the course of which, if it

appears that any individual is inadmissible to the United States or is

chargeable to a quota against which the prior recorded demand is

exceedingly heavy, he will be informed of his situation in order that he may

make his plans accordingly. Those who obviously can not hope to receive

immigration visas for some time to come because they are chargeable to

small European quotas against which large demands now exist will be

clearly informed of their status. In other words, a sincere endeavor will be

made to reduce the uncertainties of the situation to the minimum.

The issue of quota visas will begin immediately after July 1 against

allotments of quota numbers from the appropriate quotas which will be as

large as prior applications against the quotas will permit and will proceed at

the maximum rate allowed by the law. Before the expiration of the time

limit specified in Order Number 86, within which aliens of this class must

present quota visas, it will probably be found that all who have hitherto held

border-crossing permits issued to them by the Department of Labor since

the quota system became effective, will not, by reason of the numerical

restrictions of the quota law, be able to receive immigration visas. Should

this prove to be the case, I shall be glad at once to request the Secretary of

Labor to allow further time in which these people may gain a status in

conformity with the law and the Secretary has already assured me that any

such request will receive the most sympathetic consideration possible.

Meanwhile, I shall be glad to confer with you whenever you desire it, and I

am directing the officers of this Department to keep in touch with your

Legation and to continue their studies of the subject with a view to clearing

away, so far as can be done under existing law, all difficulties and

dissatisfaction in regard to border crossing. Should these studies indicate

that there are difficulties inherent in the law which tend to affect adversely

the traditional friendly relations between Canada and this country, I shall

make it a point to have the matter brought to the attention of the Congress

when it convenes, and the Secretary of Labor assures me that he will

cooperate to this end.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 365]

The Canadian Minister (Massey) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, 8 June, 1927.

No. 149

SIR: I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Note dated May

Department of Labor of the United States. In so doing I desire to thank you

for the careful and courteous consideration given by you and your officials

to this subject at the conference held at the Department of State on May

12th. and on subsequent occasions.

I am instructed to inform you that His Majesty’s Canadian Government is

pleased to note that the Government of the United States desires to continue

the traditional freedom of mutual travel between Canada and the United

States. His Majesty’s Canadian Government is gratified by your assurance

that in the administration of this Order steps will be taken to avoid inflicting

hardship on individuals so far as may be possible, and more particularly by

your undertaking to ask the Secretary of Labor to extend the time set in the

Order during which those who have to secure quota visas must comply with

its terms, if it should become evident that these persons will be unable to

secure quota visas by December 1st. 1927. The assurance of the Secretary

of Labor that he will give to such a request the most sympathetic

consideration possible is also noted with gratification. His Majesty’s

Canadian Government is pleased to learn that you and the Secretary of

Labor are prepared to co-operate in bringing to the attention of the

Congress any difficulties inherent in the law which may be indicated by a

further investigation of this subject.

His Majesty’s Canadian Government, however, regrets that the Government

of the United States has not considered it possible to modify in any respect

the terms of the Order at the present time, and that, in consequence, a long-

standing and reciprocal arrangement between the two countries has been

suddenly terminated. I have the honour to lay before you, for the purpose of

record, the views of His Majesty’s Canadian Government on the issues

involved.

For many years there has been reciprocal free movement over the border

between the United States and Canada, a movement freer and involving a

larger number of people than that between any other two countries in the

world. This freedom of movement has been an outstanding demonstration

of the close connection and friendship existing between the people of the

two countries. The boundary is of such a character that the communities

situated close to it on both sides must have many common interests. In

some of these border communities the relationship has been so intimate that

residents on one side of the frontier have been in the habit of crossing daily

to the other side to engage in employment. This practice, as you are aware,

is of many years standing. The Convention known as Jay’s Treaty,

concluded in 1794, provided in Article 3:—

“It is agreed that it shall at all times be free to His Majesty’s

subjects and to the citizens of the United States and also to the

Indians dwelling on either side of the boundary line freely to pass

and repass by land or inland navigation into the respective

territories and countries of the two parties on the Continent of

America.”

The broad principle which underlay this provision is clearly indicated in the

statement contained in the concluding paragraph of the same Article:—

“This Article is intended to render in a great degree the local

advantages of each party common to both and thereby to promote

a disposition favourable to friendship and good neighbourhood.”

The practice rooted in this understanding and in the unique conditions of

border intercourse on this Continent has continued to this day. It has been

most marked in the area adjacent to Windsor and Detroit and in the Niagara

region. Though a large majority of the individuals who so cross the border

daily are Canadians entering the United States, the practice is reciprocal,

and a considerable number of citizens of the United States come to Canada

each working day.

The Canadian authorities have always treated, and continue to treat, citizens

of the United States entering Canada in this way as non-immigrants

domiciled in the United States. The Government of the United States has

until lately similarly regarded Canadians crossing daily to the United States,

and has made regulations to facilitate their crossing the boundary by the

issue of identification cards to these persons, whom they describe as “aliens

who habitually cross and recross the boundary upon legitimate pursuits.”

In the Windsor area, however, particularly during the last few months, the

status of Canadians so situated has become increasingly uncertain,

especially the status of those who are not of Canadian birth. Many either

have been definitely turned back at the border, or have been required to pay

head tax and to secure immigration visas. The publication of General Order

Number 86 has suddenly ended this growing uncertainty by providing that

hereafter all who are employed in the United States while living in Canada

are to be considered as immigrants to the United States.

His Majesty’s Canadian Government does not question, of course, the right

of the Government of the United States to determine what persons may be

admitted to the United States. They wish, however, to express their view

that the ending, without notice or negotiation, of this long-standing

arrangement, under which economic interests have developed and

communities have grown up in Canada dependent in part on employment in

the United States, is a legitimate ground for concern. Ten years have

elapsed since the passage by the Congress of the United States of the

Immigration Act of 1917, and three years since the passage of the

supplementary Act of 1924; no new legislation has been enacted since 1924

which affects the status of those who cross the border in this way, and the

practice has been permitted to continue until the present time. The Order

now applies for the first time to those who cross the border daily the

provisions of the Act of 1924, three years after its passage.

As regards the general principle of the Order, the definition as an

“immigrant” of one who is permanently domiciled in Canada and who

enters the United States for a period of only eight or ten hours each working

day, appears to be a departure from the ordinary meaning of the term, and

seems to give to it a special sense in contradiction to customary usage.

Immigration is generally considered to involve a change of domicile, and

no other instance is known in which persons who retain in full their legal

domicile and citizenship in one country are, at the same time, treated as

immigrants to another country. In the view of His Majesty’s Canadian

Government, the interpretation of the term “immigrant” carried out in the

practice which has been in force between Canada and the United States for

many years is eminently fair and reasonable.

Certain exceptions to the operation of General Order Number 86 are made

in Section 2 of the Order, by which the individuals who come within four

specified classes are to continue to be admitted upon payment of head tax

only. I understand that these exceptions are made to mitigate the hardship

caused to individuals who began crossing the border before the passage of

the Immigration Act of 1924. In Section 3 of the Order, all who have begun

to cross the border since June 30, 1924, are given “a reasonable time, not to

exceed six months from June 1, 1927, within which to obtain immigration

visas and otherwise comply with the laws”. I am instructed to represent that

for those who have to secure quota immigration visas the period of six

months can hardly be regarded as “a reasonable time”, except perhaps in a

small number of cases in which the persons’ names have for some time

been on the waiting list for quota visas. As you already are aware, it is for

those citizens of Canada who have to secure quota visas, numbering

probably between four and six thousand, that His Majesty’s Canadian

Government feels an especial concern.

The laws of Canada make no distinction between citizens of Canadian birth

and those of British or foreign birth who have acquired citizenship by

domicile or naturalization, just as the laws of the United States make no

distinction between native born and naturalized citizens. Unless some

modification is made now or later, the effect of this Order will undoubtedly

be to exclude from the United States the very large majority of these four to

six thousand Canadian citizens who will be unable to secure quota visas

before December 1, 1927. The number of persons seriously affected is a

very small proportion of the population either of Canada or of the United

States, but in the Windsor area it represents a very substantial percentage of

the population of all ages, probably about fifteen per cent. In this area

particularly the sudden dislocation of long established relations could

hardly fail to have grave results.

The view of His Majesty’s Canadian Government on the general principle

of the Order has already been stated. With regard to its particular

provisions, it is felt that in equity ample protection should be given to all

who have been in the habit of crossing the border to work, irrespective of

the date at which they began the practice, either by the extension of the

exempted classes in Section 2, or by the elimination of the six months’ time

limit in Section 3, or by some other means. The interpretation given to the

Immigration Act of 1924 up to the present time has encouraged the belief

that the daily crossing of the border to employment in the United States was

not affected by this Act. The retroactive aspect of the Order in excluding

individuals who have been previously permitted by the Immigration

authorities to enter the United States cannot, therefore, fail to cause ill-

feeling and to work great hardship.

I shall be glad to accept the invitation which you cordially extend in the last

paragraph of your Note to co-operate with your Department in studying

these and other border-crossing difficulties; and I trust that in consequence a

mutually satisfactory arrangement may be arrived at before long. In

conclusion I take pleasure in assuring you that His Majesty’s Canadian

Government fully appreciates your earnest desire, so clearly manifested in

the discussions which have taken place on this subject, to preserve by

practical means the traditional friendly relations between the United States

and Canada.

I have [etc.]

VINCENT MASSEY

[Document 366]

The Canadian Minister (Massey) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, 13 June, 1927.

No. 159

SIR: I have the honour to refer to your note of May 28th. 1927, and to my

General Order Number 86 of the Department of Labor of the United States.

In the view of the competent authorities of His Majesty’s Canadian

Government, certain doubts may arise as to the interpretation to be given to

some of the clauses of this Order. In order, therefore, to prevent, so far as

may be possible, uncertainty as to their status among those affected by this

Order, I have the honour to submit below a list of questions concerning its

interpretation. I shall be glad if you will be so good as to transmit these

questions to the proper authorities of the Government of the United States,

and in due course to furnish me with the information requested:—

1. What is the status under the Order of Canadians born in

countries to which the quota applies who began to cross the

not have the requisite residence qualifications at the time of their

first admission to qualify under the provisions of Section 2 C and

D. of the Order?

2. Will persons who fulfil the provisions of this Order, by the

payment of head tax and by the presentation of visas when

necessary, be able to continue to cross the border indefinitely

without being required to pay head tax and to secure visas a

second time?

3. Will persons who comply with the provisions of this Order at

some future date be able to live in Canada and cross the border

daily to work?

4. Will a person who is permitted under this Order to cross the

border daily, and who at some future date changes his

employment in the United States from one employer to another,

be permitted to continue to cross the border?

5. What will be the status under the Immigration Laws of the

United States of persons permitted to cross the border under

Section 2 of the Order? Will they be considered to have been

admitted as immigrants to the United States?

6. What is the meaning of the phrase at the end of the first

paragraph of Section 2 “provided that they are not coming to seek

employment”?

7. If a person permitted to cross the border under Section 2 of the

Order ceases in the future to cross the border, will he be permitted

to resume the practice at a later date?

For greater certainty regarding the exact meaning of the various classes of

persons enumerated in Sections 2 and 3 of the Order, I submit in addition

the following general enquiry:

Will the following classes of persons be able to continue to cross the border

on compliance with the conditions set out after each class?

(a) Canadians, irrespective of national origin, who began to cross

the border before May 1st. 1917, without payment of head tax or

presentation of visas;

(b) Canadians, irrespective of national origin, who began to cross

payment of head tax;

(c) Native born Canadians who began to cross the border between

(d) Native born Canadians who began to cross the border since

June 30th. 1924, upon payment of head tax and presentation of a

non-quota visa;

(e) Canadians born in countries to which the quota applies, who

1922, and who had lived in Canada for one year before their first

admission to the United States, upon payment of head tax;

(f) Canadians born in countries to which the quota applies, who

1924, and who had lived in Canada for five years before their first

admission to the United States, upon payment of head tax;

(g) Canadians born in countries to which the quota applies, who

began to cross the border after June 30th. 1924, upon payment of

head tax and the presentation of a quota visa from the allotment

of the country of their birth.

I have [etc.]

VINCENT MASSEY

[Document 367]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Chargé (Wrong)

WASHINGTON, June 30, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to refer to the Minister’s note No. 159 of June 13,

1927, requesting certain information regarding the operation of the

Department of Labor’s General Order No. 86 and to advise you that the

following replies have been made by the appropriate branch of the

Government to the questions propounded by you.

The questions are taken up in the order in which they appear in the

Legation’s note, with the answers appended thereto.

“1. What is the status under the Order of Canadians born in

countries to which the quota applies who began to cross the

not have the requisite residence qualifications at the time of their

first admission to qualify under the provisions of Section 2 C and

D of the Order?

“A. The Order contemplates that where residence is a requisite,

such residence must have obtained at the time of original

admission.

“2. Will persons who fulfil the provisions of this Order, by the

payment of head tax and by the presentation of visas when

necessary, be able to continue to cross the border indefinitely

without being required to pay head tax and to secure visas a

second time?

“A. Persons who comply with the provisions of the Order are

admitted as immigrants, and the immigration rules and

regulations governing what constitutes abandonment of status,

exemption from repayment of head tax, etc., for aliens so

admitted are applicable.

“3. Will persons who comply with the provisions of this Order at

some future date be able to live in Canada and cross the border

daily to work?

“A. The answer to the preceding question would seem to answer

this query.

“4. Will a person who is permitted under this Order to cross the

border daily, and who at some future date changes his

employment in the United States from one employer to another,

be permitted to continue to cross the border?

“A. This question would also appear to be answered by the

foregoing, the nature and place of employment being a matter of

no particular concern.

“5. What will be the status under the Immigration Laws of the

United States of persons permitted to cross the border under

Section 2 of the Order? Will they be considered to have been

admitted as immigrants to the United States?

“A. This question is answered in the affirmative. In fact, the

whole tenor of the Order deals with such persons as immigrants

and not as visitors.

“6. What is the meaning of the phrase at the end of the first

paragraph of Section 2 ‘provided that they are not coming to seek

employment’?

“A. The exemptions in the Order apply only to aliens entering in

pursuance of existing employment, and not to persons seeking

employment.

“7. If a person permitted to cross the border under Section 2 of

the Order ceases in the future to cross the border, will he be

permitted to resume the practice at a later date?

“A. This question is answered under query No. 2.

“All the questions under the captions (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and

(g) are answered in the affirmative, with the restrictions already

referred to.”

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

WILBUR J. CARR

[Document 368]

The Canadian Minister (Massey) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, 26 November, 1927.

No. 281

SIR: I have the honour to refer to your note of May 28th. 1927 and to my

reply thereto of June 8th, regarding the operation of General Order Number

86 of the Department of Labor of the United States, and also to the

numerous conversations which have taken place between members of your

Department and this Legation on this subject. In the course of your note you

were kind enough to employ the following language:

“Before the expiration of the time limit specified in Order

Number 86, within which aliens of this class must present quota

visas, it will probably be found that all who have hitherto held

border-crossing permits issued to them by the Department of

Labor since the quota system became effective, will not, by

reason of the numerical restrictions of the quota law, be able to

receive immigration visas. Should this prove to be the case, I shall

be glad at once to request the Secretary of Labor to allow further

time in which these people may gain a status in conformity with

the law and the Secretary has already assured me that any such

request will receive the most sympathetic consideration possible.”

The time limit of December 1st. which was set in this Order is now only a

few days away. It has become apparent that a considerable number of

Canadian citizens, who have been freely permitted to cross the border daily

to employment under permits issued to them by the Department of Labor,

are unable to comply with the terms of the Order because they were born

abroad, and cannot secure immigration visas chargeable to the quotas of

their countries of birth by December 1st. I understand that there are

registered at the various United States Consulates at border points, the

names of some three thousand individuals who have been in the habit of

crossing the border to employment, and who have applied without success

for the issue of quota immigration visas. These three thousand individuals

are therefore in the most imminent danger of being deprived of their means

of livelihood.

I therefore venture to suggest that the time has come when the assurances

made in the second of the sentences which are quoted above from your

note, should be put into effect. I need not emphasize the desirability of

reaching a rapid decision, nor the difficulties which will be incurred at the

points principally affected, if no relief is afforded before December 1st. The

view of His Majesty’s Government in Canada, as expressed to you in my

note of June 8th, remains unchanged. It sincerely hopes that you may find it

possible to inform me immediately that the effects of the Order have been

so modified as to permit at least those who have applied for immigration

visas without being able to secure them, to continue to cross the border

without difficulty.

You will doubtless note that I am now only requesting relief for those who

have taken all steps in their power to comply with the terms of the Order. In

your note of May 28th. you stated that the compulsory relinquishment by

such persons of their employment in the United States, which they may

have enjoyed for a number of years, would constitute a hardship which you

sincerely regretted. I have every confidence that you will take all steps to

avoid the infliction of this hardship, and to arrive at an equitable solution of

this problem.

I have [etc.]

VINCENT MASSEY

[Document 369]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, December 9, 1927.

and to recent conferences held with you at the Department upon the subject

of relief for those residents of Canada crossing the border daily for

employment in the United States who have applied for quota immigration

visas but who have been unable to obtain them prior to December 1, 1927,

the time limit specified in General Order No. 86 of the Department of Labor

within which they were to present such visas.

As you have already been informed, it has been found possible to grant a

substantial measure of relief to the aliens in question by arranging that those

who have gone as far as they could in order to comply with the terms of

General Order No. 86, by registering as applicants for visas at the American

Consulates on the border prior to December 1, 1927, shall have priority

status as of the date when they were accorded the border-crossing privilege.

It is believed that they will thus be able to obtain their visas and to satisfy

the requirements of the American immigration laws as fast as their

examination can take place by the immigration authorities on the American

side of the border, they continuing meanwhile to enjoy their border-crossing

privileges. This relief is afforded in an effort to remedy any injustice that

may have been suffered by this class of quota aliens due to the probability

that they understood prior to the promulgation of General Order No. 86,

that they had complied with American law when they had applied for and

obtained border-crossing permits and that it was not necessary for them to

apply also for immigration visas.

The Departments of State and Labor believe that the situation which was

created by General Order No. 86 has, as a whole, largely disappeared, so

many adjustments in individual cases having been made under the terms of

the Order during the six months’ period afforded for that purpose which

ended November 30, 1927. The change made in the priority status of quota

commuters who have been unable to obtain visas, although having

registered as visa applicants prior to December 1, 1927, will, it is believed,

afford all needed relief in those cases. Commuters born in Canada, on the

other hand, may obtain non-quota visas upon application at a consulate and

satisfying the consul as to their birth in Canada and their admissibility to

this country under its immigration laws.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:

WILBUR J. CARR

Washington, March 30, 1927.

[Document 370]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)

WASHINGTON, April 13, 1926.

EXCELLENCY: I have the honor to invite your attention to the fact that pike-perch

in Lake Champlain, which annually migrate to the Canadian waters of

Missisquoi Bay at the northern end of the Lake for the purpose of

spawning, are being taken with seines under licenses issued by the

Canadian authorities. The spawning season usually lasts from about March

first to April fifteenth and it is understood that the licenses are issued for

this period, although it has been reported that individuals continue illegally

to fish with seines until well along into the month of May. During this time

when the fish are passing into the Canadian waters they are taken in very

large quantities without having had an opportunity to spawn, thus serving to

destroy in large measure the future supply of this valuable food fish.

The question of conserving the pike-perch fisheries in Lake Cham-plain

was discussed by the American-Canadian Fisheries Conference held in

1918. The report of this Conference, signed by the Commissioners for the

United States and the Commissioners for the Dominion of Canada at Lake

Champlain, New York, September 6, 1918, contained the following

statement with reference to the protection of the fisheries of Lake

Champlain:

“At the Boston hearings representatives from the States of New

York and Vermont appeared to urge better protection of the

fisheries in Missisquoi Bay, the Canadian portion of Lake

Champlain. This matter had received preliminary consideration

by the conference during its sittings in Washington, D. C.

“It was explained that for some years past these two States, with

the cooperation and assistance of the Federal Government, were

endeavoring to make Lake Champlain a favorite tourist resort, as,

owing to its character, it could not support any extensive

commercial fishing. To this end both States were prohibiting all

net fishing, but the most important spawning grounds for pike-

perch, the most valuable fish in the lake, are in the portion thereof

that is in Canadian territory, and there each spring, when the fish

crowd into these waters to spawn, they are caught with, seines.

Thus the good effects of the work of the two States were being

largely nullified.

“It was also explained that the United States Bureau of Fisheries

operates a pike-perch hatchery on the lake and that it was

prepared to enlarge the hatchery and increase its work if the net

fishing were stopped.

“While this matter was not explicitly referred to the conference

for consideration, it was one of which it could take cognizance. It

was, therefore, left with the Canadian delegation for such action

as they felt justified in taking.

“Following the return of the Canadian section to Ottawa, after

hearings at St. John, it laid the facts before the Canadian

Government, and recommended that all net fishing in Missisquoi

Bay should be stopped. This recommendation was approved, and

the fishery regulations for the Province of Quebec were amended

The amendment, prohibiting net fishing in Missisquoi Bay and in the

Canadian waters of Lake Champlain, was later incorporated in an Order in

Council of October 22, 1921, which in turn was rescinded by a subsequent

Order in Council, dated March 1, 1922.

Since the promulgation of the Order in Council of March 1, 1922, it appears

that net fishing has been authorized in Missisquoi Bay under licenses issued

by Canadian authorities, and that at the present time fish are being gathered

in by seines night and day.

The harmful effect which this seining is having upon the Lake Champlain

Fishery is apparent.

[Document 371]

The British Ambassador (Howard) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, June 7, 1926.

No. 393

regarding the pike-perch fisheries in Lake Champlain, I have the honour to

inform you at the request of the Government of Canada, that enquiries made

through the Department of the Province of Quebec which administers

fisheries in that area, indicate that while some illegal fishing was attempted

in April, the seines and other apparatus were immediately seized and an

official of the Department, who has since made a thorough investigation,

has reported that conditions are now entirely satisfactory.

As set forth in your note under reference, the question of prohibiting seining

in the Missisquoi Bay was considered by the Canadian-American Fisheries

Conference of 1918, and in anticipation of the different questions that had

been referred by the two Governments to the Conference being settled by

the acceptance of its report by both Governments, a regulation was adopted

by Order in Council of February 18th, 1918, prohibiting fishing by means

of nets of any kind in Missisquoi Bay. This regulation was maintained in

the face of growing objection to it until March 1st, 1922, up to which time

the recommendations of the Conference, though they had been approved by

the Canadian Government, had not been approved by that of the United

States and there was no immediate indication that they would be.

Missisquoi Bay is in the Province of Quebec, where the fisheries are being

administered by the Provincial authorities, which consequently issue any

licenses which authorize fishing there. The statement in your note

abovementioned that it has been reported that individuals continue to fish in

the Bay during the close season is being communicated to the Provincial

authorities for proper attention.

It will be recalled that the Treaty of 1908 for the regulation of the fisheries

in boundary waters32 covered not only Missisquoi Bay, but other waters as

well. The regulations adopted by the Commission appointed under that

Treaty failed to receive the approval of the United States Senate and so did

not become effective.

In the light of the above, the Dominion Government are of the opinion that

the situation should be dealt with as a whole rather than that Missisquoi Bay

should be considered by itself.

I have [etc.]

ESME HOWARD

[Document 372]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, March 1, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to invite your attention to the situation regarding pike

perch fisheries in Lake Champlain which in former years has been a subject

of correspondence between the Department and the British Embassy. In

Canadian Government’s view that fishing in boundary waters should be

considered as a whole rather than that the fishing in Missisquoi Bay should

be considered separately.

While this Government appreciates the Dominion Government’s position as

set out in the Ambassador’s note, it believes that the interests of the people

on both sides of the international boundary require the discontinuance of

seine fishing in Missisquoi Bay, independent of the solution of questions

relating to fisheries in other boundary waters. This Government understands

that in the Lake Champlain region the interests of the summer angler are of

greater financial importance to the resident people than market fisheries

could be. You will recall that the American-Canadian Fisheries Conference

of 1918 found that the work of the States of New York and Vermont

directed toward the building up of the Lake Champlain region as a summer

resort was being “largely nullified” by seine fishing in the Canadian part of

Missisquoi Bay. The benefits of the fish hatcheries in the American section

of the Lake are likewise impaired by the seine fishing.

This Government appreciates the importance of adequately protecting and

regulating fishing in all the boundary waters through the cooperation of the

governments of the United States and Canada. It is a matter of regret to it

that questions of a local nature have delayed it in undertaking negotiations

in regard to the fisheries in certain waters. However, this Government is

hopeful that in respect of the fisheries in every part of the boundary waters

in relation to which no serious questions have arisen the Dominion

Government will find it possible to cooperate in the preservation of the

permanent interests of the people immediately concerned.

In view of the opening of the season in which seine fishing in Lake

Champlain has been permitted, which is now approaching, I have the honor

to request that you bring the views of this Government to the attention of

the Government of Canada with the suggestion that, if the Dominion

Government finds it practicable to prohibit the use of seines in Missisquoi

Bay, this Government will appreciate such action being taken.

Accept [etc.]

JOSEPH C. GREW

[Document 373]

The Canadian Minister (Massey) to the Secretary of State

WASHINGTON, 22 March, 1927.

No. 53

subject of the pike perch fisheries in Lake Champlain, I have the honour to

state that the competent Department of the Dominion Government which

has had the matter under consideration, represents that the conditions

affecting the situation in Lake Champlain remain unchanged, such

conditions being briefly outlined in the following manner.

It is explained that the fisheries of Missisquoi Bay are the property of the

province of Quebec and are being administered by the Provincial

authorities, who are opposed to the prohibition of a reasonable amount of

seine fishing in the Bay, though while pike perch or pickerel resort to the

Bay for spawning purposes fishing for them is prohibited during the

spawning season. While the exclusive power to make regulations in all

parts of Canada rests with the Federal Government, in an area where the

fisheries are owned and are being administered by the Provincial

authorities, the Federal Government hesitates to impose regulations that are

not desired by the Provincial authorities unless the conditions are

extraordinary in their character.

Although the question of fishery regulations in Lake Champlain was not

referred to the Canadian American Fisheries Conference in 1918, it was

brought to the attention of the Conference by delegations representing the

States of New York and Vermont, and indeed the question was raised by the

American members of the Conference at its preliminary sittings. It was at

the time anticipated that the recommendations of the Conference would be

approved by both countries, and accordingly as the fishing season was then

approaching, on the recommendation of the Canadian members of the

Conference to their Government, a regulation was adopted in February

1918, prohibiting all net fishing in Missisquoi Bay. The Conference

completed its work and submitted its report in September 1918, and its

recommendations

were

subsequently

approved

by

the

Canadian

Government, though such approval was not given by the United States

Government. The regulation was, however, maintained in the face of

continuously growing opposition until March 1922, when it was annulled as

there was no indication at that time that the recommendations of the

Conference would be approved.

Attention is further called by the Department to the fact that the Missisquoi

Bay situation was covered by the Treaty of 1908 for the regulation of the

fisheries in boundary waters, but that the regulations drawn up by the

Commission appointed under that Treaty failed to receive the approval of

the United States Senate.

After consideration of all circumstances, the Canadian Government is still

of opinion that the Missisquoi Bay situation should be dealt with in

connection with other outstanding matters and not by itself and I am

accordingly requested in bringing their views to the notice of the United

States Government, to take advantage of the opportunity to dwell upon the

importance of early attention being given to the settlement of the

outstanding fishery questions between the two countries.

I have [etc.]

VINCENT MASSEY

[Document 374]

The Secretary of State to the Canadian Minister (Massey)

WASHINGTON, March 30, 1927.

SIR: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note No. 53 of

March 22, 1927, relating to seine fishing in the Missisquoi Bay section of

Lake Champlain.

I note with regret that the Canadian Government does not deem it advisable

to discontinue the issuance of licenses for such seine fishing at this time.

Accept [etc.]

FRANK B. KELLOGG

Chile:

[Document 375]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

WASHINGTON, August 19, 1927.

No. 765

SIR: This Government has, as you are aware, entered upon the policy of

negotiating with other countries general treaties of friendship, commerce

and consular rights, of which the central principle in respect of commerce is

an unconditional most-favored-nation clause governing customs and related

matters. This policy was inaugurated pursuant to the principles underlying

treatment for American commerce will be maintained in all countries.

Besides the provisions relating to commerce, those treaties include

provisions relating to rights of nationals of each country in the other

country, protection of property and rights and immunities of consuls.

Reference is made in this connection to the Department’s Diplomatic Serial

treaties was delayed pending the favorable action of the United States

Senate on the first treaty drafted in accordance with the new policy, the

ratification of which treaty was not consented to until 1925. This

Government is now prepared to enter into such a treaty with Chile and

desires to do so as promptly as practicable.

The first treaty to become effective expressing the present policy of this

Government was the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights

with Germany, signed December 8, 1923, ratifications of which were

United States with Hungary, Esthonia and Salvador, of which the ones with

Esthonia and Hungary have been brought into force by exchange of

ratifications.

A treaty containing the unconditional most-favored-nation clause was

signed with Turkey on August 6, 1923. About a dozen other treaties

containing it are in process of negotiation. Modi vivendi based upon the

same principle, entered into with the following countries, are in force—

Brazil, Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, Finland, Greece, Guatemala,

Haiti, Latvia, Lithuania, Nicaragua, Poland (including Danzig), Rumania

and Turkey.

You are requested, unless you perceive objection, to inquire whether it

would be agreeable to the Government of Chile to proceed to the

negotiation with the United States of a similar treaty. A special draft will, of

course, be prepared for presentation to Chile if this proposal is acceptable to

the Chilean Government. It is probable that certain departures from the text

of the German treaty should be made either in the special text to be

submitted to the Government of Chile or, on behalf of either party, during

the course of negotiations.

It would be gratifying if, among its early treaties embodying the principle of

unconditional most-favored-nation treatment, the United States could

celebrate a general commercial treaty with Chile. The lack of a general

commercial treaty with Chile since the Convention of Peace, Amity,

Commerce and Navigation, concluded May 16, 1832, was terminated on

January 20, 1850, is a matter of regret to this Government and it hopes that

a comprehensive modern agreement may now be entered into. You will of

course keep in mind in this connection that a most-favored-nation clause

with a condition, such as that contained in the first sentence of Article II of

the Treaty of 1832, would not now be acceptable to the United States.

For your confidential information, though the Department, in proposing a

treaty with Chile, is influenced chiefly by its policy of concluding with

other countries generally treaties containing the unconditional most-

favored-nation clause, you are nevertheless desired to use especial diligence

in seeking a favorable response from the Chilean Government, thus

forestalling any efforts that other countries may be planning to make for the

purpose of interposing in South America arrangements based upon special

privilege—a policy wholly antagonistic to the policy of equality of

treatment which the United States is undertaking to promote. You may

recall in this connection that in 1923 this Government renounced the

preferential customs treatment which certain American products had been

receiving in Brazil and requested instead a pledge of equal footing with

other countries in the Brazilian market.

For your further confidential information and guidance, the Department was

informed some time ago that there was a movement on the part of Spain to

seek from the countries of Latin America special commercial concessions

in return for certain advantages to be accorded to their commerce in Spain.

In this connection see the Department’s circular instruction dated April 19,

Reference is made confidentially to the Embassy’s despatch No. 346 of

December 20, 1923, which touched inter alia on the possibility that the

Chilean Government would desire some exception to the most favored

nation clause covering either the Latin American countries as a whole or,

more specifically, Bolivia and Argentina. While it would appear inadvisable

to raise the question of exceptions in any discussions with the Chilean

Government, the Department suggests that, in case Chilean officials should

introduce the matter, you might assume an attitude of discouraging the

exemption of any large group of countries, and in case the suggestion is

made that one or two specific countries should be exempted, you might

state that you will report the matter to Washington. You will of course avoid

any commitment.

The Department either has transmitted or expects at an early date to

transmit instructions, similar to the present instruction, to the American

missions in the other South American capitals except Ecuador, the political

regime now functioning in which is not recognized by the United States,

and, at least for the present, Panama, with which there remains pending an

important treaty of a different character.

FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Document 376]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

146. Minister of Foreign Affairs after studying German treaty is willing to

negotiate on those general conditions but says Bolivia would have to be

excepted because of economic situation and existing treaties and future

political reconciliation. Last night Under Secretary told me both Peru and

Bolivia would have to be excepted but Minister of Foreign Affairs

mentioned only Bolivia. I told Under Secretary exception was too great.

Minister of Foreign Affairs said he would have to create a commission on

which Minister of Hacienda and Minister of Fomento would be represented.

… Minister of Foreign Affairs said he would discuss matter with two

colleagues mentioned and perhaps could give me a memorandum Monday,

but when I asked if he would like to have you prepare a draft treaty he said

yes enthusiastically. I suggest you rush it to me unless you can cable me

what to draft by reference to German treaty. I have presented matter in such

a manner that Minister of Foreign Affairs almost thinks he suggested it and

I believe I have convinced him that to conclude a treaty would cover him

with glory. [Paraphrase.] He informed me that he had recently negotiated

commercial conventions with Germany and Spain. [End paraphrase.] I do

not believe this is generally known. He assured me that nothing in them

would prevent entering into treaty with us along these lines, that there is no

favor granted that would be obstacle to our negotiations. I think I have

inspired Minister of Foreign Affairs with desire to negotiate at once and it is

barely possible that a treaty could be concluded in time to submit to

Congress at its special session which it is now thought will convene on

October 17th.

I do not think any treaty can be concluded unless Bolivia is excepted and it

is likely that Congress will insist Peru also be excepted. Minister of Foreign

Affairs thinks congressional discussion would make it impossible to

conclude a treaty in less than two months. Under Secretary says six months

because of necessity of consulting Chamber of Commerce for promoting

national industry, et cetera.

COLLIER

[Document 377]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

Germany as follows and submit it to the Foreign Office. All references

herein are to Articles of that Treaty. Articles of your draft when completed

will have to be renumbered.

follows.

Preamble. Substitute “Chile” for “Germany” and leave names of

plenipotentiaries blank.

Article 1. Remove brackets from last paragraph and rewrite as follows:

“Nothing contained in this Treaty shall be construed to affect existing

statutes of either of the High Contracting Parties in relation to the

immigration of aliens or the right of either of the High Con tracting Parties

to enact such statutes.” (See Treaty Series Number 736.)

after “or” insert “charges or bases of such duties or charges and no.” In line

4 substitute “or” for “and no.” In line 8 after “other” insert “from whatever

place arriving.” At the end of paragraph 2 add “nor shall any such duties,

charges, conditions or prohibitions on importations be made effective

retroactively on imports already cleared through the customs or on goods

declared for entry into consumption in the country.” Between paragraphs 3

and 4, insert the following paragraph:

“In the event of licenses being issued by either of the High

Contracting Parties for the importation into or exportation from

its territories of articles the importation or exportation of which is

restricted or prohibited, the conditions under which such licenses

may be obtained shall be publicly announced and clearly stated in

such a manner as to enable traders interested to become

acquainted with them; the method of licensing shall be as simple

and unvarying as possible and applications for licenses shall be

dealt with as speedily as possible. Moreover, the conditions under

which such licenses are issued by either of the High Contracting

Parties for goods imported from or exported to the territories of

the other Party shall be as favorable with respect to commodities,

formalities and otherwise as the conditions under which licenses

are issued in respect of any other foreign country. In the event of

rations or quotas being established for the importation or

exportation of articles restricted or prohibited, each of the High

Contracting Parties agrees to grant for the importation from or

exportation to the territories of the other Party an equitable share,

in view of the normal volume of trade in the particular class of

goods between the two countries, in the allocation of the quantity

of restricted goods which may be authorized for importation or

exportation. In the application of the provisions of this paragraph

no distinction shall be made between direct and indirect

shipments. It is agreed, moreover, that in the event either High

Contracting Party shall be engaged in war, it may enforce such

import or export restrictions as may be required by the national

interest.”

In paragraph 4, line 3, after “extend” insert “by treaty, law, decree,

regulation, practice or otherwise.” For paragraph 5, use corresponding

paragraph of Treaty with Esthonia, which includes goods exported as well

as goods imported, and substitute therein “Chile” for “Esthonia.” Between

paragraphs 5 and 6 insert new paragraph as follows:

“In the same manner there shall be perfect reciprocal equality in

relation to the flags of the two countries with regard to bounties,

drawbacks and other privileges of this nature of whatever

denomination which may be allowed in the territories of each of

the Contracting Parties, on goods imported or exported in national

vessels so that such bounties, drawbacks and other privileges

shall also and in like manner be allowed on goods imported or

exported in vessels of the other country.”

Compare with last paragraph of Article 7 of the Treaty with Esthonia. A

new Article relating to customs procedure will be transmitted later for

insertion immediately after Article 7. Do not postpone submission of draft

to Foreign Office pending its receipt.

“United States.”

Article 12. Add at end of second paragraph a new sentence as follows: “If

such consent be given on the condition of reciprocity the condition shall be

deemed to relate to the provisions of the laws, National, State or Provincial

under which the foreign corporation or association desiring to exercise such

rights is organized.”

Article 13. Strike out the last sentence of the first paragraph.

In place of original articles 14 and 15 insert the following Article of two

paragraphs

“Commercial travelers representing manufacturers, merchants

and traders domiciled in the territories of either High Contracting

Party shall on their entry into and sojourn in the territories of the

other Party and on their departure therefrom be accorded the most

favored nation treatment in respect of customs and other

privileges and of all charges and taxes of whatever denomination

applicable to them or to their samples.

If either High Contracting Party require the presentation of an

authentic document establishing the identity and authority of a

commercial traveler, a signed statement by the concern or

concerns represented, certified by a consular officer of the

country of destination shall be accepted as satisfactory.”

substitute “or to any discrimination” for “and shall be given national

treatment.” Substitute “or any other matter” for “and all other matters.”

Article 29. Strike out everything following “zone” in line 12.

Article 32. Substitute “Spanish” for “German.” Leave name of City and

date blank.

Omit Senate resolution. Reservation regarding immigration is incorporated

in text of draft as last paragraph of Article 1. Department will instruct you

further regarding reservation as to national treatment of shipping. Prepare

draft but do not present it pending further instructions.

The complete text will be forwarded by early pouch. Consideration is being

given in regard to exception of treatment accorded Bolivia and Peru.

KELLOGG

70.

[Document 378]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 9: p.m.]

Department wishes me to submit draft of commercial treaty to the Foreign

Office as stated in two places or whether it wishes this withheld pending

further instructions as distinctly stated in end of message. Please cable

instructions.

Minister of Foreign Affairs tells me Minister of Hacienda and new Minister

of Fomento or Promotion are considering the treaty in principle. Minister of

Hacienda is said to oppose waiver of power to grant special favors.

Special session of Congress not yet called owing to disturbed internal

political conditions … These have preoccupied the attention of the Cabinet

so that treaty could not have been presented advantageously last week even

if that were your desire. Moreover rumors of Cabinet organization would

have made such a move useless. It is now thought Congress may convene

middle of November.

COLLIER

[Document 379]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[Paraphrase]

Department whether you think any material prejudice to negotiations would

result if we deferred submittal of draft treaty until the middle of November

or thereabouts, so as to allow time for further consideration of question

whether to include in draft treaty substance of United States Senate

reservation regarding national treatment of shipping.

KELLOGG

[Document 380]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

SANTIAGO, October 30, 1927—noon.

[Received 5 p.m.]

will promote ultimate success. Special session of Congress not yet called

and date uncertain. Every measure in which we are [interested?] is now in

as good shape as can be hoped for. Political situation again tranquil.

Have been invited to make trip on Thursday this week to Buenos Aires,

Paraguay and Iguassu. Will be gone about 15 days but can return

immediately if occasion should arise. I am greatly in need of rest and

request immediate cable permission so as to make arrangements. Hofer will

be in charge.

COLLIER

[Document 381]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

WASHINGTON, November 2, 1927.

No. 788

SIR: There is transmitted herewith for submission to the Foreign Office for

negotiation between the United States and Chile a draft of a treaty of

Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights which already has been the

subject of preliminary instructions. A copy of the draft is enclosed for the

use of the Embassy.

Detailed instructions in regard to each article of the draft will be sent to you

by an early pouch. The following statements in explanation of the more

important differences between the enclosed draft and the Treaty of

Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights signed by the United States and

Germany, December 8, 1923, are made for your information and for use in

explanations to the Chilean authorities.

The reservation concerning statutes relating to the immigration of aliens

made by the Senate of the United States in giving its advice and consent to

the ratification of the treaty between the United States and Germany is

incorporated in the draft as the last paragraph of Article I. The reservation

making provision for the termination at the end of one year of the

paragraphs of Article VII relating to the treatment of vessels and Articles

IX and XI (Articles X and XII of the enclosed draft) is not included in the

enclosed draft. Further reference will be made to this reservation.

The fourth paragraph of Article VII is designed to assure equality of

treatment in respect of licenses, quotas and contingents for the importation

or exportation of restricted goods. In practice it has been difficult to obtain

such equality of treatment for the commerce of the United States in certain

European countries in which systems prohibiting or restricting the

importation or exportation of certain goods have been in force, and from

which prohibitions or restrictions abatements are made by contingents or

licenses. This Government desires that the paragraph be included in the

treaty with Chile as it is undertaking to have it included in all the treaties of

Friendship, Commerce, and Consular Rights, which it is now negotiating.

Stipulations in regard to prohibitions, restrictions and licenses are contained

in the International Convention Relating to the Simplification of Customs

Austrian Treaty of May 22, 1924, and in a provision contained in the

second paragraph of Exchanges of Notes signed by the United States with a

number of countries, namely,—

The seventh paragraph of Article VII providing for equality of treatment of

vessels with regard to bounties, drawbacks and other privileges, although

not contained in the treaty between the United States and Germany is

included in a number of the older treaties to which the United States is a

party, and this Government desires to have it included in the treaties of

Friendship, Commerce, and Consular rights, which it shall sign hereafter

with maritime countries.

The sentence at the end of the second paragraph of Article XIII “If such

consent be given on the condition of reciprocity the condition shall be

deemed to relate to the provisions of the laws, National, State, or

Provincial, under which the foreign corporation or association desiring to

exercise such rights is organized” is designed for use in treaties with

countries in which the right of a corporation organized under the laws of the

United States to engage in business is conditioned on reciprocity. This

provision would have the effect of obtaining for American corporations in

Chile in the event that the laws of Chile in relation to the right of a foreign

corporation to engage in business contain a condition of reciprocity, the

right to engage in business according to whether the laws of the State of the

United States under which such corporation is organized extend the right to

engage in business to foreign corporations.

The reservation making provision for the termination of paragraphs and

articles relating to shipping made by the Senate in giving its advice and

consent to the ratification of the treaty with Germany is included in the

Treaty with Esthonia as the third paragraph of Article XXIX. As stated

above on page 2 of this instruction no corresponding reservation is included

in the enclosed draft. The Department will instruct you by telegram whether

to include such a paragraph in the draft before submitting it to the Chilean

Government or at any time during the negotiations.

If it be included it will be added as the third paragraph of Article XXX. The

words “Except as provided in the third paragraph of this Article” will be

inserted at the beginning of the first paragraph of Article XXX and the new

paragraph will read as follows:

“The sixth and seventh paragraphs of Article VII and Articles X

and XII shall remain in force for twelve months from the date of

exchange of ratifications, and if not then terminated on ninety

days previous notice shall remain in force until either of the High

Contracting Parties shall enact legislation inconsistent therewith

when the same shall automatically lapse at the end of sixty days

from such enactment, and on such lapse each High Contracting

Party shall enjoy all the rights which it would have possessed had

such paragraphs or articles not been embraced in the Treaty”.

Further comment in regard to the differences between the enclosed draft

and the treaty of the United States with Germany will be included in the

detailed instructions.

When presenting the draft to the Foreign Office please state that this

Government reserves the right to propose changes therein throughout the

course of the negotiations. Please inform the Department by telegram of the

receipt of this instruction. You will, of course, not present the draft to the

Foreign Office, until the Department sends you a further communication

authorizing you to do so.

Frank B. Kettoce

[Document 382]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 12: p.m.]

109. Chilean Government special commission appointed to study problem

of promoting merchant marine is considering the recommendation of

preferential customs duties on importations in national vessels. This will

greatly injure Grace Line which has asked my assistance in pursuance of

informal representations as to injury this is likely to do commercial interests

but would appreciate specific instructions.

COLLIER

[Document 383]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 8: p.m.]

law for American [Chilean?] national mercantile marine has been

published. Synopsis is as follows:

1. Chilean Government to repay steamers amount of Panama

Canal tolls. This will give steamers Teno and Aconcagua

practically $115,000 United States gold yearly. The commission

which reported bill is said to have declared that this subvention is

to offset “a direct compensation paid by the American

Government equivalent to tolls”.

2. Shippers of nitrate in Chilean vessels are to receive a premium.

3. Ten percent reduction in customs duties to be allowed on

imports in Chilean vessels.

4. Minister of Hacienda is empowered to raise loans for account

of Chilean companies for the purchase of new vessels, such loans

to be granted by the Government and vessels to be mortgaged to

the Government and companies’ dividends in excess of 10

percent to be equally divided between stockholders and

Government.

British and other European shipowners have asked their Governments to

make protests before Chilean Government especially with regard to points 1

and 2.

Manager of Grace Line to make protests before Chilean Government

especially with regard to points 1 and 2.

Manager of Grace Line asks me to aid and says proposed measures would

be decisively detrimental to Grace Line and appears to be especially

directed against its service between Chile and New York, inasmuch as there

are no established Chilean lines between Chile and European ports.

I request instructions and respectfully suggest that in view of strong

movement for promoting national objects mere representations as to general

desirability that nothing at all be done to hurt mutual commercial interests

will not be sufficient. [Paraphrase.] If we are to secure moderation of

Chile’s present mood, I think more concrete representations will be

necessary, such as would be used between business competitors. I do not

mean, however, to recommend—and not at all under present conditions—

anything suggestive of retaliation, although I have a feeling that a firm

policy of defense by the United States is necessary. I shall take no action

until I receive instructions. [End paraphrase.]

COLLIER

[Document 384]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 6 p.m.]

115. Government has sent to Congress project of law embodying all points

probably greatly diminish opposition to bill by British shipowners and

eliminate that of other nations. Grace Line is seriously and almost solely

threatened. I renew request for instructions by cable.

COLLIER

[Document 385]

The Acting Secretary of State (Castle) to the Ambassador in Chile

(Collier)

[Paraphrase]

1. It is the feeling of the Department that objection may properly be raised

by the Government of the United States with respect to point 3 in

Embassy’s synopsis of proposed law and also with respect to preferential

export duties or bounties of similar effect should measures such as those

contemplated in point 2 be brought up again.

You should try in every proper way to dissuade the Government of Chile

from applying the above discriminatory measures, pointing out that Chilean

ships and their cargoes pay the same duties and charges in American ports

as American ships and their cargoes, and that the failure of Chile to accord

reciprocal treatment to American ships would be viewed by the

Government of the United States with the greatest regret. You may say also

the policy of national treatment of shipping has become almost universal

and that according to available information only two nations at the present

time depart therefrom. Almost invariably such discriminatory policies lead

to controversies with other states.

2. The following is for your information and guidance. The two nations to

which reference is made above are Mexico and Portugal. In the case of the

latter,

representatives

of

maritime

nations

have

made

strong

representations.

3. As to point 1, while the Government of the United States does not

question the legal right of nations to subsidize shipping, yet it must point

out that the granting of subsidies to ships using the Panama Canal, with the

avowed object of relieving such ships of the burden of tolls which

competing ships are obliged to pay, would change the present status

whereby the Canal is used by vessels of all countries on an equal footing.

The Government of the United States would view with concern any step

which would tend to substitute for the present regime of equality in the use

of the Canal one of special advantage. You may discuss this matter in the

above sense with the appropriate authorities. If these authorities should

refer to mail payments to the Grace Line by the Government of the United

States, you may indicate that these payments have no relation to Canal tolls

and that similar payments are made by the Government of the United States

to lines operating in other parts of the world.

For your information. The Department understands that payments to the

Grace Line for carrying United States mail to the west coast of South

America during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1927, amounted to

$284,801, and to the Chilean Line, the Compañía Sud Americana de

Vapores, whose ships it is proposed to subsidize, $50,883. The Grace Line

employs four ships and has approximately two sailings a month, while the

Chilean Line employs two ships and has one sailing a month. Possibly it

was the disparity in such payments which prompted the recommendation of

a subsidy to the Chilean Line. It may be useful in this connection to

ascertain the payments by the Chilean Government to the two companies

for carrying the mail.

On the basis of its present information regarding point 4 the Department

perceives no grounds for objection.

It is the desire of the Department to conclude a general commercial treaty

with Chile containing provisions for reciprocal national treatment of

shipping. On August 19 instructions were mailed to you. Kindly employ

especial diligence to prevent the adoption of a policy so gravely at variance

with United States treaty aims.

Inform Department fully of any action by you. In case you discuss the

question with your colleagues, you should be careful to avoid any

suggestion of joint action. You should not threaten retaliation in any

discussions with Chilean officials.

CASTLE

[Document 386]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 4: p.m.]

paragraph 2 of commission’s recommendations because section 17 of

nitrate law already gives President power to pay bounty to producers who

ship on Chilean ships. Much anxiety amongst diplomats of shipping

countries, all cabling their Governments for instructions.

COLLIER

[Document 387]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

120. James Heavey, Chilean manager Grace Line, called today. Believes

nationalistic movement in Chile will result in passage of ship subsidy law

substantially as reported. Says there will be probably many purchases of

new boats. Braun and Blanchard, owners of existing service between

Valparaiso, Punta Arenas and Buenos Aires, already have plans ask

Government for guarantee of loan for purchase of at least four new ships for

European and North American trade. He also said Government member of

nitrate board contemplates immediately putting into effect section 17 of

nitrate law authorizing additional [subsidies?] to Chilean ships that carry

nitrate. Moreover all shipping interests are greatly agitated by provision in

the report of joint committee appointed to study revision of tariff which

authorizes President to grant additional reduction of duty equal to 25 pesos

per ton on several classes of merchandise including structural steel,

vehicles, agricultural machinery and many other articles. Heavey estimates

this represents at least 70 percent of American exports to Chile. Foreigners,

especially British, greatly agitated by this provision claiming that inasmuch

as existing Chilean lines to foreign countries only touch American ports this

will give great advantage to American exporters. Undoubtedly this

proposed tariff provision as well as all features of shipping law would

stimulate American export trade at least until Chile purchases new ships

and establishes services to Europe. This provision should be carefully

considered by the Department but I assume that you wish your instructions

so unless otherwise instructed.

COLLIER

[Document 388]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[Paraphrase]

(1) The Department has noted the considerations set forth in your telegram

be made to dissuade the Government of Chile from applying discriminatory

import duties in favor of Chilean ships.

to shippers would apparently be similar in effect to preferential import

duties. You should, therefore, try to dissuade the Government of Chile from

applying the former measure on the same general grounds as the latter,

namely, that neither Chilean ships nor their cargoes are subjected to

discriminatory treatment in ports of the United States as compared with

American ships.

Grace and Company has informed the Department that the National Nitrate

Council has passed a measure, to become effective upon the approval of the

President, providing for a payment of 7 pesos per metric ton in favor of

Chilean ships for nitrate carried to Canada, Cuba, and the United States.

Grace and Company consider that this measure, in conjunction with

preferential import duties, will seriously affect their interests.

Inform the Department whether the payments referred to by the Grace Line

would be made to shippers or to shipowners. The Department is giving

consideration to the question whether representations should be made

regarding payments to Chilean shipowners based on quantity of cargo

carried and distance transported, but you should take no action with regard

to such measures without specific instructions.

Department whether the mileage subsidy of 2 pesos per ton of coal

transported in Chilean ships for each one thousand kilometers would be

payable to shippers or to shipowners. If payable to shippers, its effect would

be similar to the discriminatory measures mentioned above and appropriate

representations in the same sense should be made.

Telegraph as soon as possible as to the probable effect of your

representations, also, whether the representatives of other countries have

made representations, and if so, to what effect.

KELLOGG

[Document 389]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 2: p.m.]

yesterday issued decree under sections 17 and 33 of nitrate law granting to

Chilean ships carrying nitrate to foreign countries the following bounties

per metric quintal: To countries [south?] of the Panama Canal, 50 Chilean

centavos; to countries north of Panama Canal, including Cuba and the

Antilles, 70 Chilean centavos; to countries on Atlantic seaboard, 1 Chilean

centavo. Decree goes into effect as soon as published in Diario Oficial.

Bounty is paid to ship and not to producer. Correct the error in point 2 of

Error was due to incorrect newspaper report of law.

COLLIER

[Document 390]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 9: p.m.]

11 a.m. Yesterday I had separate conversations with regard to ship subsidies

with the President of the Republic, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Under

Secretary, Chief of Diplomatic Section, prominent Senator, prominent

Deputy on committee to which bill has been referred, German and French

Ministers, Dutch and British Charges. First four apparently much impressed

by

my

representations;

diplomats

mentioned

have

also

made

representations. Principal British opposition is due to their belief that

preferential duties will favor American export trade. However, owing to bad

effects of proposed bill on British service between Valparaiso and New

York, they have same reasons for opposition to bill as Grace Line. I am

informed from other sources that British Foreign Office called Chilean

Minister to Great Britain to its office and made very strong representations

to him. Possibly such action by you with Davilá17 would be helpful

especially if there is a possibility of increase of duties by us to counteract

effect of Chilean discrimination and bounties. I believe all persons

connected with the Foreign Office believe bill as drafted most unwise.

Under Secretary says he took my note18 in which I made strong

representations against repayment Panama Canal dues and tariff preference

and bounties to Minister of Finance who has promised him to reconsider

bill. He made same promise to me when I saw him at suggestion of

President of Republic. I am soon to have another long talk with him. I also

talked with Delcourt, head of the Nitrate Bureau, and Simon, head of the

Budget Bureau, both of them members of commission that recommended

ship subsidy bill. Senator and Deputy with whom I talked believe bill as

drafted very faulty … I feel confident before final passage provisions as to

Canal tolls will be stricken out and there is strong probability that

preferential duties will be eliminated and possibly bounties to ships and that

instead there will be a lump sum subvention with provisions for diminution

in case companies do not drum up commerce and get full cargoes. If section

317 of customs law19 is applicable, may be well for Department to let

Dávila know of its existence even if inexpedient to intimate that it will be

put into effect. I shall not relax my efforts although I have repeatedly urged

reciprocity of treatment and have not hinted at reprisals even to counteract

unfair discrimination.

COLLIER

[Document 391]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 11: p.m.]

141. Have made further representations to Minister of Foreign Affairs as to

proposed law favoring mercantile marine, calling attention to principles of

Geneva convention 192320 (see Trade Information Bulletin 202, stating that

even if Chile has not ratified it, it should not be forgotten as expression of

its delegate as to principles that should govern, and that the United States in

fact adopts this liberal practice wherever reciprocal treatment is not denied

to it.

Minister of Hacienda lunched with me today privately. I discussed matter

fully with him and I am assured by him that he will give personal

reconsideration to bill and redraft it and that provision as to the Panama

Canal toll dues will be stricken out. I also believe preferential duties will be

eliminated and possibly also in near future payment to ships of peso per ton

of nitrate carried by them. He made following interesting statement

“Although this payment is made to ships it is intended to benefit producers

who unquestionably will decline to send nitrate on Chilean ships unless

freight is reduced by this amount paid to ships by the Government.”

Practically, this payment therefore is considered by him as bounty to

producers. I believe Government eventually will substitute law granting

lump sum subvention or payments for maintenance service on designated

routes.

COLLIER

[Document 392]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 8 p.m.]

163. Government has published ship subsidy bill substituting [bill?]

telegrams. Summary of new bill is as follows:

Article 1. President of the Republic authorized to spend up to

2,000,000 pesos annually as subventions to national companies

which have maintained for more than 3 years a regular service

through the Panama Canal. This subvention to be regulated in

proportion to the quantity of cargo carried by the respective

companies.

Article 2. Companies accepting these benefits are to share net

proceeds with the State as follows:

Reserves are first to be deducted and from balance a dividend of

10 percent is to be paid stockholders and the residue distributed

proportionately between stockholders and the State, the latter

being considered as holding shares of a value equal to 10 times

subvention paid during the year. Government to name a director

on the companies that accept the subsidy.

Article 3. President of the Republic authorized to contract for

account of companies, and with Government guarantee, loans that

may be required for acquiring ships destined to foreign commerce

or coastwise trade. These loans to be guaranteed by mortgages on

the ships, companies to arrange to take care of the service of the

loans.

Article 4. Expenses occasioned by the law are to be met by

increasing all consular duties 10 percent.

Consular fees are frequently based on value of invoice. I assume proposed

increase affects consular invoices of imports from all countries whether

Chilean vessels maintain service with them or not. If so proposed increase

seems to me unobjectionable in principle and possibly beneficial to

American exports. Personally, cannot see ground for objection to new bill

but would appreciate Department’s instructions.

COLLIER

[Document 393]

The Chargé in Chile (Hofer) to the Secretary of State

[Received 11: p.m.]

172. The President has formally called Congress into special session

November 15th. Subjects on the agenda affecting American interests are:

1. Appropriate measures for Chilean delegation to the Pan

American Conference at Havana21 which will be definitely

appointed according to the Minister of Foreign Affairs within a

week.

2. New ship subsidy bill.

3. Revision of the tariff regulations.

4. Insurance bill.

5. Coal bill.

The petroleum bill for the exploitation of Chilean oil fields so far not on the

agenda.

Fearing that proposed legislation may contemplate the payment of a further

Government bounty for nitrate carried by Chilean vessels and the proposed

tariff revision may contain a provision as rumored that shipments of iron

and steel carried by Chilean bottoms are to receive a 25-peso per ton rebate,

I have reiterated to Minister of Foreign Affairs point of Department’s

Ambassador’s note 802, September 32th to Foreign Office transmitted to

Chargé d’Affaires is protesting against any legislation providing for

bounties or [rebates].

I understand the President desires to railroad all legislation, the exact status

of which is in many cases obscure, through Congress as fast as possible.

HOFER

[Document 394]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Chile (Hofer)

[Paraphrase]

to any proposed tariff or shipping legislation by which discriminating

import duties would be imposed in favor of cargo carried in Chilean ships,

you are instructed, unless you see some objection, to invite the attention of

the appropriate authorities to the following laws of this country.

1. Subject to the stipulations contained in section 4228 of the Revised

Statutes, mentioned below, section 2502 (as amended) provides that a

discriminating duty of 10 percent shall be imposed on merchandise

imported into the United States in foreign ships. However, the President, by

section 4228, is empowered to suspend the application of this measure in

favor of ships of any nation which presents satisfactory evidence that it

does not lay discriminating duties on the cargoes of American ships. In

accordance with this stipulation a Presidential proclamation dated

November 1, 1850, suspended the application of such discriminating

duties insofar as Chilean ships were concerned, the suspension to continue

effective as long as reciprocal exemption of American ships from

discriminatory treatment was continued by Chile.

When referring to the above stipulations of law, you should indicate that the

adoption by the Chilean Government of the discriminatory measure in

question would eliminate the only basis on which the President of the

United States is empowered to continue in suspension the law by which

Chilean ships would be subjected to similar discriminatory treatment in

American ports.

[Document 395]

Memorandum by the Secretary of State

[WASHINGTON,] December 6, 1927.

The Chilean Ambassador called on me today in relation to the laws pending

before the Chilean Congress. He said the Chilean Government was going to

abandon the discriminatory tariff duties and any law to refund canal tolls

and that if they did anything, they would make a straight subsidy to Chilean

steamship lines. I told him of course we had no objection to that; that my

objection to the other procedure was that we gave uniform rates through the

Canal to all nations; that at one time we had a law giving American

coastwise ships free tolls; that I had no idea that Congress would ever go

back to the free toll system but if foreign countries commenced to refund

their tolls, quite likely the Congress would discriminate in favor of

American ships.

So far as the tariff duties are concerned, I told him we are in favor of even

tariffs to all nations on all goods, whether carried in domestic or foreign

bottoms, but if any countries commenced to discriminate on goods carried

in foreign bottoms, we automatically would be compelled to do the same.

He said he had perhaps gone farther with his Government than he ought and

that he had told them he thought it was very unwise after having taken the

matter up with American interests. I thanked him very much and told him I

thought it was satisfactory as to the progressive tariff on oil. He said he

thought he had arranged it satisfactorily to the American business interests

and copper and nitrate companies. He said that the House of

Representatives had passed a law; that the Senate was going to postpone it.

He said it was largely on his advice; that the cost of manufacturing copper

in this country had been constantly going down and the cost in Chile had

been going up so that they were about equal and he thought if additional

burdens were placed upon the copper companies, the companies would

develop more copper in this country and less in Chile.

[Document 396]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 5: p.m.]

119. Government has sent to Congress proposed law to aid coal industry. It

provides for a Government coal board, imposes heavy increased duties on

coal and crude petroleum, creates fund for port works and for loans not

exceeding 20 million pesos to private persons for construction of [colliers],

grants annual subsidy of 10 pesos per ton of cargo capacity for ships

constructed in Chile and a mileage subsidy of 2 pesos per ton of coal

transported in Chilean vessels per 1,000 kilometers. Full text and analysis

of bill will reach you September 29th. This should be considered in

connection with proposed ship subsidy law.

COLLIER

[Document 397]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

WASHINGTON, October 10, 1927—noon.

protest from the Chile Copper Company and the Andes Copper Mining

Company on the ground that the proposed coal law singles out American

copper companies for discriminatory taxation which in application will

soon amount practically to confiscation of their properties. The Department

is not yet convinced that a formal protest would be justified but you may

nevertheless bring the matter informally to the attention of the Minister for

Foreign Affairs pointing out that since it appears impracticable for the

copper companies to use coal instead of oil the proposed progressive duty

upon the latter will apparently prevent them from operating at a fair profit

and that the exemption of Diesel engine oil suggested by the Chilean

Ambassador will not help matters unless extended to include fuel oil. Please

impress upon the Minister for Foreign Affairs that while the Department

does not question the right of the Chilean Government to enact legislation

for the legitimate encouragement of Chilean industries it is greatly

concerned over the probable effects of this particular measure and cannot

believe that any law which might threaten the existence of the American

copper interests in Chile could ultimately benefit that country.

KELLOGG

[Document 398]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

SANTIAGO, October 19, 1927—noon.

[Received 2: p.m.]

me that my representations were forwarded to Minister of Hacienda who

assures Foreign Office that he will make changes in law which will save the

United States interests from injury. The answer is somewhat indefinite but

hopeful. I will watch developments.

COLLIER

[Document 399]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

58. Department informed by American interests that Chilean Government is

paying little attention to protests made by their representative, Mr. Seibert,

against the coal bill, which has already been approved by the Joint

Committee of Congress. Department had hoped that no definite action

would be taken pending the receipt of full report which it understands

Chilean Ambassador, following conferences in New York, is making to

President Ibañez. Please investigate and cable briefly report on present

situation.

KELLOGG

[Document 400]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 8 p.m.]

unwillingness to modify coal and petroleum bill. Minister of Hacienda last

Sunday published full page exposition in local newspapers, criticising

American companies for not having made representations as to innumerable

and varied propositions and suggestions criticising methods for protecting

the coal industry advanced during the last 5 years. His exposition also

sought to justify Government’s action and challenges statements made by

local representatives of North American interests as to burden which

proposed new law will impose upon them. I immediately addressed a note

to Foreign Office defending companies for not having bothered

Government with representations as to proposals that had not received

Government’s approbation and referring to Minister of Hacienda’s

admission that Government’s proposition was not published until

September 2nd, and that companies’ representations were made September

29th, and the American Government’s representations, based upon

necessarily partial and incomplete information, were made October 14th. I

requested, in view of the immensity of interests involved, that the matter be

studied further by Chilean Government and opportunity be given American

Government to become more fully apprised as to the facts.

I have engagements to see Minister of Foreign Affairs and President of the

Republic as to matter today. Minister of War and Minister of Fomento are

dining with me tonight. Last-mentioned should be particularly interested. I

will endeavor to present the matter to all of them and also will see Minister

of Hacienda if possible.

Rampant protectionist sentiment and desperate condition of Chile coal

industry, coupled with [paraphrase] the reported statement that powerful

Chilean nitrate companies are willing to accept an increased duty on coal

which they use provided that the Chilean Government will reduce the

export duty on nitrate [end paraphrase], make it doubtful whether duties

will be materially reduced; but I will do the best I can. Incidentally it should

be borne in mind that loss of revenue caused by any possible reduction of

nitrate export duties will be made up by increased taxes, probably on copper

and possibly on iron ore.

COLLIER

[Document 401]

The Chargé in Chile (Hofer) to the Secretary of State

SANTIAGO, November 16, 1927—noon.

[Received 5: p.m.]

passed coal bill substantially as reported by joint committee late yesterday

after short discussion. Bill expected to be sent promptly to the Senate.

[Paraphrase.] Seibert says that there is little hope for effective modifications

since prestige of Government and Minister of Finance, who has suffered

much embarrassment by protests, is involved if Congress does not promptly

approve bill. [End paraphrase.]

HOFER

[Document 402]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 2: p.m.]

186. Have continued efforts to secure modification of coal and petroleum

bill. Minister of Foreign Affairs on November 30th answered note referred

Government felt copper companies had delayed unduly in making protests

and also challenged accuracy of their figures and conclusions and stated

that it was difficult to accede to request for prolongation of the study of this

measure but that “as a demonstration of its good will the Government had

proposed to Congress an addition to law permitting President of the

Republic for a period of one year to make resolutions as to the matter if he

believed such action consistent with national interest.” I understand

intention is to authorize President to suspend or modify application of law if

in his judgment wise. Meantime thorough investigation of the situation will

be made.

William Braden30 has had numerous conferences with President and

Minister of Hacienda as to this bill and also existing tax laws and is about to

leave, hopeful and fairly well satisfied with this arrangement. There has

been a formal interchange of notes between him and Minister of Hacienda

providing for such a study of entire situation in fulfillment of assurance

given me by Foreign Office as above-mentioned.

COLLIER

[Document 403]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

19. Home Insurance Company of New York calls Department’s attention to

a cablegram from its agent in Chile reading in part as follows:

“Minister Finance has published his intentions to nationalize

insurance as soon as possible. Principal points are as follows.

Government will form a reinsurance company. Foreign

companies will be eliminated. Native companies must reinsure

their surplusses with Government company. When law is passed

companies will be considered national only if two-thirds of

capital belongs to Chileans.”

It is stated that British and German companies doing business in Chile have

asked for diplomatic intervention. Home Insurance Company desires this

Government to protest against measure as being confiscatory. Please inquire

of Foreign Office concerning proposed measure and report fully by

telegraph, especially with regard to extent to which it appears to be

confiscatory. Department has requested company to furnish information

concerning nature and extent of its business and property interests in Chile.

KELLOGG

[Document 404]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 11: p.m.]

informal representations to Minister of Foreign Affairs as to proposed

insurance law, and have subsequently conversed with him. He says my

representations will receive serious consideration but have been sent by him

to the Minister of the Treasury whose project this is. Its provisions are

correctly stated in your cable. As yet it cannot be said to have had

indorsement of Cabinet although probably reflecting the avowed policy of

this administration to promote national interests in every way possible.

German and British Ministers who have made rather vigorous protest owing

to their large interests, believe project will be adopted and this is not

unlikely, although not apt to occur at once, and some substantial

amendment may be made. Ministers of Treasury, Interior and Public Works

dined with me last night. The first-named told me the matter was not ready

for immediate enactment, although he felt that much if not all insurance

should be effected in Chilean companies and that French companies had

been driving them out of the field by rather unfair methods. I pointed out

mutual advantages that would permit French companies to continue

business and unfairness, practically amounting to that which might be

considered destruction of property rights, if French companies were

prohibited from carrying [on] a business which they had established in the

past at considerable expense. Except in this respect I do not see anything

confiscatory. Chilean Government appears inclined to consider this as

simply withdrawal of a license to each business issued without any

consideration entitling it to be considered permanent and does not consider

it confiscatory. Am acting independently of British and German Ministers

but in close touch with them. Minister of Hacienda in submitting his project

to commission appointed to consider insurance question said that it was not

official and should be considered only as basis for study. I know of no

inquiries as to their business yet made from foreign companies but if law is

enacted new companies will be subject to inspection by Superintendent of

Insurance and required to furnish all pertinent information that may be

desired by him.

COLLIER

[Document 405]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

insurance bill, modified and made more drastic, was sent recently to

Congress with urgent message requesting immediate passage in form

presented. This draft of law limits insurance business in future to nationally

organized companies and requires that all reinsurance be effected through

the caja of reinsurance. However, it permits foreign companies now doing

[business?] in Chile to reorganize as national companies. Minister of

Hacienda tells me that the general provision that two-thirds of stock must

be owned by citizens or residents of Chile does not apply to last-mentioned

case and that existing foreign companies may reorganize and stock may be

held by foreigners in the same proportions as at present. Agents for

American companies dread requirement of reorganization as national

companies because of great powers given to Superintendent of Insurance

who may not only fix rates but determine amount of risk that may be

carried and dictate with what company reinsurance may be effective.

Nevertheless agents of American companies believe that the grant of such

powers to Superintendent of Insurance, although apt to be exercised

capriciously for the purpose [of] driving foreign insurance out of business,

cannot be questioned in principle as violative of international or

constitutional right. Proposed legislation does not appear confiscatory

unless refusal to allow continuance of a business which has acquired a

goodwill value can be so considered.

In order to prevent insurance from being written by foreign owners of

property located in Chile in foreign companies, the act as now drafted in

section 59 imposes tax on such policies equal to half of premium that would

be charged by Chilean national companies and imposes very heavy fines in

addition to [for?] failure to pay. Prior to incorporation of this provision in

the bill, the big American business interests had expected to avoid

hardships of the law by insuring in New York with New York companies

and the foreign insurance doing business in Chile had hoped this possibility

of the insurance business being thus diverted from Chile to foreign

countries would convince the framers of the bill of the inexpediency of the

proposed legislation.

All are greatly perturbed by new provision and wish assistance of our

Government.

I have had three opportunities to discuss matter directly with Minister of

Hacienda who earnestly advocates this legislation. I got him to withdraw

the request for urgent action by Congress but matter has been referred to a

joint committee of House and Senate and it is possible that measure will be

rushed through notwithstanding he assured me his purpose in withdrawing

urgency request was to permit me to communicate with you and obtain

instruction.

There have been intimations that article 59 would be stricken out if we

would not oppose rest of legislation. Best-informed agent for American

companies believes this will be the maximum which we can accomplish and

that if this section is eliminated it will result in either abandonment of the

bill or eventual repeal.

I know of no treaty obligations preventing Chile from limiting insurance

business to its own citizens. I request Department’s instructions as to any

principles of international Jaw that may be invoked. I have made

representations to Ministry of Foreign Affairs that proposed law is injurious

to mutual commercial interests, inconsistent with fundamental idea of

insurance to spread loss and that it is particularly hazardous to Chile to seek

to insure itself, considering possibility of catastrophe by earthquake with

enormous incidental loss.

I have told Minister of Hacienda that in my opinion section 59 infringes

upon sovereignty foreign countries and trespasses upon right of foreigners

to make legitimate contracts in foreign countries with other foreigners. I

believe he is impressed by this reasoning and that it is for this reason there

have been intimations that he may change this provision especially if

optional provisions were withdrawn. But I have specifically declared that I

have no authority to compromise in this manner and that I await your

instructions. British, French and German colleagues, who have been

cooperating, are much pleased with my success in getting Minister to notify

Congress that measure may not be considered urgent.

Foreign Chamber[s] of Commerce in Chile have all or practically all

petitioned Government not to pass measure and some Chilean business

interests are expressing doubt as to wisdom of legislation and it is said that

some national insurance companies fear workings of law but hardly dare

oppose it.

I have been careful to say nothing that indicates possibility of any

retaliation afterward and other so-called nationalistic legislation intended to

promote Chilean industry.

[Paraphrase.] If the Department believes it wise to point out that this

legislation which is intended to exclude foreigners or to limit unorganized

opportunities is undesirable, I recommend that it be done through

conversations between you and the Chilean Ambassador to the United

States.

I have conversed with two vice presidents of the National City Bank of

New York, now in Santiago, and with Doctor Kemmerer and we agree that

the proposed legislation is likely to be detrimental to the real economic

interests of Chile but [omission?] because of official or business relations

with the Chilean Government. Instructions requested. [End paraphrase.]

COLLIER

[Document 406]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[Paraphrase]

WASHINGTON, August 8, 1927—noon.

31. The Department has not yet received proposed Chilean law

nationalizing insurance. However, upon the information at hand, the

Department does not think a protest is warranted upon grounds that the law

under international law would be confiscatory and violative of the rights of

American citizens. Nor does the Department think that article 59 infringes

upon the sovereignty of foreign countries and trespasses upon the rights of

foreigners as you suggest. However, the Department believes that you are

warranted in urging that it be eliminated because it would interfere with free

and mutually beneficial intercourse between the United States and Chile. At

your discretion you may take up this matter again informally with the

Minister for Foreign Affairs.

KELLOGG

[Document 407]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

SANTIAGO, September 12, 1927—noon.

[Received 6: p.m.]

with amendments to Chamber of Deputies. All efforts by myself and

commercial attaché and interested American enterprises to get printed or

specific information about committee amendments have so far been

unavailing, report “not yet having been printed for distribution”. It is

understood that existing foreign agencies will be allowed to continue

business with present personnel and without reorganizing as national

companies upon condition that in addition to amount required for

mathematical reserves they invest 2,000,000 pesos in Chilean securities or

property that can be readily liquidated and that they pay a tax on premiums

collected 50 percent greater than the tax to be paid by national companies.

Former section 59, modified and now made section 46, is said to provide

that every person or company who insures property located in Chile in

companies not established in Chile must pay a tax “variable between 15 and

20 percent of the premium that would be collected by a Chilean national

company”, the President of the Republic to be authorized to fix the tax

within these limits. It is uncertain whether policies taken out in foreign

companies whose existing agencies may be continued by them under the

new law will be subject to this tax.

Shall I protest against discriminatory taxation and also against second-

mentioned tax so far as it affects policies on Chilean property taken out in

the United States by Americans not residents of Chile? Cable promptly,

measure likely to be rushed through. Nationalistic sentiment strong, mere

representations as to promotion of mutual interests by equal or liberal

treatment not apt to produce results.

Cottier

[Document 408]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

[Paraphrase]

perceive no good basis for a protest against the provisions of the insurance

law. See Department’s telegram number 31, August 8, noon.

KELLOGG

[Document 409]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

SANTIAGO. September 19, 1927—noon.

[Received 12: p.m.]

135. Insurance bill as amended is considered by local representatives of

American fire companies already having agencies here as likely to result in

big increase in business because it will prevent entrance of new foreign

companies unless they nationalize and because it requires Chilean

companies to effectuate all insurance among themselves or through

Government caja while requiring foreign companies to reinsure in caja

only 20 percent. However many object even to this in principle, unwilling

to cooperate in any way with Government in insurance business and on this

ground threaten to discontinue agencies but most agents believe prospects

of increased business will cause them not to do so. Requirement of

increased deposits and heavier taxes even though discriminatory are not

considered by agents as offsetting probable big increase in business and

profits. National companies in whose interests bill was drafted not now

completely satisfied with its provisions and may seek amendments which

may possibly be adopted although this is not likely, moreover any further

discussion is apt to help established foreign companies.

COLLIER

[Document 410]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

[Received 7: p.m.]

138. Regular session of Congress has terminated. Government contemplates

calling special session about October 6th. Insurance bill will then come

before Senate. I request Department’s consideration of the fact that the tax

on policies negotiated by foreigners with foreign companies and executed

in foreign countries affects not only insurance on real estate, that is,

buildings, but also insurance on personal property, machinery and other

chattels and also insurance against loss of prospective profits caused by

interruption of business due to fire. Am informed that one of three great

American copper companies carries 12 million dollars against loss of

prospective profits, presumably the others carry proportionate insurance.

Attorneys for American interests have argued that if such contracts relating

to personal property even though used in connection with or derived from

real estate situated in Chile can thus be taxed, it would appear that any

contract affecting such personal property, as for instance mortgages and

assignments, could be taxed. Does this in the Department’s opinion affect

its decision that no representation should be made against this feature of the

law?

COLLIER

[Document 411]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile

(Collier)

American concerns there is no apparent ground for a formal protest but in

your discretion you may continue to urge informally that the provision in

question be eliminated upon the ground that it would interfere with business

between the two countries.

CARR

[Document 412]

The Chargé in Chile (Hofer) to the Secretary of State

[Received 10: p.m.]

passed Senate yesterday with modifications, all of which according to

Beausire, representative of Great American and Home Insurance

Companies, are acceptable to foreign companies. Article 46 amended so as

to permit insurance of properties in Chile with local branches of foreign

insurance companies or if the risk is unacceptable the local companies may

place insurance abroad without being subject to tax.

HOFER

[Document 413]

The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State

SANTIAGO, November 29, 1927.

[Received December 21.]

No. 1256

reporting the modifications made in Article 46 of the redrafted Insurance

Bill, I have the honor to state that on the 23 instant the Chamber of

Deputies approved the bill in question with all of the modifications made by

the Senate with the exception of Article 36 which does not vitally affect

foreign interests but refers to the question of non-taxation of local

institutions of a benevolent or charitable character.

The bill as presented at the opening of the special session of Congress

contained several new changes beneficial to Foreign Companies and the

subsequent amendments,—particularly in Article 46 which now allows

local branches of foreign insurance companies to place insurance abroad

when the insurance has been turned down by the local companies, without

being subject to a special tax,—is considered by Mr. Beausire as

eliminating the most harmful feature of the bill as far as foreign companies

are concerned. However, the cutting down of the required capitalization of

the local companies to only $500,000 and of the foreign companies to

$1,000,000 is somewhat regretted by foreign interests as this it is believed

will permit the establishment of certain local companies which would not

have been able to have entered the field if the original amount of

$1,000,000 capitalization for local companies and $2,000,000 for foreign

companies had remained in force.

In conformity with the Department’s instructions I have refrained from

formal protests, but I have repeatedly made informal representations as to

the injury to the general business interests of the two countries likely to

result from the bill as originally drafted.

I have [etc.]

WM. MILLER COLLIER

[Document 414]

The Chargé in Chile (Engert) to the Secretary of State

SANTIAGO, November 22, 1926.

[Received December 22.]

No. 962

SIR: Referring to an item mentioned on page 32 of the Embassy’s General

transmit herewith a translation of the full text of the decision of the

Santiago Court of Appeals which held that a Second Secretary of the

Brazilian Embassy in Santiago—and therefore by inference any other

diplomatic secretary in this capital—is subject to the jurisdiction of the

Chilean courts in a criminal case, and that an order for his arrest and

imprisonment may be issued provided notification thereof be given to the

Brazilian Ambassador.

As the diplomatic secretary in question was recalled by his Government

shortly after the case began and although the decision of the Court of

Appeals will consequently remain without effect as regards his person, most

members of the diplomatic corps in Santiago feel very strongly that a

dangerous precedent has been set which should not remain unchallenged.

For the Department’s information I am quoting below in translation Article

I of the Chilean Code of Criminal Procedure:

“The Tribunals of the Republic exercise jurisdiction over

Chileans and foreigners for the purpose of judging crimes

committed in its territory, except in the cases provided for by the

rules generally recognized in International Law”.

The Department will observe, moreover, that in paragraph (1) of the

inclosed decision the exceptions made by International Law are admitted.

But in paragraph (2) the Court is of the opinion that International Law

recognizes diplomatic exemptions from criminal jurisdiction only in favor

of “Ambassadors, Ministers, and Chargés d’Affaires”.

Apart from the fact that in most civilized countries no distinction is made

between the chiefs of missions and the diplomatic secretaries as regards

their immunity from arrest and trial by the local authorities, the decision

appears to contradict itself because it will be noted that in paragraph (9) it

goes so far as to say that not even an Ambassador could claim the privilege

of exterritoriality if he committed a crime in Chile, as he would be subject

to the jurisdiction of the special tribunal provided for in Article 15 of the

Code of Criminal Procedure.

I have [etc.]

C. VAN H. ENGERT

[Enclosure—Extracts—Translation]

Decision of the Santiago Court of Appeals, September 24, 1926

1. As a general rule all persons who reside within the limits of a country, be

they citizens or foreigners, are subject to the laws which that country

establishes, except the exceptions recognized by international law, and in

consequence it pertains to the tribunals of each nation to judge of all the

acts subjected to them by its constitution or laws and to conserve the

validity of the public authority by the defence and vindication of all the

rights created by its laws which have been disregarded.

2. That the exceptions recognized by international law, accepted by all

civilized countries, are (1) the person of a sovereign, when he enters the

territory of a friendly power; (2) the diplomatic agents, understanding as

such the ambassadors and diplomatic ministers and chargés d’Affaires, who

represent the sovereign and government of friendly nations; (3) the

warships which sail or anchor in territorial waters; (4) the armies or troops

of other nations which visit or pass in transit through national territory;

[Document 415]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Chile (Collier)

WASHINGTON, January 8, 1927.

No. 699

SIR: The Department refers to the Embassy’s despatch No. 962 of November

22, 1926, enclosing a copy in translation of the decision of the Court of

Appeals at Santiago of September 24, 1926, holding that a Secretary of the

Brazilian Embassy in Santiago was subject to the jurisdiction of the Chilean

courts in a criminal case and that he might be arrested and imprisoned for

his criminal acts committed in Chilean territory. The Embassy states that

although the decision of the Court will remain without practical effect as the

Secretary in question was called home by his Government shortly after the

case began, members of the diplomatic corps in Santiago feel that the

decision is a dangerous precedent and should not go unchallenged.

While the Department feels that the decision of the Court in the case

referred to was in contravention of the generally recognized principle of

international law that diplomatic immunity from local criminal jurisdiction

enjoyed by heads of diplomatic missions also extends to the members of

their suites, it is considered that this Government need not make a special

protest against the precedent set by the case. However, should the

diplomatic corps at Santiago decide that the decision merits a joint protest

to the Chilean Government as being contrary to international law, you are

authorized to express concurrence.
