44 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 13. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal to President Carter1 Washington, March 24, 1977 SUBJECT Cargo Preference Legislation (H.R. 1037) Executive Summary H.R. 1037 provides that 20% of the U.S. oceanborne oil imports will be carried by U.S. tankers, with the percentage rising to 30% by 1980. The EPG has reviewed H.R. 1037 and is unanimous in opposing it for a number of reasons, including cost and inflationary impact, adverse impact on the Navy shipbuilding program, precedent for other countries, violation of treaties, and exacerbation of the world tanker service. The EPG has also considered possible amendments to H.R. 1037, such as extended timetable of implementation, reduced preference percentages, construction subsidies, and allowance for foreign-built tanker participation. We have also considered supporting an amended H.R. 1037 in conjunction with reductions in the maritime subsidy program. The EPG was unanimous, again, that the bill will be unsatisfactory even in amended form. During the campaign, you did make statements which maritime interests understand as commitments to support cargo preference. Some alternative initiatives to assist the maritime industry would mitigate adverse political reaction from a negative stand on cargo preference, and you may wish to consider such alternatives as described in this memorandum. The EPG has not staffed out in detail these proposals, but we felt it appropriate to seek your guidance before proceeding further. In any event we should not take a formal public position until there has been additional consultation with the Congress. Options The Options are:2 Option A: Oppose H.R. 1037 and take no further action. 1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 14, 3/28/77 [1]. Confidential. Sent for action. A typed notation reads: “The President has seen.” Attached is an undated note from Carter to Eizenstat that reads: “Stu— Check w/Congressional leaders or staffs. Then report to me. I want to build up MM [Merchant Marine] but with minimum adverse effect on consumers—HR 1037 may be best way—but I doubt it.” Hutcheson forwarded the memorandum to Eizenstat under cover of a March 28 note. (Ibid.) 2 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to any of these options.
