793.00/123a: Telegram
[Document 667]
The Secretary of State to the Minister of China (MacMurray)
WASHINGTON, August 1, 1925—3 p.m.
180. The Japanese Ambassador called upon me yesterday and stated with reference to
the draft note communicated to you with Department’s 165 July 23, 3 p.m., that his
Government understood that this Government was not only ready to appoint its
delegates to the Special Conference on Chinese tariff matters, but was furthermore
prepared to accept any reasonable proposal for extending the scope of that conference
and also to take up, either at the Tariff Conference or at a subsequent time, the subject
of a comprehensive revision of the treaties looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy. He
stated that the Japanese Government is inclined to believe that in the Powers’ reply to
the Chinese note, it would be safer and wiser to mention only those matters, which they
are convinced, are possible of realization and not to refer to those pertaining to the
extension of the scope of the Tariff Conference, much less to that of tariff autonomy.
He said that the Japanese Government believe that to make reference at this juncture in
the Powers’ note to China to a matter which cannot be confidently expected to be
realized is to give a false hope to the Chinese people and bring about confusion. He
said that the Japanese Government was therefore constrained to take exception to the
American proposal to make reference in the Powers’ note to China to the questions of
extending the scope of the Tariff Conference and also of tariff autonomy.
I explained to the Japanese Ambassador that I was very definitely of the opinion that
the reply which should be made to the Chinese Government at this time should be so
cast as to show the willingness of the Powers to discuss any matters, even including the
question of tariff autonomy, which might be brought up at the time when the
conference meets. I stated that in my opinion in the present condition of public
sentiment in China and in view of the kind of agitation that was going on that no
conference on tariffs simply limited to the exact terms of the Nine-Power Treaty could
be expected to meet the situation. I stated that I have felt that there must be a
willingness of all the Powers to meet China and to discuss the entire tariff situation. I
stated that I was not insisting on the use of the precise words “tariff autonomy”
necessarily but said that the wording of the note should be so phrased as to cover tariff
autonomy should it be advanced as a question. I read to him that portion of
Department’s No. 173 of July 30, 1 p.m. in which you were authorized to substitute for
the term “looking toward ultimate tariff autonomy” the words “dealing with the entire
subject of the tariff” and stated that I hoped that this phraseology would meet the
objections which the Japanese Government had to the use of the other term.
