1220 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 23. The Soviet has rejected the August 29th European zone pro­ posals. However, they did evince interest in earlier informal U.S. sug­ gestions based on a 5° E–­30° E zone running from a line east of Paris to a line just west of Leningrad-­Odessa. In response to this informal U.S. probing, the Soviet on April 30, 1957, responded with a proposal for a zone running from 0 degree (Greenwich) to 25° E (Lvov-­Brest-­Wilna). 24. The Soviet likewise has rejected the August 29th Arctic Zone and the North American-­USSR zone. In response to informal earlier probing by the United States during the London talks, the Soviet on April 30th responded with the suggestion of an Eastern Siberia-­Western United States zone running from 108° E to 90° W. 25. The Western European UN Subcommittee members (UK and France), in line with the May 25, 1957 Presidential decision3 that the Euro­ pean zone should be left to the initiative of Western European nations, did take the initiative in advancing in the NATO Council the concept of a 5°–35° European zone. The NATO Council then left to the West­ ern UN Subcommittee members (U.S., UK, France, Canada) the manner in which this zone should be advanced. During the 4-­Western Power meetings at the end of July with the Secretary heading the U.S. Delega­ tion, it was decided not to advance 5°–­35° European zone but to advance for “discussion” and only under conditions of complete inseparability a small but undefined European zone. Outer-­Space Objects 26. Particularly in view of the recently apparent Soviet strides in satellite-­missile technology, it is in the U.S. interest now to make sep­ arable from the rest of the package and to agree to the August 29th proposal for the establishment of a technical committee to study the design of an inspection system which would assure the use of outer-­ space objects for peaceful purposes. 27. The Soviet during the London discussions did not react to the U.S. missile proposal except to indicate that their proposal to eliminate nuclear weapons included all “rockets”. Armaments Regulation Organization 28. The setting up of an Armaments Regulation Organization under the aegis of the UN Security Council would be in the U.S. inter­ est. Agreement on such an organization by itself would have certain value in breaking the atmosphere of stalemate and thereby improv­ ing the chances for agreement on subjects on which the two sides are not now far apart. Such an organization also could begin to make the 3 NSC Action No. 1722. [Footnote is in the original.]
