Arms Control and Disarmament 1587 data necessary to counter proposals of this nature that have been or are likely to be made by other parties. d. The draft terms of reference for a Study Group on Disarmament Measures, attached hereto, should be substituted for the terms of ref­ erence for a Study Group on Increasing Protection Against Surprise Attack, proposed by the Secretary of State. e. In the event that Mr. William C. Foster is not available to direct the Study Group, a senior U.S. Military Officer should be appointed. However, if Mr. William C. Foster, or an individual of similar stature, should assume the responsibility of the Chairman of the Study Group, a senior U.S. Military Officer should be designated as the Director of the Study Group Staff. In any event, the consultants should include at least one military officer. For the Joint Chiefs of Staff: /S/ Arleigh Burke Chief of Naval Operations Appendix PROPOSED TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR THE AD HOC STUDY GROUP ON DISARMAMENT MEASURES 1. The objective of the Study Group is to develop detailed proposed U.S. positions relative to disarmament measures for possible use by a U.S. delegation to an international conference. 2. The study group will be guided in its work by the following: a. U.S. positions relative to disarmament measures will be devel­ oped within existing U.S. disarmament policy. b. U.S. positions on disarmament measures will maintain, as a min­ imum, the relative U.S. national defense posture vis-­a-­vis the Soviet Bloc. c. U.S. positions relative to disarmament measures which might reduce the combat readiness of U.S. forces and their weapons systems will be developed only for the purpose of countering such measures should they be proposed by other nations. 3. Specifically, the Study Group shall accomplish the following tasks: a. Identify specific and verifiable disarmament measures which might reduce the likelihood of armed conflict, to include reductions of armed forces and armaments. These measures should be applied to each type of weapons system, together with its using organization; first within limited geographic areas where friction exists or is likely to develop, and then to progressively enlarge geographic areas, finally encompassing all militarily significant nations. b. Design systems for verifying adherence to the measures iden­ tified under subparagraph 3 a above. Specify the type numbers, and source of verification personnel, their organization for verification
