1058  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
That is why it must be resolved before the treaty can be completed and 
signed. The sides already have broadly agreed to such a ban, but are 
bogged down in trying to agree on its implementation. You and I now 
need to issue instructions to complete work rapidly on this question.
As on the other issues, if you and I can agree on the principles to 
be applied, I am confident that a way can be found to translate them 
quickly into practice. We should agree that each side would use prac-
tices such that the other side can in fact acquire data about ballistic 
missile performance. Otherwise, the ban on data denial would be 
meaningless. Second, we should agree that each side would be obli-
gated to ensure the other side can interpret and understand the data it 
acquires. Otherwise, a guarantee that the data will be received would 
likewise be hollow.
On the basis of these two principles, my senior advisers and 
experts have just completed an extensive review of this complex issue. 
The resulting approach takes fully into account concerns raised by the 
Soviet side and, I believe, provides a fair and equitable basis for resolv-
ing the issue promptly. We will be presenting our new and comprehen-
sive proposal to the Soviet delegation in Geneva within the next few 
days. In light of the complexity and importance of this issue, I propose 
to send a special team of technical experts to Geneva that would be 
instructed to work with their Soviet counterparts to reach quick agree-
ment on the necessary data denial provisions.
Mikhail, let me urge you to accept the approach I have laid out 
in this letter as the basis for the two of us to direct our negotiators to 
complete their work promptly. If you can do so, I am prepared to send a 
team of senior officials to Geneva immediately to meet with their Soviet 
counterparts in order to expedite resolution of the remaining START 
issues. On the same basis, I likewise am ready to ask Jim Baker to meet 
with Foreign Minister Bessmertnykh in the near future so that they can 
break through any remaining logjams and clear the way for a summit 
this summer at which you and I can sign the START treaty.
In sum, we should resolve the outstanding issues directly, deci-
sively, and in a way that will produce an agreement that we together can 
proudly state will be effective and lasting. I know you share my commit-
ment to such an achievement, which would crown our relationship and 
show that the United States and the Soviet Union continue to lead the 
way toward a safer world. This has become more important than ever as 
we intensify our efforts to thwart the spread of nuclear weapons.
I look forward to hearing from you on this and to expanding our 
cooperation in all areas.2
2 Printed from an unsigned copy. In telegram 16084 from Moscow, June 10, 1991, 
the Embassy reported that Baker handed the letter to Bessmertnykh in Geneva on June 7. 
(Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, N910004–0438)
