establishment of a real government here, the working out of an arrangement for accomplishing this purpose might prove feasible by means of a separate arrangement, either severally or collectively, with the various regional administrations. 12. With regard to anticipated benefits from the Conference, it is my mature opinion that our position would be no worse than if we concluded an agreement with a central administration which is and for years must be a political nonentity. The promises to relieve trade of the incubus of likin and other inland taxation are not seriously believed by anybody to be realizable. Nor, under the circumstances that have come to exist, could an undertaking for the consolidation and funding of unsecured debts possibly be carried out. Seizure of control of customs by leaders in each area would merely be provoked by the attempt, which would thus precipitate a break-up of Customs Administration: the only stabilizing influence and the only source of revenue by which the indebtedness of China can conceivably be met. The suggestion of the British two months ago that our agreement with the existing regime be concluded by us, subject to the condition that assent be given to it by other regions, falls between two stools, it seems to me: the “outs” would take our committing of ourselves to an arrangement profitable to the “ins” as a challenge; the “ins” would be resentful of our offering them an agreement, of which the precedent condition obviously could not be fulfilled. In my judgment, we must dismiss as absolutely futile and illusory any hopes based upon the possibility that a central administration in China could carry out any obligations it might assume in connection with the Conference. 13. After consulting Strawn,72 who indorses strongly the above views, I have considered carefully this question: whether our position regarding the manner of our contacts with China ought to be determined and announced immediately or whether developments in respect to the present indeterminate situation in North China should be awaited. My firm conviction is that this position, if it is to carry the moral weight of a decision formed
