5. The procedure laid down in paragraph 4 may also be followed if, after the
verification of the flag and in spite of the voluntary production of the manifest, the
Commanding Officer of the warship continues to suspect the vessel of engaging in the
illicit conveyance of articles covered by Categories I, II, IV and V.
6. In the cases referred to in paragraph 1 (b) hereof, if it is ascertained, as a result of the
visit made on board the vessel that, whereas it flew no flag, it was also not entitled to
fly the flag of a recognised State, the vessel may, unless the innocent nature of her
cargo can be duly established to the satisfaction of the Commanding Officer of the
warship, be conducted to the nearest point in the maritime zone where there is a
competent authority of the Power to which the detaining warship belongs, and shall be
handed over to such authority.
7. The authority before whom the suspected vessel has been brought shall institute a
full enquiry in accordance with the laws and regulations of his country and in
conformity with the procedure laid down in paragraph 8 below.
This enquiry shall be carried out in the presence of an officer of the detaining warship.
If, however, the presence of such officer is impracticable owing to the duties upon
which the warship is engaged, an affidavit sworn by the Commanding Officer may in
special cases be accepted by the authority holding the enquiry in place of the oral
evidence of an officer of the warship.
8. (a) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (a) above, if it is proved at this
enquiry that the flag has been illegally flown, but that the vessel is entitled to fly the
flag of a recognised State, she shall, if that State is one of the High Contracting Parties,
be handed over to the nearest authority of that State. If such State is not a High
Contracting Party, the vessel shall be disposed of by agreement between the State
responsible for her detention and the State whose flag she is entitled to fly, and,
pending such agreement, shall remain in the custody of the authorities of the nationality
of the detaining warship.
(b) If it should be established that the use of the flag by the detained vessel was correct,
but that the vessel was engaged in the illicit conveyance of articles covered by
Categories I, II, IV and V, those responsible shall be brought before the courts of the
State under whose flag the vessel sailed. The vessel herself and her cargo shall remain
in charge of the authority conducting the enquiry. The illicit cargo may be destroyed in
accordance with laws and regulations drawn up for the purpose.
(c) In the case of vessels referred to in paragraph 1 (b) above, if it be established that
the vessel had the right to fly the flag of one of the High Contracting Parties but was
engaged in the illicit conveyance of any of the articles covered by Categories I, II, IV
and V, the procedure laid down in the preceding paragraph should be followed.
