Uruguay 1157 we await the time when the Uruguayan Government may finally take constructive economic measures that are increasingly needed, including solution of the packing house problem, we can reduce the extent to which our relations suffer by taking advantage of the very fact that the Uruguayan Government has, for several years, been encouraging the public impression that the countervailing duty on wool tops has had a more deleterious effect than has been the case. The U.S. Government now has an opportunity to gain disproportionately from public opinion from removal of the countervailing duty. (4) There appears to be very little possibility that any significant quantity of Uruguayan wool tops would be exported to the United States in the predictable future if the countervailing duty were now removed. In the absence of the duty, according to competent experts, the price of Uruguayan wool tops would still be above the world price. Furthermore, viewed in terms of relative importance, even in the peak year of 1958, when imports of Uruguayan tops into the United States amounted to home 14 million pounds (valued at slightly over 16 million dollars) quantitatively these imports amounted for only about 3 percent of total U.S. wool consumption. Since 1958, Uruguayan tops exports to the United States have dwindled to only a few hundred thousand pounds annually, and it is very unlikely that the relatively high 1952 volume could ever be repeated. (5) The number of U.S. companies which are dependent to an important extent upon the combing of raw wool into wool tops as a large part of their manufacturing operations has evidently diminished since the countervailing duty went into effect in 1953. The number of U.S. plants in which this is now a large part of total operations is probably less than ten. The possibility of complaints or criticism from there plants is further reduced by the fact that there would probably be no increased imports of Uruguayan wool tops into the U.S. in the predictable future if the countervailing duty were removed. Moreover, the convincing indication that the officially established exchange rate for Uruguayan exports of wool tops can no longer be continued as a “subsidy” as compared with the average exchange rate for all other Uruguayan exports and imports, oil [illegible in the original] the basis for complaint from those factories that imports of Uruguayan wool tops should legally be subjected to a countervailing duty. The large number of complaints received by the U.S. Government prior to the application of the countervailing duty against wool tops in 1958 suggests that a preponderant majority of those complaints came from wool manufacturers and wool producers in the United States who may not have been directly affected by the importation of Uruguayan wool tops, but whose organized associations were acting in sympathy with the small group of manufacturers who were dependent upon wool combing operations.
