1979 593 accommodations. In this regard I differ with some of the suggestions in your assessment. C. (TS) On the general military balance, I believe your assessment may be in some places too stark (on strategic forces) and in others too optimistic (general purpose forces). 1. I concur that after certain worst-­case Soviet attacks on our strategic forces, and our retaliation on theirs, we would have about 10 percent less deliverable warheads than the Soviets would (1982 estimate), and far less megatonnage. On the other hand, I believe such estimates must be viewed in light of the assumptions involved, recognizing that a scenario approach is only one consideration: a. Such a “military” attack on the US would involve the detonation of 2000 or more megaton-­sized warheads on US soil. The resulting fatalities, direct and from fallout, would probably exceed in a few days time the losses in Europe in World War II. I think it unlikely that we would try to “ride out” such an attack, or respond as calculated. Still less could the Soviets count on our doing so. b. Even if we chose to wait, we would have about 3000 remaining deliverable strategic nuclear warheads, after we struck at residual Soviet strategic forces. Thus, it is not clear what the Soviets could gain by the initial attack. c. For safety we make calculations assuming fully generated Soviet forces with US forces on day-­to-­day alert. If either a preceding period of tension is assumed or some strategic warning, enough US forces are generated to alter the residual warhead balance in our favor. d. We could alter the bomber alert rate in the 1980’s, albeit at some cost, to rectify perceived imbalance, and can in other ways, if we choose, add modest numbers of warheads by 1985. e. By the mid-­to-­late 1980’s with the advent of TRIDENT and M–X, the calculations will become more favorable for us. (TS) I do not wish to imply I am content with our strategic position. Indeed, the trends are quite bad over the next five years. Deficiencies in our C3 survivability and endurance are particularly troubling. And we cannot be other than greatly concerned about Soviet advantages in many measures of strategic force capability—­and in TNF and conventional forces as well—­in the early-­to-­mid 1980’s. A confident, aggressive Soviet leadership is likely to have a relaxed attitude toward precipitating crises, and in them. The potential for miscalculation and catastrophe will be substantial. I therefore think we need to increase our strategic force programs above what is now approved. Without that, I foresee grave difficulties. But I do not feel that the nation is now in peril because of the strategic balance or that we are now so perceived by our friends and Allies. 2. (S) Conversely, I am concerned about your estimate that we have begun to achieve a better balance in NATO. I certainly agree that the LTDP is a great step forward, but it is as yet only promise. The actions
