726
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
martial law, and when his control is firmly established he is expected to
recall the Majlis. Elections for a new Majlis are to be anticipated there-
after. The army will doubtless manipulate these elections to ensure a
conservative majority in the new Parliament.
General Cabell predicted that the Tudeh Party would be ruthlessly
curbed, with the result that it would probably go underground. Its
leadership is still intact, and it may be expected to work with the pro-
Mossadegh factions to discredit the Shah and the new regime.
The allegiance of the tribes, said General Cabell, is not yet com-
pletely clear, but the fact that they have never been able to work in con-
cert with one another minimizes the dangers which Zahedi must antici-
pate from the tribes.
General Cabell stated that the most urgent problems confronting
the new government of Iran are economic and financial. It is unlikely
that an agreement with Britain, to settle the oil controversy, can be
readily and quickly achieved, if for no other reason than that General
Zahedi cannot afford to seem a British stooge. However, concluded
General Cabell, if United States financial aid can be promptly extended,
Iran will again assume its place in the pro-Western grouping of nations
and American relations with Iran will improve. Relations between Iran
and Great Britain are not likely to undergo any sudden change, and a
settlement of the outstanding issues between the Soviet Union and Iran
is unlikely at present.
Secretary Dulles commented that while what happened in Iran
was spontaneous, he did feel obliged to say that a number of people in
Iran had kept their heads and maintained their courage when the situa-
tion looked very tough. He felt that CIA in particular was entitled to
great praise. He also expressed himself as pleased with the cooperation
between CIA, State and FOA.
As a result of what had happened, Secretary Dulles informed the
Council, the United States now had a “second chance” in Iran when all
hope of avoiding a Communist Iran appeared to have vanished. Secre-
tary Dulles said that there had been an exchange of letters between the
President and General Zahedi.3 Secretary Dulles summarized General
Zahedi’s letter, pointing out the latter’s statement that he desired to re-
consider the problem of the oil settlement and that he needed assist-
ance. The President had replied that General Zahedi’s request would
receive sympathetic consideration. Secretary Dulles went on to point
out that in order to assist the new regime, the Administration would re-
quire funds beyond those programmed in the Mutual Security Act. The
additional funds would probably be in the neighborhood of $35 mil-
3 See Documents 301 and 302.
