Covert and Overt Operations 773 broad consensus building around the concept that holding the hostages is no longer to the advantage of Iran or any of the competing political groups. —Although the Parliament has been given the assignment of solving the crisis, it will not make a decision until it has received the “correct” signal from Khomeini. It cannot be expected to act on its own initiative; —Khomeini will send the “correct” signal when he senses the public is ready to end the crisis. This perception, in part, will be generated by the advice he receives from his close confidants and advisors. 282. Message From the Department of State to the Swiss Ambassador to Iran (Lang)1 Washington, May 13, 1980 We would appreciate it if the following message could be transmitted to Ambassador Lang in Tehran. 1. We have recently completed an assessment of our experiences in dealing with the hostage crisis and reached several conclusions which will guide us in this next phase of diplomatic effort. We regard the period until the new parliament convenes and addresses the hostage question as a crucial moment for preparing the ground for positive action by the legislators. Ideally, we would hope during this period to reach an understanding with the Iranian authorities as to how the hostage issue would be handled with the new parliament and what would be the most useful U.S. contribution. We would like to explore the best ways of doing that and would welcome your analysis and advice. 2. We consider that our previous efforts to negotiate release of the hostages failed largely because of the intransigence of the clerical leadership. We had concentrated our efforts on the secular leadership and left it to them to carry the arguments with the clerics. In this phase we want indirectly to try to be as persuasive as possible with the clerics. We believe Capucci may be best suited to this job, but we will explore whether others might also contribute to this process. We will be in 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 33, Iran Update 5/80. Secret. Attached to an undated briefing memorandum from Saunders to Christopher and Newsom entitled “May 14—Iran Update.”
