Afghanistan 795 be turned into an effective force that can clear and maintain security in major areas of the countryside. The Soviets attribute their inability to rebuild the Afghan Army to the failure of the Babrak regime to develop political support. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) In planning the size and structure of their initial intervention force in Afghanistan, the Soviets probably assumed that the Afghan Army would be both willing and able to bear the brunt of counterinsurgency operations. For their part, the Soviet forces were to secure a few key cities and supply routes and to provide forces for limited counterinsurgency operations in the countryside in support of the Afghan Army. Soviet leaders also probably expected the introduction of Soviet combat troops to stiffen the resolve of the Afghan Army and intimidate the insurgents. Instead the opposite has occurred. The insurgency has grown while the Afghan Army has deteriorated at an increasing rate. As a consequence, Soviet forces in Afghanistan have had to shoulder responsibilities that had not been anticipated. ([classification marking not declassified]) It is unlikely that the performance of either the Afghan Government or the Afghan Army can quickly be improved. Discord between the political factions making up the Afghan regime is preventing effective administration, and the prospects of resolving the contention are poor. Efforts to recruit new men for the Afghan Army are having poor results and currently cannot even make up the continuing losses through desertion. It probably will be impossible to find the men to create the several additional Afghan divisions that the Soviets want until there is considerably more administrative control over the population. Moreover, Afghanistan’s borders cannot be sealed by the Soviet and Afghan forces now available. ([classification marking not declassified]) Despite the difficulties they have encountered, the Soviet field command in Afghanistan now appears to be optimistic about the results of their recent operations. At least some commanders apparently believe that the insurgents have suffered serious setbacks and are now on the defensive. Large insurgent bands are reportedly dispersing into groups of 50 men or less and seeking refuge among the population. [1 line not declassified] The Soviet command in Afghanistan apparently believes that it may be possible to establish the Afghan Government’s authority in some contested areas and that the Afghan Army may be able to defeat the smaller insurgent bands. ([classification marking, codeword, and handling restriction not declassified]) This optimism clashes with earlier Soviet views and contradicts recent information available to us as well as views expressed by independent Soviet observers. [4 lines not declassified] There is no evidence that the Afghan Government is able to take hold in the countryside—
