Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
111
viewpoints of the sides coincided here. Buchheim stated that in general
this was correct, but he would state it somewhat differently. He would
say that, with regard to this agreement, the situation should be that
after signing the agreement nothing would have changed regarding the
rights now held by both sides except that they had recorded obligations
not to carry out certain specified acts against space objects. This should
be the full scope of this aspect of the agreement.
8. Khlestov said the sides seem to have a common understanding
that even with the agreement under negotiation the right was recog-
nized for a party to the agreement to protect itself against space objects
used for hostile or pernicious actions. This was the first point. The U.S.
view was that a state could use any measures for protection against
such acts except those listed in an agreement, namely, damaging, de-
stroying or changing the trajectory of space objects. Any other meas-
ures could be used. Perhaps he was inexperienced in this, but he won-
dered if Buchheim could give any examples of other measures besides
those prohibited in the agreement. Buchheim responded that Khlestov
could get a better answer to this question from his own experts.
Khlestov said he was not trying to make Buchheim say anything. He
said that there were other methods and if Buchheim did not wish to
talk about them Khlestov would ask his own specialists. Buchheim re-
plied that that would be better. He could answer only in general terms.
Since the Soviet side had thought so much on these matters, and partic-
ularly about what you call “hostile acts”, surely it had thought about
measures that might be taken against such missions. He could not be-
lieve that, with its scientific, technological and military resources, the
Soviet Union could not think of any measures other than blowing up a
space object. Soviet specialists surely knew of other examples. Khlestov
said that the U.S. viewpoint is that a state should undertake other
measures for protection against pernicious acts. The Soviet viewpoint
is that—in those instances—a state must have the right to take actions
which are prohibited in the agreement, that is damaging, destroying or
changing the trajectory of a space object. This is the difference between
the sides.
9. Khlestov said the Soviet side wanted to include in the agreement
an exhaustive list of actions against space objects which would be pro-
hibited, because such actions were effective when used against space
objects. He meant not only damaging or destroying a space object, but
all acts should be prohibited which would affect the space object and
would make it inoperative as a result of the acts. The Soviet side had in-
troduced the act of displacing a space object from orbit. The two sides
had discussed the meaning of “not to destroy” for a long time. The So-
viet side understood that a wide spectrum of instances were being
talked about, not destroying on board equipment or not interfering
