International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 83 tion in an effort to match these deficits. Countries collectively are not likely to reduce their deficits. Another problem is that there could be less growth in 1978 than in 1977. From now until 1980, apart from Japan, it is difficult to see who will meet the OECD targets. Only Japan will have larger growth in 1978 than in 1977. The US and Canada are doubtful as are France and Italy. How can we answer this problem? Also, with regard to balance of payments again, the US has moved to a deficit while the UK is moving to surplus on balance of payments but with less growth than we would like. We must ask whether the IMF proposals are adequate. Are they sufficient? And, I must say that I doubt whether they will be carried through on time. Helmut Schmidt said, and I agree, that we should project confidence. But this should not be a false confidence. We should give a real assessment on this situation and find real answers. I have one final concern. People are looking for direct benefits from the Summit; we must all keep that in mind as we proceed. Giscard: I thank you Mr. Prime Minister for living up to London’s tradition of hospitality. I welcome also two new leaders. President Carter has already gained considerable popularity in international public opinion. I also welcome Prime Minister Fukuda whom we all know and respect. I would caution before we begin that the final outcome should avoid a bureaucratic tone. Our experts excel at bureaucracy. We should ensure the final outcome reflects this group in this room. I have five comments on the economic situation: First, I deeply believe that profound structural changes have taken place in international economic affairs over the last three or four years. This is not a conventional crisis of 18 months or two years; there are profound changes. We had accustomed ourselves to cheap energy and reliable raw materials. The developing countries were not seen as a threat to our industry. We were accustomed to the healthy growth of the 1960s. We wasted resources and all of our emphasis was on relations among developed countries. All that now is behind us and we cannot go back to an old situation. We must adjust to a new resource distribution by organizing ourselves differently. Second, on the issue of employment. While things are improving in the US, the situation in Europe is poor. Whether in countries of low inflation (such as Germany) or high inflation (such as ourselves), the unemployment situation is serious. It will have an ideological content for our youths. The Socialist countries seem to have low growth but appear to be able to solve the problem of unemployment. Whatever their economic problems, they solve unemployment. We cannot accept high
