Previous to the enforcement of the Chinese national tariff law, an interim
surtax of 5 percent on ordinary goods, 30 percent on A grade luxuries
(namely, wine, tobacco) and 20 percent on B grade luxuries shall be levied in
addition to the present customs tariff at 5 percent ad valorem.
The collection of the above-mentioned interim surtaxes shall begin three
months from the date of signature.
The decisions relative to the above four articles shall be carried into effect
from the date of signature.
Chinese tariff law referred to in proposals 2 and 3 in Wang’s speech is a law
promulgated October 24, 1925, by the Chief Executive of the revolutionary
government and will be telegraphed tomorrow or later.75
Following Dr. Wang’s address, the American Minister spoke as follows:
“It is with a particular satisfaction that we of the American delegation take
our place[s] in this conference called in pursuance of one of the treaties
concluded at the Washington Conference [and] with the object of effectuating
the purpose[s] of that treaty. [It] is our earnest hope that the work of the
present conference may be carried on in the same spirit of mutual good will,
hopefulness, and confidence, which characterized the proceedings at
Washington.
There lies before this assembly a definite task imposed by the customs tariff
treaty. We, for our part, approach these duties with [a] hearty good will,
determined to do our share in bringing into practical operation the principles
and the purposes established by the treaty. In so doing we are prepared to
consider carefully, with open minds and in a generous spirit, any reasonable
plan which may be proposed with a view to realizing [the] hopes and
inspirations [aspirations] of the Chinese people in regard to the customs tariff
of China.
We are hopeful that the deliberations of this conference, actuated by mutual
respect and sympathetic understanding, may result in arrangement[s] that,
while safeguarding the just interests of the foreign nations, may also be the
means of assisting the Chinese people in developing and maintaining a sound
national life.”
The French Minister in his address laid special emphasis on the necessity for the
financial rehabilitation of China. He confined himself in the main to pleasant references
to the conference and to the program of work.
