March 1952–February 1953
329
F. Summary of the Situation
1. The July 1952 political upheavals in Iran have produced extreme
internal instability and some strengthening of the Tudeh position.
2. The Tudeh Party is the most closely organized political group in
Iran and stands to profit most by the present chaotic situation.
3. As a result of the July riots, the position of the Shah and the mo-
rale of the Army have been considerably weakened. The National Front
under Prime Minister Mossadegh, because of its acceptance of Tudeh
support in the riots, is now plagued by a series of splits in its leadership
which provides the Tudeh with opportunities to infiltrate certain fac-
tions and increase its influence in government affairs.
4. The people in the north, confused by the temporary cooperation
of National Front and Tudeh elements and with little voice in their gov-
ernment, could be expected to do little in the way of preventing a polit-
ical upheaval.
5. Currently CIA capabilities in Iran are insufficient to prevent a
Tudeh coup should such be attempted. Following such an event, how-
ever, a foothold might be gained in Iran through support of selected
tribes. The Qashqai are the only such group which we are considering
supporting at the present time. Their organization, orientation, leader-
ship [less than 1 line not declassified] make their selection obvious. Also,
they have indicated in the past that they would be receptive to our sup-
port, and have claimed that they could bring other tribal groups into an
armed alliance against a Communist central government.
II. Mission
To make preparations for combating, by paramilitary methods, the
efforts of Communist elements to seize control in Iran.8
[Omitted here are 25 pages of operational details of the plan.]
8 In a covering note, Helms wrote: “Meeting with Director was held 28 August 1952
at which time he approved this plan. He gave certain oral instructions with regard to the
arms to be acquired. The program is now being implemented by the NE Division.”
