654 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement youth organizations before 1953. In 1949, joined preparatory committee ­Sino-­Soviet Friendship Association, became Executive Committee mem­ ber and Deputy Secretary General Association. Relieved of these assign­ ments by late 1954. As Fonmin official, accompanied Chou to Moscow January 1950 for Sino-­Soviet negotiations. Only other known trip outside China: In 1952 headed Sino-­Soviet Friendship Association delegation to Mongolian-­ Soviet cultural conference in Ulan Bator. Was delegate from Kuomintang Revolutionary Committee to ­Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and has been one of directors Chinese People’s Institute of Foreign Affairs. Dulles 449. Letter 29 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 29 Washington, January 16, 1956 Dear Alex: We are trying to be more forehanded in getting out the guidance for your meetings. We are now having our preliminary session on ­Saturday preceding the Thursday meeting. This enables us to get out the first draft of the telegram by Monday morning. If all goes well we can get the Secretary’s approval on Monday and dispatch the telegram before the close of business on that day. I believe you will agree that the extra day’s margin is a good thing. We met with the Secretary last Monday, the 9th for about 45 minutes. He personally approved your instructions after making slight changes. I believe you will be inter­ ested in knowing that he continues to follow the talks closely notwith­ standing the ever-­mounting pressures on him. He gave no indication at the last meeting that he felt any change of tack on our part was needed. So there is no reason to expect any new departure in your guidance in the absence of agreement on the renunciation of force item and satisfac­ tory implementation of the agreed announcement, or some other major move by the Chinese Communists. I am enclosing a copy of the Shepley article on the Secretary from the January 16 issue of Life Magazine. In view of the flurry this article 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­ Informal.
