Negotiating Channels 389 CIA Vice President’s Office Admiral Stansfield Turner Denis Clift Justice NSC Benjamin Civiletti David Aaron Colonel William Odom Energy Gary Sick John Sawhill Tom Thornton SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS 1. Cooperation with Allies. Mr. Newsom reviewed the results of Mr. Christopher’s consultations in Europe thus far. In general, the prospects of imposing sanctions on Iran do not look promising. The British are taking a firm line that they lack the legal authority to do it, and it is also evident that they do not believe politically that the sanctions will be effective. State is working on a spread sheet of what the allies are doing and what they are likely to do—both on Iran and with regard to the Soviet Union.2 (S) Treasury will circulate today draft regulations on our own legal steps on sanctions. Mr. Christopher believes that publication of our own regulations could be marginally helpful to him in his efforts with the Europeans. The group discussed the desirability of including extraterritorial scope in our own regulations. This is a sensitive point with the Europeans and is likely to bring us into direct conflict with them if we attempt to extend our own regulations to cover the activities of U.S. subsidiaries abroad. A committee composed of Treasury, State, Commerce and Agriculture will meet today to analyze the effects of actions by U.S. subsidiaries on sanctions and the steps we can best take to increase the effectiveness of our own actions.3 (C) The SCC generally believed that our best approach would be to call in the principal companies and inform them that it is U.S. policy to deny shipments to Iran and that we will publicize activities by U.S. subsidiaries which are not consistent with that policy. Mr. Claytor felt 2 The spreadsheet, “Economic Measures Related to Iran and Afghanistan: Draft #1—January 15, 1980 AM,” is attached to a January 15 memorandum from Tarnoff to Brzezinski. Under headings “Afghan Trade Measures” and “Informal Measures,” the spreadsheet was divided into columns labeled “US Action,” “US Request,” and “Foreign Reaction.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800026–1153) 3 Carter wrote in the right margin beside this paragraph: “Be aggressive. Europeans need US pressure.” The sense of the January 15 meeting was that foreign subsidiaries of U.S. firms be excluded from the regulations for sanctions against Iran because to include them would raise old issues with U.S. European allies on the influence of U.S. multinationals on their domestic economies and politics. The meeting attendees also determined to postpone any decision until Christopher and Cooper weighed in. (Memorandum from Odom to Brzezinski and Aaron, January 15; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, Box 22, Treasury Department 3/79– 3/80)
