Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
11
term investment in basic scientific research, we found we could only do
it in the name of national security. When we faced the choice between a
Great Society at home and defending our so-called national security in
Southeast Asia, you know what took priority. The war on poverty was
lost long before the war in Vietnam ground to its tragic finale.
In time, this bloated concept of national security ultimately came
home to us with Watergate. Who can forget the passage in the White
House tapes when Richard Nixon is groping for a way to try to justify
to the American public the break-in of Daniel Ellsberg’s psychiatrist’s
office?
John Dean suggests, “You might put it on a national security
grounds basis.” The President responds, “National security. We had to
get information coming out and everything coming out. The whole
thing was national security.” John Dean adds, “I think we could get by
on that.”
And there was an even more chilling exchange in the Watergate
hearings when Senator Talmadge asked John Ehrlichman, “Now if the
President could authorize a covert break-in, and you do not know ex-
actly how that power would be limited, you do not think it could in-
clude murder or other crimes beyond a covert break-in, do you?” Mr.
Ehrlichman answers, “I do not know where the line is, Senator.”
Let’s retire this term “national security” and get back to defining
our interests more concretely, in terms of diplomatic interests, military
interests, and economic interests; or political, humanitarian, ethnic and
cultural interests.
I see nothing wrong in being frank about the fact that in the Middle
East our support for Israel is based on political and cultural affinity,
that our desire for good relations with the Arab states is based on eco-
nomic interests, and that our hope for peace between the two is based
on concern that war could prompt a military confrontation between the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Portugal offers another example of how dealing with specific in-
terests rather than the concept of national security helps clarify what is
at stake. While we would like to see a democratic Portugal, and should
do what we can to encourage that, our primary interest is military. We
must not be too pious in our criticism of the present government and
forget that we were willing to tolerate a truly odious dictator for gener-
ations—precisely because the Salazar regime5 provided us with a mili-
tary base in the Azores that enabled us to control the Atlantic and sup-
port the Middle East.
5 Reference is to Antonio de Oliveira Salazar, who served as the Portuguese Prime
Minister from 1932 until 1968.
