Special Session on Disarmament
1223
language on SALT issue but should report all such language to Wash-
ington for approval.
B. CTB. Since negotiations on a CTBT initiative are at a sensitive
stage, US Del should carefully coordinate any language on this issue
with USSR and UK Dels. Del may accept language which stresses im-
portance of completing negotiations as a matter of urgency, but should
not accept setting any specific deadlines or target dates. If joint lan-
guage proves possible, US Del should seek to retain language along
lines discussed at last PrepCom, otherwise we would prefer language
explicitly stating US view that CTB should ban all tests of nuclear ex-
plosive devices whether for peaceful or military purposes. US Del
should discourage any proposals for a moratorium on nuclear testing.
C. Cut-Off. US Del should report any proposals regarding a cut-
off of the production of fissionable materials for nuclear weapons
use. Guidance on US response to such proposals will be provided
subsequently.
D. Non-Proliferation. As background to nonproliferation discus-
sions US Del should acknowledge responsibility of nuclear weapons
states to reduce their own arsenals—pointing to SALT, CTB, and Presi-
dent Carter’s pledges to work towards nuclear disarmament. The US
should emphasize those aspects of our non-proliferation policy that
have generated considerable international support (e.g., NPT, INFCE,
Treaty of Tlatelolco, IAEA, NUF) and should seek to avoid being
drawn into contentious issues like the nuclear suppliers group. Del
should use suitable opportunities to welcome or encourage action by
particular states on the NPT or Treaty of Tlatelolco. Relevant sections
in the non-proliferation background paper4 identify appropriate
countries.
Regarding the dispute over access to nuclear technology our objec-
tive should be to develop among the Non-Aligned a better understand-
ing of the US position and to work for language consistent with US nu-
clear export policy. It is US policy to continue a substantial program of
international nuclear cooperation and the initiative to be announced at
the SSOD will give further evidence of that commitment. US should not
be defensive about its past record in this area—both bilaterally and
through the IAEA. Any language worked out should strike a balance
between our willingness to provide the benefits of nuclear technology
to the developing world and our responsibility to ensure that any such
exports are not misused. Such goals should not be viewed as contradic-
tory. Specifically, the US can support language that argues for “the
right of access” as long as appropriate non-proliferation concerns are
4 Not found.
