prosecution of the plebiscite, the better it will be for the relations between
Chile and Peru, for the suffering Peruvians here, and for our own prestige.
(6) I am aware how bitterly this conclusion will disappoint the Department
and the Arbitrator, and how much they hope that Mr. Mathieu’s advent to
the Chilean Ministry for Foreign Affairs will bring about such an
improvement of conditions as will make possible a fair plebiscite, and I
shall cheerfully subordinate my opinion to Department’s as far as I can
without impairing my usefulness to the Department and the Arbitrator. For
this reason I suggest the following final effort to save plebiscite and to
meet, as far as can be met, the views of the Department.
I appreciate that what I am about to recommend, though less vigorous than
is required, in my own opinion, still does not conform to views expressed in
Department’s telegram of February 4; but I feel that I should be shirking my
duty to the Arbitrator did I not frankly and fully submit my
recommendation together with my reasons for making it.
 
(7) As immediate action is necessary in this case, it is my opinion that I
should 
have 
personal 
and 
informal 
conversation 
with 
Chilean
Commissioner (either Mr. Edwards or his successor) at once, go over entire
situation with him in spirit of frankness and candor, and say to him that
unless an immediate and radical change of conditions in the province is
brought about and maintained, I shall be obliged to present in the
Plebiscitary Commission and to press for immediate passage a resolution
declaring in substance that Chilean authorities in Tacna-Arica have
frustrated the free, fair, and orderly plebiscite which was contemplated by
the award. If the Department approves my proposal it could at same time
communicate in the same sense with Chilean Minister for Foreign Affairs. I
repeat that I do not believe that even with best of intentions will Mr.
Mathieu be able to cope with the political situation and to reverse currents
now running; but to give him the opportunity to do so under stimulus of
kindly and wholly confidential communication which I suggest, seems to
me to be the last untried expedient for carrying out plebiscite under the
award. My advisers are in accord with this plan.
