672
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
that import levels will be brought down to 370 million pairs and that a
mechanism will be established to assure that this figure is met. They are
also hopeful that this mechanism can be continued for three additional
years after expiration of the current relief program. These objectives are
opposed strongly by (a) consumer groups, who are concerned about
the inflationary impact of quotas; (b) U.S. shoe retailers; (c) foreign sup-
pliers who would be hurt and, in the case of Europe, might impose bar-
riers of the same sort.
Fortunately, the upward trend of imports appears to have re-
versed, based on recent data and projections. Various forecasts and our
contacts with the EC and other exporting countries lead us to conclude
that imports in 1980 will drop significantly from 1979 surge levels, to
roughly 380–385 million pairs.
I believe that imposition of a global quota is not warranted at this
time and I have told this to the industry and unions. However, the in-
dustry does need to be given more certainty about our intention to
moderate imports and limit future surges in order to restore the credi-
bility of the relief program.
II. OPTIONS
The first option would be to continue quiet efforts to reduce imports
below 1979 surge levels. It would not, however, lock the Administra-
tion into a position where it will have decided in advance: (a) how
much imports have to fall; and (b) how restrictive an action should be
taken if action is later judged necessary. Treasury, State, Justice, Na-
tional Security Council and International Development Cooperation
Agency favor this option. (Fred Kahn)
These agencies believe that a commitment now to restrict imports
if, in the future, those imports exceed a trigger level as called for in op-
tion two, would signal a significant retreat from the Administration’s
anti-inflation objectives—enumerated in a wide range of economic pol-
icies. Moreover, coming at the same time as possible price-increasing
actions on steel imports, such a commitment could be read as a reversal
of Administration trade policy.
The proponents of this option believe a commitment to restrict im-
ports should not be made when imports are falling and will probably
continue to fall. A decision to restrict shoe imports, in their view,
should be made only when we see whether the level of imports in fact
remains excessively high. A trigger could force us to take a major pro-
tectionist step affecting scores of countries if imports exceed 385 million
pairs by a small margin. Many of these countries would be LDC oil im-
porters. Moreover, they believe, a commitment now to bring imports
“toward pre-surge levels” (370 million pairs), would guarantee the in-
dustry a ceiling on imports—even if the industry makes no effort to
