460 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 160. Response to Request for Intelligence From the Acting Assistant Director for Joint Chiefs of Staff Support ([name not declassified]) to the Director of Joint Strategic Plans and Policy (Lyons)1 Washington, January 11, 1980 SUBJECT Afghan Paper for DDPMA Trip (U) REQUIREMENT J–5 request of 8 January 1980 for information on US sanctions, Soviet tactics, airlift and casualties in Afghanistan 1. (C) Sanctions: The principal Soviet reactions to the various retributive measures announced by the President have been twofold. First, military operations in Afghanistan have continued with increasing evidence that the force buildup has not abated. Second, Moscow has launched a propaganda blitz, accusing the US, with Chinese and Egyptian complicity, of meddling in Afghan internal affairs, arming and training the insurgents, and supporting Pakistan in its assistance to rebel factions. Presumably the Soviets will take steps to ameliorate any shortfall in grain, fish, and technology requirements by finding alternative sources of supply or buying through a third country “cutout.” There are retaliatory actions against the US and allies available to the Soviets in such areas as Berlin, Cuba and elsewhere; however, these do not appear too likely in the near term given the operational success of their occupation of Afghanistan. 2. (TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) Soviet Tactics: The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan began with an airbridge into Kabul on 25 December. When completed on the 27th, the airhead consisted of an airborne force equivalent to two regiments. Another proximate airborne regiment had previously been deployed to Bagram airbase north of Kabul in early December. The airborne forces in Kabul initiated the coup d’etat in the capital on the night of the 27th while some Bagram elements may have deployed north to secure the major road leading from the Soviet border. (TS [codeword and handling restriction not declassified]) In Kabul, BMD-equipped battalions apparently moved to secure key government facilities, the Radio Afghanistan compound, and Darulaman Palace in the city’s suburbs where President Amin was staying. Soviet troops 1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 4, Background paper for new DJ5. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
