March 27–December 31, 1979 981 Secretary Vance said that if there is a spotlight, it will be harder to do. Ambassador Strauss asked whether the spotlight would actually help. Dr. Brzezinski asked whether the Israelis want a settlement in Lebanon. Secretary Vance and Ambassador Strauss said yes. Dr. Brzezinski asked why. Secretary Vance said the Israelis see that they are losing over Lebanon, that it is hurting them. Weizman and Dayan and some others know this. The polls show that Israel sees it is being hurt. Dr. Brzezinski said that Begin could see that Israel has a security zone in Lebanon under Israel’s control; Lebanon is kept divided, and the Syrians off balance; and Begin keeps the PLO as a rallying symbol. If this is a tacit thing, then it will defuse the situation. Secretary Vance said that in practical security terms, this is right. But it has gone beyond that now. Israel is worried about its image with its friends, like the Netherlands, England, even the U.S. Ambassador Habib said that nothing in the plan takes away these benefits. Haddad will still be there as a buffer. There is no security threat to Israel (the threat is really terrorism). The communal divisions in Lebanon that are useful to Israel would still be there. But Israel would gain in its capacity to gain support for what it does with regard to a Lebanon truce. Dr. Brzezinski said that for Begin, it is important to maintain the distance between the U.S. and the PLO. If this were reduced, there is the political danger that the Israelis would stick it to the President. Ambassador Habib said we could define limits, which would not create difficulties. He would like to see this done. Ambassador Strauss said he will not go for the plan until this is done. Before starting, we should say where we will not go. Say it and mean it. Secretary Vance said that this is fair. Ambassador Strauss said we need to be forthright about it, so the President will not get trapped. Ambassador Habib said that Hal Saunders wants to protect the President. Ambassador Strauss said that this plan is a stepping stone to the PLO. We need to guard against that. Maybe he should get in a plane, go to Israel, and talk about an initiative on Lebanon. And why not say that some progress has been made? Secretary Vance said that it needs to be a little quieter.
