1196 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Kippur—because of those three days. He (Prime Minister Begin) has said this to Sadat and to the President, too. He will not wait. He will answer now. Sadat said that his was not a proposal, it was just something to think about. Ambassador Linowitz said to think about a flag (over Jerusalem Holy places). To Sadat he (Prime Minister Begin) had said: does this mean sovereignty? And Sadat had said: yes and no. He had said to Sadat: Arab sovereignty and an undivided Jerusalem is a contradiction in terms. Never do Jordanian citizens cast votes in Jordan. The President asked if this were right. Don’t they? Professor Lapidot said there hadn’t been any elections in 13 years. Prime Minister Begin said that there is a difference on Jerusalem. Israel put its law on Jerusalem in toto—but not on Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza district. Israel is sovereign in toto. Therefore, it can’t be said that they vote for the Jordanian government. Elections were postponed. The President asked: does that therefore mean no elections? Prime Minister Begin answered: yes, there would be elections; but the President had asked about Jerusalem. In Jerusalem there are Judean citizens. Some opted for Israeli citizenship. They have 80–90,000 Jews in Israel who are not citizens, and they do not vote for the Knesset. To have a vote in Jerusalem for the Arab residents: this is out of the question. It is absolutely impossible. It means repartition. The President asked about absentee voting. Prime Minister Begin said that Ambassador Linowitz had brought that idea up. But what change does that make? Israel says that if the inhabitants in Jerusalem vote for the Administrative Council, then this is repartition, since there would be two jurisdictions, since the Arabs would be under the Administrative Council and the Jews would be under Israel. So he had said at Camp David. He never misled anyone. The President said he knows. Prime Minister Begin said that he and Sadat had written separate letters about it. There should be no illusions; there can be no repartition and no vote. The city cannot be divided. The President said he sees how firmly Prime Minister Begin feels about it. If an American lives in either West or East Jerusalem, he can vote in the United States. This does not encroach on sovereignty. His judgment is that the entire prospect of elections on the West Bank would be destroyed. There can be no elections if we take away the franchise from these people who happen to live there. Minister Burg said he would respond not in sentiment, although Jerusalem is in the Bible more than 660 times, and is in the Koran not once. He will speak as a statesman. The logic is this: a U.S. citizen in Jerusalem can vote for the President of the United States, because he wants to be ruled by the President here. A citizen in Jerusalem can vote
