International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 —This is particularly true if petitions are brought against Japanese producers, whose average costs are the basis of trigger prices. —With the new antidumping statute,6 the TPM fast track procedure offers no saving in time once an investigation is started. —Petitions against EC producers would mean that roughly 43 percent of current U.S. steel imports (33 percent EC, 10 percent Canada) need not be monitored by the TPM. If the petitions also include Japanese producers, then 76 percent of current U.S. imports would not require TPM monitoring. —With a petition against Japanese steel producers, the Japanese can be expected to refuse to supply cost of production data which is the basis of the TPM. —We do not have sufficient staff to simultaneously administer the TPM and process major antidumping cases; nor do we believe the TPM should be applied selectively. 3. The filing of antidumping petitions may lead to a serious disruption of U.S.–EC trade relations. (The Japanese are less concerned, since they are not as vulnerable to dumping charges.) In order to mitigate the damaging effects of these petitions on U.S.–EC relations, we should instruct Ambassador Enders to inform Commissioner Davignon immediately when the petitions are filed, and he and other Administration officials should—through intensive consultations—endeavor to explain to the EC that: —We cannot deflect these cases in the absence of a more restrictive import regime which would be more detrimental to the EC, and/or unacceptable subsidization of our steel industry which conflicts with our MTN Subsidy/CVD Code obligations and our macroeconomic policies. —The MTN provides increased discipline in our trading relationships. New rules were negotiated and it is natural that they should now be used. —We should urge the Community not to overreact, and to recognize that the U.S. Government has no legal right to refuse to process these cases. They are private legal actions which should not trigger protectionist actions by governments. —The dumping petitions will take time to complete (at least 160 days) and the outcome, both with regard to findings of sales at less than fair value and injury, is uncertain. European retaliation prior to any determination of these cases could trigger a U.S. counter-action, precipitating an unwarranted trade war. 6 The Trade Agreements Act of 1979 revised the way in which anti-dumping petitions were investigated and assessed.
