standing and reciprocal arrangement between the two countries has been
suddenly terminated. I have the honour to lay before you, for the purpose of
record, the views of His Majesty’s Canadian Government on the issues
involved.
For many years there has been reciprocal free movement over the border
between the United States and Canada, a movement freer and involving a
larger number of people than that between any other two countries in the
world. This freedom of movement has been an outstanding demonstration
of the close connection and friendship existing between the people of the
two countries. The boundary is of such a character that the communities
situated close to it on both sides must have many common interests. In
some of these border communities the relationship has been so intimate that
residents on one side of the frontier have been in the habit of crossing daily
to the other side to engage in employment. This practice, as you are aware,
is of many years standing. The Convention known as Jay’s Treaty,
concluded in 1794,29 provided in Article 3:—
“It is agreed that it shall at all times be free to His Majesty’s
subjects and to the citizens of the United States and also to the
Indians dwelling on either side of the boundary line freely to pass
and repass by land or inland navigation into the respective
territories and countries of the two parties on the Continent of
America.”
The broad principle which underlay this provision is clearly indicated in the
statement contained in the concluding paragraph of the same Article:—
“This Article is intended to render in a great degree the local
advantages of each party common to both and thereby to promote
a disposition favourable to friendship and good neighbourhood.”
The practice rooted in this understanding and in the unique conditions of
border intercourse on this Continent has continued to this day. It has been
most marked in the area adjacent to Windsor and Detroit and in the Niagara
region. Though a large majority of the individuals who so cross the border
daily are Canadians entering the United States, the practice is reciprocal,
