938
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
282.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 17, 1977
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Secretary of Commerce
The Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Director, Agency for International Development
The Director, United States Information Agency
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisors
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Council of Environmental Quality
The Director, National Science Foundation
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
Implications of Worldwide Population Growth for United States Security and
Overseas Interests
The policy established by NSDM 314 of November 26, 19752 has
been reviewed and will remain in effect. That portion of NSDM 314 as-
signing responsibility to the Under Secretaries Committee is hereby su-
perseded. That responsibility is transferred to the NSC Ad Hoc Group on
Population Policy which is hereby established. This Group should be
composed of representatives of the addressees and will be chaired by
the Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans, International Environ-
mental and Scientific Affairs.3
This Group should report as appropriate to the Policy Review
Committee, chaired by the Department of State.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 41, Population Policy: 2–6/77. Attached but not
printed is a May 25 covering memorandum from Mink to Tuchman, Grant, Atlas, Rowe,
Hjort, Levin, Shultz, Sanders, Levin, Palmeri, Nordhaus, Costello, Sweeney, Bente,
Warren Thompson, and Press, transmitting a copy of Brzezinski’s memorandum and re-
questing that the agencies provide Green with the names of officers designated as repre-
sentatives to the Ad Hoc Group. (Ibid.)
2 See footnote 3, Document 280.
3 In her May 25 memorandum, Mink indicated that she had delegated the chair-
manship of the Group to Green and designated Lindsey Grant as the Department of
State’s representative. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global
Issues—Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 41, Population Policy: 2–6/77)
