44
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
speaking for the West Bank and Gaza. On the West Bank, Sadat stated
he will prepare himself for “flexibility”. (He did not elaborate on what
he had in mind.) He went on to say that in anything he negotiates, it
will not only be Egyptians, but the Saudis as well who should support
it. The Saudi position is terribly important. The U.S. has great interests
in Saudi Arabia and has had a historical relationship with that country.
If a satisfactory framework can be achieved, the Saudis will support it.
He had the previous day received a message from Prince Fahd in reply
to the President’s letter to King Khalid.2 Fahd’s message had stated
that, apart from relinquishment of Arab land and sovereignty, the
Saudis will support him in whatever he agrees upon.
I said I was glad to hear that there will be flexibility in his West
Bank ideas but noted that some of his closest colleagues contend that
Egypt has no mandate to discuss West Bank matters. How did he see
this aspect of the problem? Sadat agreed that the lack of a clear-cut
mandate from either the Arabs, Hussein or the Palestinians poses a
problem for Egypt in negotiating West Bank matters. But, Sadat ob-
served, if he neglects to negotiate the West Bank, which means the Pal-
estinian case, he will in effect be pressed into appearing to negotiate for
a separate Sinai settlement with Begin. This, as he put it, will subject
him to criticism by the Soviets and the rejectionist Arabs. A separate
agreement for the Sinai will strengthen the Soviets in the area. This
should, at all costs, be avoided. The second reason why he is prepared
to negotiate for the West Bank is the position of Egypt as the leader of
the Arab world. He noted that Egypt has half the population of the
Arab world. Real power lies in Egypt. Israel recognized this in the Oc-
tober ’73 war. The Syrians were finished in 48 hours, but it took 19 days
before the Israelis bested the Egyptians. Even then, they would not
have been able to do so if the U.S. satellite photography had not been
furnished to the Israelis. This satellite photography had revealed his
25th Division preparing to cross the Canal. Egyptian leadership in the
Arab world will be totally damaged if he were to discuss only Sinai. An
agreement on a framework of peace signed with Egypt will give the Is-
raelis the endorsement of the largest Arab power. No one can do any-
thing to change this. There may be some terrorism, but there is no real
threat to Israel if Egypt is out of the conflict.
He recalled that his Jerusalem trip3 had given Israel legitimacy so
far as the Arabs are concerned. On the West Bank, he reiterated that he
will show flexibility. The West Bankers, he professed to know from his
Jerusalem trip, are with us. This will provide ample legitimacy to any
West Bank arrangements he might negotiate. He is ready to proceed
2 See footnote 1, Document 11.
3 See footnote 3, Document 4.
