310 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 5. The reports are now being completed and cleared in the Department. Well before submission to Congress, the Department will telegraphically provide the final texts to posts in each country for which either security assistance or development assistance human rights reports are required (refer to lists of countries in each category below). Congress can be expected to make public all of these reports immediately after their submission. 6. Action requested: Posts in countries with which the U.S. has or expects to have development assistance programs should seek an appropriate opportunity to provide host governments, at an appropriate level, with the text of human rights provisions of revised Section 116 of the FAA, and report reactions, if any. In addition, posts in security assistance recipient countries should remind host governments, at an appropriate level, of the human rights reports required under Section 502B of the FAA (refer to 76 State 231122). Posts should also advise governments that reports for countries in both types of assistance programs will be provided to Congress by January 31, 1978. Posts should avoid implying that this representation assures the provision of either type of assistance, since budget deliberations are still underway within the Executive Branch of FY79 proposals. 7. Embassies in countries which receive neither form of assistance may, at their discretion, also bring to the attention of host governments the requirements of Sections 116 and 502B of the FAA of 1961 as amended. 8. FYI. Following are countries currently receiving, or expected to be proposed for, development assistance, including those receiving assistance under narcotics programs and housing guarantee programs, and on which human rights reports will be submitted under amended Section 116. ARA—Bolivia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay. NEA—Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Yemen (Sana). EA—Burma, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand. AF—Benin, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Empire, Chad, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Upper Volta, Zaire, Zambia. 9. The following countries are currently expected to be proposed for a security assistance program which will require the submission of a human rights report under Section 502B.
