310
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
5. The reports are now being completed and cleared in the Depart-
ment. Well before submission to Congress, the Department will tele-
graphically provide the final texts to posts in each country for which ei-
ther security assistance or development assistance human rights
reports are required (refer to lists of countries in each category below).
Congress can be expected to make public all of these reports immedi-
ately after their submission.
6. Action requested: Posts in countries with which the U.S. has or
expects to have development assistance programs should seek an ap-
propriate opportunity to provide host governments, at an appropriate
level, with the text of human rights provisions of revised Section 116 of
the FAA, and report reactions, if any. In addition, posts in security
assistance recipient countries should remind host governments, at an
appropriate level, of the human rights reports required under Section
502B of the FAA (refer to 76 State 231122). Posts should also advise gov-
ernments that reports for countries in both types of assistance pro-
grams will be provided to Congress by January 31, 1978. Posts should
avoid implying that this representation assures the provision of either
type of assistance, since budget deliberations are still underway within
the Executive Branch of FY79 proposals.
7. Embassies in countries which receive neither form of assistance
may, at their discretion, also bring to the attention of host governments
the requirements of Sections 116 and 502B of the FAA of 1961 as
amended.
8. FYI. Following are countries currently receiving, or expected to
be proposed for, development assistance, including those receiving
assistance under narcotics programs and housing guarantee programs,
and on which human rights reports will be submitted under amended
Section 116.
ARA—Bolivia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Sal-
vador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nica-
ragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay.
NEA—Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco,
Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Yemen (Sana).
EA—Burma, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand.
AF—Benin, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central
African Empire, Chad, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mali,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, So-
malia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Upper Volta, Zaire, Zambia.
9. The following countries are currently expected to be proposed
for a security assistance program which will require the submission of a
human rights report under Section 502B.
