244  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
START—Mobile ICBM Verification
1. Road Mobile Basing Mode. The issue is whether to alter the current 
U.S. position to restrict road-­mobiles to a large Deployment Area as an 
aid to verification and whether to eliminate our proposal for a small 
Restricted Area where mobiles are normally deployed in peacetime.
Discussion
The U.S. approach to verification of road-­mobile ICBMs confines 
such systems to 25 square kilometer Restricted Areas in peacetime 
except for notified transits or operational dispersals. The U.S. concept 
includes a Deployment Area which contains several Restricted Areas, 
but the only function of this larger area is to constrain exercise disper-
sals. Operational dispersals are not constrained to any area.
The JCS understand that the U.S. verification proposal is compat-
ible with current Small ICBM basing concepts for both the Minuteman 
basing mode and Southwest basing mode. However, the final basing 
mode for Small ICBM has not been selected and some possible basing 
concepts are not compatible with the U.S. verification proposal.
Although the existing U.S. concept could support a form of random 
periodic movements, some believe it is better suited to Minuteman bas-
ing. They believe that a primary rationale for Restricted Areas is to aid 
in monitoring the number of deployed missiles and launchers.
If the number of missiles/launchers permitted outside the 
Restricted Area at any one time is small (10% or less), then the IC 
believes monitoring is improved. Such small numbers may be com-
patible with training and maintenance requirements for Small ICBM 
Minuteman Basing, but are inadequate for Southwest Basing, which 
may require up to 30% out of the Restricted Areas.
Moreover, some believe that it is impossible to assign a maximum 
percentage that will protect future operational concepts that may be 
necessary to ensure survivability. Finally, depending on the size and 
number of Restricted Areas, the area available to each missile may not 
be sufficient for survivability without dash on warning.
Two approaches have been suggested to address these concerns. 
One revised approach would eliminate the Restricted Areas in favor of 
larger Deployment Areas in which road-­mobile missiles could operate 
without restriction. Another approach would eliminate the percentage 
limit on the number of missiles that could be outside the Restricted 
Areas at any one time. (Variants of these approaches would not per-
mit missiles outside the larger Deployment Area for operational 
dispersals.)
