Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Christopher to inform these governments that we are taking tangible steps in our bilateral relationship with Moscow to manifest our displea- Since in your conversations yesterday with European leaders3 you drew a parallel between the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in 1979 and the one in Czechoslovakia in 1968, it may be useful for you to know what actions Johnson and Rusk took after the August 20, 1968 Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia. (You may be sure the Soviets have the list at hand and will draw comparative conclusions about the international environment in which they operate. The same will be true of most countries of the world, especially those anywhere near Afghanistan.) Within three days of the invasion: (1) The President made a strong public statement.4 (2) Secretary of State made a public statement.5 (3) We initiated a Security Council meeting. (4) We suspended bilateral talks with the Soviets on peaceful uses of the atom.6 (5) Embassy Moscow was instructed to restrict all official and social contacts with Soviet officials.7 (6) We sent the same instructions to all US diplomatic missions worldwide. 3 In a December 28 memorandum to Brzezinski and Aaron, Blackwill provided a brief summary of the President’s calls to Thatcher, Schmidt, Cossiga and Giscard d’Estaing that day. (Ibid.) At 4:30 p.m. that day, the President spoke to reporters assembled in the White House Briefing Room and commented: “I have discussed this serious matter personally today with several other heads of government, all of whom agree that the Soviet action is a grave threat to peace. I will be sending the Deputy Secretary of State to Europe this weekend to meet with representatives of several other nations to discuss how the world community might respond to this unwarranted Soviet behavior. Soviet military action beyond its own borders gives rise to the most fundamental questions pertaining to international stability, and such close and extensive consultations between ourselves and with our allies are urgently needed.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, p. 2287)
