676
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Christopher to inform these governments that we are taking tangible
steps in our bilateral relationship with Moscow to manifest our displea-
sure. (S)
Since in your conversations yesterday with European leaders3 you
drew a parallel between the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in 1979
and the one in Czechoslovakia in 1968, it may be useful for you to know
what actions Johnson and Rusk took after the August 20, 1968 Soviet
occupation of Czechoslovakia. (You may be sure the Soviets have the
list at hand and will draw comparative conclusions about the interna-
tional environment in which they operate. The same will be true of
most countries of the world, especially those anywhere near Afghani-
stan.) Within three days of the invasion:
(1) The President made a strong public statement.4
(2) Secretary of State made a public statement.5
(3) We initiated a Security Council meeting.
(4) We suspended bilateral talks with the Soviets on peaceful uses
of the atom.6
(5) Embassy Moscow was instructed to restrict all official and so-
cial contacts with Soviet officials.7
(6) We sent the same instructions to all US diplomatic missions
worldwide.
3 In a December 28 memorandum to Brzezinski and Aaron, Blackwill provided a
brief summary of the President’s calls to Thatcher, Schmidt, Cossiga and Giscard
d’Estaing that day. (Ibid.) At 4:30 p.m. that day, the President spoke to reporters assem-
bled in the White House Briefing Room and commented: “I have discussed this serious
matter personally today with several other heads of government, all of whom agree that
the Soviet action is a grave threat to peace. I will be sending the Deputy Secretary of State
to Europe this weekend to meet with representatives of several other nations to discuss
how the world community might respond to this unwarranted Soviet behavior. Soviet
military action beyond its own borders gives rise to the most fundamental questions per-
taining to international stability, and such close and extensive consultations between our-
selves and with our allies are urgently needed.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II,
p. 2287)
4 Presumable reference to Johnson’s August 21, 1968, statement, recorded for
broadcast by radio and television networks. Johnson asserted: “The tragic news from
Czechoslovakia shocks the conscience of the world. The Soviet Union and its allies have
invaded a defenseless country to stamp out a resurgence of ordinary human freedom. It
is a sad commentary on the Communist mind that a sign of liberty in Czechoslovakia is
deemed a fundamental threat to the security of the Soviet system.” (Public Papers: Johnson,
1968–69, Book II, p. 905)
5 Reference is to Rusk’s August 22, 1968, news conference, held at the White House;
see Department of State Bulletin, September 9, 1968, pp. 261–263.
6 See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. XIV, Soviet Union, Document 289.
7 See ibid.
