North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 797 Tab 1 Paper Prepared by the Economic Policy Group13 Washington, April 8, 1977 Review and Recommendations of Economic Issues in North/South Relations 1. Should the U.S. improve the “quality” of its aid by softening terms, untying procurement, making multi-year appropriations, and enhancing the developmental focus of food assistance programs? Recommendation (1): Provide assistance including food aid to the least developed countries (29 countries identified by UNCTAD) primarily on a grant basis; (2) provided other donors take similar steps, untie bilateral assistance except security supporting assistance to the Middle East, food aid, and technical cooperation grants; (3) earmark minimum regular quantity of grain for multi-year food aid programming according to development criteria. LDC Position: Developed countries should: provide all assistance for the poorest or least developed countries (LLDC’s) by grants; untie all development assistance; increase the dependability of food aid; and commit to multi-year aid appropriations. Industrial Countries Position: Despite some reluctance on the part of France and Canada, industrial countries are likely to support U.S. initiatives. Summit Action: Inform our allies of what aid quality improvements we plan to adopt and seek assurances that our approach is consistent with their plans. Perhaps the Summit could recommend improving the quality of aid by donor countries. CIEC Action: Seek: a uniform developed country commitment to U.S. proposals on the “quality” of aid; and an agreement that OECD negotiations on aid untying be accelerated to permit agreement in principle so that the results could be mentioned in the CIEC ministerial communique. We would seek comparable commitments from OPEC countries. Options Considered and Rejected: TERMS. Adopt terms to individual debt servicing capacity and project characteristics while continuing to provide all development assistance as grants to LLDCs; give all bilateral assistance in grant form; provide AID development assistance to LDCs with per capita annual income under $300 base essentially 13 Confidential.
