932 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI stages for MIRV missiles with mobile variants were consolidated or ended. Facilities not subject to PPCM would be subject to inspection, to confirm that solid rocket motors are not being covertly produced and missiles are not being covertly assembled. We also proposed a much simpler way to implement the concept of tagging. We have received your response, and considered it carefully. Frankly, it does not reflect the same spirit of compromise that underlies our proposal. Your response simply repeats previous positions. Throughout our discussions of this issue, the US has made proposals designed to address the concerns the Soviet side has raised. For example: — We have agreed to allow a substantial number of mobile ICBMs in START, despite the fact that we may not deploy any. — We have agreed to reciprocity in the number of facilities subject to PPCM, despite the fact that we have no mobile ICBMs. — We have even agreed to put Peacekeeper in the mobile ICBM verification regime from the beginning, even though it is not now a mobile ICBM. To meet your concerns with our proposal, Amb. Bartholomew in Washington offered a number of steps that would: — Resolve your concern that on the Soviet side there will be more solid rocket motors than assembled missiles. — Simplify inspection of solid rocket motor plants. — Drop our proposal on periodic scheduled tours of certain solid rocket motor plants, which you have objected to. With these steps can you agree to establish PPCM at the solid rocket motor plants where the SS–24 and Peacekeeper first stage motors are produced? Heavy ICBM silos As you know, the heavy ICBM issue continues to be a concern to the US, particularly as a political issue. We have made many concessions that will allow you to maintain a viable heavy ICBM force through the duration of START. Allowing the construction of new heavy ICBM silos would be a significant additional concession which would need to be justified in detail to the Senate in the ratification process. — Until early this year the Soviet position also banned the construction of new heavy ICBM silos. — Nothing has changed that now makes the construction of such silos imperative. There have been no new silos since 1972, yet the Soviet heavy ICBM force has been extensively modernized, with several generations of new missiles. Both SALT I and SALT II banned the construction of new ICBM silos.
