Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX violating CSCE has prompted conciliatory gestures, e.g., the easing of restrictions against Western journalists. Point out that the Soviet and East European governments will have to comply more closely with the human rights provisions of the Helsinki accords or lose face— and propaganda points—this summer when the 35 CSCE signatories reconvene in Belgrade. B. Downplay the deleterious effects of the recent wave of emigrations and expulsions. Stress that important dissident leaders, notably Andrey Sakharov, one of the founding fathers of the human rights movement, are still active inside the Soviet Union. The Orlov Committee has received international attention since its establishment last May and continues, despite official harassment, to compile and publicize evidence of Soviet violations of the Helsinki accord. Remind audiences that the dissident movement has produced a number of strong leaders. In the past, new personalities have emerged to carry on the struggle after leaders like Solzhenitsyn have been expelled. C. Continue to publicize the evidence of human rights violations which recent emigres provide. Remind audiences that dissidents like Amalrik and Bukovskiy have not lost credibility by leaving the Soviet Union. D. Continue to publicize the extreme measures taken against dissidents: harsh prison sentences, psychiatric abuse, and the recent phenomenon of street violence. Focus on key individuals like the ailing Mustafa Dzhemilev, imprisoned for his efforts on behalf of displaced Crimean Tatars, Sergey Kovalev and Andrey Tverdokhlevob, sentenced for their activities in the Moscow chapter of Amnesty International, and the members of the Orlov Committee such as Aleksandr Ginzburg and Lyudmila Alekseyeva, who continue to be harassed by the KGB. E. Expose Moscow’s increasing independence [dependence] on the more devious tactics against dissidents, designed to paralyze the human rights movement over the long term without attracting significant publicity. Soviet officials continually interfere with communications between dissidents and the outside world: by intercepting mail, jamming phone conversations and harassing would-be interviewers from the Western press. A customs regulation instituted last July substantially increased the duty on gifts sent to the USSR and thus undercut the financial support which religious groups, families of political prisoners and “refuseniks” (dissidents, usually Jews, who have been denied emigration visas and subsequently fired from their jobs) receive from abroad. More recently, the KGB has taken to planting evidence, e.g., foreign currency, to incriminate such dissidents as Aleksandr Ginzburg and members of the Kiev and Leningrad branch of the Orlov Committee. Remind audiences that such measures, though less dramatic than
