Afghanistan
215
4. In sum, if those two Soviet motorized divisions located on the
Afghanistan border are now manned at higher states of readiness, as
the evidence suggests they may be, the Soviets would be able, within
about a 48 hour period, to insert an airborne division (the 105th at
Fergana) into Kabul, a motorized rifle division into Kandahar, and at
least major elements of a motorized rifle division into Mazar-i-Sharif.
A major ground force intervention along these lines would not need
to be preceded by much if any visible mobilization of army and front
level support elements. [classification marking not declassified].
5. At the time the IIM Soviet Options in Afghanistan was being
drafted the consensus of community analysts was that the Soviets could
insert an airborne division and possibly some individual combat units
of battalion or regimental size while affording us little warning but
that any major military action beyond that probably would have to be
the kind of multi-division action that would be clearly indicated well
in advance. While that judgement may have been consistent with the
situation at the time, we do not believe it remains valid. [classification
marking not declassified]
6. Adding to our concern in this regard is information we recently
obtained [less than 1 line not declassified] indicating that activity seen in
imagery of Kushka and Termez, in the spring of this year, and which
was interpreted to be exercise activity of the units normally garrisoned
there, actually was an augmentation—albeit apparently of a temporary
nature—with additional forces originally located several hundred kil-
ometers from the Afghanistan border. This evidence points to the diffi-
culty of interpreting [1½ lines not declassified] the significance of activities
of ground force units in and around major garrisons. [classification
marking and codeword not declassified]
7. Another factor that bears on the Soviet ability to quickly move
larger forces into Afghanistan is the extent to which major terminals
in Afghanistan, particularly the air terminals, have been improved. We
do not know, in fact, the full extent of what has taken place in the two
months that the Pavlovskiy mission has been in Afghanistan. Recent
imagery, however, does show that at Bagram airbase parking areas
are being blacktopped and a new heightfinder radar now is operational
there. Both of these improvements raise the traffic handling capacity
of the airfields. We also have unconfirmed information [less than 1 line
not declassified] that the Soviets have virtually “taken over” Kandahar
airport, which already has been the best equipped in Afghanistan in
terms of air traffic capacity. According to [less than 1 line not declassified]
the cargo of much of the extensive airlift that has been underway
in the last two months has been construction materials. [classification
marking and codeword not declassified]
8. Adding to the ominous nature of these military developments
are:
