156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I In these ways, our policy is in keeping with our tradition, our international obligations, and our laws. In pursuing a human rights policy, we must always keep in mind the limits of our power and of our wisdom. A sure formula for defeat of our goals would be a rigid, hubristic attempt to impose our values on others. A doctrinaire plan of action would be as damaging as indifference. We must be realistic. Our country can only achieve our objectives if we shape what we do to the case at hand. In each instance, we will consider these questions as we determine whether and how to act: 1. First, we will ask ourselves, what is the nature of the case that confronts us? For example: What kinds of violations or deprivations are there? What is their extent? Is there a pattern to the violations? If so, is the trend toward concern for human rights or away from it? What is the degree of control and responsibility of the government involved? And finally, is the government willing to permit independent outside investigation? 2. A second set of questions concerns the prospects for effective action: Will our action be useful in promoting the overall cause of human rights? Will it actually improve the specific conditions at hand? Or will it be likely to make things worse instead? Is the country involved receptive to our interest and efforts? Will others work with us, including official and private international organizations dedicated to furthering human rights? Finally, does our sense of values and decency demand that we speak out or take action anyway, even though there is only a remote chance of making our influence felt? 3. We will ask a third set of questions in order to maintain a sense of perspective: Have we steered away from the self-righteous and strident, remembering that our own record is not unblemished? Have we been sensitive to genuine security interests, realizing that outbreak of armed conflict or terrorism could in itself pose a serious threat to human rights? Have we considered all the rights at stake? If, for instance, we reduce aid to a government which violates the political rights of its cit-
