1244  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
9. Wang replied with regard first agenda item performance his govt 
always conformed with agreement that item. Regarding case McCarthy 
already clearly stated if his request in conformity with prescribed regu­
lations, all his requests would have been granted. As result lenient pol­
icy his govt handling cases Americans great majority those imprisoned 
for offenses against Chinese law been deported. By contrast, with regard 
Chinese imprisoned US prisons, his side so far had not seen any move by 
US Govt with regard them. Up to now not single person of those impris­
oned US had returned China, when I was referring Americans in China 
it seemed never aware still many Chinese in prison in US. Statements 
my side with regard imprisoned persons full of self-­contradiction. For 
instance, in statement issued Dec 17 1955 Dept of State alleged in our 
agreement no distinction made between those in prison and those out 
of prison. But Asst Sec State Walter Robertson in aide memoire to Indian 
Embassy stated Chinese prisoners in US not covered by agreement. 
This self-­contradictory statement. Can we be allowed give such unequal 
interpretation to agreement reached between us? He therefore advised 
me take note fact many Chinese in US obstructed and prevented from 
returning. US claims self be free country. What kind of free country is it if 
Chinese students correspondence with families being interfered with. If 
freedom of Chinese students to communicate with families being inter­
fered with what else could one expect of freedom for Chinese to return 
from US.
10. Wang continued, question improving relations between two 
countries closely connected with how we proceed in these present 
talks. Since present state affairs these talks not satisfactory, question 
confronting us was how make these talks move forward and make 
progress. In order move these talks forward his side taken initiative in 
making whole series efforts this direction. Then at very end they put 
forward proposal for holding FMC our two countries. If US also shares 
desire improve relations and also shares desire solve issues by peaceful 
means, should take effective steps move talks forward. It their hope US 
would proceed this direction.
11. I replied he had raised question how we move talks forward. 
We move these talks forward if we resolve problems called upon to deal 
with. After more than fifteen months we have not resolved very first 
problem called upon to deal with. Why had we not resolved it? Because 
his govt had not taken action necessary to resolve it, even though it had 
committed self do so. He referred to efforts our respective govts resolve 
problems. Aide memoire June 1 of Dept of State to Indian Embassy he 
referred to was most excellent example of efforts my govt resolve prob­
lems. Memo correctly pointed out Chinese alien common criminals in US 
prisons not subject our discussion leading up to our agreed announce­
ment and we did not consider them included therein. Nevertheless, in
