1955 245 me of anticipated dates of arrival Hong Kong released Americans and on health and welfare those still imprisoned. He then returned to his proposal formal text announcement be given UK by US and India by PRC. PRC will then give full information to UK on their responsibilities “entrusted” to them by US. 4) He then asked my assent to his speaking, on which I indicated I had nothing further to say this morning and indicated no objection. He then pulled out and read a long prepared statement to effect now that “agreement” reached on item 1 should turn to item 2 under which desired raise two points: US economic blockade and embargo and preparation for “negotiations at a higher level on easing and elimina­ tion of tensions in the Taiwan area”. Also asked what I thought should be discussed under item 2. 5) At close his statement I said I had “noted it” and stated that I also had matters which I wished to discuss under item 2 “at the proper time” but felt it was premature. “I cannot consider item 1 finally dis­ posed of until all Americans in PRC who desire return are able to do so.” “Agreed announcement represented advance but way in which carried out cannot but help influence atmosphere in which discussion item 2 carried on.” Hoped we could quickly get to item 2. 6) Wang apparently surprised and not prepared for my position which he characterized as very strange and regrettable. In much incon­ clusive give and take along these lines, I pointed out item 1 could have been quickly and completely resolved if they had permitted all Americans return but 19 Americans still detained, etc. In reply specific question as to when I would consider it “proper time” proceed item 2, I stated “when it is clear the terms agreed announcement being faithfully implemented.” 7) At end of meeting when usual question arose as to what to say to press, he said “I will inform press of the two items I have raised and you are free to tell them what you wish”. I misunderstood and interpreted his statement as meaning only that he was going to tell the press we had dis­ cussed agenda items 1 and 2, and replied that I was going to inform press simply that we had exchanged information on implementation agreed announcement. On comparing notes my advisors after meeting I am now clear that what he meant was that he was going to inform press two subjects raised his prepared statement this morning which he has done. Regret I did not realize this was his intention or I would have protested as contrary spirit our agreement on private nature talks. 8) Next meeting Tuesday, September 20. Gowen Note: Mr. Waddell’s office (FE) notified 9/14/55 10:53 a.m. EMB (CWO)
