124
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
grounds that they will enjoy the benefits of growth in the domestic
color television market. The unions will benefit even where such
growth is a result of the operation of Japanese affiliates since such affil-
iates will generate substantial labor content in the United States. The
risk for domestic producers will be that the market will not increase as
expected due either to economic problems (which seem unlikely) or
competition for the consumer dollar by other products such as video
recorders.
In addition to this problem, the risk for unions is that American
companies will continue to move their component and subassembly
operations off shore. This is an inevitable trend in the industry but its
effects will be moderated by the agreement because Japanese com-
panies will be locating assembly plants in the United States.
I believe this agreement can be successfully sold to the domestic in-
dustry and unions and I would expect only mild Congressional reac-
tion, if any.
The unions will privately be pleased and publicly say “while it’s a
good step in the right direction it should have gone farther in reducing
imports.”
Effect on Consumers
We would expect only minimal effects on the pricing and avail-
ability of color television receivers as the result of the orderly mar-
keting agreement for the following reasons:
1. There is considerable excess capacity domestically (e.g. about 30
percent in 1976).
2. We expect that capacity and production will be expanded by
Japanese firms in the United States in the near future and expansions
by domestic producers would also be likely. The lead time for such in-
vestments is relatively short because of the assembly nature of TV re-
ceiver production.
3. Imports from countries other than Japan will be permitted to in-
crease so long as Japanese producers are not disadvantaged. The
United States Government will determine if restrictions on such im-
ports are appropriate.
4. We estimate that there are substantial excessive inventories at
both wholesale and retail levels in the near term which will assure ade-
quate supplies under expected market conditions. There is also the one
million sets coming in prior to the effective date of the agreement (from
Jan. 1, 77 to Apr. 1, 77).
5. We will monitor prices and market conditions throughout the
period of the agreement and can liberalize or terminate the agreement
if conditions warrant such actions.
