970 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement in Europe, and the regard the present prospects of reducing tensions through negotiations as favorable. On the other hand, the Governments of France and West Germany stress the continuing seriousness of the Soviet threat to Europe, and are generally opposed to concessions as a price for reduced tensions. The problem is compounded by anti-­ German sentiment in the UK.9 45. The second potentially divisive factor is the desire on the con­ tinent, notably in France, for a greater role and voice in decisions. De Gaulle seeks increased status for France and national control of French forces within NATO. Furthermore, there is some support in France, and to a lesser degree among other continental WEU countries, for the cre­ ation in the next few years of some form of European continental mili­ tary grouping, possibly related to NATO. 46. Basic underlying factors are the impact of Soviet military prog­ ress and, in some quarters, growing doubts about the adequacy of the US military posture and the future course of US policy. The Soviet ICBM buildup is in itself almost certain to increase doubt as to whether in fact the US would exert its full weight against Soviet pressures in Europe. The level of trust in US support of NATO is not yet seriously reduced. However, West Germany and Turkey in particular, and to a lesser degree other European NATO members are highly sensitive to any apparent US lack of firmness in East-­West negotiations or to any suggestion of a substantial reduction in US forces committed to NATO, as possible indications of gradual US withdrawal. 47. The prosperity of the major NATO countries makes them capa­ ble of bearing a larger share of the military load. However, the trend of popular feeling is generally against any increase in defense budgets. Arguments over the soundness of NATO military strategy add to the popular reluctance to support defense spending. 48. In this complex situation, current Soviet emphasis on reducing tensions creates a special problem. To the extent that an impression of detente persists, it will be difficult to prevent cuts in defense budgets, to avoid further serious strains within NATO, and to preserve pres­ ent NATO force goals or to devise a new strategy commanding broad assent and support. If the pressure motif again becomes dominant in Soviet policy, this would probably tend to strengthen NATO ties and stimulate defense efforts. 49. The course of events in key individual countries could, of course, greatly affect the outcome. In France an Algerian solution is 9 The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, considers that the last sentence of this paragraph should be eliminated: he believes that anti-­German senti­ ment in the UK is not a significant factor in the differences of view on policy toward the USSR. [Footnote is in the original.]
