420
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
This would mean that through direct or indirect channels we would
have to develop a joint scenario with the risk that it would not be
successful and presumed on the front end that the steps that we took
would create the proper atmosphere for Ghotbzadeh, or Bani Sadr or
Beheshti to go to the Ayatollah and say that, “we have won, and it is
time to let the hostages go”. The great risk would be that Khomeini
would reject their plea and we would be back at square one having
used up most of our bargaining chips.
Such a scenario would only be useful if we had good reason to
believe that Khomeini himself is looking for a way out. If he is not,
then the risks would not be worth taking.
If this was done, it would have to be done in a way that did not
appear to Khomeini or to the others in the Revolutionary Council as a
sign of U.S. weakness that could then only invite a possibly harder line.
If you are interested in pursuing this possible course of action, it
would require you, Cy, Zbig, the Vice-President and others addressing
several questions.
1. What would be the best scenario we could develop that did not
undermine our nation’s principles, but at the same time sends a positive
signal to the moderates in the Revolutionary Council that could be
used effectively with the Ayatollah for the release of the hostages?
Let me give you an example of the kind of scenario that might be
developed:
Step 1. Statement by President Carter that “beyond the resolution
of the hostage crisis, the United States desires to have a friendly relation-
ship with the people and government of Iran”.
Step 2. Iran responds with a statement by either the Foreign Minister
or new President that “the early release of the hostages is a goal of the
Revolutionary Council”.
Step 3. UN resolution is introduced with U.S. support establishing
a commission of inquiry.
Step 4. Statement from Iranian official that at the time that the
commission completes its report, it will release the hostages.
Step 5. If step 4 takes place, U.S. supports UN resolution. If it does
not, U.S. vetoes resolution in the Security Council.
Step 6. Commission of Inquiry is set up with a ten day limit on its
activities. Travels to Iran to receive testimony.
Step 7. Commission completes report and on agreed upon date,
issues report simultaneous with announcement from Iran that the hos-
tages will be released within twenty-four hours.
Step 8. At the time the hostages are put on plane, the Panamanian
government announces that it has received formal request of extradi-
