North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
919
Within the OECD the United States is viewed 1) as a conservative
force whose defense of economic principles will prevent the adoption
of measures that some European countries are willing to accept, if only
to defuse confrontations with developing countries (France, UK, Ger-
many); or 2) as an obstacle to real progress in the North-South Dialogue
(Nordic countries). Japan’s position is somewhat ambiguous; their gov-
ernment supports us on some issues, but not on others.
A striking element of the current situation in developed countries
is a lack of mutual confidence between senior officials of the major
Western countries and their political leadership.
• A recent cable from Ambassador Enders pointed out that Tru-
deau is far ahead of his Cabinet on North-South questions.5
• Recently, several officials from England, France and Germany
expressed concern that a Summit, an EC Council meeting, or some
other gathering of political leaders might lead to advances in
North-South issues that the officials would find uncongenial.
But the responsibility for the impasse on North-South issues is
clearly not ours alone. The Group of 77 is in difficult straits. On both
debt and common fund issues—the two main planks of the present
platform of the developing countries—their unity is sustained only by
extreme demands. Disagreements within the group forced the suspen-
sion of the Common Fund negotiations in November, since any move
toward the OECD proposal would have fractured their unified front.
Disagreements within the 77 will also hamper their ability to negotiate
on debt in March.6
Unfortunately, the very fragility of the cohesion of LDCs leads
them to adopt extreme positions. Those positions, in my view, increase
the likelihood of confrontations between the developing and devel-
oped countries. However, the CIA downplays the likelihood of a major
confrontation in 1978 with the Group of 77 (Tab A). The CIA analysis
does stress the frustrations that are building up within the Group of 77
and we must therefore look beyond the next twelve months to the
UNCTAD meeting in 1979 and the Special Session of the UN in 1980.7
Both offer the G–77 considerable opportunities for a return to the con-
frontation tactics of 1974–75.
In 1974 and 1975 the United States found itself isolated from its
allies and facing a hostile majority in the United Nations. The outcome
was the Kissinger speech to the UNGA in 1975 (delivered by Moy-
5 Telegram 536 from Ottawa, February 3. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D780052–0246)
6 Brzezinski highlighted this paragraph. Reference is to the discussion of interna-
tional debt at the March meeting of the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board.
7 UNCTAD V took place in Manila from May 7–June 3, 1979; the Eleventh Special
Session of the UN General Assembly took place August 25–September 15, 1980.
