Mathieu repeated his doubts about congressional approval; and he said that Peru would interpret this step as a sign of weakness and that the United States had shown no willingness to try to get Peru to accept such an arrangement, although virtually trying to coerce Chile to accept it. I asked what he meant by “coercing”. He said by such statements as General Lassiter had made to Claro at last meeting of Commission; these statements were that Commission would have to vote impracticability of plebiscite and put blame on Chile unless conditions changed. Mathieu characterized these statements as a threat. I said that they were neither a threat nor pressure, but were a friendly allusion to conditions which were thought bad, in hope that Chile might find way to correct them. I said that my own inference was that trouble arose from fact that though many guarantees had been given by Chilean Government, they were not carried out by officials. We talked about two hours. Mathieu referred again and again to difficulty of getting Chilean Congress to approve an unlimited enlargement of Arbitrator’s faculties; but he said that if Chile could be assured she would receive Arica, the Congress would promptly give authorization. He again expressed wish that it were possible to have separate plebiscites, one for Tacna, the other for Arica. Toward the end he made the only practicable suggestion, worthy possibly of serious consideration. He said in effect: The Chilean Government has accepted mediation; it could do this as acceptance was advisory rather than obligatory, and for that reason Chilean Congress did not have to be consulted in advance. Let the Arbitrator bring pressure on Peru to induce her to accept mediation. He can compel both nations to consent to mediation and then to accept whatever he recommends. He can use same measure toward Chile that his representative is using now, namely, to have Commission vote passage of a resolution that plebiscite cannot be held because of the alleged frauds and violence. He can coerce Peru by letting her know that procrastination, evasion, vague generalization and much agitation, and unsupported accusations must cease and that plebiscite will be held at once. At the present moment the United States will not allow the plebiscite to be held and Peru will not allow any other solution to be tried. If mediation is accepted, let the plebiscite be kept alive by adjournment so that its coercive power will not lapse.
