968
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
With this withdrawal, the United States would be willing to cooperate
with other countries to help insure the establishment of a non-aligned
Afghanistan and a government which corresponded to the will of the
Afghan people. (C)
Soviet actions in Afghanistan, the President stressed, posed a serious
challenge to detente. The U.S. response had been peaceful and designed
to resolve the problems in Afghanistan without further bloodshed. The
countries that were represented at Venice were united in demanding
that Soviet troops had to be withdrawn from Afghanistan. This was
the message that Secretary Muskie had delivered to Foreign Minister
Gromyko,3 which Giscard had delivered to President Brezhnev, and
which Chancellor Schmidt would take to Moscow in the next few days.
They considered the Soviet action to be of great strategic importance
and a great concern to all of them. The United States was also deeply
concerned about the tone of terrorism, exemplified most vividly by
the capture of 53 United States diplomats, an act supported by the
Iranian Government. The United States was equally concerned about
the terrorist acts against Yugoslav personnel and facilities in the United
States. The President stressed that the Administration was determined
to bring the perpetrators of these terrorist acts to trial and would do
everything possible to prevent such acts in the future. (C)
Turning again to the international situation, President Carter
stressed his commitment to see detente improved and to continue to
seek better relations with the Soviet Union. He also emphasized his
commitment to the reduction and control of nuclear weapons. The
same spirit governed U.S. attitudes toward Iran. Once the hostages
had been released, the United States would appreciate Yugoslav assist-
ance in normalizing relations with Iran. The United States had no
quarrel with the Iranian people but only with the terrorists who were
illegally holding 53 U.S. diplomats. (C)
In closing, President Carter asked for President Mijatovic’s com-
ments on the matters he had raised and expressed his willingness to
answer any questions he might have. (U)
President Mijatovic began by noting that the Yugoslav leadership
was deeply interested in President Carter’s views and grateful for his
presentation. He stated that he wanted to discuss international prob-
lems from the Yugoslav point of view. Yugoslavia, he emphasized, was
deeply concerned about the deterioration of the international situation
which had occurred recently in all areas except Zimbabwe. Particularly
worrisome was the deterioration of relations between the U.S. and the
3 Muskie met Gromyko in Vienna May 15–16 on the occasion of the Anniversary
of the Austrian State Treaty.
