266 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI non-­withdrawal period; reduce treaty interpretation debates during and after ratification, and satisfy the stated Soviet concerns. They argue further that the U.S. completed its Defense & Space position only in the last round of negotiations, and that we have not yet even had an opportunity to explain fully the position to the Soviets. Option 2. Negotiate an explicit agreement based on the terms of what is now the U.S. unilateral assurance. Seek agreement to permit testing in space of all ABM weapons, including those not permitted under the “broad interpretation” of the ABM Treaty. (favored by JCS) If successful, the option could provide better protection for U.S. testing rights, constrain Soviet as well as U.S. activities, and counter congressional efforts to legislate restrictions on SDI tests. However, some believe that it is unlikely that the Soviets would accept this proposal and worry that placing it on the table could undermine our claim that we are already entitled to test in space under the “broad interpretation” of the ABM Treaty. Those who support this option argue that a unilateral testing assurance does not provide a common U.S.-Soviet understanding of what is and is not allowed during the non-­withdrawal period, and worry that it would constrain the U.S. without constraining the Soviets. Finally, they argue that such an approach would obviate the debate over the “broad interpretation” of the ABM Treaty, and would discourage Congressional efforts to legislate restrictions on SDI testing. Decision27 2. Deployment Rights After a Non-Withdrawal Period. This issue is whether the U.S. should insist on an automatic right to deploy SDI at any time after the agreement of non-­withdrawal from the ABM Treaty. Option 1. Our current position. It provides that ABM Treaty provisions (other than those covering withdrawal rights from the Treaty) would continue after the non-­withdrawal period, until six months after a side gave notice of its intention to deploy defenses. It would also explicitly give the sides the right to deploy defenses, after a non-­withdrawal period and such notice. (favored by State, OSD, ACDA, Amb. Rowny, and the Defense & Space Negotiator) Those who support this option believe that we should continue to build on the Washington Summit Joint Statement (WSJS) in which 27 Bush indicated his approval of Option 1.
