614 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Akhromeyev: We fail to understand each other. My problem is not with your text. The Soviet Union holds the position that all these limits should be bilateral. Neither side has the right to go beyond these limits. In the case of your proposal, we have unilateral declarations. We cannot agree to this. In this case, the limit would not be the responsibility of both sides. I am coming to the conclusion we can’t work it out successfully. I don’t see how to solve this. I don’t think our government could agree to your option. I will report positively on ALCMs, and will report we cannot achieve common ground on SLCMs. Burt: We have a problem with the question of mutual agreement. You did not touch on verification. I would like to know if the question of a mutual limit is your cardinal point, and if so are you prepared to move back from the verification language in your paper. Akhromeyev: Yes. If we had a limit binding for both sides (perhaps recorded in other ways, say in the negotiating record) then we could get to dropping the verification measures. Burt: Under the US approach the US would declare its number, and the Soviet Union would have the right to declare a similar number. Akhromeyev: Our proposal is 600 for you and for us. Give us your figure. The idea is we would agree on the binding number of SLCMs, and in return we would drop insistence on verification for SLCMs. Akhromeyev: Let us put away SLCMs, nothing has worked out. It is decisive to us to have a binding limit for both sides on SLCMs. Bartholomew: I have two points. First, the approach agreed to in Moscow gives you and us a politically binding limit. Second, it is the US view that that is a real limit and the only limit we can accept. We don’t have a difference over a limit but over it’s form. This is in substance and form very far in your direction. Akhromeyev: It is not in our direction. There is one cardinal difference between us. We should establish a binding, obligatory common limit. Otherwise we don’t have realistic limits with unilateral declarations. I will report to our political leadership, and they may arrive at another decision. Our leaders understand this particular problem. Our President and Prime Minister and the others are personally familiar with it. The way they view this problem rules out your option. How they react when I report this I cannot say. Whether they would unilaterally decide or write a letter to the US President I cannot say. I am giving the maximum concessions. On this point I cannot give you a concession. I will report it to my leaders and let them decide. Bartholomew: I will be faithful in reporting your views. Please in describing mine, make clear how the politically-­binding limits would be real. Akhromeyev: The good part of our discussions is that we clearly understand each other’s positions, and realize the maximum
