Chapter 5, May–June 1990 715 is that there’s been a basic change in the Soviet Union attitude toward CFE. Now there seems to be resistance to move on questions you have, particularly about the size of Bundeswehr. I think one has to remember that if one doesn’t conclude a CFE, we’re not going to hold a CSCE Summit. I have already indicated our willingness to institutionalize CSCE and to ensure that Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union have a forum in which they can all get together with the rest of Europe to discuss not only economic issues but also security matters. However, as I said we feel very strongly that it doesn’t make sense to have a CSCE Summit until after we have a CFE agreement. We are disinclined as are the Germans to deal with a conventional force limit in a Two-Plus- Four context. I know that the British and the French feel the same way. We’re all willing to move quickly on CFE and to deal with your needs and to deal with your needs as they regard the Bundeswehr and the follow-­on negotiations or possibly in a protocol or something like that. I understand your concerns and others understand them as well. There won’t be any foot-­dragging or delay on our part. We’ll move quickly to a follow-­on discussion or to a protocol. I guess what I’m saying is that it seems to me if you delay CFE, you’re going to delay the time at which it will become possible to deal with limits on Bundeswehr. Meanwhile, the political situation is going to pass us by. Even some of the decisions that we’ve already tentatively agreed to on CFE are tending to be over-­ taken by events. But, of course, it’s a decision you’ll have to make and I just want you to know that we’re willing to work quickly and push our allies to get a quick CFE agreement. If we can do that we can have a CSCE Summit and I think then we can deal with the question of restrictions on forces in the Central Zone. I can’t speak for the Germans, but I can just tell you where I think the Germans are and I think that they are willing to do that. One final point. I want to reemphasize the problems that is presented in START by the Backfire. We’re going to have a very hard time going to the Congress with a deal that neither includes it in START or in CFE. Shevardnadze: I think we can decide to have our experts discuss intensively, if necessary, in this area. I think we have established a good procedure now of exchanging letters now if necessary. So I believe the remaining time until the Summit we can be actively dealing with each other. If necessary, we can become personally involved in this process. And that way, we’ll be more likely to complete the process. I really can’t add anything to what I’ve said on heavies. On mobiles, I think there is a basis for us to work. As to Backfires, I think I’ve been clear that we do agree that it ought to be in the CFE talks. And that implies by definition that we will be discussing it bilaterally.
