Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX six months. This was largely illusory, however, because most persons subscribed purely as a device to get out of the country. (U) There are a number of reasons why dissidents fail to attract meaningful support. The vast majority of East Europeans obviously considers the personal cost of participation far too high and believes there is only a slim chance that dissident activity can produce change. Political apathy and anti-intellectualism among workers and a frequent aloofness among intellectuals are the major factors that have kept these two key segments of society apart. The regimes naturally exploit and encourage these attitudes. Liberals within the establishment intelligentsia may sympathize with certain dissident objectives but, more than likely, they consider many of the goals and methods unrealistic, if not dangerous. Those dissidents who have long been open critics are sometimes viewed, justifiably or not, as gadflies, whose failure to produce change is proof of their futility. (U) Frequent personal and philosophical differences among dissidents have weakened their overall cause. This diversity and disunity helps in part to explain why some in the regimes are relatively tolerant of dissidents; a fragmented movement cannot draw wide support. (U) What Do They Want? The dissidents seek a variety of changes in the existing systems of rule in Eastern Europe. Some advocate sweeping reforms that would in fact constitute revolutionary changes in the way the Communist systems function. While none of the dissidents challenge outright the leading role of the party, as this would make them vulnerable to charges of treason, some of the dissidents, notably those associated with one of the leading Polish groups, incline strongly toward West European Christian democratic views. Those pressing for the broadest changes include most Polish dissidents, some East Germans, and many Czechoslovak Chartists. Their political platforms typically embrace the following demands: (U) • A “real” multiparty system or some formal mechanism for greater interest group representation within a one-party system (usually, but not always explicitly, within a so-called Communist framework). • The abolition or significant relaxation of censorship. • The reduction of centralized, bureaucratic controls, especially in the economic and government administrative spheres. • Greater independence from the USSR. Nonetheless, most dissidents recognize, however reluctantly, the imposed necessity of some type of close relationship with the Soviet Union. • Respect for human and civil rights already delineated in domestic laws and international accords signed by East European govern-
