736 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 164. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, June 9, 1959 OTHERS PRESENT The Vice President, Acting Secretary Dillon, Secretary McElroy, Deputy Secretary Gates, Budget Director Stans, General Lemnitzer, Admiral Burke, General White, Mr. Holaday, General Persons, Dr. Killian, Mr. Gordon Gray, General Goodpaster Mr. McElroy said the group had come in to talk about the air defense problem and specifically the issue of the BOMARC and NIKE– HERCULES. He gave the President a paper on basic principles in the evaluation of the continental air defense plan. Before beginning the dis­ cussion, he told the President that Defense has decided to procure no fighter aircraft in FY–60. At his request, Mr. Holaday then displayed, on a map of the United States, deployments presently in effect, as previously planned, and as now planned for the NIKE–HERCULES. In addition to deployments presently programmed, a certain num­ ber of additional SAC bases are to be protected. He then showed the deployments now proposed for the BOMARC; these lie along the east­ ern, northern, and western segments of the periphery of the continen­ tal United States, with the BOMARC A generally in the northeastern United States and the BOMARC B to be used for the remainder. The President asked why the BOMARCs along northern sector were not moved further north into Canada. He asked whether the Canadians would like to have them there. Mr. McElroy said he would like to put them there if the Canadians would. General White said he feels that we have pushed the Canadians about as far as we can on bases for military activities. Admiral Burke added there would probably be great resistance by the Canadians to taking these on. The President then spoke, indicating that he does not believe in forcing weapons on other countries. What he wanted to know was whether we had ever asked them “Do you want us to deploy BOMARCS further north so as to give you additional protection?” Mr. McElroy said that the money implications of the decision being proposed were essentially that there would be a saving of $75 million from the FY–59 program, $60 million from the FY–60 pro­ gram, and $418 million from the FY–61 and 62 programs. He went on to say that the over-­all saving would be in the order of $1,300,000,000, arising from a reduction of total program from $3.8 to $2.5 billion. The 1 Source: Continental air and missile defense. Secret. 6 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Bomarc. Drafted on June 10.
