218
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
99.
Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of
State1
Geneva, April 19, 1979, 1525Z
6663. Subject: (C) US–USSR Chemical Weapons Negotiations,
Round nine: Sixth (Final) Plenary Meeting, April 12, 1979.
CW Message No. 19
1. (C—Entire text)
2. Summary: Sixth and final plenary meeting of round nine was
held on April 12. Both sides presented assessments of round nine. In US
view, despite some progress on defining limitations to be placed on
super-toxic chemicals not related to chemical warfare, little or no prog-
ress took place in key areas; at same time, there seems to have been an
unraveling of understanding regarding toxins and safe irritants. The
US remains convinced that it would be a mistake to make entry into
force of the proposed convention contingent upon adherence of any
specific third state and that Soviet attempts to link such adherence to
specific provisions now under negotiations served only to interfere
with the bilateral negotiations. SovDel, for its part, also concluded that
key questions remained unresolved, citing both “objective” and “sub-
jective” difficulties. Among the latter the SovDel had not noticed any
steps by the US in round nine to meet their position. Concerning the
question of riot control agents, SovDel observed that CS had not been
specifically discussed and therefore no agreement could have been
reached between the two Delegations. Moreover, while subdivision of
irritants into “safe” and “not safe” categories had been discussed,
agreement had not been achieved. Soviet position on adherence by all
permanent members of UN security council was restated. Following
plenary, an informal meeting was held to discuss how to deal with CW
issue in the CD (septel)2 end summary.
3. The sixth and final plenary meeting of round nine was held
April 12 at the Soviet mission. Amb Israelyan opened meeting with the
suggestion that after a short exchange of views, the two sides should
hold informal discussions on how to deal with problem of Chemical
Weapons in CD. Amb Fisher agreed to this procedure (see septel) and
then made statement presenting US assessment of round nine. He
began with observation that frank exchange of views in drafting group
had clarified respective positions on number of topics relating to decla-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790180–0536.
Confidential; Priority. Also sent to Bonn, London, Moscow, and USNATO.
2 Not found.
