Bolivia  149
Lechin will seek to accelerate the process by calling for wage increases 
and other concessions. While Lechin will not hesitate to use any oppor-
tunities provided by labor discontent to move against Siles, his success 
will depend on the cooperation of labor groups associated with the 
rival leadership of Juan Sanjines.
31. We believe that Sanjines probably will continue to support the 
moderate leadership as long as his position in the labor movement is 
not threatened thereby. While agreement between him and Lechin does 
not appear likely, those two leaders might take parallel action against 
Siles and his program. The likelihood of such action would be increased 
by a sharp deterioration in the economic situation or even by the gov-
ernment’s inability to placate labor demands. Widespread labor unrest 
and violence threatening to exceed armed forces’ capabilities probably 
would lead to a modification of the stabilization program, and possibly 
to Siles’ resignation.
32. Sanjines appears to be motivated by an ambition to replace 
Lechin as COB Executive Secretary. If Sanjines gained a clear-­cut ascen-
dancy in the labor movement, his continuing support for moderate 
MNR leadership would be doubtful. Even in present circumstances, 
his past association with Communist groups may result in further 
Communist penetration of the party and government.
33. Given continued external assistance at approximately present 
levels, the short-­term outlook is for slow improvement in the economic 
position of this impoverished country. Some increase in agricultural 
production is likely, and there may also be a reversal of the present 
downward trend in metal production. Only a major increase in foreign 
investment would lead to greater progress in economic development 
before the end of Siles’ term in 1960. Bolivia’s capacity to provide the 
stability necessary to attract foreign private investment will depend for 
some years upon U.S. assistance.
34. Nationalist and Communist propaganda attacks against U.S. pri-
vate capital, especially in oil development, are likely to increase, but these 
attacks by themselves are not likely to affect foreign investment or over-­
all U.S. interests. Over the longer run, development of oil resources may 
lead to an improved economic condition. However, the modest economic 
progress we have estimated for the next few years will not necessarily 
assure the continuation of moderate MNR forces in control after 1960.
35. A serious deterioration in the economic situation would greatly 
weaken moderate leadership in the MNR. The otherwise poor prospects 
for the parties in opposition to the MNR, both rightist and Communist, 
would be enhanced. The resulting political instability would proba-
bly bring a leftist MNR regime to power and involve some increase in 
Communist influence. Such a regime would be weak and disorganized.10
10 A map showing the outline of Bolivia’s strategic mineral resources is not printed.
