248
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
tain funds was sale oil stored Abadan. Did I think US market perhaps
some US Cos wld be willing under certain conditions purchase this oil.
I replied in my opinion Iran wld be making mistake try sell this oil to
any customer other than AIOC. I did not (rpt not) believe US Govt wld
purchase oil in present circumstances or that any resp US firm wld care
start feud with AIOC by buying it. Qavam asked if there was possibility
that US in order help Iran meet crisis wld give it temporary budgetary
assist. I said I cld not (rpt not) say precisely what US Govt wld do but I
did not (rpt not) think it wld be able give finan aid unless Amer public
cld be convinced that Iran was doing everything possible help itself. At
present US public thought that Iran was not (rpt not) doing all possible
help itself. It considered Iran by assuming unreasonable attitude re oil
dispute, was at least partly resp for its present fin difficulties. Unless
Amer public opinion shld believe that Iran was energetically and sinc-
erely trying settle oil dispute on reasonable and fair basis it wld be cer-
tain to object to extension US finan aid to Iran.
5. Qavam said if he PriMin he wld do everything within reason
come understanding with Brit. But how about Brit? Did I have any
reason believe Brit on their part wld meet friendly Iran approach
half-way? Neither he nor (rpt nor) any other PriMin cld afford capitu-
late entirely. Public sentiment Iran cld not (rpt not) be entirely ignored
even by strong central govt. He wld like to come to equitable agrmt
with Brit not (rpt not) only because he wanted friendly relations with
Brit and because Iran needed fon financial assist but because he
anxious restore Iran’s good name in business world so that fon in-
vestors wld not (rpt not) be afraid to take risks in country. In view its
geographical and intl position econ develop of Iran shld be speeded up.
Fon investments shld therefore be encouraged.
6. I asked Qavam if he had any idea as to kind of solution oil prob
which might be agreeable to Brit, wld restore confidence business
world in country and wld at same time be acceptable to Iran public. He
countered by saying he had intended to ask me precisely same ques-
tion. I told him I not (rpt not) sufficiently acquainted with sentiments
Iran public or with current Brit attitude to venture answer. I said how-
ever that for purpose discussion I might ask him what his views wld be
with re to some kind arrangement under which an intl private com-
pany wld undertake operation oil industry Iran on behalf Iran Govt
and oil produced wld be sold to AIOC at prices to be agreed upon.
These prices wld be so set as to permit sale Iran oil on competitive basis
in world markets and at same time to provide for payment compensa-
tion installments. Qavam said he had been thinking of some kind of ar-
rangements along these lines. Possibility it might be acceptable to Iran
people if intl company wld be of really international character and wld
include Iranians on same basis as natls of other countries. I said I did
