632
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
220.
Memorandum From the Under Secretary of the Treasury for
Monetary Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of the Treasury
Blumenthal1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
The Cost of the MTN: A Short List of “Sweeteners”
In order to liberalize trade in the MTN, we have had to restrict
trade in certain sectors. These “sweeteners” were the political price
paid by STR and the Administration to gain the support, or at least the
non-opposition, of certain industries when the MTN package goes to a
vote in Congress.
We break these down into two groups. The first are those paid di-
rectly in order to secure agreement to specific elements of the MTN
package. An example would be the tax deferral given the spirits in-
dustry as part of the negotiation over wine gallon. The second group
are those actions which, although not directly related to the MTN, were
required to appease protectionist pressures which might have had a
spillover effect. An example would be the shoe OMAs. The second are
designated (*) below.
We have attached a table prepared by the Office of Trade Research
in March, which estimates the costs to the United States of import re-
strictions by sector.2 It finds that the expense to consumers of import
protection was about $80 billion in 1978. A large part of this total repre-
sented transfers to U.S. producers, leaving an efficiency loss to the U.S.
economy of about $8 billion.
*1) Summer 1977: OMAs were imposed on shoes imported from
Korea and Taiwan, and on color TVs from Japan. The latter was ex-
tended also to Korea and Taiwan in 1979. The principal cost to U.S. con-
sumers is the long-run dynamic cost of discouraging investment
abroad in low-cost production destined for the U.S. market.
2) February, 1978: The Trigger Price Mechanism took effect. Treas-
ury estimates of the price effects of the TPM range from 3.1 to 14 per-
cent. Without the TPM, we would have been under intense pressure to
1 Source: Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological
File, Box 6, 6/1/79–6/19/79. No classification marking. Printed from an uninitialed
copy. Drafted on June 19 by E. Barber (ITT) and reviewed by Ray (ITT), Hufbauer (IT),
and Bergsten. The memorandum was forwarded to Blumenthal under cover of a June 19
memorandum from Solomon. (Ibid.)
2 Attached but not printed is an undated table entitled “Costs to the United States in
1978 of Import Restrictions on US Imports.”
