3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
830
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
bility for normalizing and repairing the damage is that of the U.S. ad-
ministration. It’s not Soviet actions which have damaged U.S.-Soviet
relations or the Afghanistan problem. Rather, these relations have been
damaged as a consequence of the U.S. administration’s frivolous ac-
tions, not to put it harder. The real reasons for the damage are not Af-
ghanistan at all. One has the impression that Washington is trying to
cram all the hard words it can into this issue. They understand our
policy and character poorly in Washington. Before, they used to under-
stand our policy and our character better and they viewed U.S.-Soviet
relations more soberly. It is not we who are responsible for what has
happened in our bilateral relationship.
10. Attacks on President Carter
It is not our style to be much interested in personalities and refer to
them frequently in statements in our mass media. But there is an ava-
lanche of anti-Soviet statements in the U.S. media and on the part of of-
ficials including those at the highest levels. We have no special interest
in mentioning personalities like President Carter. From time to time
some representatives of the President make references concerning us
which, I can assure you, cannot be compared to what is done in the So-
viet Union. You would certainly win first place on this issue. Refer-
ences are made in our media, but we do not take any official steps
toward our press.
11. CSCE
We are for Madrid and wish it to be positive and successful. This
depends, of course, if all the countries including the U.S. work for the
success of the conference. But if any party wishes to undermine the
conference well in advance, then it will have to bear its responsibility.
12. Iran
Briefly, our position on the hostages is well known. We condemn
the arbitrary actions against diplomats. As I told Secretary Muskie, we
sent private messages to the Iranians and informed Washington about
that. The response of the U.S. administration was a rude and tactless re-
action. We received the most hostile statements from Washington. We
decided at that time that Washington was not thinking of putting the
various elements of its policy together or that Washington was thinking
of the matter in an entirely different way.
It would have been an elemental matter to explain one’s gratitude
for our actions but, when we saw that our actions were not appreciated
and that Washington was not interested in our assistance, we decided
that the minimum behavior of the U.S. administration clearly deprived
us of the opportunity to take another step on the hostage question. It is
hard for us to act on that problem when it is used against the Soviet
Union, and it is being directed more and more against the Soviet Union.
