1957 1385 had not been as considerately handled as our authorities had handled cases Mr. Tseng and Dr. Lin. This problem of Americans remaining in prison in Wang’s country was readily resolvable by his authorities so that further discussion of it between us would not be necessary. The solution of this problem would permit us to direct our undivided attention to the question of reciprocal renunciation of force, which remains fundamental to successful discussion of other items under second part our terms of reference. 13. Wang replied question of taking effective steps and means to relax tension Taiwan area and settling disputes between our two coun­ tries was at center of terms reference leading to present talks between us. In talking about causes and sources tension Taiwan area and dis­ putes between our countries he had to flatly reject my statement which he could only consider arbitrary. It entirely reversed and obscured the facts. It failed to take into account facts of situation. Liberation of China and establishment of PRC entirely natural development of internal forces China and no foreign country should have any right to interfere in this affair. 14. Wang continued, since establishment PRC U.S. been pursuing policy downright hostility to China and policy which did not recognize existence of PRC. Furthermore, U.S. taken series steps in opposition to PRC. It was U.S. which had initiated policy embargo against China. It U.S. started aggression in Korea and brought about armed threat against his country. It U.S. who still occupied by armed force their terri­ tory Taiwan and established aggressive military bases against his coun­ try. It was U.S. which carried out threatening and aggressive activities around territory his country. It was U.S. which did everything it could deprive PRC of right take part in affairs of international community. 15. Wang continued, objective this series hostile policies and activi­ ties was interfere in internal affairs his country and as Dulles announced object of US was try subvert Wang’s government. No amount statements could cover up the series arbitrary and gross violations of standards international conduct, and of Charter U.N., against Wang’s country. Wang’s country could not be shaken by such aggressive and hostile pol­ icies by U.S. China would exist forever and would become consolidated and stronger. Those who would suffer would be persons who tried play with fire in this respect. 16. Wang continued, today’s situation was that U.S. stationing military bases on territory other countries. It was U.S. threatening and attempting subvert Wang’s country rather than Wang’s country try­ ing subvert my government. It was no more than deception to present this sort of policy of hostility as being steps for defensive purposes. In point of fact people in Asia as well as all other places rising to protest against U.S. policy of creating tensions. This was underlying cause
