Non-Proliferation 939 necessary with respect to enrichment technologies. We have over the past months informally consulted with the governments of the UK, France, the FRG, and the USSR concerning the approach incorporated in the above note. On the substance of our approach to special restraint in enrichment exports, it should also be noted that: (a) restraint should cover all present enrichment technologies, and not only those mentioned in the NSG guidelines: (b) at the same time, we recognize that additional, more stringent, controls may prove necessary in the future regarding advanced isotopic separation technologies such as laser isotope separation: (c) supplier consultations would not be intended or used for commercial advantage. We would not intend to make any public announcement of this policy. 4. For Paris. We have made a particular effort to shape the above text to take into account the exchange Nye had with Bujon (CEA) and Louet (MFA) in late May.2 If the French question whether the proposed principle would apply to their chemical process, you should say that processes that are demonstrated to be particularly attractive with respect to difficulty of producing HEU and ease of material accountancy could be treated in a less stringent manner. 5. For Bonn. We have also sought to shape our approach according to the views expressed by Dittman, et al, when they met with Nye in Bonn in late May.3 If the Germans raise the question of transfer of enrichment technology under the FRG-Brazil deal, you should say that text does not envision any retroactive application of the proposed principle. Our previously-stated concern on the transfer of sensitive technologies under the FRG-Brazil deal remains unchanged. 6. For London. Proposed language of suppliers undertaking is that agreed upon by Nye and Moberly.4 British are thoroughly familiar with the proposed approach. You should share this instruction with FCO, to keep them informed of steps we are taking. 7. For Moscow. Our basic approach on this issue was discussed most recently with the Soviets in Vienna on September 19, when Ambassador Gerard Smith briefed Morokhov (Vienna 8485)5 subject was also discussed in May, when Nye met in Geneva with Timerbaev.6 Soviets seemed generally sympathetic to the need for further restraints on 2 Not found. 3 Not found. 4 Not found. 5 Telegram 8485 from Vienna, September 20, reported that the head of the Soviet Delegation to the IAEA General Conference, Morokhov, “welcomed briefing by Gerard Smith on status of London Suppliers Conference, saying Soviet and US interests were ‘identical’ in non-proliferation.” Smith called this comment “significant.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780384–0286) 6 Not found.
