Bolivia 147 Three other labor leaders recently appointed to the MNR national political committee may still have ties with orthodox Communists. Role of Military and Para Military Forces 23. The present estimated strength of the army is 6,500, mostly career soldiers. Its usable equipment, largely of European origin, consists primarily of light infantry weapons and miscellaneous light artillery. The air force has 454 men, 87 of them pilots; of its 42 aircraft only two-­thirds are operational and most of these are trainers. While top officers and probably the majority of the personnel in the army and air force generally support the present MNR regime, political, personal, and service rivalries increased in early 1957. Substantial reductions in forces as part of the economies under the stabilization program contributed to this development. A recently decreed organization of the armed forces is probably designed to bring them more firmly under the government’s control. Siles’ recent request for U.S. military assistance was based not only on internal security needs but also on dissatisfaction among the military over the government’s inability to finance an increase in the strength and an improvement in the equipment and training of the services. 24. In contrast to the army, the Carabineros—­a national police corps of about 6,700 organized along military lines—have maintained their strength, probably as a result of the government’s dependence on this force for internal security. The training and morale of the Carabineros are good by Bolivian standards, although their capabilities are limited by poor armament and lack of mobility. In addition, there are: (a) an MNR security force which is directly responsible to the party’s National Political Committee and which has about 1,500 members, two-­thirds of whom are located in La Paz, (b) a workers’ militia roughly estimated to be 10,000 with primary loyalties to local labor unions, and (c) rural police forces which display considerable autonomy. Except for the MNR security force, these units are ill-­disciplined and poorly equipped. They have been utilized by the government for demonstrations during national celebrations and periods of political tension. At the same time, however, the government has controlled these forces by failure to provide full equipment and to replace the reduction in numbers through normal attrition. 25. The bulk of the armed forces and Carabineros would probably support the Siles regime in the event of a serious struggle between MNR moderates and leftist elements. These forces could probably defend the government against attack by the workers’ militia. However, the security forces probably could not control a situation involving widespread labor unrest and violence, and in any case substantial defection from either the armed forces or the Carabineros would make the survival of the government doubtful. A rightist attempt to overthrow the Siles regime is unlikely; any such attempt would almost certainly be resisted by the workers’ militia and by sufficient elements of the armed forces and the Carabineros as virtually to insure the survival of the government.
