German Democratic Republic festo” had been compiled by members of a “League of Democratic German Communists,” supposedly consisting of “middle and senior level” party members. The existence of such a group, either inside or outside the party, was termed “extremely doubtful” by the West German Foreign Office, a view shared by the vast majority of Western observers. While the impact of the “Manifesto” within East Germany appears to have been minimal, the controversy following its publication and the retaliatory closure of Der Spiegel’s office in East Berlin threatened, for a time, to disrupt FRG–GDR relations. Both sides, however, tried to head off that outcome and to underline their determination to continue a policy of cooperation. Thus, when Chancellor Schmidt offered to send a personal emissary, State Secretary Hans Jurgen Wischnewski, to East Berlin in late January for talks with top GDR officials, Honecker promptly accepted. While the details of Wischnewski’s discussions are not known,3 he appears to have succeeded in restoring inter-German relations to their status quo ante. Conclusions and Prospects During the decade after the Berlin Wall, Western observers initially tended to overstate the dangers to the GDR regime of popular opposition. Gradually, they began to minimize the continuing vulnerability of the regime to internal unrest. The events of the past two years suggest that neither approach is necessarily a guide to estimating the prospects for the continuing stability of the GDR in the 1980s. The GDR has special vulnerabilities but also certain advantages in dealing with them. East Germany’s vulnerabilities are well known: —The absence of a firm national identity makes the goal of regime legitimacy more difficult to achieve in the GDR than elsewhere in East Europe. —The constant contrast with West Germany is damaging to the regime’s image and to popular morale. —The GDR is the most exposed of the East European states to Western media influence because most East German citizens regularly watch FRG television. —The highly visible Soviet military and political presence constantly nourishes strong anti-Russian popular sentiments dating from World War II and before. Tending to offset these vulnerabilities are the advantages that the GDR derives, in many cases, from the same set of circumstances: 3 A report of Wischnewski’s conversations in East Berlin is in Akten zur Auswärtigen
