418 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement negotiations reached point appeared some agreement in principle in sight. 3. I perceive no objection to draft text but have difficulty in visu­ alizing at this stage how negotiations thereon might develop. In event some agreement in principle is reached it is possible CHICOMS may desire inclusion some language in their section reaffirming their posi­ tion on Taiwan etc. This of course would open door for us to insist on inclusion counter-­balancing statements our section. CHICOMS also likely insist on inclusion UN Charter language from article 2 para 4 on “international” and “threat” use of force. 4. Have no further comments at this time. Gowen 304. Telegram 922 from Geneva1 Geneva, October 20, 1955, 9 p.m. 922. From Johnson. 1. 22nd meeting today lasted two hours and twenty minutes. I opened with prepared statement as follows: A. Mr. Ambassador, I first wish to discuss with you this morning question of implementation of announcement with regard to return of civilians which we issued on September tenth. This Saturday six weeks will have passed since that announcement was issued. In our last few meetings I have expressed to you increasing concern over delay by your government in implementing that announcement. At our last meeting I stated that it should be evident that my government was bound to take increasingly serious view of your government’s failure to implement announcement with respect to 19 Americans in jail if this failure should be further protracted. However, I have not taken up valuable time at these meetings to discuss this matter in detail. B. I have done this in deference to your wish that we should pro­ ceed to discussion of matters under agenda item 2 as rapidly as possi­ ble. This is my desire too, but you must understand that in order for discussion of these complex subjects to proceed with some hope of 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–2055. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution.
