380 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 there was a tremendous difference in the unsuccessful attempt of the Security Council to impose sanctions and the actual imposition of sanctions. Marcel said that he understood and had pointed this out to Ghotbzadeh whose response was that it was the “political action of the vote itself” which would be troublesome for he and Khomeini to deal with.) Ghotbzadeh went on to talk about the importance of trying to find some solution before the elections on the 25th of January. Marcel reported that he expressed repeatedly his concern about this date and that the only conclusion he could draw was that it was perceived by the Foreign Minister as something that was critical to his own chances of being elected President. The Foreign Minister said that there were three ways to resolve the present crisis: the death of the “criminal” Shah, the potential of the Waldheim channel or the potential of a new channel of negotiation with the Panamanians. The Shah’s Death. Ghotbzadeh said that before the Waldheim mission, it was widely believed by Khomeini and many members of the Revolutionary Council that the Shah’s illness had been exaggerated. He said that no one could understand the paranoia that existed in Iran about the Shah’s being returned and reinstated by the United States. He said that Waldheim had brought a medical report (Marcel had the impression that it was a written medical file) that convinced the key people on the Council that the Shah was a “dying man”. He said that the Shah would not die quick enough to satisfy he and Khomeini, but that the Shah’s death was a certain way to break the impasse. The “Waldheim Channel”. The Foreign Minister said that “more was accomplished by the Secretary-General than is known publicly” and that there were problems but that the Waldheim visit had been “worthwhile”. He said that with the consent of the United States, the Secretary- General could put together a package which contained three basic elements important to he and Khomeini. First, that Sean McBride would have to be involved in whatever tribunal was established to investigate the crimes of the Shah. Secondly, that while they did not want or expect the Shah back in Iran,8 the General Assembly had to recognize the right of the Iranians to seek the legal extradition of the Shah from Panama. And finally, that once the tribunal with McBride was set up 8 Ghotbzadeh said that in the early days of the embassy takeover, they had dreamed of the return of the Shah, but that if he returned now, it would be an even greater problem for he and Khomeini as the country would be torn apart by the emotion and chaos caused by his return and the very different views as to what should be done with him. [Footnote is in the original.]
