I think that it should be clearly understood once for all that if negotiations come to naught, the plebiscite will be dealt with in manner and spirit which will not fail to keep in view the basic consideration of the plebiscite; namely, that it must be a free and fair one. There will be no splitting of hairs, and technical considerations, such as have been mentioned, will not be allowed to block way to just result. I have no right to speak for the Arbitrator, of course, for he can express an opinion only when a question comes before him upon a proper record; I have no doubt, however, on the point that the powers of the Commission and its control over the process which has been committed to its charge are plenary, and that until that process has been carried through to completion the Commission’s powers are ample to do whatever may be necessary to promote a fair and free election. It is for this reason that I have attached not the slightest importance to the expiration of the registration period which has heretofore been fixed. The Plebiscitary Commission can at any time, if it deems proper, revise or amend its regulations, reopen registration, or even cancel registration lists and start in all over again if it desires. It can also suspend the plebiscitary process for as long as it pleases, and can in last resort declare plebiscite frustrated or impracticable. If the road to settlement through negotiation should be finally blocked, the power to deal with plebiscite can not, therefore, be held to have been diminished or impaired either by any lapse of time or by the technical completion of any phase of the proceedings. Neither Chile nor Peru can assume that the problems which, in that contingency, would arise will not be faced with all the courage that is required to do exact justice. Chile can not fall into any more lamentable error in this emergency than to mistake patience for weakness. In present stage of negotiations with Peru ready to go forward either on basis of permanent neutralization or on basis of Bolivian corridor outlined in my No. 80, May 16, 2 p.m., it seems incomprehensible that Chile should put herself deliberately in the indefensible position of wrecking the good offices, and then falling back upon the plebiscite with the risks attending it, which I have frankly endeavored to point out.
