194
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
a. Policies designed to respond to the needs of the poor and pol-
icies which tend to ignore the needs of the poor.
b. Corruption of such a nature that significant resources are di-
verted toward the nation’s elite and away from the majority of the
population.
4. Describe the level of the government’s responsibility for the
foregoing human rights record, including the extent to which positive
human rights measures are articulated as public policy or violations
condoned as public policy because of security or other justifications.
Evaluate the genuineness of those justifications.
5. Describe the willingness and past record of the government re-
garding independent, outside investigation of alleged human rights
violations.
B. Analysis and recommendations
1. Identify legitimate objectives over the next three, six, twelve
months in relation to improving conditions in (fill in appropriate
country), with respect to categories A 1, 2, and 3 above. Define in terms
of (a) importance, (b) feasibility, (c) U.S. leverage, (d) likely interna-
tional support and (e) provide options and recommended actions (e.g.,
quiet diplomacy, IFI loans, security assistance, EXIM bank credits, etc.)
in terms of their usefulness and likely consequences.
2. Identify principal reactions in the host countries, pro and con, to
the new U.S. human rights policies and Embassy actions and proposed
actions in support of those policies, including reactions of the gov-
ernment, opposition leaders, church and the most influential private
and intellectual groups and the general public.
3. Evaluate reactions in 2 above in terms of the implications for
positive and negative changes in the human rights conditions.
4. a. Where a human rights record justifies U.S. actions, evaluate
the impact of those actions on other U.S. interests in that country, i.e.
political, economic, security, diplomatic (influence of the host country
on U.S. interests in the region).
b. Where the human rights record is good or encouraging, indicate
the likelihood of the host government’s supporting U.S. efforts to pro-
mote human rights through governmental and non-governmental
organizations.
End outline.
5. Action requested: A few ARA Embassies have already received
copies of the above outline by pouch. They are preparing to cable in
first drafts, or have already done so. However, first drafts for most
countries will be prepared in the Department and then cabled to posts
for comment and suggestions. The first draft for Brazil, prepared by the
