534
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
An evaluation of the position of some of these elements is given in
a following section. It must be noted that of this number only the Asso-
ciation of Retired Army Officers can be considered as wholeheartedly
behind Zahedi. Until very recently Zahedi seemed interested in ob-
taining power by constitutional means—as the choice of the Majlis—
but in April he was ready to stage a coup if he were to be appointed
Prime Minister by a royal decree. At this time he claimed to have se-
lected his cabinet and the heads of the army, gendarme´rie and police.
e. Relations with the Shah
Zahedi was a faithful servant of the late Reza Shah and has en-
joyed the confidence and good-will of his son, the present ruler. In 1947
the Shah named him Inspector General and in 1949 when General Raz-
mara forced him out of the Army the Shah named him as his Adjutant.
In 1950 the Shah appointed him to the First Senate and in 1951 he was
Minister of Interior in the pro-Shah cabinet headed by Ala, present
Minister of Court. Throughout 1952 there seems to have been little di-
rect contact between the Shah and Zahedi. Then on 11 April the Shah is
said to have favored Zahedi as successor to Mossadeq, but believed
that the decision was up to the Majlis and must wait until Mossadeq’s
popularity had declined even lower.
f. Relations with Ayatollah Kashani
Kashani undoubtedly plans to direct the affairs of Iran as the
power behind the successor of Mossadeq. As early as September 1952
Kashani is said to have selected Zahedi to replace Mossadeq.
On 2 April 1953 Zahedi claimed the support of Kashani and on 11
April he stated that Kashani was reaching an understanding with Boru-
jerdi and Behbehani—influential religious leaders—on the necessity of
encouraging the Shah to stand up to Mossadeq.
Certainly Zahedi and Kashani do not trust each other: Zahedi says
he will get rid of Kashani in due course, while Kashani must feel that he
could control Zahedi.
2. Negotiations with Zahedi
Within the first two weeks of April 1953 Zahedi appeared ready to
insist that the Shah appoint him Prime Minister, but he has failed to
press this point. It is believed that Zahedi will not act precipitously and
will not attempt to carry out a coup or any more legalistic maneuver
without assurances of U.S. support. [3 lines not declassified]
[2 paragraphs (11 lines) not declassified]
(3) Oil Issue
Zahedi will be presented with the draft of an oil agreement which
is to be implemented after his government is firmly established. He will
be assured that implementation of the agreement will be followed by a
