788 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 of other parties on the scene in Tehran. Saunders also met with lawyers, Bourguet and Villalon, and with Archbishop Capucci.7 II. STATUS OF INITIATIVES ON IRAN 1. Socialist International Initiative Kreisky, Palme and Gonzalez still plan to arrive in Tehran within a few days. They expect to meet with Bani Sadr, Beheshti, the Revolutionary Council, and Khomeini’s son, Ahmad. Their purposes are to explore “cooperation with democratic Europe” and tangentially to have a positive impact on the hostage question. 2. Capucci/Bourguet Initiatives Capucci and Bourguet are in Tehran. Capucci will try to see the leading authorities in Tehran to determine whether it would be useful for him to try to generate démarches in Tehran by the Syrians, Saudis, Emiratis, Kuwaitis, Algerians and Palestinians. His ideas are still unformed, but he has in mind trying to develop a consensus for the release of the hostages. Capucci and Bourguet hope to go to Damascus this weekend, after seeing the leadership in Tehran, to discuss with President Assad and possibly with Yassir Arafat ideas for resolving the crisis. Capucci feels that it is urgent to stimulate some activity before May 28, when the members of parliament first meet. We have stressed to Capucci and Bourguet in the strongest terms that we oppose trials in any form, and Capucci agrees with our position. The Vatican has agreed not to interpose objections to Capucci’s travel to Damascus, provided the USG obtains the agreement of Israel to look the other way. Capucci and Bourguet are holding in reserve the idea of a sevennation conference. The conference would be sponsored jointly by Switzerland and Algeria with the US and Iran attending. The Swiss have decided to stay loose on this until Iranian reaction to such a conference becomes more firmly known. The Swiss recognize that a detailed negotiation of outstanding US-Iranian issues should come only after the hostages’ release. 3. Iranian Conference Initiative The Iranians are continuing their efforts to organize a June 2–5 conference of sympathetic organizations and individuals from European and Third World countries. The stated purpose of the conference is to condemn US interference in Iran and the aborted rescue mission. There have been some suggestions that Bani Sadr sees the conference as an opening to build some support in Iran for a resolution of the 7 A report of Precht’s meeting with Bourguet and Villalon is in telegram 6378 from Vienna, May 21. (Ibid.) Saunders’s meeting with Capucci is reported in telegram 13084 from Rome, May 17. (Ibid.)
