permit no division of classes in this country, with one occupation striving to
secure advantage over another. Each must proceed under open opportunities
and with a fair prospect of economic equality. The Government can not
successfully insure prosperity or fix prices by legislative fiat. Every
business has its risk and its times of depression. It is well known that in the
long run there will be a more even prosperity and a more satisfactory range
of prices under the natural working out of economic laws than when the
Government undertakes the artificial support of markets and industries. Still
we can so order our affairs, so protect our own people from foreign
competition, so arrange our national finances, so administer our monetary
system, so provide for the extension of credits, so improve methods of
distribution, as to provide a better working machinery for the transaction of
the business of the Nation with the least possible friction and loss. The
Government has been constantly increasing its efforts in these directions for
the relief and permanent establishment of agriculture on a sound and equal
basis with other business.
It is estimated that the value of the crops for this harvest year may reach
$13,000,000,000, which is an increase of over $3,000,000,000 in three
years. It compares with $7,100,000,000 in 1913, and if we make deduction
from the figures of 1924 for the comparatively decreased value of the
dollar, the yield this year still exceeds 1913 in purchasing power by over
$1,000,000,000, and in this interval there has been no increase in the
number of farmers. Mostly by his own effort the farmer has decreased the
cost of production. A marked increase in the price of his products and some
decrease in the price of his supplies has brought him about to a parity with
the rest of the Nation. The crop area of this season is estimated at
370,000,000 acres, which is a decline of 3,000,000 acres from last year, and
6,000,000 acres from 1919. This has been a normal and natural application
of economic laws, which has placed agriculture on a foundation which is
undeniably sound and beginning to be satisfactory.
A decrease in the world supply of wheat has resulted in a very large
increase in the price of that commodity. The position of all agricultural
products indicates a better balanced supply, but we cart not yet conclude
that agriculture is recovered from the effects of the war period or that it is
permanently on a prosperous basis. The cattle industry has not yet
