612
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
lowed, I do not think that I should start out by staying with KUCLUB
personnel in the Compound. I should think it might be more logical for
me to spend a little while visiting someone in Shimran and then
perhaps move down to the Compound as a matter of convenience. I
quite agree that I should not stay [less than 1 line not declassified]. I think
it would be better if I did not stay in any one place too long and as long
as I have only casual infrequent meetings with other than station per-
sonnel, there would be no reason for any one person to realize the
length of my stay. A cultivated air of boondoggling might also help.
Perhaps I should go, or at least appear to go, for a few days shooting.
Perhaps illness would be the best arrangement for at least part of the
time. I could arrive for a few days visit and then have to stay on because
of sickness. I do think that, if we put our minds to this, between us we
should be able to work out something that can make my stay relatively
inconspicuous.
I believe that there is a slight and so far unacknowledged differ-
ence of opinion as to whether or not I am to be in direct contact with
any principals during my visit. The request from [cryptonym not declas-
sified] that I be made available for this assignment mentioned the desir-
ability of having someone on the spot who could stiffen any characters
who begin to waiver at the last minute. My own feeling and that of
Ascham is that I should not see any of the locals, except in case of emer-
gency where I felt that my own appearance in the picture could make a
sufficient difference to warrant the risk. I would appreciate your views
on this point also. Presumably we will overlap for a few days in Tehran
and can discuss this matter then. Incidentally your departure could
provide a perfectly plausible reason for my initial visit.
I trust you have come up with some constructive ideas as to how
we can get rid of [cryptonym not declassified]. Head [less than 1 line not de-
classified] feels that this can be left to [cryptonym not declassified] but I
think that [less than 1 line not declassified] may need some assistance. I
feel also that if we could arrange for [less than 1 line not declassified] to be
away during the days of decision, it would be most helpful. During our
discussions [less than 1 line not declassified] we had not anticipated that
[less than 1 line not declassified] would be present and I must admit that
[less than 1 line not declassified] return came as an unexpected blow to
me. We should also be giving some advance thought to [cryptonym not
declassified] further travels. [2½ lines not declassified]
With best regards,
Kermit Roosevelt3
3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.
