United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 11 importers, threatens the continuance of the voluntary quota system which to date has been remarkably successful. Considerable pressure is being exerted on the Administration to convert the voluntary program to a mandatory program. While restive under the voluntary program, Venezuela has indicated that conversion to a mandatory program would be considered a violation of the U.S.– Venezuela trade agreement, and that it was studying the imposition of retaliatory measures in that event. The seriousness of the problem to our relations with Venezuela and Canada subsequently moved the United States to suggest high level consultation by all three governments. Accordingly, early in March, consultations were held in Venezuela7 with high level Canadian observers.8 The U.S. delegation sought to obtain acquiescence to the continued imposition of unilateral import quotas by the U.S. under Article 7 of the Trade Agreements Act,9 and on a mandatory basis if that should be necessary, on the ground that a serious price decline would be imminent in the absence of such controls. No definite decisions or agreements were reached. Venezuela reserved the position that it objected in principle to restrictive measures on its petroleum exports, and that additional restrictive measures (e.g. mandatory controls) would give grounds for their consideration of retaliatory measures. The advantage of such consultation was affirmed by all parties and the desirability of their continuance as required. Both Venezuela and Canada have indicated their interest in the creation of a more permanent type of inter-Governmental consultative body for a continuing review of petroleum matters of mutual interest. Recommendation It is recommended that: (a) to meet the immediate problem, the type of inter-Governmental consultation undertaken be continued, and (b) study be undertaken of the feasibility of a western hemisphere oil commission which would keep the western hemisphere supply and demand situation under constant review. 4. Coffee (a) At the appropriate time in the near future indicate that the United States is prepared to cooperate in a multilateral coffee study group on a world-­wide basis, and that 7 The referenced consultations were held in Caracas, March 12–14, 1958; the Canadian Ambassador to Venezuela attended as an observer. Documents pertaining to this subject are in several Department of State decimal files, principally 411.006 and 831. 2553. 8 At this point, the source text was hand-­corrected to read “. . . observers also present.” 9 Apparent reference to Section 7 of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1955 (Public Law 84–86), approved June 21, 1955, which directed the President to “adjust” the level of imports of any product when he found that increased imports were impairing or threatening to impair the national security. For text of the Act, see 69 Stat, 162.
