March 27–December 31, 1979
1027
313.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, November 26, 1979
SUBJECT
Assessments of Israeli Political Developments (U)
At Tabs A and B are State’s assessments2 of Begin’s prospects and
the potential of a Labor government, as you requested. (C)
In summary:
Begin. State notes that most observers give Begin and Likud only
about 6–8 months. Conflicts within the Cabinet are rife, with personal
differences coming to the fore. (Begin has a 4–5 seat majority; 0–1 if
Agudat Ysrael formally leaves the coalition and lines up with the oppo-
sition). Thus the government could fall over even a relatively minor
issue. By contrast, the threat of defeat (Likud would suffer severe losses
at the polls and almost surely be out of power) is likely to concentrate
the minds of the fractious elements. (S)
Begin may now venture more into foreign affairs, playing to the
domestic audience with a renewal of conflict in Lebanon, a crackdown
on PLO activity in the West Bank, and stressing the relationship with
Egypt even more. Only the last would be helpful to the peace pro-
cess. (S)
State argues flatly that the May 1980 date for completing an au-
tonomy agreement is dead. And the chances of extending the date
would depend in large measure on Israeli activities in Lebanon and on
the West Bank. The agreement with Egypt will continue to be imple-
mented, however. (S)
Labor. The polls now indicate that Labor would get about 40% of
the vote, and Likud about 30%. Labor’s flexibility in power would de-
pend in large measure on whether it had to make a coalition with the
National Religious Party. The NRP could split, however, over terri-
tories issues, or through attraction of its right-wing to the new hawkish
Tehiya Party. But this is unlikely. (S)
Labor has mixed views on the autonomy process—which derives
from Begin’s orientation, as opposed to Labor’s long-standing prefer-
ence for partition and a deal with Hussein. Yet Labor does have to deal
1 Source: Carter Library, Brzezinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial
Xs—(10/79–12/79). Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. In the upper right-hand
corner of the memorandum, Carter wrote: “Good, helpful. C.”
2 The assessments are attached but not printed.
