954
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Several such technical committees might be formed at the outset,
corresponding to the general areas represented by the spheres of ac-
tivity on which there is presently agreement:
1) Economic affairs (for example, finance, trade, agriculture, in-
dustry and labor).
2) Social affairs (for example, education, culture, religion, social
welfare, housing, transportation and health).
3) Local affairs and public order (for example, municipal adminis-
tration, administration of justice, and local police).
A fourth technical committee might be formed to discuss the struc-
ture, composition and seat of the elected body, in light of the agreement
to negotiate those subjects. This committee could also discuss those
functions specified as responsibilities of the elected body in the appro-
priate portions of section A of the Camp David Framework (for ex-
ample, representation on the continuing committee).
Either party should be free to raise any subject in the working
group or its committees. Additional spheres can be discussed and addi-
tional committees can be formed if necessary, it being understood that
each party must agree to any decisions taken.
The work program of the technical committees might include, but
need not be limited to, the following:
—Identification and accumulation of the data required to discuss
each sphere of activity with objectivity and in detail.
—Description of the major tasks that will have to be undertaken by
the elected body in each sphere.
—Description of the major problems with which the elected body
will be faced in carrying out those tasks.
—Examination of the existing laws and regulations pertaining to
each sphere of activity, and identification of those which will remain
relevant to accomplishing the tasks and solving the problems in each
sphere during the transition period.
—Identification of those tasks and problems which will require ad-
ditional measures during the transitional period.
Each technical committee could report the results of its work to the
working group in accordance with a schedule decided by the plenary.
The working group could then forward each report to the plenary, to-
gether with whatever comments it might choose to transmit.
The working group could also review the powers and responsibil-
ities held in all spheres by the military government and its civilian ad-
ministration under the present arrangements and report to the plenary
a comprehensive listing of these powers, responsibilities and spheres.
This would be undertaken without prejudice to the views of either
