Yugoslavia parties. My trip with Luther Hodges to Pittsburgh and my trip to Yugoslavia were made to see if we could head off this confrontation by helping both sides find ways to resolve their problems without resorting to arbitration. These efforts in the first instance should include (a) maintaining pressure on both sides to work out mutually satisfactory resolutions, (b) urge Export-Import Bank to offer an acceptable refinancing arrangement and (c) convince Westinghouse to complete the project in early 1981. There are other remedies possible such as direct USG involvement in procurement of essential components, but we should keep these possibilities in abeyance until we see how well our other efforts will work. I have already talked with Gordon C. Hurlbert, President of Westinghouse Power Systems Company since my return. I emphasized to him the importance we attach to the achievement of an amicable solution not to mention the stake Westinghouse has in this matter if it has any hopes of obtaining future contracts in Yugoslavia (and perhaps even in the Third World). While of course the USG has no legal standing in this matter, I am convinced, as was Ambassador Eagleburger, that the Yugoslavs welcomed our trip and our offer of good offices. As for Westinghouse, I believe that the Corporate Management recognizes the assistance the Department has extended in all parts of the world (e.g. Korea, Philippines) in order to channel sizeable contracts to an American manufacturer. —You need not be burdened with the details of the dispute. Basically, the Yugoslavs wish to have the project completed as soon as possible (original contract called for operations in 1979—“on the line in 79”. Now at best it will be 1981). Westinghouse needs cash since the project has cost much more ($230 million) than originally expected. Beyond that, both sides have a myriad of complaints of differing magnitudes against each other. We think these could be settled amicably if both sides could achieve their principal objectives. As for the FMS, there can be no question that Ambassador Eagleburger’s complaints concerning the Dragon case have validity. As in the Westinghouse matter, an earlier alert might have prevented the current situation. The Dragon case is a good illustration of the need for an Embassy to closely monitor the implementation process of FMS cases. (We all need to watch implementation of major cases more closely.) There is practically no chance for that being done effectively in Washington, given the wide dispersion of responsibilities among agencies. The Ambassador was reluctant, as are most of our Chiefs of Mission, to add to his staff, but the importance of having the critical sales “go right” outweigh in my mind the costs of an additional staff member. I think Ambassador Eagleburger would agree. Although we obviously have not managed the FMS program satisfactorily, I believe the Ambassador feels that the Yugoslav military-to-
