458
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
In the near term, Moscow will seek to consolidate its gains in
southwest Asia and attempt to minimize the costs elsewhere. To date
the Soviets appear surprised by the forcefulness of the US response
which, together with the general outrage expressed by most non-Com-
munist nations, may be giving Moscow reason to believe it underesti-
mated the wider effects of its actions in Afghanistan.
There is no reason to believe that foreknowledge of these responses
would have altered the Soviet decision to intervene, but Moscow may
have to give more attention than it had thought necessary to its relations
with the world community. In Europe, for example, we would expect
the Soviets to appear to be more accommodating on disarmament
issues while portraying the United States as the principal obstacle to
progress. In the Middle East, Moscow will attempt to divert Arab
attention away from the Soviet attempt to crush a Muslem insurgency
and back toward American support of the Egyptian-Israeli peace proc-
ess. Elsewhere in the Third World, the Soviets will try to counter
the damage to their image among the nonaligned states. The Afghan
invasion has already embarrassed Moscow’s Cuban surrogates and
caused Havana’s withdrawal from consideration for a seat on the UN
Security Council.2
From Moscow’s point of view, the most worrisome potential conse-
quence of its Afghanistan adventure is the prospect of closer Sino-
American security cooperation. Soviet actions in Afghanistan will make
the soon-to-resume Sino-Soviet talks even more difficult. Moscow will
also be watching for signs of a more aggressive Chinese stance toward
Vietnam now that the USSR has, for the first time, invaded a country
that borders China.
The foreign policy fallout of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan will
be mixed. A long-term Soviet presence in Afghanistan and continued
involvement in the conflict will probably lead to increasingly unfavor-
able reverberations for Moscow’s standing throughout the Islamic
world, particularly among Afghanistan’s neighbors who are opposed
to a change in the balance of power in the area and are apprehensive
about the dangers inherent in Soviet-American rivalry being played out
in their region. Indeed, the longer the Soviets remain in Afghanistan,
the greater the temptation will be for Moscow to take more active
steps to influence the behavior of Iran and Pakistan. Similarly, a long
involvement in Afghanistan might alter the terms of detente in a way
that could tempt the Soviets to challenge US interests in the Middle
East and the Caribbean more aggressively.
[1 paragraph (1 line) not declassified]
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
2 According to a news report, January 6, Cuba concluded “the Soviet intervention
of Afghanistan has started a landslide of votes for Havana’s opponent, Colombia.”
(“Cuba Ends Fight for Seat on Council,” New York Times, January 7, 1980, p. A2)
