Chapter 4, February–April 1990 607 Burt: It would give important impetus to Moscow, Washington, and Geneva if Ministers can agree on this list and give instructions to negotiators and staffs tomorrow. Akhromeyev: I will report this to Shevardnadze tomorrow morning. Akhromeyev: Let me tell you of my directives from Shevardnadze. My minister has come to the conclusion that circumstances demand an informal exchange between the sides now to expand on possible solutions to the ALCM and SLCM problems. I have no directive to proceed, and this exchange is absolutely informal. If you become interested in our approaches, then tomorrow morning in our presence Secretary Baker and Minister Shevardnadze will look at these options. They would decide for themselves how to proceed further. If our propositions are not acceptable to the US, they should be forgotten and buried in this room. Neither you nor we would refer to them in the future. Bartholomew: My instructions were that you had some ideas that I am to listen to and react to. I am operating on exactly the same basis as you are, free from instructions. This is a matter for Ministers. We have an open mind and are ready to listen. Akhromeyev: In all candor I should say one more thing. We have not received any directives. Shevardnadze and myself are aware of attitudes of political leaders. I have taken the maximum of what our leaders might settle for. Beyond that maximum would be reckless for you to press or for us to accede. This is my personal judgement. Akhromeyev: Let me address the grounds for resolving ALCMs. First, the counting rule for ALCMs proposed by the US is acceptable to the USSR. American heavy bombers would be attributed 10 long-­range ALCMs, provided the maximum capability is 20 long-­range ALCMs. For Soviet heavy bombers, the attribution would be 8 long-­range ALCMs and they could carry up to 12 long-­range ALCMs. Under these circumstances, the USSR would possess the right to deploy within the framework of the 1600 limit 40% more heavy bombers than the number possessed by the US. For future heavy bombers we would agree to a counting rule for both sides attributing 10 ALCMs per heavy bomber, while actually they could be equipped with up to 20 ALCMs. This would apply to both the US and the USSR. We would withdraw the provision on functionally defined distinctions to distinguish nuclear from non-­nuclear ALCMs, and accept the American proposal on this score. We would take out of the 1600 limit on delivery vehicles for each side up to 100 heavy bombers equipped with non-­nuclear missiles or gravity bombs. We would establish a sliding level on heavy bombers equipped with ALCMs for the American side, and the permissible ceiling on the number of each side’s aircraft would also be established, and this
