Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 ernment divided; our friends uncertain. There seems a diffusion of power everywhere. We find no accepted poles of authority, no widely shared principles of action. If Dean Acheson was present at the creation, where are we? We are at a stage which marks the “greening of American diplomacy.”3 We are witnessing its democratization and final maturity. For a century and more, this country enjoyed the luxury of ignoring the rest of the world. Geography provided the basis of our foreign policy, and isolation from foreign crises was the result. At the end of World War II we moved to a new stage. We began, fitfully, to apply our growing national power to the world stage. Overwhelming and almost unchallengeable national power provided the basis of our foreign policy, and intervention and involvement in several foreign crises were the result. Now we are entering a third stage in our diplomatic development. We are attempting, again fitfully, to adjust to the new power of others while trying to maintain or enhance our own. The result is a challenge to this country of a unique sort, for we are being asked for the first time to practice diplomacy as other nations have always been forced to practice it. Like other nations we are finding that our foreign policy goals are at least as likely to be attained because of the subtlety of our approach as through the morality of our cause or the strength of our military and economy. We can no longer order so we have to practice the art of persuading others. What does all this mean in practice? In the period following the Second World War, American power rose to unprecedented heights. With the rest of the world in ruins, the United States accounted for 60% of the world’s industrial production, 50% of its military spending, and a commanding share of its monetary reserves. Some call this period the “golden age of American diplomacy.” But the phrase is not at all appropriate. It was not a golden age of American diplomacy but an exhilarating age of American governance. The task of American foreign policy then lay primarily in deciding among ourselves what to do, much less in deciding how to persuade others to do it with us. Other friends, given their weakness, had little choice. In that period, America achieved an influence over the entire globe—its politics, its economics, its culture—that had never been seen before and probably will never be seen again. 3 Presumably Maynes based this phrase on Charles Reich’s The Greening of America (New York: Random House, 1970). In it, Reich heralded the development of the counterculture in the 1960s, noting that the organizational society of the early postwar era had given way to a more egalitarian society.
