Human Rights
129
own low-key way. Among the smaller West European nations, will-
ingness to be outspoken on the human rights issue seems to vary in-
versely with physical proximity to the Soviet Union.
Latin America
US human rights initiatives have aroused considerable resentment
in several Central and South American countries ruled by military re-
gimes that have felt directly challenged. They have denounced US
statements and actions as unwarranted and unacceptable interference
in strictly internal affairs.
Argentina and Uruguay rejected all US military assistance after
Washington linked aid cuts to human rights violations in those coun-
tries.6 Brazil, already angered by US pressure to modify its nuclear deal
with West Germany,7 condemned the State Department’s preparation
of a report on its human rights practices as an affront to its sovereignty
and renounced the 1952 military assistance agreement.8 Guatemala and
El Salvador have also rejected military assistance conditioned on US
judgment of their human rights situations.
The Latins are angered by what they regard as US failure to under-
stand and make allowances for their political and internal security
problems. The Southern Cone military regimes, especially, are con-
vinced that their countries’ experiences with political disintegration, in-
surgency, and terrorism fully warrant tough internal security meas-
ures. The Argentines, for example, insist that they will not deviate from
the practices they deem indispensable in their continuing war with
leftist terrorists no matter what outside criticism they incur.
The Latins are also resentful over the fact that they were not con-
sidered important enough to US interests to be treated specially (like
South Korea). They have questioned US qualifications for making in-
ternational moral judgments and have voiced suspicion that the US has
ulterior motives for its human rights stand. The latter view is particu-
larly strong in Brazil, where the human rights issue is viewed as an ad-
junct to US pressure on nuclear matters.
6 See footnote 2, Document 23.
7 In June 1975, the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany negotiated a
technology agreement with the Government of Brazil, in order to sell Brazil a “complete
nuclear fuel cycle,” including an uranium enrichment facility, a fuel fabrication unit, re-
actors, and a facility for reprocessing spent fuel into plutonium. The Ford administration
pushed for both nations to agree to a treaty, prior to the sale, that would prevent the Bra-
zilians from using the system to produce nuclear weapons. (David Binder, “U.S. Wins
Safeguards in German Nuclear Deal With Brazil,” The New York Times, June 4, 1975, p. 16
and Craig R. Whitney, “Brazilians and West Germans Sign $4-Billion Nuclear Pact,” The
New York Times, June 28, 1975, p. 2)
8 In addition, the Government of Brazil rejected the $50 million of assistance ap-
proved by the United States. See John Maclean, “Would U.S. fight alongside rebels? Polit-
ical reality still outranks human rights,” Chicago Tribune, April 26, 1977, p. C–16.
