National Security Policy  607
developments in Poland were likely to jeopardize the political or mili­
tary security of the Bloc.25
206. Concerning East Germany, the Soviet leaders will almost cer­
tainly continue their campaign to build up the GDR as an ostensibly 
sovereign power. Internally, the political and economic weakness of 
the East German regime will continue to pose major problems for the 
Soviets. Attempts to give greater stability to the GDR through more lib­
eral internal policies would involve political risk and would probably 
require greater economic subsidy from the Soviet Union, something the 
Soviet leaders would be reluctant to give. On the other hand, turning 
up the screws to enforce popular submissiveness and to make the GDR 
more economically self-­dependent has led to the mass flight of key pro­
fessionals, and may lead to other serious losses. Thus the Soviet tactical 
approach to the GDR regime will probably continue to show signs of 
vacillation and uncertainty.
Bloc Relations with Yugoslavia
207. Concern over their position as Bloc leader and prime center 
of Communist doctrine, and fear that the acceptance of Yugoslavia as 
a non-Bloc Communist power was at least potentially a serious dan­
ger to that position, were probably the principal causes of the Soviet 
leaders’ decision to break off the rapprochement with Yugoslavia. The 
Soviet effort to re-­establish close relations with Tito in the summer and 
early fall of 1957 was aimed at inducing Yugoslavia to identify itself 
with the Soviet camp. When it became clear—­as it evidently did at the 
International Communist conference in Moscow in November 1957—­
that Tito was unwilling to so align himself on Soviet terms, the break 
in the rapprochement was probably inevitable. The appearance of the 
“revisionist” Yugoslav Party program the following spring probably 
only helped to shape the nature and timing of the subsequent Soviet 
campaign.
208. For the foreseeable future, the USSR is unlikely to attempt 
any essentially new approach to its Yugoslav problem. The tenor of the 
Bloc anti-Yugoslav campaign, however, will probably vary somewhat 
with time and place, the greatest weight being given to it by Albania, 
Bulgaria, and Communist China. Moscow evidently does not intend 
to resume the program of development credits for Yugoslavia and 
will probably also hamper the normal flow of trade from time to time, 
while denying that these measures are intended as economic sanctions. 
Though it wishes to exert pressure on Yugoslavia in order to discourage 
independence-­minded and revisionist elements in Poland and the other 
European Satellites, it is fearful that dramatic anti-Yugoslav measures 
25 See NIE 12.6–58: “The Outlook in Poland,” dated 16 September 1958. [Footnote 
is in the original.]
