250 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI NSC Staff Recommendation That you approve the consensus.16 6. SSI at Facilities Subject to PPM. The issue is whether to allow inspections at facilities subject to PPM, but where the monitoring party has chosen not to install a PPM system. Discussion The current U.S. position specifies that such facilities would be subject to either mandatory SSI or right-­of-­refusal SSI. Prior to entry into force, a list of facilities subject to mandatory SSI would be agreed between the sides. However, procedures for determining which category such facilities would be placed after entry into force have not been developed. The JCS and State believe that it is desirable to have the right to inspect Soviet facilities we have chosen not to PPM, and that the security risk of such Soviet inspections of U.S. facilities is acceptable. They believe that since the Soviets have more facilities that may be subject to PPM and since the Soviets will insist on equal numbers of PPM sites in the U.S. and Soviet Union, this mandatory SSI right would be to our advantage. OSD and DCI believe that it makes little sense to offer the Soviets the right to either type of SSI in lieu of PPM since, in their view, we will require continuous monitoring to count Soviet production. They believe the right to SSI would not provide a cost saving to us or aid to verification, but would give the Soviets access to our production techniques for strategic missiles, large space/SDI boosters, and intelligence programs collocated at these facilities, should they choose to exercise the SSI option. OSD further argues that subjecting such facilities to right-­of-­refusal SSI would severely undermine our ability to prevent covert production, since it is likely that the Soviets would reject requests to inspect plants at which they were cheating. Option 1. Do not permit SSI at facilities subject to PPM. (favored by OSD and DCI) Option 2. At a facility subject to PPM, but where the monitoring side decides not to establish a PPM system, negotiate the right to either place that facility on the mandatory SSI list or have it remain subject to PPM in the future. (favored by ACDA) 16 Scowcroft initialed his approval.
