1054 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX could be decisive, and that the U.S. should be ready when the time comes. The objective, Sadat said on both occasions, was for he and Begin to reach agreement on giving directives to their negotiators. Against this background, we could ask Sadat if his comments after the last two summits still represent his views and how he plans to proceed in the January summit since, if he is looking to us to play a role, we need to know what his strategy is and what he expects from us. As part of such an oral representation, we should be prepared to note specific issues in the negotiations where we believe attention at the summit could usefully be focused with some hope of reaching agreement on appropriate directives to the Egyptian and Israeli negotiating teams. 8. I have given considerable thought to what those specific issues should be, and have also discussed this question with Jim Leonard and with my senior political section staff who have participated from the beginning in the autonomy talks. I agree with Jim Leonard (Cairo 26211)9 that it would be desirable to encourage specific agreement at the summit in three areas: something in the autonomy negotiations, something on Jerusalem, and something for the Palestinians. I also agree that the best issue to focus on arising out of the autonomy negotiations would be the size of the elected self-governing authority. (Incidentally, Boutros Ghali singled this out as one of the three issues on which he believes there should be an effort to reach early agreement; the other two were amnesty for Palestinian prisoners and giving an international flavor to the commission that would supervise West Bank/ Gaza elections). I also agree with Jim that, so far as something for the Palestinians is concerned, the idea of a return of deportees is better than seeking Israeli agreement to amnesty prisoners who have been tried and convicted for security crimes. 9. With respect to Jerusalem, I have reservations about Jim’s fallback idea of suggesting discussions between Israel and representatives of the Christian and Muslim faiths about the holy places. My own view is that this would be perceived as accepting the long-standing Israeli position that the only questions related to Jerusalem that are open to discussion are those pertaining to the status of the holy places. My own preference would be to go for agreement on the right of Arab residents of East Jerusalem to vote in and stand for the elections to the selfgoverning authority. (Boutros Ghali is concerned that this would be seen as accepting the Israeli position that autonomy applies to people but not to land. I consider this a legalistic argument outweighed by the political symbolism of giving the vote to East Jerusalem Arabs.) 9 Telegram 26211 from Cairo, December 23. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840157–2099)
