1370  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
8. Wang continued, my authorities had remarkable record attempts 
hinder return Chinese students. Dr. Lin only one among many such 
unfortunate victims. That many more Chinese students so far unable 
return, due to our obstructions, was beyond question. Dr. Lin was 
Chinese student who had never offended our laws, yet subjected to 
rough handling by our authorities merely because she desired return 
and invoked Geneva accord to return. What was there to assure freedom 
of Chinese in US to return? He urged my government actually take nec­
essary measures stop all violation of agreement to return Chinese from 
US. With view safeguarding legitimate interests of Chinese nationals, 
Wang also asked me request my authorities return to Dr. Lin her private 
property of $6,800 and all notebooks taken from her and give assur­
ances against all recurrences such incidents. In addition, if I had any 
information with regard 52 and 22 persons who failed return, as well as 
concerning Chinese confined in our prisons, he glad hear it.
9. I replied, with regard Dr. Lin, I noted two things. First by his 
own statement she had returned to his country. Eight Americans who 
covered by our Agreed Announcement had not returned. There were 
other Americans who would never return—who had died from treat­
ment they received in his prisons. There were others who had returned 
broken in mind and body. Virtually without exception they tell stories 
of most violent mistreatment. Second point I noted with regard Dr. Lin: 
if in fact there was basis for statements which he said she had now made 
and if in fact she felt being obstructed from leaving, she was at all times 
free to communicate with Indian Embassy. Fact that she apparently did 
not do so, fact that Indian Embassy not yet called to our attention single 
substantiated case obstruction among thousands Chinese in US, was 
incontrovertible evidence of faithfulness with which my authorities 
been carrying out our agreement. This has been affirmed also by public 
statements issued by Government of India and Indian Embassy.
10. I continued, with regard first part his statement I must flatly 
reject his completely erroneous statements that US had, or had intent 
carry out any acts aggression. We had to start with recognition of fact, 
whatever the views and policies of his government might be, the terri­
tory of Taiwan was lawfully occupied and administered by a govern­
ment with which US had long had diplomatic relations, by a government 
recognized as a lawful government by majority of nations of world, by a 
government also so recognized by UN. US had with that government a 
treaty of mutual defense which had been published and registered with 
UN. That treaty and all our arrangements and understandings with that 
government were publicly and irrevocably defensive in their nature. 
Very first article of that treaty very specifically sets forth the agreement 
of both parties to it to settle any international dispute in which they may 
be involved by peaceful means. This an element which common to all
