3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
126
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
main objective in trade seemed to be the acquisition of Western
technology.
The Secretary commented that Shulman had been telling him that
for months. Shulman observed that the Department of Commerce has
an advisory committee on East-West trade. The meetings are open, and
the NCSJ could attend. There will be a meeting in May or June.
Secretary Vance commented that there is also a Joint Economic
Committee chaired by Treasury. Shulman said that technology transfer
will become a more prominent issue. There is sharp division of opinion
within industry over this issue. Hartman observed that technology
transfer is only an issue in the very advanced high technology areas,
not in other areas of Soviet-American trade.
Individual Cases
Goodman asked if any specific cases such as Anatoliy Shcharan-
skiy had been raised in Moscow, and whether there had been any feed-
back. The Secretary indicated that specific cases had not been dis-
cussed. Gold and Goodman reported that the NCSJ had just received
word that Naum Salanskiy9 had been told he may leave the USSR.
Hellman asked whether Shcharanskiy’s case will be raised. Gold sug-
gested that perhaps Ambassador Toon could raise it. The Secretary re-
plied that he had thought about that, but was not sure such a repre-
sentation would be a help or a hindrance to Shcharanskiy. Shulman
indicated he shared the Secretary’s doubts. He commented that he
thought it was probably helpful for the Jewish organizations to con-
tinue to publicize the case.
The Secretary said he thought it better for the Department to ad-
vance the causes of the dissidents and Soviet Jewry in general terms
rather than by raising specific cases. With regard to cases such as
Shcharanskiy, Yuriy Orlov and Aleksandr Ginzburg, Shulman saw
three general approaches open to the Soviets—1) crack down; 2) to
mend their relations with the US, take favorable action in symbolic
cases; and 3) take a mixed approach as with Dr. Shtern and Shcharan-
skiy10—arrest some while letting others out. Shulman said he thought
the third was more likely. Shulman continued that he thought it would
be easier for the Soviets to let Shcharanskiy out rather than try him, but
easier for them to try Ginzburg. In that case they have specific charges
involving currency transgressions.
9 Soviet physicist.
10 Reference is to Mikhail Shtern, a refusenik released from a Soviet prison in
mid-March 1977, about the same time Anatoli Shcharanskiy, a Soviet dissident, was
imprisoned.
