Special Session on Disarmament
1221
UNGA, which would have a slightly larger membership and a Chair-
man appointed by the UN Secretary-General. However, most members
of the CCD are of the view that the French will not actively participate
in any multilateral negotiating body, regardless of its structure of pro-
cedures, until after work on a comprehensive test ban treaty has been
completed.
The most significant and contentious proposals are those dealing
with the CCD. The impetus for the proposed changes comes from sev-
eral states, including both the Non-Aligned and our allies, who are in-
terested in providing for wider participation in the work of the CCD
and increasing the role of individual members in the negotiating
process vis-a-vis the co-chairmen. Also, there is a general desire to facil-
itate participation by France and the PRC in the future work of the
Committee. (France is a member of the CCD, but has never participated
in the work of the Committee.) There is widespread support for the
abolition of the co-chairmanship which most countries regard as anach-
ronism. The co-chairmanship is one of the stated obstacles to French
participation. The US position is that we should be flexible but should
preserve the CCD’s ability to function as an effective negotiating body.
We attach importance to gaining French participation in the CCD and
facilitating the PRC’s joining at some future time. We could accept rec-
ommendations for a limited enlargement of the Committee’s member-
ship and constructive recommendations for changes in CCD proce-
dures, so long as the Committee retains control over its work and
continues to operate by consensus. We would also be willing to con-
sider ways in which non-member states might participate, in a limited
way, in the work of the Committee. We would oppose any attempt to
alter CCD procedures to conform with UNGA rules of procedure. We
would not be opposed to proposals designed to acknowledge the rela-
tionship between the UN and the CCD such as giving the SYG’s repre-
sentative a more active role. In the context of achieving a satisfactory
package of recommendations regarding changes to the CCD, we would
be prepared to give up the co-chairmanship, if a generally acceptable
alternative can be found.
The Soviets are more attached to the co-chairmanship than we and
are likely to hold out until late in the Session before giving way on this
point. Both the US and the USSR will use it as bargaining leverage to
insure that any recommended reforms to the CCD emerging from the
SSOD are satisfactory.
On the aspects of the machinery question not directly related to the
CCD, we have fewer problems. We have no objection to having the
First Committee deal solely with disarmament and related interna-
tional security issues, nor do we object to some strengthening in the
staff of the UN Disarmament Center so it might carry out technical
