134  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Background on START
The specific numerical limits (6000/4900/1600) in START reflect 
the overall objectives of reducing the strategic nuclear forces on both 
sides, and concentrating those reductions in “fast flying” ballistic mis-
siles. Other limits, notably the halving of the S-18 force and ballistic 
missile throwweight, and the U.S. proposed subceiling on ICBM RVs, 
reflect the view that ICBMs are the most destabilizing part of the stra-
tegic force mix. The “counting rules” embedded in these limits further 
encourage the two sides to emphasize “slow flying” airbreathers over 
ballistic missiles, and result in the overall START reductions being 
much less than the widely quoted “50 percent.”
These limits would force the Soviets to reduce their traditional 
heavy reliance on ICBMs, thus reinforcing a process that already is 
underway. It also would encourage them—­and us—­to place greater 
emphasis on bombers and cruise missiles, notwithstanding the sorry 
state of our air defenses, and the somewhat problematical future of our 
bomber modernization program. At issue is whether the force struc-
tures that these basic numerical limits encourage would enhance stabil-
ity and reduce the risks of war while maintaining an effective deterrent.
START Issues for Discussion
The Defense Strategy Review (NSR–12) concluded that:
— Present START reductions do not imperil military sufficiency 
although deeper reductions might.
— Our goal should be stability and reduced risk of war, not reduc-
tions, per se.
— Likely START reductions probably do not save money.
— Plausible arms control alterations of the ratio of Soviet hard tar-
get kill warheads to U.S. silos will not solve the ICBM vulnerability 
problem.
— Downloading and deMIRVing may be good ideas on grounds 
of flexibility, but mobility and strategic defense are better approaches to 
solving the ICBM vulnerability problem.
— START allows us to keep an adequate SSBN force.
The discussion paper for this meeting builds on these conclusions 
and examines the specific numerical limits in START. It concludes:
— We should retain the 1600 limit on delivery vehicles, at least for 
now. It is not in our interest to expend the political capital at this point 
to raise a limit agreed at the highest levels, which may constrain the 
Soviets more than the U.S., and which may encourage the Soviets to 
reopen issues resolved in our favor.
— We should retain the 4900/6000 warhead limits.
