3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 862 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI “In view of repeated requests of the American side the Embassy has been instructed to confirm once again that the Soviet side considers as completely unfounded allegations which try to establish some sort of connection between an outbreak of anthrax in the region of Sverdlovsk in April 1979 and the compliance by the Soviet Union with the Convention Prohibiting Bacteriological Weapons. “The Soviet Union, as one of the initiators of and participants in the Convention, has always attached the utmost importance to the undeviating fulfillment of all its provisions which represent a major measure in the field of real disarmament and the effective prevention against making and storing types of weapons of mass destruction lethal for mankind. We have already emphasized that the fulfillment by the Soviet side of obligations established by the Convention is guaranteed by the appropriate state institutions of the USSR and that the Soviet Union does not possess bacteriological (biological) agents, toxins, weapons or equipment and means of delivery as mentioned in Article I of the Convention. “Besides, in view of the request made by the American side concerning information on the causes of an outbreak of anthrax in the region of Sverdlovsk in April of last year the Soviet side has communicated the fact that the outbreak was a result of periodic livestock epidemics in those regions and that the cases of human illness were due to the consumption of cattle meat sold in violation of established veterinary rules. This communication was based on data from the Epidemiological Service furnished in particular by the magazine ‘Microbiology, Epidemiology, and Immunology’ (May 1980 issue). “The stated facts show that the incident concerning anthrax in the region of Sverdlovsk is completely within the realm of veterinary and public health and does not touch upon any matter relating to the aims or observance of the Convention Banning Bacteriological Weapons as mentioned in Article V. “It is noted with bewilderment and regret how irresponsibly some American officials make public statements obviously trying to cast a shadow over the faithful fulfillment by the Soviet Union of its treaty obligations. The obviously inspired clamor in the American mass media around this contrived problem is also noted. “The Soviet side reaffirms that there is no basis for consultations within the context of Article V of the convention on the Banning of Bacteriological Weapons”. End text. 4. In the discussion which ensued, Ambassador Earle regretted the Soviet disregard of our demarche which had furnished detailed information underlying our concern over compliance. He noted the Soviets had not addressed themselves to the information in our paper. Referring to his conversation with Ambassador Dobrynin last Friday, Am-
