3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
862
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
“In view of repeated requests of the American side the Embassy
has been instructed to confirm once again that the Soviet side considers
as completely unfounded allegations which try to establish some sort
of connection between an outbreak of anthrax in the region of Sverd-
lovsk in April 1979 and the compliance by the Soviet Union with the
Convention Prohibiting Bacteriological Weapons.
“The Soviet Union, as one of the initiators of and participants in
the Convention, has always attached the utmost importance to the un-
deviating fulfillment of all its provisions which represent a major meas-
ure in the field of real disarmament and the effective prevention against
making and storing types of weapons of mass destruction lethal for
mankind. We have already emphasized that the fulfillment by the So-
viet side of obligations established by the Convention is guaranteed by
the appropriate state institutions of the USSR and that the Soviet Union
does not possess bacteriological (biological) agents, toxins, weapons or
equipment and means of delivery as mentioned in Article I of the
Convention.
“Besides, in view of the request made by the American side con-
cerning information on the causes of an outbreak of anthrax in the re-
gion of Sverdlovsk in April of last year the Soviet side has communi-
cated the fact that the outbreak was a result of periodic livestock
epidemics in those regions and that the cases of human illness were due
to the consumption of cattle meat sold in violation of established veteri-
nary rules. This communication was based on data from the Epidemio-
logical Service furnished in particular by the magazine ‘Microbiology,
Epidemiology, and Immunology’ (May 1980 issue).
“The stated facts show that the incident concerning anthrax in the
region of Sverdlovsk is completely within the realm of veterinary and
public health and does not touch upon any matter relating to the aims
or observance of the Convention Banning Bacteriological Weapons as
mentioned in Article V.
“It is noted with bewilderment and regret how irresponsibly some
American officials make public statements obviously trying to cast a
shadow over the faithful fulfillment by the Soviet Union of its treaty
obligations. The obviously inspired clamor in the American mass
media around this contrived problem is also noted.
“The Soviet side reaffirms that there is no basis for consultations
within the context of Article V of the convention on the Banning of Bac-
teriological Weapons”. End text.
4. In the discussion which ensued, Ambassador Earle regretted the
Soviet disregard of our demarche which had furnished detailed infor-
mation underlying our concern over compliance. He noted the Soviets
had not addressed themselves to the information in our paper. Refer-
ring to his conversation with Ambassador Dobrynin last Friday, Am-
