628 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 185. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State and the White House1 Tel Aviv, February 27, 1979, 1603Z 4000. Subject: Letter From Prime Minister Begin to the President. 1. Secret-entire message. 2. Ciechanover’s office has just telephoned us following text of Begin’s letter to the President. We understand Ambassador Evron has been instructed to deliver the letter to the White House immediately upon receipt.2 Quote Dear Mr. President: I thank you for your letter of February 263 and for the invitation it contained to participate this week in a meeting, under your sponsorship, with the Prime Minister of Egypt, Dr. Khalil. Foreign Minister Dayan today reported in detail to the Cabinet on the talks at Camp David. It is clear that no progress was made towards an agreement between the parties on the outstanding issues. Indeed, Egypt actually hardened its positions and, in addition to its previous proposals which Israel could not accept, has now put forth further proposals which are either inconsistent with the Camp David Accords of September 17, 1978, or make the peace treaty so meaningless as to be totally unacceptable to Israel. My colleagues and I were compelled, therefore, to ask ourselves whether, under these circumstances, a meeting between Dr. Khalil and myself could be of value to advance an understanding between us in the peacemaking effort. Regretably but unavoidably, we reached the conclusion that such a meeting would not be useful. Mr. President, in your letter to me of February 6, 1979,4 you wrote: “I recognize that Foreign Minister Dayan and Prime Minister Khalil would need to consult closely with you and President Sadat, respectively, as the discussions progressed. For this reason, I would anticipate that, after several days of intensive discussions, the Ministers might then wish to return home to consult with their governments.” 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 10, Israel: Prime Minister Menachem Begin, 1/79–2/80. Secret; Flash; Exdis Distribute as Nodis. Printed from a copy that indicates the original was received in the White House Situation Room. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the telegram, indicating that he saw the document. 2 A copy of this version of the letter, transmitted to Carter by Evron on February 27, is ibid. 3 See Document 184. 4 See Document 174.
