National Security Policy  849
2. I then reported to the President on the new policy for Finland.
3. I reported to the President that I had done nothing with respect 
to recruiting members or staff for the new committee to review the 
report of the old President’s Committee on International Information 
Activities because Mr. Sigurd Larman had been out of the country and 
was due back only that day. However, I had arranged for quarters and 
financing. The President said he continued to think well of having 
Mr. Larman as the Chairman and authorized me to explore the matter 
with Mr. Larman, agreeing, if necessary, to write him a letter.
4. I then again discussed with the President the proposal of the 
Institute for Defense Analysis to broaden its interests and capabilities to 
include economic, social and political fields so that it might be in a posi­
tion to make studies for the government in non-­military fields just as it 
had done on weapons systems. I reported to the President that except for 
OCDM the departments represented on the Council took a rather nega­
tive view of the IDA proposal. I said to the President that I was reopening 
the question because I was still convinced that in some way we should 
try to do long-­range planning, or at least thinking, in economic and polit­
ical fields as well as in the military field and, I did not think we had ade­
quately faced up to the problem. Furthermore, I reported that there was 
developing in many quarters an interest in such a thing and described to 
him as an example, the proposed University of Chicago group under the 
leadership of Dr. Bothwell and I said that something similar was going 
on at Ohio State University and other places.
The President then said that this was the kind of thing that he was 
now thinking about for his National Goals Commission for which, of 
course, he had been unable to get financing. I suggested to the President 
that there might be a possibility of combining the National Goals 
Commission with the kind of proposal that was coming out of IDA and 
the University of Chicago with the purpose of obtaining financing. For 
example, Dr. Bothwell had indicated that the Foundations would look 
favorably upon his proposal if they were satisfied with respect to lead­
ership and also with respect to some sort of sponsorship or interest on 
the part of the Federal Government. The President seemed interested in 
this approach and I offered to discuss it with General Persons.
5. I then reported to the President on my discussions with Secretary 
Herter and with Mr. George Allen with respect to the objectivity of the 
Voice of America broadcasting in relation to the President’s discussion 
with Premier Khrushchev about jamming. I said that Mr. Allen agreed 
with the prescription but felt he still had some problems which he would 
like discussed with the President. As an example, he did not know quite 
what to do with a situation as was involved in Mr. Walter Robertson’s 
speech to the United Nations concerning Communist China, which was 
made of course as an official representative of the U.S. This was not
