the Commission has the settled conviction that the further prosecution of the plebiscitary proceedings, in an effort to hold the plebiscite as contemplated by the Award, would be futile. The Commission can not ignore its paramount duty under the Award to hold only a free and fair plebiscite, as contemplated by the Treaty and the Award, and not to hold a plebiscite which would not be in accord with the intent of the Treaty and the Award. The Plebiscitary Commission accordingly decides upon the grounds above stated: First. That a free and fair plebiscite, as required by the Award is impracticable of accomplishment. Second. That the plebiscitary proceedings be, and they are, hereby terminated, subject, however, to the formulation and execution of such measures as may be required for the proper liquidation of the affairs of the Commission and the transmission of its records and final report to the Arbitrator.” (2) Text quoted above has been seen and approved by General Pershing. When time comes to present it, you should offer it on your own initiative without previously notifying or consulting either Freyre or Edwards. (3) You must choose precise time for introduction of resolution with utmost care to see that such action, looking as it does to definite termination of the plebiscite, is taken only under circumstances which render it inevitable by reason of Chile’s attitude in forcing the issue. Much depends, in this respect upon what Chile may do within next three or four days. I have been advised that a new note is on way here from Santiago, and text of it may be received later today. There is always bare possibility that Chile may come forward at last minute with proposal entitled to consideration, and that Edwards may receive instructions not to force issue on plebiscite for time being. We do not feel that you can afford to declare plebiscite terminated in face of any new proposals by Chile which hold out any real prospect of settlement. But if nothing develops to alter present status and we continue to confront
