Eastern Europe Region
149
should be made to bear the brunt of the negative consequences of
intervention, in continuation of our goal of dividing the East, not driv-
ing it together. The basic reality, arguing for differentiation, is that the
entire EE area is in a permanent, low-grade crisis in which Russian
interests and the interests of the client states tend to diverge. As regards
the Polish regime, our approach should be that it was forced against
its inclination and better judgement by the Russians to do their bidding.
The alternative to differentiation, a general anathema on Russians,
EE’s and Polish Party people of every stripe is the easier option, but
experience shows it will not carry very far before counter-pressures
develop. The West [as] a whole, and the U.S. in particular, will be faced
with tough decisions in the economic aid field in a post-intervention
situation. I would not rule out carefully conditioned offers of assistance,
or short-term food relief measures, as a way of looking—and being—
constructive, re-entering the Polish scene and retaining flexibility from
which to acquire marginal area of influence. End summary.
3. I know the Department has under consideration the question of
our response to Soviet intervention in Poland.2 This is a many faceted
issue. I submit some thoughts on how we might deal with the Polish
authorities and the other EE’s, in distinction to the Russians.
4. Much will depend on the circumstances, and several scenarios
can be envisaged. The Russians will, as in Czechoslovakia in 1968,
claim that they and other Warsaw Pact forces have responded to a
Polish invitation. They may actually be able to provide some substantia-
tion of the claim or, as in 1968, they may simply declare an invitation
as a fact and proceed from there.
5. The main consideration is that, whatever the Russian stage man-
agement turns out to be, it is they who are responsible. The others go
along, more or less willingly. We should be guided accordingly. The
Russians should be made to bear the negative consequences of interven-
tion, so far as the U.S. reaction goes. We should distinguish between
them and their Warsaw Pact allies to the extent possible. The objective
should continue to be, as in our post-Afghanistan policy, to seek to
divide, not to unite the Eastern group.
6. There are difficulties in this suggested approach. It would not
be easy, for example, to operate on the premise that the East German
and Czechoslovak regimes have been dragged into intervention in
Poland, in light of their anti-Polish actions and statements in the past
several weeks. Hungary and Romania have been fairly restrained by
comparison, and I judge Bulgaria too. In the event of intervention they
2 See Document 44.
