802
Chapter 6, June–December 
1990
146.	 Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to President Bush1
Washington, June 25, 1990
SUBJECT
The Tacit Rainbow Missile and the START Treaty
Tacit Rainbow is a conventionally-­armed cruise missile. Never­
theless, it became the subject of last minute negotiations between Jim 
Baker and Shevardnadze to resolve the nuclear ALCM issue in START at 
the May ministerial. Since then, critics of START have tried to distort the 
record on Tacit Rainbow to make it seem as though we made a conces-
sion to the Soviets. The facts clearly demonstrate otherwise and we are 
effectively countering the critics’ arguments.
Tacit Rainbow is armed with a forty-­pound high explosives war-
head. Launched from B–52 bombers, F–16 fighter aircraft, and from 
ground launchers, its mission is to suppress enemy air defenses. Under 
certain optimal conditions, its range can be up to about 800 km. The 
missile is still in development, with a scheduled deployment in the 
mid-1990s. The Air Force and the Army eventually hope to buy a com-
bined total of more than 30,000 units.
Although Tacit Rainbow clearly has nothing to do with the strate-
gic nuclear weapons that would be limited in START, it became an issue 
because we and the Soviets had agreed at the June 1988 Summit to count 
all “existing” cruise missiles, whether nuclear or conventionally-­armed, 
as though they were nuclear. (“Future” conventional cruise missiles are 
excluded from START limits provided they are “distinguishable” from 
nuclear ALCMs.) Consequently, if Tacit Rainbow were deemed to be 
an “existing” cruise missile, it would have to count against our START 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, USSR Chronological Files, START Files, Soviet Power Collapse in Eastern 
Europe—Strategic Arms Control (June 1990). Secret. Sent for information. Copied to 
Quayle and Sununu. A stamped notation at the top of the memorandum reads: “The 
President has seen.” Bush initialed the memorandum in the upper right-­hand corner.
