1.
Editorial Note
Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter declared his candidacy for the
Democratic Presidential nomination on December 12, 1974. In prepara-
tion for Carter’s announcement speech, adviser Stuart Eizenstat and
members of the Governor’s Issues Group provided Carter with specific
themes he needed to emphasize. In a November 1, 1974, memorandum,
Eizenstat surveyed the current mood in a post-Watergate America:
“We are currently a country adrift from our moorings. Our leaders
muddle through from day to day, reacting to crises, with no notion of
where we are headed.
“As we approach our 200th anniversary as a nation, it is time that
our actions be guided by defined goals we wish to achieve in the bal-
ance of the 20th century. These are not pie-in-the-sky hopes but real-
istic, achievable goals. These national goals must be clearly defined so
that our citizens and our decision-makers know where we are headed
and why we are going there.”
Eizenstat stressed that while Carter did not need to define “the
specific goals the nation must set for itself,” he should “display some
notion of the areas in which specific, defined goals are a prerequisite to na-
tional government decision-making.” In addition to five domestic areas,
Eizenstat listed the elimination of domestic and international hunger
and “a foreign policy which is realistic, reasonable, and which reflects
our national goals and ideals and stresses the tempered use of power
abroad.” Referencing Carter’s ability to demonstrate national leader-
ship, Eizenstat noted:
“You have had to make executive decisions—to make a budget
and live within it—to develop new programs and provide the leader-
ship to carry through these programs—to deal with people on a daily
basis, not with Washington lobbyists—while your principal opponents
have never made executive decisions but simply react as legislators to
problems—who can propose the world without regard to account-
ability or efficiency of their proposals. Your experience is closer to that
required as President than theirs. Indeed, their ‘duties’ are such they
can run for President and be Senator at the same time.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“You should stress your own varied background—e.g. farmer and
nuclear physicist—with emphasis on your foreign policy experience.
“Your accomplishments should not be set out in washer-list form
but should be interspersed throughout the speech.” (Carter Library,
“It is obvious that domestic and foreign affairs are directly interre-
lated. A necessary base for effective implementation of any foreign
policy is to get our domestic house in order.
“Coordination of effort among the leaders of our nation should be
established so that our farm production, industrial development, for-
eign trade, defense, energy, and diplomatic policies are mutually sup-
portive and not in conflict.
“The time for American intervention in all the problems of the
world is over. But we cannot retreat into isolationism. Ties of friend-
ship and cooperation with our friends and neighbors must be strength-
ened. Our common interests must be understood and pursued. The in-
tegrity of Israel must be preserved. Highly personalized and narrowly
focused diplomatic efforts, although sometimes successful, should be
balanced with a more wide-ranging implementation of foreign policy
by competent foreign service officers.
“Our nation’s security is obviously of paramount importance, and
everything must be done to insure adequate military preparedness. But
there is no reason why our national defense establishment cannot also
be efficient.” (The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I, part II: Jimmy
items he intended to include in the draft are in the Carter Library, 1976
Presidential Campaign, Issues Office—Stuart Eizenstat, Box 1, An-
Later that evening, Carter addressed a rally of family, friends, and
political supporters at the Atlanta Civic Center. In his remarks, Carter
asserted that winning the Presidency was not the “most important
thing in my life.” Continuing, he noted: “There are many other things

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
that I would not do to be President. I would not tell a lie; I would not
mislead the American people; I would not avoid taking a stand on a
controversial issue which is important to our country or the world. And
I would not betray your trust.” Referencing his earlier address to the
National Press Club, Carter commented that he had spent “25 or 30
minutes” covering “30 specific issues in some superficial way.” Once
he left gubernatorial office on January 14, 1975, he intended to “spell
these issues much more clearly and much more definitively and much
more thoroughly. So that by the time the end of this campaign arrives,
the American people will know not only what I stand for, but, I hope
with my efforts and those of other candidates, what this country ought
to stand for.” (The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I, part I: Jimmy
Carter, pages 11 and 12)
2.
Address by Jimmy Carter
Tokyo, May 28, 1975
NEW APPROACH TO FOREIGN POLICY
Foreign policy was the subject of an address delivered to the American
Chamber of Commerce in Tokyo, Japan, May 28, 1975. Mr. Carter said:
The world in 1975 is a very different world from that which we
knew in the 1950’s and 1960’s. Recent events have proven that a stable
world order for the future cannot be built on a preoccupation with the
old strategic issues which have dominated East-West and North-South
relations since the end of World War II.
Carter delivered prepared remarks before the American Chamber of Commerce. Carter
traveled to Japan to attend the Trilateral Commission meeting held in Tokyo and Kyoto
May 30–31. Private citizens of Western Europe, Japan, the United States, and Canada es-
tablished the Trilateral Commission in 1973 to promote cooperation among these regions
on common problems. Zbigniew Brzezinski, the Trilateral Commission’s Director, ad-
dressed the members on the last day of the conference. His remarks are printed in Charles
B. Heck, ed., Trialogue: Trilateral Leaders Discuss Global Redistribution of Power and Problems
of Trilateral Community, Japan, May 1975 (New York: The Trilateral Commission, 1975),
pp. 11–14. Brzezinski recalled that Carter’s performance at the meeting had impressed
him and convinced him to support Carter’s bid for the Democratic nomination, even as
the other likely Democratic nominees sought his counsel. Brzezinski began authoring for-
eign policy papers for Carter, and by the end of 1975 Brzezinski “had emerged as Carter’s
principal foreign policy adviser.” (Brzezinski, Power and Principle, pp. 6–7)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Recently, with the end of the Vietnam conflict, a tremendous
burden has been lifted from our shoulders—both an economic burden
and one of divisiveness and doubt. Our over-involvement in the in-
ternal affairs of Southeast Asian countries is resulting in a mandatory
reassessment by the American people of our basic foreign policies. The
lessons we have learned can be a basis for dramatic improvements in
the prospects for world peace and the solutions for international
problems. The people of the United States are inclined to look toward
the future and not to dwell on the mistakes of the past.
Lessons Learned
What are the lessons we have learned? What are our likely deci-
sions about the future?
There is no doubt that our people are wary of any new foreign in-
volvements, but we realize that many such involvements will be
necessary.
We have learned that never again should our country become mili-
tarily involved in the internal affairs of another nation unless there is a
direct and obvious threat to the security of the United States or its
people. We must not use the CIA or other covert means to effect violent
change in any government or government policy. Such involvements
are not in the best interests of world peace, and they are almost inher-
ently doomed to failure.
When we embrace one of the contending leadership factions in a
country, too often it is the power of the United States, not the support of
the people, which keeps that leader in power. Our chosen leader may
then resort to repressive force against his own people to keep himself in
power.
We have learned the hard way how important it is during times of
international stress and turmoil to keep close ties with our allies and
friends and to strive for multilateral agreements and solutions to crit-
ical problems. I hope that our days of unilateral intervention such as oc-
curred in Vietnam, Cambodia, and the Dominican Republic are over.
Another lesson to be learned is that we cannot impose democracy
on another country by force. Also, we cannot buy friends; and it is ob-
vious that other nations resent it if we try. Our interests lie in protecting
our national security, in preventing war, in peacefully promoting the
principles of human freedom and democracy, and in exemplifying in
our foreign policy the true character and attitudes of the American
people.
We understand the vital importance of our relationship with our
allies. Our friends in Japan, Western Europe and Israel must know that
we will keep our promises; yet, they will be reassured not by promises
but by tangible actions and regular consultations. It is particularly im-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
portant that we recement strained relationships with our allies; that
will be far easier to accomplish now that our involvement in Vietnam is
over. The United States will always honor those commitments which
have been made openly by our leaders and with the full knowledge
and involvement of the people of our country.
We must never again keep secret the evolution of our foreign
policy from the Congress and the American people. They should never
again be misled about our options, our commitments, our progress, or
our failures. If the President sets the policy openly, reaching agreement
among the officers of the government, if the President involves the
Congress and the leaders of both parties rather than letting a handful of
people plot the policy behind closed doors, then we will avoid costly
mistakes and have the support of our citizens in our dealings with
other nations. Our commitments will be stronger; abrupt changes will
be fewer.
Secretaries of State and Defense and other Cabinet officers should
regularly appear before Congress, hopefully in televised sessions, to
answer hard questions and to give straight answers. No equivocation
nor unwarranted secrecy should be permitted.
Interdependence Among Nations
What are the other elements of our future foreign policy? This is no
time for thoughts of isolationism. We can now turn our attention more
effectively toward matters like the world economy, freedom of the seas,
environmental quality, food, population, peace, conservation of irre-
placeable commodities, and the reduction of world armaments. The in-
tensity of our interrelated problems is rapidly increasing, and better
mechanisms for consultation must be established and utilized before
these problems become more dangerous.
Interdependence among nations is an unavoidable and increasing
factor in our individual lives. We know that even a nation with an
economy as strong as ours is affected by errors such as the excessive
sale of wheat to Russia in 1973, by commodity boycotts, and by the ebb
and tide of economic events in the rest of the world. Our own tempo-
rary embargo of soybeans and other oil seeds was a damaging mistake
to ourselves and to our friends like Japan. Such mistakes can be
avoided in the future only by a commitment to consultation, as exem-
the United States. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XV, Soviet Union, June
bean and seed exports. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
plified by the Trilateral Commission relationship among North Amer-
ica, Western Europe, and Japan.
The machinery of consultation must be reexamined and some new
mechanisms developed. Others need to be abandoned or revitalized.
We must strengthen international organizations such as the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the United Nations. Our
new commitment to multinational consultation should be reflected in
the quality of the representatives we appoint to international agencies.
It is likely in the near future that issues of war and peace will be
more a function of economic and social problems than of the military
security problems which have dominated international relations in the
world since World War II.
The relationship between Japan and the United States is based on
both firm pillars of interest—our mutual security and our great eco-
nomic relationship.
The security of Japan is vital to the United States, and we will
maintain our commitment to Japan’s defense. The sensitive question of
the level and deployment of military forces here will, of course, be
shaped in a continuing dialogue with Japan.
The enormous trade flow of $24 billion a year is the largest
overseas commerce the world has ever known. We rely on one another.
There is no place for abrupt unilateral decisions which shock the other
trading partner. Major foreign policy actions affecting the other must
be thoroughly discussed in advance with our friend.
Interdependence means mutual sacrifice. For example, we must
cooperate with our allies in reducing our demands for fossil fuel, assist
them in the alternative development of energy resources, build up
common stockpiles, plan jointly for future crises, and share the oil in-
vestments of the OPEC countries.
Among our people there is broad support for continuing the policy
of de´tente with the Soviet Union and China—but not at the expense of
close cooperation and consultation with our friends and allies. We
must again reorient our foreign policy attention toward our friends.
Our recent emphases have all too often involved our adversaries and
ignored the interests and needs of our allies. De´tente should be pur-
sued on a mutually beneficial basis through a series of sustained, low
key and open discussions among the participants—and not just dra-
matic or secret agreements among two or three national leaders.
Our concern with foreign policy, however, must go beyond
avoiding the mistakes of the past, reaffirming our close relationship
with our allies, and continuing the process of de´tente. We must end the
continuing proliferation of atomic weapons throughout the world,
which is as senseless as a waste of precious resources as it is a mortal

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
danger to humanity. We should refuse to sell nuclear powerplants and
fuels to nations who do not sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty
or who will not agree to adhere to strict provisions regarding inter-
national control of atomic wastes. The establishment of additional
nuclear-free zones in the world must also be encouraged.
In addition, however, the United States and the Soviet Union have
an obligation to deal with the excessive nuclear armaments which we
possess. Our ultimate goal should be the reduction of nuclear weapons
in all nations to zero. In the meantime, simple, careful, and firm public
proposals to implement these reductions should be pursued as a prime
national purpose in all our negotiations with nuclear powers—both
present and potential. The Vladivostok Agreement5 obviously permits
the continued atomic arms race.
We must play a constructive role in the resolution of local conflicts
which may lead to major power confrontations. Peace in the Middle
East is of vital interest to us all. While peace is the basic responsibility of
the nations in the area, the United States must help secure this peace by
maintaining the trust of all sides. We must strive to maintain good rela-
tions with the Arab countries as well as Israel, and to recognize Arab
needs and aspirations as long as they recognize that the major element
of a settlement is the guaranteed right of Israel to exist as a viable and
peaceful nation. The rights of the Palestinians must also be recognized
as part of any final solution.
It is essential that the flow of oil to Japan and Western Europe
never be shut off. The United States should not consider unilateral ac-
tion in the Middle East to assure our own nation’s access to Mideast oil.
Open or veiled threats of armed intervention do not contribute toward
a peaceful settlement of the problems of this tortured region.
The peoples of the developing nations need the aid, technology,
and knowledge of the developed nations. We need the developed na-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tions as sources for raw materials and as markets for our exports. The
world will not be a safe or decent place in which to live, however, if it
continues to divide between countries which are increasingly rich and
those which are increasingly impoverished.
The knowledge that food, oil, fertilizer and financial credit are vital
must not be the cause of international extortion; rather, our interde-
pendence should provide a basis on which continuing international
trade agreements can be reached. There is a danger that the recent eco-
nomic successes of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
cartel will encourage other confrontation by countries possessing
scarce raw materials. This could be a serious and self-damaging mis-
take, resulting in a series of pyramiding and perhaps uncontrollable
confrontations, leading to serious damage to the poorer and weaker
nations.
A stable world order cannot become a reality when people of
many nations of the world suffer mass starvation; when the countries
with capital and technology belligerently confront other nations for the
control of raw materials and energy sources; when open and discrimi-
natory trade has become the exception rather than the rule; when there
are no established arrangements for supplying the world’s food and
energy nor for governing, control, and development of the seas; and
when there are no effective efforts to deal with population explosions
or environmental quality.
We must remember that because of our tremendous and contin-
uing economic, military and political strength, the United States has an
inevitable role of leadership to play within the community of nations.
But our influence and respect should go beyond our military might,
our political power, and our economic wealth—and be based on the
fact that we are right, and fair, and decent, and honest, and truthful.
Our U.S. foreign policy must once again reflect the basic ideals of
our people and our nation. We must reassert our vital interest in
human rights and humanitarian concerns, and we must provide en-
lightened leadership in the world community. The people of the United
States want to be trusted and respected, and we are determined, there-
fore, to be trustworthy and respectful of others.

3.
Statement by Senator Walter F. Mondale
Washington, June 2, 1975
AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY AFTER VIETNAM
Mr. President. Let me express my appreciation to Senator Cran-
ston, Senator Kennedy, and others who have arranged this historic dis-
cussion. It is fitting that we begin the debate on the future course of
America’s post-Vietnam foreign policy in the context of the Senate’s
consideration of the military authorization bill. For it was our tragic
experience in Vietnam which showed how empty is a foreign policy
based on military power alone.
As we try to define America’s future world role, we must take full
account of the fact that the citizens of this country are profoundly skep-
tical. They know only too well that their patriotism has been exploited
by political leaders who could no longer justify their actions with
candor. I do not believe that the United States is about to become an iso-
lationist country, but the American people no longer want to be the
world’s policemen nor go on one-man crusades. I believe that Amer-
icans are willing to continue to shoulder our fair share of the world’s re-
sponsibilities, but only if these responsibilities are defined in terms that
make sense, that are consistent with our basic values and that relate to
our real concerns. This requires that we go back to basics—in the terms
that we use to think about foreign policy, in the values we pursue, and
in the way we view the real sources of America’s prestige and power.
The first step in revising our thinking about foreign policy should
be to jettison the amorphous term “national security,” and to get back
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
to talking concretely about our diplomatic, military, economic and
other interests.
The term “national security” has dominated our thinking in for-
eign affairs for three decades. In the late 1940’s, when the National Se-
curity Council was established by law, we were concerned about a
monolithic enemy—the Soviet Union, the Peoples Republic of China,
and Communist parties throughout the world appeared to be acting in
concert, using every means of diplomacy, military coercion, economic
leverage and propaganda, orchestrated on behalf of Soviet imperialistic
expansion. With the lessons of Hitler fresh in our minds, we felt, and I
believe quite rightly, that we had to meet this threat with a comprehen-
sive national effort. Otherwise we believed that the United States and
the American people would ultimately be placed in direct jeopardy.
But as the years passed, the Sino-Soviet alliance cracked apart.
Communist parties outside the Soviet Bloc began to define their in-
terests to suit themselves and not the Soviet Union.
Our own problems became more complicated and the concept of
“national security” was not much of a guide to solving them. For ex-
ample, the idea of national security has militarized our foreign policy to
the point of being virtually helpless when confronted by major interna-
tional economic problems such as energy. All we could do to respond
to OPEC’s fourfold increase in the price of oil was to mutter empty
threats about invading the Middle East.
But even worse, I believe the fog of national security helped to lead
us into the tragic swamp of Vietnam, into the morass called Watergate.
In the early 1960’s we saw Vietnam as a threat to our overall na-
tional security. We could not see that our interests in Southeast Asia
were diplomatic, not military. The problem was to contain the threat of
Soviet and Chinese Communist influence, and not as some suggested
at the time, to defend Hawaii.
While there was nothing wrong with encouraging a democratic,
pro-U.S. government in Saigon, we failed to recognize that our bottom-
line interest only required a reasonably independent South Vietnam,
regardless of the complexion of its government. Skillful diplomacy, not
military intervention, might have achieved—and in fact might still
achieve—that basic diplomatic objective.
National security confused our objectives at home, as well as
abroad. If we wanted to support higher education, we had to justify it
in terms of national security. When we wanted to make sensible long-
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
term investment in basic scientific research, we found we could only do
it in the name of national security. When we faced the choice between a
Great Society at home and defending our so-called national security in
Southeast Asia, you know what took priority. The war on poverty was
lost long before the war in Vietnam ground to its tragic finale.
In time, this bloated concept of national security ultimately came
home to us with Watergate. Who can forget the passage in the White
House tapes when Richard Nixon is groping for a way to try to justify
to the American public the break-in of Daniel Ellsberg’s psychiatrist’s
office?
John Dean suggests, “You might put it on a national security
grounds basis.” The President responds, “National security. We had to
get information coming out and everything coming out. The whole
thing was national security.” John Dean adds, “I think we could get by
on that.”
And there was an even more chilling exchange in the Watergate
hearings when Senator Talmadge asked John Ehrlichman, “Now if the
President could authorize a covert break-in, and you do not know ex-
actly how that power would be limited, you do not think it could in-
clude murder or other crimes beyond a covert break-in, do you?” Mr.
Ehrlichman answers, “I do not know where the line is, Senator.”
Let’s retire this term “national security” and get back to defining
our interests more concretely, in terms of diplomatic interests, military
interests, and economic interests; or political, humanitarian, ethnic and
cultural interests.
I see nothing wrong in being frank about the fact that in the Middle
East our support for Israel is based on political and cultural affinity,
that our desire for good relations with the Arab states is based on eco-
nomic interests, and that our hope for peace between the two is based
on concern that war could prompt a military confrontation between the
United States and the Soviet Union.
Portugal offers another example of how dealing with specific in-
terests rather than the concept of national security helps clarify what is
at stake. While we would like to see a democratic Portugal, and should
do what we can to encourage that, our primary interest is military. We
must not be too pious in our criticism of the present government and
forget that we were willing to tolerate a truly odious dictator for gener-
ations—precisely because the Salazar regime5 provided us with a mili-
tary base in the Azores that enabled us to control the Atlantic and sup-
port the Middle East.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
By putting our interest in Portugal’s internal affairs into perspec-
tive, I think it should make it even more possible for us to be patient, to
be more understanding of the very difficult internal problems of estab-
lishing a reasonably representative and progressive government in the
aftermath of decades of tyranny. I believe we need not worry too much
about how the political complexion in Portugal may change from day
to day. Personally, I will be rooting for the moderate and democratic
forces in Portugal, but as a government we should be clear that the
essential American concern is for the continuation of our military
relationship.
The second major issue we need to confront in defining our future
foreign policy is how to support our basic values without winding up
back in places like Vietnam. I do not believe the American people will
support a foreign policy devoid of human values, yet how do we stop
short of meddling in other peoples’ affairs?
I believe strongly that we can and should support human rights,
individual freedom and justice, governments who derive their power
from the consent of the governed. I have always opposed communism
because it has jeopardized these values. But somewhere along the line
we lost sight of the fact that we were contesting tyranny, regardless of
its political coloration.
We became absorbed in the narrower struggle against commu-
nism, and in the process supported and ultimately overcommitted our-
selves to some of the most outrageously oppressive regimes in the
world. And ironically, the consequence has often been to give a boost to
the Communists by identifying the United States and our values with
petty tyrants.
The lesson, I believe, is to support those who truly favor democ-
racy, freedom, and social justice and treat with equal disdain tyrants,
whatever their political label.
A second major lesson that we should have learned by now is that
our commitment to freedom and justice cannot substitute for the lack of
commitment on the part of others. We cannot care more about the in-
tegrity and independence of a country being threatened than its
leaders. We must not offer to make sacrifices that are greater than the
sacrifices to be borne by those we would help.
A third way to be true to our values, yet avoid the pitfalls of an-
other Vietnam, is to turn our attention to the great unfinished business
on the world’s agenda: hunger, development, economic stability and
progress, a new equitable regime for the oceans, a more effective con-
trol of conventional and nuclear arms. There is a very long list that has
received too low priority for too great a time. By tackling these
problems, I believe that we can fulfill our responsibilities, pursue our
basic values, without inevitably being drawn into the agony of war. We

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
may, in fact, even be able to make a contribution to reducing some of
the causes of human conflict.
Finally, if we are to define a new direction for American foreign
policy, we must have a more balanced appreciation of the real sources
of American power and influence in the world. With military power
second to none, we were unable to alter the course of history in Viet-
nam. With the ability to destroy the world we could not prevent the
oil-producing countries from bringing truly agonizing hardship to mil-
lions upon millions of Americans in the form of inflation and the
deepest depression since the 1930’s. And all the military might in the
world does not enable us to command the respect we once had in the
international arena.
Military power is increasingly irrelevant to the host of economic,
social and political issues confronting this country. This is not to say
that we do not have a fundamental military interest in a stable strategic
relationship with the Soviet Union or with a secure Europe, Japan and
Israel. But the oil cartel, the threat of other commodity cartels, the
problem of world hunger, worldwide recession and inflation—none of
these issues, which immediately affect the security of every American,
can be resolved by military force.
Moreover, I am convinced that the basic source of American power
to deal with these issues lies in the ability of the American people and
their government to solve this nation’s problems. Our ability to manage
a growing and vibrant economy, to be first in the world in techno-
logical innovation; to lead the world in efforts to bring equality to all of
our citizens; to provide social justice, good housing, jobs, schools; to
take care of our old; to insure equal opportunity to our young—these
are the things that once were the hallmark of America. We were re-
spected for these things. Nations sought our advice and our counsel,
because they had confidence in our leadership, in our sense of prior-
ities, and in our humanity.
Now, after decades in which considerations of national security
have taken priority over all others in this country, we have squandered
$150 billion worth of investment in the quagmire of Vietnam. We have
spent over $1 trillion in arms. We have sent our best and brightest into
the defense industries, into the military services, into the secret intelli-
gence agencies. We have kept our military machine polished, but have
let our cities decay, our transportation systems collapse, our national
unity dissolve. We have pursued American ideals in the jungles of
Southeast Asia and have ignored them in the jungles of our cities.
If there is anything that must underline a new foreign policy for
the United States, it should be the recognition that the source of
America’s strength and influence in the world is our ability to meet our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
needs at home. If we can’t solve our problems here, we are not going to
solve our problems, or anybody else’s problems, abroad.
This is not a call to isolationism, nor unilateral disarmament. We
must keep this country strong militarily, and we will no doubt devote
the resources to do so. The Soviet Union and others should not be
tempted by recent events into miscalculating our commitment to our
friends and allies. We are not opting out of the world.
In fact, I think that perhaps we have finally turned the last page on
isolationism in the United States. Isolationism is an unwillingness to
deal with the world as it is. At one time America demonstrated this by
having nothing to do with international affairs. And when we became
involved in world affairs, we seemed to want to control everything, to
transform other countries in our image, to leave nothing to chance. This
too was an unwillingness to deal with the world as it is, and really is a
kind of isolationism.
Perhaps now we will begin to accept the diversity, the conflict, and
even the disorder that are inherent in the world. We cannot completely
control such things, and we have found, to our tragic dismay, that if we
try, they only end up controlling us.
Mr. President. I have tried to outline my views on the basic prin-
ciples underlying the development of a new American foreign policy in
this post-Vietnam period.
—First, our policy must be one that is not dominated by elitist ab-
stractions like “national security,” but which is grounded in concrete
interests which the American people can identify with and support.
—Second, we must be more disciplined, but no less determined, in
the pursuit of our ideals. The response to our overinvolvement in Viet-
nam is not a Philistine policy devoid of values. Rather, it is to re-
dedicate ourselves more conscientiously to democracy, freedom, jus-
tice and the international agenda of human needs.
—Third, we must draw upon sources of national power and influ-
ence in addition to military power in the pursuit of our foreign policy.
We must recognize that America is strong abroad only insofar as it is
strong at home. World leadership and respect will be determined by
how well we meet the needs of our own people—for only in that way
can this nation recapture its unique claim to being the last, best hope for
mankind.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
4.
Remarks by Jimmy Carter
Chicago, March 15, 1976
OUR FOREIGN RELATIONS
In a presentation to the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, March 15,
1976, Mr. Carter said:
I am pleased to speak to you today. This council is the oldest, the
largest, and the most active organization of its kind in the country. For
over 50 years you have helped make this city and this region better in-
formed about a world which the St. Lawrence Seaway now brings to
your doorstep. Men like Adlai Stevenson, Paul Douglas, and Frank
Knox studied the world through this council and went on to make
history.
I want to take this opportunity to explain how I shall approach the
problems of foreign policy if I am elected President:
How I see our international situation today;
What our role in the world should be;
How we should approach our relationships with different kinds of
international neighbors;
What kinds of policies, and what kind of policymakers we shall
need so that our international relations can be true expressions of the
goals and the character of the people of our country.
Our recent foreign policy, I am afraid, has been predicated on a be-
lief that our national and international strength is inevitably deterio-
rating. I do not accept this premise.
The prime responsibility of any President is to guarantee the secu-
rity of our nation, with a tough, muscular, well-organized, and effec-
tive fighting force. We must have the ability to avoid the threat of suc-
cessful attack or blackmail, and we must always be strong enough to
carry out our legitimate foreign policy. This is a prerequisite to peace.
Our foreign policy today is in greater disarray than at any time in
recent history.
Carter spoke before the members of the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations in the Pru-
dential Auditorium. (Sean Toolan, “Might Send U.S. Troops to Africa, Carter Says,” Chi-
mary; see Jim Squires, “A Big Bouquet for Carter and a Wreath for Reagan,” Chicago

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Our Secretary of State2 simply does not trust the judgment of the
American people, but constantly conducts foreign policy exclusively,
personally, and in secret. This creates in our country the very divisions
which he has lately deplored. Longstanding traditions of a bipartisan
policy and close consultation between the President and Congress have
been seriously damaged.
We are losing a tremendous opportunity to reassert our leadership
in working with other nations in the cause of peace and progress. The
good will our country once enjoyed, based on what we stood for and
the willingness of others to follow our example, has been dissipated.
Negotiations with the Soviets on strategic arms are at dead center,
while the costly and dangerous buildup of nuclear weapons continues.
Public Confidence Eroded
The policy of de´tente, which holds real possibilities for peace, has
been conducted in a way that has eroded the public confidence it must
have.
The moral heart of our international appeal—as a country which
stands for self-determination and free choice—has been weakened. It is
obviously un-American to interfere in the free political processes of an-
other nation. It is also un-American to engage in assassinations in time
of peace in any country.
The people of other nations have learned, in recent years, that they
can sometimes neither trust what our government says nor predict
what it will do. They have been hurt and disappointed so many times
that they no longer know what to believe about the United States. They
want to respect us. They like our people. But our people do not seem to
be running our government.
Every time we have made a serious mistake in recent years in our
dealings with other nations, the American people have been excluded
from the process of evolving and consummating our foreign policy.
Unnecessary secrecy surrounds the inner workings of our own gov-
ernment, and we have sometimes been deliberately misled by our
leaders.
For many nations, we have two policies; one announced in public,
another pursued in secret. In the case of China, we even seem to have
two Presidents.
No longer do our leaders talk to the people of the world with the
vision, compassion, and practical idealism of men like Woodrow
Wilson and John Kennedy and Adlai Stevenson.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
Our foreign policy is being evolved in secret, and in its full details
and nuances, it is probably known to one man only. That man is skilled
at negotiation with leaders of other countries but far less concerned
with consulting the American people or their representatives in
Congress, and far less skilled in marshaling the support of a nation be-
hind an effective foreign policy. Because we have let our foreign policy
be made for us, we have lost something crucial in the way we talk and
the way we act toward other peoples of the world.
When our President and Secretary of State speak to the world
without the understanding or support of the American people, they
speak with an obviously hollow voice.
All of this is a cause of sorrow and pain to Americans, as well as to
those who wish us well and look to us for leadership. We ought to be
leading the way toward economic progress and social justice and a
stronger, more stable international order. They are the principles on
which this nation was founded 200 years ago, by men who believed
with Thomas Paine that the “cause of America is the cause of all
mankind.”
Every successful foreign policy we have had—whether it was the
Good Neighbor Policy of President Franklin Roosevelt, The Point Four
of President Truman or the Peace Corps and trade reform of President
Kennedy—was successful because it reflected the best that was in us.
Vietnam to Angola
And in every foreign venture that has failed—whether it was Viet-
nam, Cambodia, Chile, Angola, or in the excesses of the CIA—our gov-
ernment forged ahead without consulting the American people, and
did things that were contrary to our basic character.
The lesson we draw from recent history is that public under-
standing and support are now as vital to a successful foreign policy as
they are to any domestic program. No one can make our foreign policy for
us as well as we can make it ourselves.
The role of the United States in the world is changing. For years,
we were the only free nation with the military capacity to keep the
peace and the resources to insure world economic stability. Japan and
Western Europe would never have been able to achieve their economic
miracles without our help. Nor could world exports have risen to their
present level of three-quarters of a trillion dollars, had not international
trade and investment been backed for so long by the American dollars.
These were historic and generous accomplishments, of which we
can be justly proud. But we also had the power to make or break re-
gimes with adroit injections of money or arms, and we sometimes used
this power in ways that are less commendable.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The world is different now. The old postwar monopolies of eco-
nomic resource and industrial power have been swept aside and re-
placed by new structures. The Common Market countries and others
like Japan, Mexico, Brazil, and Iran are strong and self-sufficient.
We have learned that we cannot and should not try to intervene
militarily in the internal affairs of other countries unless our own na-
tion is endangered.
Over 100 new nations have come into being in the past 30 years. A
few have wealth, but most exist in bitter poverty. In many, independ-
ence has set loose long-suppressed emotions and antagonisms. In
Uganda and Angola, Bangladesh and Lebanon—and recently in the
United Nations—we have seen what can happen when nationalist and
racial passions, or tribal or religious hatreds, are left to run their course.
We cannot isolate ourselves from the forces loose in the world. The
question is not whether we take an interest in foreign affairs, but how
we do it and why we do it.
In the last few years, I have traveled in foreign lands, and met with
many of their leaders. I have served on international bodies, such as the
Trilateral Commission, which makes recommendations on some of
these problems. I have given thought to the structure of what our for-
eign policy should be.
There are certain basic principles I believe should guide whatever
is done in foreign lands in the name of the United States of America.
First, our policies should be as open and honest and decent and
compassionate as the American people themselves are. Our policies
should be shaped with the participation of Congress, from the outset,
on a bipartisan basis. And they should emerge from broad and
well-informed public debate and participation.
Second, our policies should treat the people of other nations as in-
dividuals, with the same dignity and respect as we demand for our-
selves. No matter where they live, no matter who they are, the people
of other lands are just as concerned with the struggles of daily life as
you and I. They work hard, they have families whom they love, and
they have hopes and dreams, and a great deal of pride. And they want
to live in peace. Their basic personal motives are the same as ours.
Support Humanitarian Aspirations
Third, it must be the responsibility of the President to restore the
moral authority of this country in its conduct of foreign policy. We
should work for peace and the control of arms in everything we do. We
should support the humanitarian aspirations of the world’s people.
Policies that strengthen dictators or create refugees, policies that pro-
long suffering or postpone racial justice, weaken that authority. Policies
that encourage economic progress and social justice promote it. In an

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
age when almost all of the world’s people are tied together by instant
communication, the image of a country, as seen through its policies, has
a great deal to do with what it can accomplish through the traditional
channels of diplomacy.
Fourth, our policies should be aimed at building a just and
peaceful world order, in which every nation can have a constructive
role. For too long, our foreign policy has consisted almost entirely of
maneuver and manipulation, based on the assumption that the world is
a jungle of competing national antagonisms, where military supremacy
and economic muscle are the only things that work and where rival
powers are balanced against each other to keep the peace.
Exclusive reliance on this strategy is not in keeping with the char-
acter of the American people, or with the world as it is today. Balance of
power politics may have worked in 1815, or even 1945, but it has a
much less significant role in today’s world. Of course, there are ri-
valries—racial, religious, national, some of them bitter. But the need for
cooperation, even between rivals, goes deeper than all of them.
Every nation has a stake in stopping the pollution of the seas and
the air. Every nation wants to be free from the threat of blackmail by in-
ternational terrorists and hijackers. Every nation, including those of
OPEC, sits on limited resources of energy that are running out. The vast
majority of countries, including the Soviet Union, do not grow enough
food to feed their own people. Every nation’s economy benefits from
expanding two-way trade. And everyone—except perhaps the specu-
lator—has a stake in a fair and reliable international monetary system.
Our diplomatic agenda must also include preventing the spread of
nuclear weapons and controlling the flow of narcotics.
In the future, we must turn our attention increasingly toward these
common problems of food, energy, environment, and trade. A stable
world order cannot become a reality when people of many nations of
the world suffer mass starvation or when there are no established ar-
rangements to deal with population growth or environmental quality.
The intensity of these interrelated problems is rapidly increasing and
better mechanisms for consultation on these problems that affect ev-
eryone on this planet must be established and utilized.
While the American people have had their fill of military adventu-
rism and covert manipulation, we have not retreated into isolationism.
We realize that increased anarchy will not only reverse the progress
toward peace and stability that we have made, but also strengthen the
hand of our adversaries.
That is why we must replace balance of power politics with world
order politics. The new challenge to American foreign policy is to take
the lead in joining the other nations of the world to build a just and
stable international order.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We need to reorder our diplomatic priorities. In recent years, we
have paid far more attention to our adversaries than to our friends, and
we have been especially neglectful of our neighbors in Latin America.
Coordinate Our Policy With Friends
It is important to continue to seek agreements with the Russians
and the Chinese, especially in the control of weapons. Success there
could mean life instead of death for millions of people. But the divi-
sions between us are deep. The differences of history and ideology will
not go away. It is too much to expect that we can do much more in these
relationships than reduce the areas of irritation and conflict and lessen
the danger of war.
Our nation should coordinate its policy with our friends—coun-
tries like the democratic states of Europe, North America and Japan—
those countries who share with us common goals and aspirations. We
should work in concert with them. Ours are the fortunate countries of
the world. But our continued prosperity and welfare depend upon in-
creased coordination of our policies. If we can work together on goals
which reflect the common needs and shared values of our people, we
can make our societies the strong and stable inner core around which
world cooperation, prosperity and peace can develop.
If we believe in the importance of this effort, we should make some
changes. We must both lead and collaborate at the same time. We must
consult with others more about our plans. The days of “Nixon Shocks”
and “Kissinger Surprises” must end. Our goal should be to act in con-
cert with these countries whenever we can.
And we must have faith in their commitment to democracy. We do
not need to preach to the western Europeans about the dangers of com-
munism as the Secretary of State did last week. Their traditions and
political good sense are not inferior to ours.
Our policies toward the developing countries also need revision.
For years, we have either ignored them or treated them as pawns in the
big power chess game. Both approaches were deeply offensive to their
people. The oil embargo taught us that even the least developed nation
will eventually have control over its own natural resources and that
and a 10 percent import surcharge and suspend the direct convertibility of U.S. dollars to
gold, thus removing the United States from the gold standard. Also a reference to the U.S.
“opening to China” in 1971 and 1972, which caught the Government of Japan by surprise.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
those countries which, alone or together, can control necessary com-
modities are a force that can neither be ignored or manipulated.
An attitude of neglect and disrespect toward the developing na-
tions of the world is predicated in part on a sense of superiority toward
others—a form of racism. This is incompatible with the character of
American people.
We need to enlist the cooperation of the developing nations, for
when we speak of the tasks of a stable world order, we include pre-
venting the spread of nuclear weapons, policing the world’s environ-
ment, controlling the flow of narcotics and establishing international
protection against acts of terror. If three-quarters of the people of the
world do not join in these arrangements, they will not succeed.
Our policies toward the developing world must be tough-minded
in the pursuit of our legitimate interests. At the same time, these pol-
icies must be patient in the recognition of their legitimate interests
which have too often been cast aside.
The developing world has, of course, a few leaders who are
implacably hostile to anything the United States does. But the majority
of its leaders are moderate men and women who are prepared to work
with us. When we ignore the Third World, as we have for so long, the
extremists will usually have their way. But if we offer programs based
on common interests, we can make common cause with most of their
leadership.
Our program of international aid to developing nations should be
redirected so that it meets the minimum human needs of the greatest
number of people. This means an emphasis on food, jobs, education,
and public health—including access to family planning. The emphasis
in aid should be on those countries with a proven ability to help them-
selves, instead of those that continue to allow enormous discrepancies
in living standards among their people. The time has come to stop
taxing poor people in rich countries for the benefit of rich people in
poor countries.
In our trade relations with these nations we should join com-
modity agreements in such items as tin, coffee, and sugar which will as-
sure adequate supplies to consumers, protect our people from inflation,
and at the same time stop the fluctuation in prices that can cause such
hardship and uncertainty in single-commodity countries.
Economic Development Challenges
The burden of economic development is going to be a heavy one.
There are many countries which ought to share it, not only in Europe
and Asia but in the Mideast. Today, a greater proportion of royalties
from oil can be channeled to the Third World by international institu-
tions. Tomorrow, they can receive a part of the profits from the mining

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of the seas. The purpose of such development is not to level the eco-
nomic lot of every person on earth. It is to inject the wealth-creating
process into countries that are now stagnant; it is to help developing
countries to act in what is their own best interest as well as ours—pro-
duce more food, limit population growth, and expand markets, sup-
plies, and materials. It is simply to give every country a sufficient stake
in the international order so that it feels no need to act as an outlaw. It is
to advance the cause of human dignity.
We must also work with the countries of the communist world.
The policy of East-West de´tente is under attack today because of the
way it has been exploited by the Soviet Union. The American people
were told it would mean a “generation of peace,” at no risk to the na-
tion’s vital interests. And yet, in places like Syria or Angola, in activities
like offensive missile development, the Soviets seem to be taking ad-
vantage of the new relationship to expand their power and influence,
and increase the risk of conflict.
I support the objectives of de´tente, but I cannot go along with the
way it has been handled by Presidents Nixon and Ford. The Secretary
of State has tied its success too closely to his personal reputation.
As a result, he is giving up too much and asking for too little. He is
trumpeting achievements on paper while failing to insist on them in
practice.
The relationship of de´tente is one of both cooperation and compe-
tition, of new kinds of contacts in some areas along with continued hos-
tility in others. In the troubled history of our relationships with the So-
viet Union, this is where we have arrived. The benefits of de´tente must
accrue to both sides, or they are worthless. Their mutual advantage
must be apparent, or the American people will not support the policy.
To the Soviets, de´tente is an opportunity to continue the process of
world revolution without running the threat of nuclear war. They have
said so quite openly, as recently as 1 month ago at their 25th Party
Congress. To the Soviet Union, with our acquiescence, de´tente is sur-
face tranquility in Europe within boundaries redefined to their benefit
together with support for wars of national liberation elsewhere. It is
having the benefits of the Helsinki Accords7 without the requirement of
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
living up to the human rights provisions which form an integral part of
it. This is not the road to peace but the bitter deception of the American
people.
But while de´tente must become more reciprocal, I reject the stri-
dent and bellicose voices of those who would have this country return
to the days of the cold war with the Soviet Union. I believe the Amer-
ican people want to look to the future. They have seen the tragedy of
American involvement in Vietnam and drawn appropriate lessons for
tomorrow. They seek new vistas, not a repetition of old rhetoric and old
mistakes.
It is in our interest to try to make de´tente broader and more recip-
rocal. De´tente can be an instrument for long-term peaceful change
within the Communist system, as well as in the rest of the world. We
should make it clear that de´tente requires that the Soviets, as well as the
United States, refrain from irresponsible intervention in other coun-
tries. The Russians have no more business in Angola than we have.
Favors Hard Bargaining
The core of de´tente is the reduction in arms. We should negotiate
to reduce the present SALT ceilings on offensive weapons before both
sides start a new arms race to reach the current maximums, and before
new missile systems are tested or committed for production.
I am not afraid of hard bargaining with the Soviet Union. Hard
bargaining will strengthen support for the agreements that can be
reached, and will show that we, as well as they, can gain from de´tente.
We can increase the possibility that the fear of war and the burden of
arms may be lifted from the shoulders of humanity by the nations that
have done the most to place it there.
Our vision must be of a more pluralistic world and not of a Com-
munist monolith. We must pay more attention to China and to Eastern
Europe. It is in our interest and in the interest of world peace to pro-
mote a more pluralistic Communist world.
We should remember that Eastern Europe is not an area of stability
and it will not become such until the Eastern European countries regain
their independence and become part of a larger cooperative European
framework. I am concerned over the long-range prospects for Ruma-
nian and Yugoslavian independence, and I deplore the recent infliction
upon Poland of a constitution that ratifies its status as a Soviet satellite.
We must reiterate to the Soviets that an enduring American-Soviet
de´tente cannot ignore the legitimate aspirations of other nations. We
must likewise insist that the Soviet Union and other countries recog-
nize the human rights of all citizens who live within their boundaries,
whether they be blacks in Rhodesia, Asians in Uganda, or Jews in the
Soviet Union.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Our relations with China are important to world peace and they
directly affect the world balance. The United States has a great stake in
a nationally independent, secure, and friendly China. The present tur-
moil in Chinese domestic politics could be exploited by the Soviets to
promote a Sino-Soviet reconciliation which might be inimical to inter-
national stability and to American interests. I believe that we should
explore more actively the possibility of widening American-Chinese
trade relations and of further consolidating our political relationships.
The Middle East is a key testing area for our capacity to construct a
more cooperative international system. I believe deeply that a Middle
East peace settlement is essential to American interests, to Israel’s long-
range survival and to international cooperation. Without a settlement,
the region will become increasingly open to Soviet influence and more
susceptible to radical violence. I believe that the United States should
insure Israel’s security while at the same time encourage both sides to
address themselves to the substance of a genuine settlement.
There is no question that both Africa and Latin America have been
ignored since the Presidencies of John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson.
These areas should become, and indeed will become, increasingly im-
portant in the next decade. Our relationships with these must abandon
traditional paternalism. The United States-Brazilian agreement, signed
recently by Secretary of State Kissinger on his trip to Latin America, is a
good example of our present policy at its worst. Kissinger’s remarks
during his visit that “there are no two people whose concern for human
dignities and for the basic values of man is more profound in day-
to-day life than Brazil and the United States” can only be taken as a gra-
tuitous slap in the face of all those Americans who want a foreign
policy that embodies our ideals, not subverts them.
If our aim is to construct an international order, we must also work
through the international bodies that now exist. On many of these
issues, they are the only places where nations regularly come together.
We have all been deeply disturbed by the drift of the United Nations
and the other international organizations, and by the acrimony and
cliquishness that seem to have taken hold. But it would be a mistake to
give up on the United Nations.
In the future, we should make multilateral diplomacy a major part
of our efforts so that other countries know in advance the importance
the United States attaches to their behavior in the United Nations and
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
other international organizations. We should make a major effort at re-
forming and restructuring the U.N. systems.
We Must Analyze International Institutions
We should undertake a systematic political and economic cost-
benefit analysis of existing international institutions in the United Na-
tions systems and outside, with a view to determining the appropriate
level of U.S. support. We should end the current diplomatic isolation of
the United States in international forums by working more closely with
our allies and with moderate elements in the developing world on a
basis of mutual understanding consistent with our respective national
interests.
A stable world order cannot become a reality when people of
many nations of the world suffer mass starvation, when the countries
with capital and technology belligerently confront other nations for the
control of raw materials and energy sources, when open and nondis-
criminatory trade has become the exception rather than the rule, when
there are no established arrangements for supplying the world’s food
and energy, nor for governing control and development of the seas,
and when there are no effective efforts to deal with population explo-
sions or environmental quality. The intensity of these interrelated
problems is rapidly increasing and better mechanisms for consultation
on these problems that affect everyone on this planet must be estab-
lished and utilized.
For it is likely that in the future, the issues of war and peace will be
more a function of economic and social problems than of the military
security problems which have dominated international relations since
1945.
Finally, I said I would touch on the kind of people we need to
administer our foreign policy. I believe that the foreign policy spokes-
man of our country should be the President, and not the Secretary of
State. The conduct of foreign policy should be a sustained process of
decision and action, and not a series of television spectaculars. Under
the current administration, the agencies which are supposed to conduct
our foreign affairs have been largely wasted and demoralized. They
must be revitalized and if necessary reorganized—to upgrade their
performance, their quality, and the morale of their personnel.
In our search for peace we must call upon the best talent we can
find in the universities, the business world, labor, the professions, and
the scientific community. Appointments to our U.N. delegation, to
other diplomatic posts, and to international conferences should be
made exclusively on a merit basis, in contrast to the political patronage
that has characterized appointments under this administration.

5.
Memorandum From the Director of the Trilateral
Commission (Brzezinski) to the Members of the Trilateral
Commission
New York, May 21, 1976
SUBJECT
The Commission: Its Past and Future
Since the Ottawa and Washington meetings of the Commission
complete the first three years of the Commission’s life span, I would
like to share with you some personal impressions of what we have
achieved in these three years and what we can hope to achieve in the
future. I might also add that this is my final report to you as the Com-
mission’s director.
As I said in my address in Ottawa, the international context in
which the Commission was established has changed significantly since
its creation. While relations between the trilateral countries themselves
are considerably freer of friction than they were in 1973, greater uncer-
tainty clouds the East-West relationship and the salience of relations
between the developed and the developing worlds to political and eco-
nomic stability has been more clearly established. Throughout the pe-
riod, I think it is fair to say that the Commission has been in the fore-
front of those who have sought to intensify cooperation between the
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
trilateral countries and to propose progressive reforms in relations be-
tween North and South. Quite apart from the influence which it may
have had in this way, the Commission has increasingly become an ef-
fective and recognized organization in which major problems of topical
and political importance can be discussed in a policy-oriented fashion.
As I suggested in Ottawa, the uncertainties currently hanging over
the East-West relationship make it appropriate that the Commission
should begin its new phase by paying also some attention to relations
with the Communist countries. I think it is also important to sustain the
work that we have done in the North-South area. In this way we can
contribute to insuring that the improvement in the tone of the discus-
sions between the developed and the developing countries is translated
into practical, longer range measures which can avert the threat of se-
rious North-South turbulence.
I fear that otherwise North-South tensions might interact danger-
ously with East-West conflicts in such areas as the Middle East or
Southern Africa. In general, this potential intersection of East-West and
North-South conflicts deserves our closer attention. It represents a
novel and an ominous development on the world scene.
I also proposed in Ottawa that now that the members of the Com-
mission have established a good working relationship with one an-
other, we might consider broadening the circle of those involved in our
work by inviting guests to our meetings, possibly including some gov-
ernmental representatives. I also suggested that in the future our task
forces might give slightly lower priority to achieving consensus so as to
provide more scope for originality. We shall be looking at these and
other ideas for changing and improving the operation of the Commis-
sion during the coming weeks and months. We would welcome any
comments and suggestions which you may have in this connection.
Finally, I would like to thank you for your interest and support in
the Commission in its first three years. There is no doubt that during
that time the idea of trilateralism has increasingly taken root in the con-
sciousness of the leaderships, in and out of government, in our three re-
gions. This has been an important change and one to which our efforts
have, I believe, made a major contribution. For the future, our task will
be to build on this initial success and ensure that the trilateral idea does
not become frozen but remains flexible and relevant to changing inter-
national conditions. I look forward to continuing with you in this work.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
6.
Address by Jimmy Carter
New York, June 23, 1976
RELATION BETWEEN WORLD’S DEMOCRACIES
An address on Relations Between the World’s Democracies was delivered
by Mr. Carter at a luncheon of the Foreign Policy Association in New York
City, N.Y., June 23, 1976. He said:
For the past seventeen months, as a candidate for President, I have
talked and listened to the American people.
It has been an unforgettable experience and an invaluable educa-
tion. Insofar as my political campaign has been successful, it is because
I have learned from our people, and have accurately reflected their con-
cerns, their frustrations, and their desires.
In the area of foreign policy, our people are troubled, confused and
sometimes angry. There has been too much emphasis on transient spec-
taculars and too little on substance. We are deeply concerned, not only
by such obvious tragedies as the war in Vietnam, but by the more
subtle erosion in the focus and the morality of our foreign policy.
Under the Nixon-Ford Administration, there has evolved a kind of
secretive “Lone Ranger” foreign policy—a one-man policy of interna-
tional adventure. This is not an appropriate policy for America.
We have sometimes tried to play other nations one against another
instead of organizing free nations to share world responsibility in col-
lective action. We have made highly publicized efforts to woo the major
communist powers while neglecting our natural friends and allies. A
foreign policy based on secrecy inherently has had to be closely
guarded and amoral, and we have had to forego openness, consultation
and a constant adherence to fundamental principles and high moral
standards.
We have often sought dramatic and surprising, immediate results
instead of long-term solutions to major problems which required
careful planning in consultation with other nations.
Carter spoke before members of the Foreign Policy Association in the ballroom of the
Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. (Helen Dewar, “Carter: Consult Allies on Policy,” The Washington
velop a general outline of a basic statement on foreign affairs. Brzezinski and Gardner
submitted a memorandum to Carter in January 1976, which, Brzezinski noted, would
later become the basis of the address: “The speech was Carter’s major statement on for-
eign policy, and it foreshadowed many of his actions and concerns as President.” (Power
and Principle, p. 7)

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
We must be strong in our internal resolve in order to be strong
leaders abroad. This is not possible when Congress and the American
people are kept in the dark. We simply must have an international policy
of democratic leadership, and we must stop trying to play a lonely game
of power politics. We must evolve and consummate our foreign policy
openly and frankly. There must be bipartisan harmony and collabora-
tion between the President and the Congress, and we must reestablish a
spirit of common purpose among democratic nations.
What we seek is for our nation to have a foreign policy that reflects
the decency and generosity and common sense of our own people.
We had such a policy more than a hundred years ago and, in our
own lifetimes, in the years following the Second World War.
The United Nations, The Marshall Plan, The Bretton Woods Agree-
ment, NATO, Point Four, The OECD, The Japanese Peace Treaty—
these were among the historic achievements of a foreign policy directed
by courageous Presidents, endorsed by bipartisan majorities in Con-
gress, and supported by the American people.
The world since that time has become profoundly different, and
the pace of change is accelerating.
There are one hundred new nations and two billion more people.
East-West tensions may be less acute, but the East-West rivalry has
become global in scope.
Problems between the developed and developing nations have
grown more serious, and in some regions have come to intersect dan-
gerously with the East-West rivalry.
Economic nationalism complicates international relations, and un-
checked inflation may again threaten our mutual well-being.
Finally, such global dilemmas as food shortages, overpopulation
and poverty call for a common response, in spite of national and philo-
sophical differences.
It is imperative, therefore, that the United States summon the lead-
ership that can enable the democratic societies of the world once again
to lead the way in creating a more just and more stable world order.
In recent weeks, I have made speeches on the subject of nuclear
proliferation and also on the Middle East. In the months ahead, I will
speak out on other subjects of international concern.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Today I would like to speak about our alliances, and ways they can
be improved to serve our national interests and the interests of others
who seek peace and stability in the world.
Partnership With Europe, Japan
We need to consider how—in addition to alliances that were
formed in years past for essentially military purposes—we might de-
velop broader arrangements for dealing with such problems as the
arms race and world poverty and the allocation of resources.
The time has come for us to seek a partnership between North America,
Western Europe and Japan. Our three regions share economic, political
and security concerns that make it logical that we should seek ever-
increasing unity and understanding.
I have traveled in Japan and Western Europe in recent years and
talked to leaders there. These countries already have a significant
world impact, and they are prepared to play even larger global roles in
shaping a new international order.
There are those who say that democracy is dying, that we live in
the twilight of an era, and that the destiny of modern man is to witness
the waning of freedom.
In Japan, Western Europe, Canada, some countries in Latin
America, Israel, and among many other people, I have found not a de-
cline of democracy but a dynamic commitment to its principles.
I might add that I can testify personally to the vigor of the demo-
cratic process in our own country.
In addition to cooperation between North America, Japan and
Western Europe, there is an equal need for increased unity and con-
sultation between ourselves and such democratic societies as Israel,
Australia, New Zealand, and other nations, such as those in this
hemisphere, that share our democratic values, as well as many of our
political and economic concerns.
There must be more frequent consultations on many levels. We
should have periodic summit conferences and occasional meetings of
the leaders of all the industrial democracies, as well as frequent cabinet
level meetings. In addition, as we do away with one-man diplomacy,
we must once again use our entire foreign policy apparatus to reestab-
lish continuing contacts at all levels. Summits are no substitute for the
habit of cooperating closely at the working level.
In consultations, both form and substance are important. There is a
fundamental difference between informing governments after the fact
and actually including them in the process of joint policy making. Our
policy makers have in recent years far too often ignored this basic dif-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
ference. I need only cite the “Nixon Shocks” and the abrupt actions
taken by former Treasury Secretary Connally.
We need to recognize also that in recent years our Western Euro-
pean allies have been deeply concerned, and justly so, by our unilateral
dealings with the Soviet Union. To the maximum extent possible, our
dealings with the communist powers should reflect the combined view
of the democracies and thereby avoid suspicions by our allies that we
may be disregarding their interests.
We seek not a condominium of the powerful but a community of the free.
There are at least three areas in which the democratic nations can
benefit from closer and more creative relations.
First, there are our economic and political affairs.
In the realm of economics, our basic purpose must be to keep open
the international system in which the exchange of goods, capital, and
ideas among nations can continue to expand.
“Must Avoid Unilateral Acts”
Increased coordination among the industrialized democracies can
help avoid the repetition of such episodes as the inflation of 1972–73
and the more recent recessions. Both were made more severe by an
excess of expansionist zeal and then of deflationary reaction in North
America, Japan and Europe.
Though each country must make its own economic decisions, we
need to know more about one another’s interests and intentions. We
must avoid unilateral acts, and we must try not to work at cross-
purposes in the pursuit of the same ends. We need not agree on all
matters, but we should agree to discuss all matters.
We should continue our efforts to reduce trade barriers among the
industrial countries, as one way to combat inflation. The current Tokyo
round of multilateral trade negotiations4 should be pursued to a suc-
cessful conclusion.
But we must do more. The International Monetary System should
be renovated so that it can serve us well for the next quarter of a cen-
tury. Last January, at a meeting of the leading financial officials, agree-
ment was reached on a new system, based on greater flexibility of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
exchange rates. There is no prospect of any early return to fixed ex-
change rates—divergencies in economic experience among nations are
too great for that. But we still have much to learn regarding the effec-
tive operation of a system of fluctuating exchange rates. We must take
steps to avoid large and erratic fluctuations, without impeding the
basic monetary adjustments that will be necessary among nations for
some years to come. It will be useful to strengthen the role of the Inter-
national Monetary Fund as a center for observation and guidance of the
world economy, keeping track of the interactions among national econ-
omies and making recommendations to governments on how best to
keep the world economy functioning smoothly.
Beyond economic and political cooperation, we have much to
learn from one another. I have been repeatedly impressed by the
achievements of the Japanese and the Europeans in their domestic af-
fairs. The Japanese, for example, have one of the lowest unemployment
rates and the lowest crime rate of any industrialized nation, and they
also seem to suffer less than other urbanized peoples from the modern
problem of rootlessness and alienation.
Similarly, we can learn from the European nations about health
care, urban planning and mass transportation.
There are many ways that creative alliances can work for a better
world. Let us mention just one more, the area of human rights. Many of
us have protested the violation of human rights in Russia, and justly so.
But such violations are not limited to any one country or one ideology.
There are other countries that violate human rights in one way or an-
other—by torture, by political persecution, and by racial or religious
discrimination.
We and our allies, in a creative partnership, can take the lead in es-
tablishing and promoting basic global standards of human rights. We
respect the independence of all nations, but by our example, by our ut-
terances, and by the various forms of economic and political persuasion
available to us, we can quite surely lessen the injustice in this world.
We must certainly try.
Let me make one other point in the political realm. Democratic
processes may in some countries bring to power parties or leaders
whose ideologies are not shared by most Americans.
We may not welcome these changes; we will certainly not en-
courage them. But we must respect the results of democratic elections
and the right of countries to make their own free choice if we are to re-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
main faithful to our own basic ideals. We must learn to live with diver-
sity, and we can continue to cooperate, so long as such political parties
respect the democratic process, uphold existing international com-
mitments, and are not subservient to external political direction. The
democratic concert of nations should exclude only those who exclude
themselves by the rejection of democracy itself.
Our people have now learned the folly of our trying to inject our
power into the internal affairs of other nations. It is time that our gov-
ernment learned that lesson too.
While it is too early to appraise the ultimate result of the
weekend’s elections in Italy, and though the outcome is a source of
some relief since the Communist Party failed to obtain the plurality, it
is clear that Italian political problems have been caused by the under-
lying social malaise of the country. Coping with this continuing mal-
aise will require not only a major act of will on the part of Italian polit-
ical leadership, but patient and significant assistance from Italy’s
Western European neighbors, as well as from the United States. We
must give our most alert and sympathetic consideration to such needed
assistance.
On Mutual Security
The second area of increased cooperation among the democracies
is that of mutual security. Here, however, we must recognize that the At-
lantic and Pacific regions have quite different needs and different polit-
ical sensitivities.
Since the United States is both an Atlantic and a Pacific power, our
commitments to the security of Western Europe and of Japan are insep-
arable from our own security. Without these commitments, and our
firm dedication to them, the political fabric of Atlantic and Pacific coop-
eration would be seriously weakened, and world peace endangered.
As we look to the Pacific region, we see a number of changes and
opportunities. Because of potential Sino-Soviet conflict, Russian and
Chinese forces are not jointly deployed as our potential adversaries, but
confront one another along their common border. Moreover, our with-
drawal from the mainland of Southeast Asia has made possible im-
proving relationships between us and the People’s Republic of China.
With regard to our primary Pacific ally, Japan, we will maintain
our existing security arrangements, so long as that continues to be the
wish of the Japanese people and government.
“Kissinger Voices Concern on Italy: Says Election Results Have Not Basically Eased
Shuster, “Communists Gain 49 Crucial Seats in Italy Contest: Christian Democratic Party
Wins but Gap Is Narrowed in the Final Returns,” ibid., pp. 1, 6.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I believe it will be possible to withdraw our ground forces from
South Korea on a phased basis over a time span to be determined after
consultation with both South Korea and Japan. At the same time, it
should be made clear to the South Korean Government that its internal
oppression is repugnant to our people, and undermines the support for
our commitment there.
We face a more immediate problem in the Atlantic sector of our
defense.
The Soviet Union has in recent years strengthened its forces in
Central Europe. The Warsaw Pact forces facing NATO today are sub-
stantially composed of Soviet combat troops, and these troops have
been modernized and reinforced. In the event of war, they are postured
for an all-out conflict of short duration and great intensity.
NATO’s ground combat forces are largely European. The U.S. pro-
vides about one-fifth of the combat element, as well as the strategic um-
brella, and without this American commitment, Western Europe could
not defend itself successfully.
In recent years, new military technology has been developed by
both sides, including precision-guided munitions that are changing the
nature of land warfare.
Unfortunately, NATO’s arsenal suffers from a lack of standardiza-
tion, which needlessly increases the cost of NATO, and its strategy too
often seems wedded to past plans and concepts. We must not allow our
alliance to become an anachronism.
There is, in short, a pressing need for us and our allies to undertake
a review of NATO’s forces and its strategies in light of the changing
military environment.
A comprehensive program to develop, procure, and equip NATO
with the more accurate air defense and anti-tank weapons made pos-
sible by new technology is needed to increase NATO’s defensive
power. Agreement on stockpiles and on the prospective length of any
potential conflict is necessary. We should also review the structure of
NATO reserve forces so they can be committed to combat sooner.
In all of this a major European and joint effort will be required. Our
people will not support unilateral American contributions in what
must be a truly mutual defense effort.
Cooperative, Competitive Relations
Even as we review our military posture, we must spare no effort to
bring about a reduction of the forces that confront one another in Cen-
tral Europe.
It is to be hoped that the stalemated mutual force reduction talks in
Vienna will soon produce results so that the forces of both sides can be

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
reduced in a manner that impairs the security of neither. The require-
ment of balanced reductions complicates negotiations, but it is an im-
portant requirement for the maintenance of security in Europe.
Similarly, in the SALT talks, we must seek significant nuclear dis-
armament that safeguards the basic interests of both sides.
Let me say something I have often said in recent months. East-
West relations will be both cooperative and competitive for a long time
to come. We want the competition to be peaceful, and we want the co-
operation to increase. But we will never seek accommodation at the expense
of our own national interests or the interests of our allies.
Our potential adversaries are intelligent people. They respect
strength; they respect constancy; they respect candor. They will under-
stand our commitment to our allies. They will listen even more care-
fully if we and our allies speak with a common resolve.
We must remember, too, that a genuine spirit of cooperation be-
tween the democracies and the Soviet Union should extend beyond a
negative cessation of hostilities and reach toward joint efforts in
dealing with such world problems as agricultural development and the
population crisis.
The great challenge we Americans confront is to demonstrate to
the Soviet Union that our good will is as great as our strength until, de-
spite all the obstacles, our two nations can achieve new attitudes and
new trust, and until, in time, the terrible burden of the arms race can be
lifted from our peoples.
One realistic step would be to recognize that thus far, while we
have had certain progress on a bilateral basis, we have continued to
confront each other by proxy in various trouble spots. These indirect
challenges may be potentially more dangerous than face to face dis-
agreements, and at best they make mockery of the very concept of
de´tente. If we want genuine progress, it must be at every level.
Our democracies must also work together more closely in a joint
effort to help the hundreds of millions of people on this planet who are
living in poverty and despair.
We have all seen the growth of North-South tensions in world af-
fairs, tensions that are often based on legitimate economic grievances.
We have seen in the Middle East the juncture of East-West and North-
South conflicts and the resultant threat to world peace.
The democratic nations must respond to the challenge of human
needs on three levels.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
First, by widening the opportunities for genuine North-South con-
sultations. The developing nations must not only be the objects of pol-
icy, but must participate in shaping it. Without wider consultations we
will have sharper confrontations. A good start has been made with the
Conference on International Economic Cooperation which should be
strengthened and widened.
Secondly, by assisting those nations that are in direct need.
There are many ways the democracies can unite to help shape a
more stable and just world order. We can work to lower trade barriers
and make a major effort to provide increased support to the interna-
tional agencies that now make capital available to the Third World.
This will require help from Europe, Japan, North America, and the
wealthier members of OPEC for the World Bank’s soft-loan affiliate,
the International Development Association. The wealthier countries
should also support such specialized funds as the new International
Fund for Agricultural Development, which will put resources from the
oil exporting and developed countries to work in increasing food pro-
duction in poor countries. We might also seek to institutionalize,
under the World Bank, a “World Development Budget,” in order to ra-
tionalize and coordinate these and other similar efforts.
It is also time for the Soviet Union, which donates only about one-
tenth of one percent of its GNP to foreign aid—and mostly for political
ends—to act more generously toward global economic development.
I might add, on the subject of foreign aid, that while we are a gen-
erous nation we are not a foolish nation, and our people will expect re-
cipient nations to undertake needed reforms to promote their own de-
velopment. Moreover, all nations must recognize that the North-South
relationship is not made easier by one-sided self-righteousness, by the
exercise of automatic majorities in world bodies, nor by intolerance for
the views or the very existence of other nations.
“Limit the Flow of Arms”
Third, we and our allies must work together to limit the flow of
arms into the developing world.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
The North-South conflict is in part a security problem. As long as
the more powerful nations exploit the less powerful, they will be repaid
by terrorism, hatred, and potential violence. Insofar as our policies are
selfish, or cynical, or shortsighted, there will inevitably be a day of
reckoning.
I am particularly concerned by our nation’s role as the world’s
leading arms salesman. We sold or gave away billions of dollars of
arms last year, mostly to developing nations. For example, we are now
beginning to export advanced arms to Kenya and Zaire, thereby both
fueling the East-West arms race in Africa even while supplanting our
own allies—Britain and France—in their relations with these African
states. Sometimes we try to justify this unsavory business on the cynical
ground that by rationing out the means of violence we can somehow
control the world’s violence.
The fact is that we cannot have it both ways. Can we be both the
world’s leading champion of peace and the world’s leading supplier of
the weapons of war? If I become President, I will work with our allies,
some of whom are also selling arms, and also seek to work with the So-
viets, to increase the emphasis on peace and to reduce the commerce in
weapons of war.
The challenge we and our allies face with regard to the developing
nations is a great one, a constant one, and an exciting one. It is exciting
because it calls for so much creativity at so many levels by so many na-
tions and individuals.
I have suggested steps which we and our allies might take toward
a more stable and more just world order. I do not pretend to have all the
answers. I hope you will help me find them.
What I do have is a strong sense that this country is drifting and
must have new leadership and new direction. The time has come for a
new thrust of creativity in foreign policy equal to that of the years fol-
lowing the Second World War. The old international institutions no
longer suffice. The time has come for a new architectural effort, with creative
initiative by our own nation, with growing cooperation among the industrial
democracies as its cornerstone, and with peace and justice its constant goal.
We are in a time of challenge and opportunity. If the values we
cherish are to be preserved—the ideals of liberty and dignity and op-
portunity for all—we shall have to work in the closest collaboration
with like-minded nations, seeking, through the strength that follows
from collective action, to build an international system that reflects the
principles and standards of our national heritage.
The primary purpose of our foreign policy is to create and main-
tain a world environment within which our great experiment in free-
dom can survive and flourish.

7.
Editorial Note
On July 15, 1976, former Governor of Georgia Jimmy Carter ac-
cepted the Democratic nomination for President and addressed dele-
gates at the Democratic National Convention in Madison Square
Garden in New York. In his acceptance speech, Carter referenced the
relationship between security and peace and discussed the American
character as it related to U.S. interactions with the world:
“The foremost responsibility of any President, above all else, is to
guarantee the security of our nation—a guarantee of freedom from the
threat of successful attack or blackmail, and the ability with our allies to
maintain peace.
“But peace is not the mere absence of war. Peace is action to stamp
out international terrorism. Peace is the unceasing effort to preserve
human rights. Peace is a combined demonstration of strength and good
will. We will pray for peace and we will work for peace, until we have
removed from all nations for all time the threat of nuclear destruction.
“America’s birth opened a new chapter in mankind’s history. Ours
was the first nation to dedicate itself clearly to the basic moral and
philosophical principles: that all people are created equal and endowed
with inalienable rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and
that the power of government is derived from the consent of the
governed.
“This national commitment was a singular act of wisdom and
courage, and it brought the best and bravest from other nations to our
shores. It was a revolutionary development that captured the imagina-
tion of mankind. It created a basis for a unique role of America—that of

8.
Editorial Note
In the weeks following the July 1976 Democratic National Conven-
tion (see Document 7), Democratic Presidential nominee Jimmy Carter
and
Vice
Presidential
nominee
Senator
Walter
F.
Mondale
(DFL-Minnesota) took part in a series of domestic and foreign policy
meetings in Plains, Georgia, with their primary advisers. Following
each meeting, Carter and Mondale briefed the press and answered
various press queries. At the conclusion of the July 29 meeting with the
Carter–Mondale campaign’s foreign policy advisory group, Carter
commented to the press:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“Today we had a joint discussion about foreign affairs. We empha-
sized the point that we are trying to learn as much as we possibly can
about the interrelationship between our nation and others so that we
can present to the world a foreign policy that is understood by the
American people, which is predictable, and which has an acknowl-
edged purpose, which can have bipartisan support, which can regain
the trust of other nations in our country and which can accurately rep-
resent the character of the American people.
“We had specific discussions about the African nations, and partic-
ular emphasis today throughout the discussions on the developing na-
tions of the world. Those who have been most sadly neglected in our
own nation’s emphasis in the past few years under Presidents Nixon
and Ford and Mr. Kissinger. I think this is the first time, certainly, that
any presidential candidate has ever spent so much time studying the
particular problems of the developing nations, but there is a very legiti-
mate reason for it because of the past neglect and because of the impor-
tance—the crucial nature—for the future. We discussed our relation-
ship on an East-West basis specifically, of course, with the People’s
Republic of China and with the Soviet Union. We discussed the Middle
East and the Mediterranean area, and within the special framework of
the developing nations discussion, in addition to Africa we discussed
countries in our own hemisphere.
“We also tried to analyze the proper interrelationship derived
from the Monday [July 26] meeting between correlating defense policy
establishment and foreign policy—our political interrelationship with
other countries. We discussed some creative approaches to SALT II
talks and we were particularly concerned in the Middle East in empha-
sizing the fact that without a complete confidence in our own gov-
ernment position on the Middle Eastern question, within Israel, that
there can be no, or very little, possibility of an ultimate settlement in the
Middle East. In other words, we have to have a consistent, unshakable,
unchanging commitment of support for Israel, and with that under-
standing and acceptance within the Israeli nation that we can have a
good hope for peace in the Middle East.
“We also discussed our relationship with South Africa, and
Rhodesia, with an understanding that there would be no yielding on
our part on the issue of human rights and majority rule.
“The other point that we did discuss was South America. The fact
that we should get away permanently from an attitude of paternalism
or punishment or retribution when some of the South Americans didn’t
yield to our persuasion. There was a great revelation, to me at least, that
within the Third World nations, the developing world, the unique lead-
ership role that has been played by Mexico, Venezuela, and other Latin
American leaders. I think the Latin American nations must be treated

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
as individuals. They must be recognized as far as their own worldwide
leadership capabilities of influence. And to treat them in a paternalistic
manner, or just in the hemispheric relationship, would be a mistake.”
Carter asked Mondale to discuss several additional points. Mon-
dale responded:
“One of the other matters discussed was the very crucial impor-
tance of establishing and maintaining an ongoing high-level consistent
relationship with our traditional allies in Western Europe, in Japan, and
in Canada. This is the bedrock of American foreign policy, and that the
administration ought to have that in mind at the highest level of prior-
ities at all times. I think that is a crucial part of any kind of foreign
policy that represents the best interest and ideals of the American
people.
“We also talked about the crucial need to put a ceiling, not just on
strategic arms where we think much lower ceilings are clearly needed,
but also a similar ceiling on arms transfer of tactical armaments.
“Right now, as you know, the United States is the leading arms
sales country in the world. But in order to put that kind of restriction on
the transfer of arms, there must be an agreement reached between the
Soviet Union, between other countries such as West Germany, Eng-
land, which sell armaments, but also with the consuming countries, be-
cause this is a matter which arms purchasing nations around the world
have a direct interest. And it would be our hope that we could move
forward toward some international agreement between those who sell
arms and those who buy arms to bring a dramatic reduction in the
amount of the tragic, expensive arms sales that go on in the world
today.” (The Presidential Campaign 1976, volume I, part I: Jimmy Carter,
pages 372–373)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
9.
Address by Jimmy Carter
Washington, September 8, 1976
ADDRESSING B’NAI B’RITH
On September 8, 1976, Mr. Carter addressed a convention in Wash-
ington, D.C., of B’nai B’rith, a national Jewish fraternal organization. He said:
It is a special pleasure to be here today, because I believe we share
a common heritage, and a common commitment, that brings us
together.
In 1843, B’nai B’rith was founded by a small group of immigrants
who sought to preserve for themselves and others the religious and
personal liberty they had been denied abroad.
So it was with those who founded my church in this country, to in-
sure liberty of conscience.
I am proud to meet with a group of men and women with whom I
share a total commitment to the preservation of human rights, indi-
vidual liberty, and freedom of conscience.
I would like to talk to you about my view of how our nation should
encourage and support those priceless qualities throughout the world.
This is, as you know, a difficult question. It requires a careful bal-
ancing of realism and idealism—of our understanding of the world as
it is, and our vision of the world as it should be.
The question, I think, is whether in recent years our highest offi-
cials have not been too pragmatic, even cynical, and as a consequence
have ignored those moral values that had often distinguished our
country from the other great nations of the world.
We must move away from making policies in secret; without the
knowledge and approval of the American people.
I have called for closer ties with our traditional allies, and stronger
ties with the State of Israel. I have stressed the necessity for a strong de-
fense—tough and muscular, and adequate to maintain our freedom
under any conceivable circumstances.
Carter delivered his address before the convention of B’nai B’rith in the ballroom of the
Washington Hilton Hotel. (Don Oberdorfer, “Carter Speaks on Human Rights,” The

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
But military strength alone is not enough. Over the years, our
greatest source of strength has come from those basic, priceless values
which are embodied in our Declaration of Independence, our Constitu-
tion, and our Bill of Rights: our belief in freedom of religion—our belief
in freedom of expression—our belief in human dignity.
These principles have made us great and, unless our foreign policy
reflects them, we make a mockery of all those values that we have cele-
brated in this bicentennial year.
We have not always lived up to our ideals, but I know of no great
nation in history that has more often conducted itself in a moral, un-
selfish, generous manner abroad, and provided more freedom and op-
portunity to its own citizens at home.
Still, in recent years, we have had reason to be troubled. Often
there has been a gap between the values we have proclaimed and the
policies we have pursued. We have often been overextended, and
deeply entangled in the internal affairs of distant nations. Our gov-
ernment has pursued dubious tactics, and “national security” has
sometimes been a cover-up for unnecessary secrecy and national
scandal.
We stumbled into the quagmires of Cambodia and Vietnam, and
carried out heavy-handed efforts to destroy an elected government in
Chile. In Cyprus, we let expediency triumph over fairness, and lost
both ways.
We responded inadequately to human suffering in Bangladesh,
Burundi, the Sahel, and other underdeveloped nations.
We lessened the prestige of our Foreign Service by sending abroad
ambassadors who were distinguished only by the size of their political
contributions.
We have allowed virtually unlimited sales of United States arms to
countries around the world—a policy as cynical as it is dangerous.
I find it unacceptable that we have in effect condoned the effort of
some Arab countries to tell American businesses that, in order to trade
with one country or company, they must observe certain restrictions
based on race or religion. These so-called “Arab boycotts” violate our
standards of freedom and morality.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I regret that a senior official of the Ford Administration, an Assist-
ant Secretary of the Treasury, last week told Congress that efforts
should not be made to address this basic issue of human rights.
Moreover, according to a recent House subcommittee report, the
Department of Commerce has shut its eyes to the boycott by failing to
collect information on alleged offenses, and failing to carry out a firm
policy against the boycott.
Enforce Anti-Boycott Laws
If I become President, all laws concerning these boycotts will be
vigorously enforced.
We also regret our government’s continuing failure to oppose the
denial of human freedom in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
The Republican Administration with the Sonnenfeldt statement,5
has shown a lack of sensitivity to the craving of the Eastern European
people for greater independence. That is unacceptable.
Only 13 months ago, President Ford and Henry Kissinger traveled
to Helsinki to sign the treaty of comprehensive security and coopera-
tion in Europe. It was supposed to lead to greater personal freedom for
the peoples of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, including greater
freedom to travel, to marry, and to emigrate. But since that elaborate
Members of Congress and others who have demonstrated a strong per-
sonal concern and commitment to that goal.
Despite our deep desire for successful negotiation on strategic
arms and nuclear proliferation, we cannot pass over in silence the dep-
rivation of human rights in the Soviet Union. The list of Soviet pris-
oners is long, and includes both Christians and Jews. I will speak only
of two: Vladimir Bukovsky and Vladimir Slepak. Bukovsky, a young
scientist, has been imprisoned most of the last 13 years for criticisms of
the Soviet regime. Slepak, a radio engineer in Moscow, applied for an
exit visa for Israel in April of 1970. The visa was denied and, since 1972,
he has been denied the right to hold a job.
I ask why such people must be deprived of their basic rights, a year
after Helsinki. And if I become President, the fate of men like Bukovsky
and Slepak will be very much on my mind as I negotiate with the Soviet
Union.
Liberty is curtailed in non-Communist countries, too, of course.
There are many cases of political persecution in Chile and reports of
brutal torture that are too well documented to be disbelieved.
There are those regimes, such as South Korea, which openly vio-
late human rights, although they themselves are under threat from
Communist regimes which represent an even greater level of repression.
Even in such cases, however, we should not condone repression or
the denial of freedom. On the contrary, we should use our influence to
increase freedom in those countries that depend on us for their very
survival.
Denials of human rights occur in many places and many ways. In
Ireland, for example, violence has bred more violence, and caused un-
told human suffering which brings sorrow to the entire civilized world.
I do not say to you that these are simple issues.
I do not say that we can remake the world in our own image. I rec-
ognize the limits on our power, and I do not wish to see us swing from
one extreme of cynical manipulation to the other extreme of moralistic
zeal, which can be just as dangerous.
But the present administration has been so obsessed with balance
of power politics that it has often ignored basic American values and a
proper concern for human rights. The leaders of this administration
have rationalized that there is little room for morality in foreign affairs,
and that we must put self-interest above principle.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I disagree strongly.
Ours is a great and powerful nation, committed to certain en-
during ideals and those ideals must be reflected in our foreign policy.
There are practical, effective ways in which our power can be used
to alleviate human suffering around the world.
We should begin by having it understood that if any nation, what-
ever its political system, deprives its people of basic human rights,
that fact will help shape our people’s attitude toward that nation’s
government.
Respect for Human Rights
If other nations want our friendship and support, they must un-
derstand that we want to see basic human rights respected.
Our power is not unlimited, but neither is it insignificant, and I be-
lieve that if we are sensitive and if we are concerned, there can be many
instances when our power can make a crucial difference to thousands
of men and women who are the victims of oppression around the
world.
We must be realistic. Although we believe deeply in our own
system of government and our own ideals, we do not and should not
insist on identical standards or an identical system in all other nations.
We can live with diversity in governmental systems, but we cannot
look away when a government tortures people, or jails them for their
beliefs, or denies minorities fair treatment or the right to emigrate.
Let me suggest some actions our government should take in the
area of human rights.
First, we can support the principle of self-determination by re-
fraining from intervention in the domestic politics of other countries
but, obviously, we are going to protect our interests and advance our
beliefs in other nations.
We should not behave abroad in ways that violate our own laws or
moral standards. You and I would not plot murder, but in recent years
officials of our government have plotted murder, and that is wrong and
unacceptable.
In giving trade advantages or economic assistance to other gov-
ernments, we should make sure that such aid is used to benefit the
people of that country. There will be times when we will want to help
those who must live under a repressive government. We may refrain
from giving general economic aid or military assistance to a gov-
ernment, yet wish to provide food, health care, or other humanitarian
assistance directly to the people.
The United States should lend more vigorous support to the
United Nations and other public and private international bodies in

10.
Memorandum From Zbigniew Brzezinski to Jimmy Carter
New York, September 27, 1976
SUBJECT
The forthcoming foreign policy debate and my recent trip to Europe
1. Leadership is the issue.
I think it is essential that the public be given a sharper sense than
was the case in the domestic debate2 as to what is the key issue. In my
judgement, taking into account international expectations as well as
the domestic mood, the two key and interrelated issues—which stand
above the others—are:
1. Presidential leadership
2. The American leadership in the world.
The first of the above requires more affirmative and explicit leader-
ship by the President himself; the second a clearer definition of goals
for the United States and the global community, a more affirmative ex-
pression of a sense of historical direction, and a greater awareness of
global issues.
Bearing the above in mind, I have a concrete suggestion for the debate,
in order to set the tone for it:
1. If you are asked to make the opening response, use the initial
part of the first three minutes for stating that whatever the question is it
has to be viewed in a larger context or perspective; then go on to affirm that
the major issue confronting us is the absence of effective Presidential
leadership and the related absence of a clear sense of historical direc-
tion projected worldwide by America. You can then go on to use the
rest of the three minutes to answer the specific question and you will
have still additional two minutes as a follow-on.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
2. If your opening comment involves a reaction to Ford’s response,
you can use that opportunity to raise the above theme very briefly, in-
dicating to the public that this is the key question for Americans to ponder,
then attack Ford on the specific question, and then use your own open-
ing answer for a fuller definition of the basic theme as suggested under
#1 above.
3. Remember: your audience is the nation and not the questioners.
So focus on the fundamentals and not only on the questions—and keep
hammering at the basic theme of no Presidential leadership and of no
American vision for a world that needs direction and architecture.
4. In general, I feel that Ford’s non-performance in this area ought
to be attacked more sharply and more pointedly than was the case with
his domestic performance.
For example, on detente, does he agree with Kissinger or with
Reagan? On Cyprus, he should be faulted in some detail for his non-
performance and for tolerating Kissinger’s poor record. The critical
implications of this for Western Europe and for Israel ought to be
underlined.
Similarly, on Angola, the ineptness of his leadership and of Kissin-
ger’s handling of this matter ought to be highlighted and related to the
present uncertainties about the future of the African continent. (Kissin-
ger’s recent “success” regarding Rhodesia5 can be diminished by the
suggestion that it was made necessary by his failings in the past and
that in fact the “success” is still very uncertain.)
In general, I should think that a major purpose of the debate on for-
eign policy would be to leave the public with a clear impression that Ford
has provided no leadership. In other words, even if Ford claims successes
for his foreign policy, the public should be left with the view—as-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
suming he is convincing—that it was not due to him. Has Ford in fact
given any major foreign policy speeches?
2. Likely focus of the debate.
The discussion of foreign affairs—assuming the domestic discus-
sion is any guide—is likely to concentrate on no more than two or three
major themes of interest to the newspapermen. I would anticipate that
these themes would be:
1. East-West relationship (or detente);
2. Defense;
3. Middle East;
4. Maybe Africa.
These subjects should be well-covered in your briefing book. I
would only add that on East-West you ought to stress the excessive
promises made, Ford’s ambiguity on detente (the non-use of the word,6
the Solzhenitsyn incident, etc.), the indifference to human rights, etc.
You will probably be asked how you expect to negotiate more
toughly with the Russians, and what you propose to do to increase East
European independence. Your answers on these issues ought to be
well-balanced: tough on fundamentals but showing a willingness to ac-
commodate. With regard to the Russians, you might stress in general
that domestically they are quite weak (their economy is in difficulty,
there is social unease, the non-Russian nations are gradually becoming
restless), and hence that they need a genuine and truly reciprocal detente
quite as much as we. This is not a matter of forcing them to change their
system but of realizing that we do not need to appear as needing the
detente more than the Russians.
On the East Europeans, you might first say that the Republican po-
sition on Eastern Europe has been ambiguous, then go on to stress the
importance to us and to West Europe of both Romanian and Yugoslav
independence, also emphasize that it is in the general interest of Europe
that countries such as Poland become more autonomous. You could

11.
Editorial Note
In addition to Zbigniew Brzezinski’s September 27, 1976, memo-
randum concerning the second Presidential debate between President
Gerald Ford and Democratic nominee Jimmy Carter, scheduled for Oc-
tober 6 (see Document 10), other members of the Carter-Mondale cam-
paign staff drafted briefing memoranda and books for Carter to use in
his debate preparation. Copies of the memoranda and briefing books
for the second debate are in the Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Cam-
paign, Issues Office, Issues Office—Stuart Eizenstat, Box 9, Debates—
Briefing Material [2] and Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Campaign,
Issues Office, Issues Office—David Rubenstein, Box 45, Briefing
and ibid., Debates—Reviewed [1] and [2].
Under a September 28 memorandum, adviser Stuart Eizenstat sent
Carter the final briefing book, noting that advisers Richard Holbrooke,
Robert Hunter, David Aaron, and Nicholas MacNeil had produced the
content. Part I of the briefing book included the general comments and
strategy section. In this part, the authors concluded: “You ‘win’ this de-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
bate if you establish that you are a credible and competent potential
world leader, in whom Americans can have confidence. You want to
convey that you understand the issues and have command of the facts,
that you can be trusted by the voters to preserve the peace, to keep
America strong, and to project a sense of direction for a world that still
needs American leadership. Stress your own experience—travels, visits
with foreign leaders, Trilateral Commission, Naval.” (Carter Library,
sion. He continued:
“Our country is not strong any more; we’re not respected any
more. We can only be strong overseas if we’re strong at home, and
when I become President, we’ll not only be strong in those areas but
also in defense—a defense capability second to none.
“We’ve lost, in our foreign policy, the character of the American
people. We’ve ignored or excluded the American people and the
Congress from participation in the shaping of our foreign policy. It’s
been one of secrecy and exclusion.
“In addition to that, we’ve had a chance to become now, contrary
to our long-standing beliefs and principles, the arms merchant of the
whole world. We’ve tried to buy success from our enemies, and at the
same time we’ve excluded from the process the normal friendship of
our allies.
“In addition to that, we’ve become fearful to compete with the So-
viet Union on an equal basis. We talk about de´tente. The Soviet Union
knows what they want in de´tente, and they’ve been getting it. We have
not known what we’ve wanted, and we’ve been out-traded in almost
every instance.
“The other point I want to make is about our defense. We’ve got to
be a nation blessed with the defense capability that’s efficient, tough,
capable, well organized, narrowly focused fighting capability. The

12.
Editorial Note
During the 1976 Presidential campaign, Democratic candidate
Jimmy Carter asked Cyrus R. Vance, who had served as Secretary of the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Army, Deputy Secretary of Defense, Special Envoy on the Cyprus and
Korean situations, and negotiator at the Paris Peace Talks during the
Lyndon B. Johnson administration, to serve as one of his foreign policy
advisers. After Carter made his offer, Vance consulted with Richard
Gardner, Anthony Lake, and Richard Holbrooke to gain a better sense
of Carter’s views. As he explained in his memoir of his tenure as
Carter’s Secretary of State: “He had a set of values that I found attrac-
tive. His thinking reflected a principled approach to foreign affairs,
which I believed essential for the reestablishment of a broad base of do-
mestic support for a more comprehensive foreign policy. His views on
specific issues, although still largely unformed, were in the centrist
mainstream in which I felt comfortable. I concluded that this intense
and energetic man had a real chance to become the next president of the
United States.” (Hard Choices, page 29)
Upon further assessment and consultation, Vance agreed to join
Carter’s foreign policy team. In the early fall of 1976, Vance wrote that
Carter had requested him to prepare a “memorandum setting out spe-
cific goals and priorities for a Carter foreign policy, should he be
orandum to head of the Carter–Mondale Policy Planning Group Jack
Watson, Vance sent two copies of a 25-page “Overview of Foreign
Policy Issues and Priorities” memorandum. On the first page of the
overview, Vance noted that it “rapidly surveys, if not all the trees in the
foreign affairs forest, at least the clumps of trees.” He continued with a
broad statement of themes, which he felt should constitute the primary
elements of the Carter administration’s foreign policy:
“(1) In its dealings with the Soviet Union, the United States will
keep itself strong, and will stand resolutely firm to protect key United
States interests. At the same time, the new Administration will con-
tinue to direct its efforts toward the objective of a further reduction of
tensions between the two countries.
“—Although of central importance, US/Soviet issues will not be
permitted to so dominate our foreign policy that we neglect other im-
portant relationships and problems.
“(2) The new Administration will bring a new sensitivity,
awareness and priority to the vast complex of issues clustering around
the relationships between the industrialized and the unindustrialized
world, and the new set of global issues that are emerging, such as en-
ergy, population, environment, and nuclear proliferation.
“(3) The United States will continue in international forums its un-
wavering stand in favor of the rights of free men and, without unrealis-
tically inserting itself into the internal operations of other governments,
to give important weight to those considerations in selecting foreign
policy positions in the interests of the United States.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
“(4) In its conduct of its foreign policy, the new Administration
will proceed with gravity, not flurry; will not try to do everything at
once or solve all the world’s problems; and will keep its mind focused
on long-term general objectives, not just the crises of the moment.
“(5) The new Administration will accept the necessity to make the
Congress and the American people joint partners in foreign policy
matters. To do so, the President will assume major public leadership on
foreign policy matters, and make a major investment in educating the
public to perceive the difference between its long-term interests and its
short-term interests, and the difference between the interest of the na-
tion as a whole and the interests of particular subconstituencies and in-
terest groups within the United States.
“These are pervasive general foreign policy themes. But a Presi-
dent will not always have the luxury of setting his own agenda and his
own timing. Unforeseen crises will occur, demanding instant reaction.
And the new Administration will inherit several deep-seated, impacted
sore spots (e.g., Mid-East, Korea, Greece-Turkey-Cyprus, Panama) that
will require prompt attention, as appears in later pages.” (Department
of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Records of Cyrus Vance, Secre-
Vance indicated that several others, including George Ball and
Zbigniew Brzezinski, had been asked to prepare similar overview
papers for Carter. For Brzezinski’s memorandum, which he co-
authored with Henry Owen and Richard Gardner, see Document 13.
As for his overview, Vance asserted: “My own was to become a kind of
foreign policy road map and a standard against which I measured our
success and failure in attaining the goals we ultimately set for our-
selves.” (Hard Choices, pages 29–30) The full text of the overview is
printed as Appendix I in Hard Choices, pages 441–462.
On November 30, Vance flew to Georgia to meet with Carter. That
evening, they discussed many of the items outlined in the overview
paper. At the conclusion of the meeting, Vance recalled that Carter
asked him to serve as Secretary of State. The next morning, Vance
shared with Carter his thinking about staffing the Department of State
before the discussion turned to other choices for cabinet positions. He
later reflected:
“In keeping with his declared intention to make greater use of the
cabinet, and to keep his personal staff out of the line between them and
himself—a sentiment I shared—Carter chose his cabinet officers before
he named his White House team. He asked whether I had any objection
to Zbigniew Brzezinski, who he had worked with at the Trilateral Com-
mission, as White House adviser for national security affairs. I said that
I did not know Brzezinski well, but I believed we could work together. I
asked two conditions: first, that it be made clear that I would be the

13.
Memorandum From Zbigniew Brzezinski, Richard Gardner,
and Henry Owen to President-Elect Carter
New York, November 3, 1976
This memorandum contains our recommendations for action in
ten key areas of foreign policy and national security where we believe
action should be taken in the six months between election day and May
1, 1977. In each of these areas, we have divided our recommendations
into two parts—decisions you will have to face (e.g., because of legisla-
tive requirements or already scheduled international negotiations) and
further decisions we recommend as being in the national interest. In
preparing this memorandum, we have drawn upon the “option
papers” supplied by Jack Watson as well as our own independent
study and analysis.
[Omitted here are an introductory paragraph and the table of
contents.]
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
PART ONE: OVERALL CONCEPT
1. In the first three months after the Inaugural you will have the
unique opportunity—given the likelihood of broad popular and Con-
gressional support—to set U.S. policy on a new course. This will
require:
(a) Public enunciation of your overall concept and direction.
(b) Adoption of specific actions on pressing issues.
(c) Seizing the initiative in several policy areas in order to fore-
shadow and advance your overall strategy.
2. Four issues stand out as the most urgent of all:
(a) The need to put the East-West relationship on a more stable
basis;
(b) The need to set in motion a process pointing toward a compre-
hensive Middle Eastern settlement;
(c) The need to initiate comprehensive and constructive North-
South negotiations;
(d) The need to contain the arms race and to rationalize our de-
fense posture.
3. In your State of the Union Address2 you will have the opportu-
nity to sketch out the broad outlines of the foreign policy that you in-
tend to follow. In that Address you should explicitly reassert the tradi-
tional role of the President as the formulator and articulator of U.S.
foreign policy—making clear that henceforth the United States will
speak to the world through you. We recommend the following themes:
A. The depth, extent, and pace of global change is ushering us into
a new era of either global cooperation or fragmentation.
B. The United States has no choice but to be engaged in a pro-
tracted architectural process to reform and reshape the existing interna-
tional system. Unlike the years 1945–50, this calls not for assertive
American leadership but for more subtle inspiration and cooperation
on a much wider front. The new international system cannot be con-
fined to the developed countries but must involve increasingly the en-
tire international community of more than 150 nation-states. That com-
munity, in addition to the traditional problems of war and peace, now
confronts global problems never before faced by mankind.
C. That in the above context you set the following priorities for the
United States:

14.
Editorial Note
Secretary of State-designate Cyrus R. Vance testified on January
11, 1977, before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which was
holding an open hearing in order to consider Vance’s nomination. The
previous afternoon, Vance had attended a closed, “get-acquainted” in-
formal meeting with Committee members. Senator John Sparkman
(D-Alabama) chaired the January 11 hearing and began the pro-
ceedings by summarizing Vance’s professional career. He then called
on Senators Jacob Javits (R-New York) and Daniel Patrick Moynihan
(D-New York) to offer statements in support of the Vance nomination.
Following their statements, Sparkman directed Senator Frank Church
(D-Idaho) to question Vance. Church stated:
“Mr. Vance, we have just come through an election campaign in
which there was a lively debate on foreign policy matters. I think as a
result of the election there is the expectation that the new President will
be initiating changes in American foreign policy.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
“I wonder if you might headline for the committee what you think
some of those changes may be, and what your own view may be re-
specting that.”
Vance responded:
“Thank you very much, Senator Church. I would be very happy to
do that.
“First, let me start by briefly sketching what I would consider to be
the fundamental policy principles which one could expect to guide the
development of foreign policy during the next administration.
“Let me say that in doing this I run the risk of vastly oversimpli-
fying the problem. But with that caveat at the outset, let me try.
“The first principle is the maintenance of peace. This depends
upon healthy alliances, American strength, creative efforts to facilitate
the resolution of regional disputes, as, for example, the problems of the
Middle East. In this connection I think we must remember that Amer-
ican strength and leadership abroad proceed first from a strong
America at home—strong in our economy, strong in our cohesiveness,
strong in our confidence and our commitment to fundamental values.
“The second principle is a public confidence in our foreign policy
requires confidence in how those policies are made. This, in my judg-
ment, has at the heart of it a close and cooperative relationship between
the executive branch and the legislative branch. I do not believe that we
can develop or properly implement American foreign policy without
the closest cooperation between these two branches of the Government.
“I pledge myself and this administration to this end.
“Next, I believe that we must have openness, and toward that end
all that can properly be disclosed in open sessions should be disclosed
in open sessions. There will obviously be times when things cannot be,
but the guiding principle will be that we will try and be as much open
as possible. I know that the President-elect intends to communicate
openly with the American people through the process of fireside chats
in discussing foreign policy as well as domestic policy.
“I intend to meet once a month with the press, if not more often be-
cause of special circumstances, and hold a press conference to discuss
with them whatever questions they may have.
“The third principle is the need for clear, easily understood, sub-
stantive priorities that will contribute to building the world that we
want to live in. I have four particularly in mind.
“First is a strengthening of cooperation among our allies. This is
central to everything else.
“Second, East-West relations are critical because they affect the
question of world peace. In my judgment we should pursue the less-
ening of tensions with the Soviet Union in an active and aggressive

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
way, particularly in the area of the reduction and control of nuclear
weapons.
“Further, I believe that we should seek a clearer understanding be-
tween the U.S. and the Soviet Union on the meaning of de´tente so that
we understand better how each of us perceives the process to operate. I
think this is possible and can be done. In saying this, I do not believe
that we will not continue to have political competition. I think indeed
that we will have political competition with the Soviet Union. But I do
think it is important to have a better understanding of what the ground
rules are and what we can expect of each other.
“Let me note that I do not think that the preoccupation with these
vitally important issues should so dominate our foreign policy that we
neglect other critical issues which are growing increasingly important.
“Let me turn to them.
“These I consider to be of cardinal importance: I believe we must
keep our eyes fixed on long-term objectives as well as on immediate po-
litical crises. These long-term objectives include control of nuclear arms
and nuclear proliferation, economic development and the dignity of
the developing world, energy, food, population, environment, and con-
ventional arms transfers.
“These are the global issues which will determine how the next
generation lives, and even whether it lives.
“I note, as all of you know better than I, that foreign policy is in-
creasingly intertwined with economic policy. These sets of intertwined
issues in my judgment are going to be some of the most important and
complex issues with which we will be dealing in the years ahead. In-
deed, I believe as we look over the next 5 to 10 years, we may find that
these issues will be replacing many of the security issues which have so
dominated the foreign policy agenda in the last 10 to 20 years as the
most important issues with which we have to deal.
“Finally, we must have policies based upon fundamental values.
In particular, we must stand for human rights. Without being interven-
tionist I believe we can make this concern a major focus of our foreign
policy calculations.
“I apologize for the condensation of these many and complex
problems. But perhaps this will serve as a basis from which to start our
discussion.”
After Senator Clifford Case (R-New Jersey) offered brief com-
ments, Church returned to Vance’s point concerning a U.S. foreign
policy based on fundamental values:
“This came up time and time again during the foreign policy de-
bates during the recent national campaign. I for one am very happy
that you have listed this as a point of departure for your own policy be-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
cause I think that our foreign policy should reflect our values as a
country. If we are going to mean anything to the world, we have to be
true to ourselves.
“I would hope that this will translate into some refusal on the part
of the administration to continue to extend military and economic aid
to regimes that are systematically engaged in the repression of human
rights, at least in the absence of overriding considerations of national
security that might require us to adopt a different policy. Do I under-
stand that by placing greater emphasis upon these fundamental values
we can expect that your administration of the State Department will
take into greater account the kinds of governments we are supplying
aid to in the future?
“Mr. Vance. Yes; you can.
“Matters of human rights will be given a greater emphasis with re-
spect to those decisions. But I think it is important to make the point
that you did; namely, that there are cases in which the security aspects
are of overriding importance and that that has to be borne in mind.
“Senator Church. Of course.
“I can think of many countries to which we have given large
amounts of aid under previous administrations that have had little or
no impact upon the national security of the United States. I am encour-
aged by your statement that more attention will be given in the future
to the nature and the character of the governments which we support
with our aid programs.”
Church then directed the questioning to a discussion of covert
operations:
“Mr. Vance, the other side of the coin in the matter of human rights
and fundamental values has to do with the methods that we use. Ev-
eryone knows today that under both Democratic and Republican Presi-
dents in our recent past we have intervened through covert operations
in many countries with a will, indeed with a zeal. Now these covert op-
erations were unconnected with the gathering of central intelligence in-
formation, but were secret undertakings in foreign lands to manipulate
political events in ways thought to be advantageous to the United
States.
“Our methods were justified on the grounds that we must use
them because the Russians do. They have embraced all of the black arts
of covert operations—bribery, false propaganda, physical coercion, ab-
duction, indeed even attempted assassination of foreign leaders.
“I don’t know how we can be true to our own values as a country
and continue to believe that it is our right to use such methods; though
again, I recognize that in extremity a nation must do what is needed to
assure its own survival. But we are not discussing cases of extremity,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and the habit of the past has been to intervene in these ways in the af-
fairs of other lands, even when the objective was purely technical.
“Now I would like your own view on this. If method is the essence
of whether or not we do adhere to our professed values as a nation,
what are your views and what will be your policy as Secretary of State
when it comes to decisions with respect to secret interventions in the af-
fairs of other lands?
“Mr. Vance. I am very happy to give my views on this.
“Let me say by way of background that these kinds of covert ac-
tions have been going on for a long time. They were going on when I
was in the Government, and I was part of the oversight committee at
one point in connection with them. So I have thought long and care-
fully about the subject.
“I have come to the conclusion that covert actions—and I distin-
guish between covert collection of intelligence on the one part and co-
vert actions against other countries, and I am talking about the latter—I
am convinced that covert action against other countries should be car-
ried out only in the most extraordinary circumstances. I believe that
procedures should be established so that if there is a proposal to carry
out a covert action, that it first has to be passed upon by a committee of
the senior Cabinet officers, to include the Secretary of State, the Secre-
tary of Defense, the National Security Adviser, and importantly in my
judgment, the Attorney General of the United States.
“I feel very strongly that the Attorney General of the United States
should participate in the decisionmaking process by which the deci-
sion is arrived at which goes to the President of the United States. I
think then that the President of the United States should personally ap-
prove in writing saying that he believes this to be vital to the national
security and so endorse the carrying forward of this extraordinary
circumstance.
“I then feel that notice should be given in advance to the appro-
priate committee or committees of the Congress so that they can pro-
vide their views to the President if they disagree with the proposal.
“I do not believe that the Congress should have a veto in that re-
gard because I think that splits the responsibility. But I think that it is
very likely that if the congressional committee said to the President,
‘We want to come in to see you as we have great concern for what is
being proposed here,’ this would have great weight with any President
as to whether he would then go forward with the operation.
“Finally, I believe there should be an adequate monitoring system
so that once a covert action is approved, one keeps on top of it to deter-
mine what is happening, how it is proceeding, and whether it should
be terminated.

15.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter highlighted the connections among
strength, freedom, and responsibility in his inaugural address, deliv-
ered on January 20, 1977:
“Our Nation can be strong abroad only if it is strong at home. And
we know that the best way to enhance freedom in other lands is to dem-
onstrate here that our democratic system is worthy of emulation.
“To be true to ourselves, we must be true to others. We will not be-
have in foreign places so as to violate our rules and standards here at
home, for we know that the trust which our Nation earns is essential to
our strength.
“The world itself is now dominated by a new spirit. Peoples more
numerous and more politically aware are craving, and now de-
manding, their place in the sun—not just for the benefit of their own
physical condition, but for basic human rights.
“The passion for freedom is on the rise. Tapping this new spirit,
there can be no nobler nor more ambitious task for America to under-
take on this day of a new beginning than to help shape a just and
peaceful world that is truly humane.
“We are a strong nation, and we will maintain strength so suffi-
cient that it need not be proven in combat—a quiet strength based not
merely on the size of an arsenal but on the nobility of ideas.
“We will be ever vigilant and never vulnerable, and we will fight
our wars against poverty, ignorance, and injustice, for those are the en-
emies against which our forces can be honorably marshaled.
“We are a proudly idealistic nation, but let no one confuse our ide-
alism with weakness.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“Because we are free, we can never be indifferent to the fate of
freedom elsewhere. Our moral sense dictates a clear-cut preference for
those societies which share with us an abiding respect for individual
human rights. We do not seek to intimidate, but it is clear that a world
which others can dominate with impunity would be inhospitable to de-
cency and a threat to the well-being of all people.
“The world is still engaged in a massive armaments race designed
to ensure continuing equivalent strength among potential adversaries.
We pledge perseverance and wisdom in our efforts to limit the world’s
armaments to those necessary for each nation’s domestic safety. And
we will move this year a step toward our ultimate goal—the elimina-
tion of all nuclear weapons from this Earth. We urge all other people to
join us, for success can mean life instead of death.” (Public Papers:
President Carter spoke at 12: p.m. from the East Front of the
Capitol. Immediately before the address Chief Justice of the United
States Warren Burger administered the oath of office. The address was
broadcast on radio and television. In his personal diary, the President
characterized the speech:
“I think the inauguration speech itself, perhaps one of the briefest
on record for the first inauguration of a president, was quite compatible
with my announcement speech in December 1974, and also with my ac-
ceptance speech at the Democratic convention. It accurately expressed
some of the major themes of my administration.” (Carter, White House
Diary, page 10)
In a separate videotaped address to global audiences, the Presi-
dent reinforced the themes of the inaugural address:
“I have chosen the occasion of my inauguration as President to
speak not only to my own countrymen—which is traditional—but also
to you, citizens of the world who did not participate in our election but
who will nevertheless be affected by my decisions.
“I also believe that as friends you are entitled to know how the
power and influence of the United States will be exercised by its new
Government.
“I want to assure you that the relations of the United States with
the other countries and peoples of the world will be guided during my
own administration by our desire to shape a world order that is more
responsive to human aspirations. The United States will meet its obli-
gation to help create a stable, just, and peaceful world order.
“We will not seek to dominate nor dictate to others. As we Amer-
icans have concluded one chapter in our Nation’s history and are be-
ginning to work on another, we have, I believe, acquired a more mature
perspective on the problems of the world. It is a perspective which rec-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
ognizes the fact that we alone do not have all the answers to the world’s
problems.
“The United States alone cannot lift from the world the terrifying
specter of nuclear destruction. We can and will work with others to do
so.
“The United States alone cannot guarantee the basic right of every
human being to be free of poverty and hunger and disease and political
repression. We can and will cooperate with others in combating these
enemies of mankind.
“The United States alone cannot ensure an equitable development
of the world resources or the proper safeguarding of the world’s envi-
ronment. But we can and will join with others in this work.
“The United States can and will take the lead in such efforts.
“In these endeavors we need your help, and we offer ours. We
need your experience; we need your wisdom.
“We need your active participation in a joint effort to move the re-
ality of the world closer to the ideals of human freedom and dignity.
“As friends, you can depend on the United States to be in the fore-
front of the search for world peace. You can depend on the United
States to remain steadfast in its commitment to human freedom and lib-
erty. And you can also depend on the United States to be sensitive to
your own concerns and aspirations, to welcome your advice, to do its
utmost to resolve international differences in a spirit of cooperation.
“The problems of the world will not be easily resolved. Yet the
well-being of each and every one of us—indeed our mutual survival—
depends on their resolution. As President of the United States I can as-
sure you that we intend to do our part. I ask you to join us in a common
effort based on mutual trust and mutual respect.
The United States Information Agency videotaped Carter’s re-
marks for broadcast to 26 nations on January 20. Additional documen-
tation on this message is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. XXX, Public Diplomacy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
16.
Address by Vice President Mondale
Brussels, January 24, 1977
In behalf of President Carter, I have come today to NATO Head-
quarters as a matter of the first priority. I have come to convey to you
and the member governments of the North Atlantic alliance:
—The President’s most sincere greetings;
—His commitment, and the full commitment of the United States,
to the North Atlantic alliance as a vital part of our deep and enduring
relations with Canada and Western Europe; and
—His dedication to improving cooperation and consultations with
our oldest friends so as to safeguard our peoples and to promote our
common efforts and concerns.
The President’s conviction concerning NATO’s central role is deep
rooted and firm. As he stated in his message to the NATO Ministers last
month:2
Our NATO alliance lies at the heart of the partnership between
North America and Western Europe. NATO is the essential instrument
for enhancing our collective security. The American commitment to
maintaining the NATO alliance shall be sustained and strengthened
under my Administration.
in the original. Mondale spoke before the North Atlantic Council (NAC) at NATO Head-
For the President’s remarks prior to Mondale’s departure, the text of news statements
and addresses, and Mondale’s remarks at a news conference following his return to
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen File, Box 29,
tional material is in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers, Vice Presidential
Papers, Central Files: Trips, TR 2–1, Foreign Trip Upon Taking Office: Working Visit to
he proposed the trip to Carter in order to “introduce the Carter–Mondale administration
to our major allies,” adding that he “met the leaders we would work with for the next
several years, asked for their cooperation in coordinating a series of economic stimulus
measures, told them that we hoped to operate in an atmosphere of close consultation, and
got home without touching off any major international incidents.” (Mondale, The Good
Fight, p. 199)
ered a message from President-elect Carter in the ministerial meeting of the North At-
lantic Council in Brussels on December 9, 1976. Carter asserted: “I am convinced that
NATO’s mission and the North Atlantic alliance are no less important today than when
NATO was originally established. I look forward to working closely with all the gov-
ernments represented at this meeting.”]

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
This statement of renewed American commitment comes at a time
of great promise in our country. We are a young Administration—
some 90 hours old. We have come to office following a long period of
difficulty in the United States, and of doubt among friends about our
will and steadfastness. But this has also been a time of promising
change in America, just as in Europe and elsewhere in the world. As
President Carter said in his inaugural address, “The world itself now is
dominated by a new spirit.”
I share his belief that in the United States “there is evident a serious
and purposeful rekindling of confidence.” There is a new under-
standing of our society and appreciation of our recognized limits. But
there is also a new faith in the strength of our democratic system of
government, a new willingness to meet challenges and continuing re-
sponsibilities abroad. Some of these challenges are unfamiliar to us
all—as the wind of change has transformed so much of the world. We
are ready to play our role in meeting these challenges. But we believe
the requirement for leadership and creativity also falls upon our
friends and allies in Europe, Japan, and elsewhere.
I share the confidence of President Carter that, together, we will be
equal to the tasks of the future as we have met those in the past. To this
end, the United States is wholeheartedly dedicated:
—To the security, prosperity, and well-being of our people and of
our allies;
—To “eternal vigilance” in preserving peace; and
—To promoting human values and human dignity for people
everywhere.
In cooperation with our friends abroad, President Carter is pro-
ceeding immediately with steps to strengthen the American economy.
He is proceeding with steps which will enable the United States to help
meet the extraordinary energy challenge facing all our countries. He is
giving priority attention to the agenda of vital economic and political
issues before the industrialized nations of the West—in Europe, North
America, and Japan. And President Carter is deeply conscious of the
aspirations of people in the world’s developing nations and of the need
for all of us to seek new and cooperative relations with these countries.
President Carter takes office at a time when we have moved from
the rigid period of the cold war into a period of expanded contact and
greater potential for accommodation—for mutual benefit—with poten-
tial adversaries in particular but still limited areas. It is now possible to
talk, where before it was only possible to confront one another in
deadly and undiminished hostility. And it is imperative that we con-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tinue this dialogue, ever seeking to expand its depth and compass, yet
fully consistent with Western interests.
At the same time, the President and his Administration are vitally
aware of the continuing growth in Soviet military power and the uncer-
tainties that lie ahead with inevitable changes in Soviet leadership in
the years to come. The growth of Soviet military power makes us
keenly aware of the need for the NATO alliance to modernize and im-
prove its defenses—not for the sake of military power itself but, rather,
for a more fundamental reason. This reason is stated in the North At-
lantic Treaty: that we are determined to safeguard the freedom, the
common heritage, and the civilization of our peoples, founded on the
principles of democracy, individual liberty, justice, and the rule of law.
As President Carter said in his inaugural address about our own
country:
We are a strong nation, and we will maintain strength so sufficient
that it need not be proven in combat—a quiet strength based not
merely on the size of an arsenal but on the nobility of ideas.
The Atlantic alliance has successfully withstood repeated testing
for more than a quarter century. And as President Carter begins his Ad-
ministration, we mark another milestone in U.S.-European relations—
the 30th anniversary of the Marshall plan. Today, as we look back on
how much we have done together, it is fitting to recall what Secretary of
State Marshall said at Harvard in June 1947:
Our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine but
against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos. Its purpose should be
the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emer-
gence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can
exist.
And this concern with basic values still motivates us today.
Mr. Secretary General, members of the Council, 30 years ago the
United States entered into a firm commitment to enduring involvement
on this continent—as vital to both the United States and Europe and as
reflecting shared political and human values. President Carter has
asked me personally to convey to you that the American commitment
remains firm and undiminished.
In support of our close ties with our NATO allies—our commit-
ment to allied defense—President Carter is determined to maintain
fully effective defense forces in Europe. As you are well aware, we are
determined to reduce waste and inefficiency in the U.S. defense
budget. But he has asked me to inform you that his new budget and
The British Commonwealth; Europe, pp. 237–239.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
these efficiencies will not result in any decrease in planned investment
in NATO defense—and these plans involve some growth.
Before I left Washington, President Carter emphasized to me his
deep concern about NATO’s defense. He told me that he is prepared to
consider increased U.S. investment in NATO’s defense. In turn, we
look to America’s allies to join with us in improving NATO’s defense
forces to the limit of individual abilities, to provide a defense fully ade-
quate to our needs. Of course, economic and social problems make a
strong claim on our resources—no less so in the United States than in
Europe. And in a time of de´tente, it is easy to lose sight of the need for
adequate defense. But this need is inescapable. It demands continuing
efforts in common.
The alliance as a whole must take into account the growth in Soviet
military power and together agree on the appropriate response. In im-
proving our defense forces, we must redouble our efforts to stand-
ardize weapons, rationalize our military posture, increase efficiency,
and improve reinforcement capability. We must place greater em-
phasis on improved force readiness. And as an alliance, we cannot
accept reductions in NATO defense capabilities except through negoti-
ations with the Warsaw Pact—negotiations fully securing allied in-
terests and leading to a more stable military balance.
Negotiations on force levels in Europe—MBFR [mutual and bal-
anced force reductions]—must move forward with the closest attention
paid to the interests of each member state and as a clear expression of
common and agreed positions.
Furthermore, President Carter is committed to an early resump-
tion of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, looking toward another
step this year in the effort to end the strategic arms race with the Soviet
Union. He has publicly stated that three basic principles will guide him
in this effort:
—He will pursue arms control agreements in the best interests of
the United States, the alliance, and world peace;
—He will insist on no less than equivalent advantage for the West
in any agreement; and
—He will strengthen consultations and cooperation with Amer-
ica’s natural friends and allies throughout the negotiating process.
The President has asked me today to affirm again his intention to
consult closely with our NATO allies before the Strategic Arms Limita-
tion Talks are resumed. He also looks forward to working in closest co-
operation with you on MBFR. And while the new Administration is
undertaking a careful review of these negotiations, we anticipate no
early change in U.S. proposals to our allies concerning the allied posi-
tion at the force reduction talks.

17.
Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary
Brezhnev
Washington, January 26, 1977
To General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev
As I take up my duties as President of the United States, I want to
share with you my view on relations between our two countries.
I want to express my appreciation for the informal messages I have
received from you2 and in this connection I want to affirm that it is
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
my goal to improve relations with the Soviet Union on the basis of reci-
procity, mutual respect and benefit. That goal will have my close per-
sonal attention, as well as that of Secretary of State Vance.
I have read your public remarks with great interest, and they en-
courage me to believe that we share a common desire to enhance and
preserve the prospect of lasting peace.
As I understood your very important speech at Tula, the Soviet
Union will not seek superiority in arms, will oppose the concept, and
will require only a defense sufficient to deter any potential adversary.
The United States seeks nothing more or less for itself. With persever-
ance and wisdom therefore our two countries should be in a position to
avoid a new armaments race. I have said to the American people that
my firm goal is to eliminate all nuclear weapons.
There are three areas where progress can be made toward this
goal. A critical first step should be the achievement of a SALT II agree-
ment without delay, and an agreement to proceed toward additional
limitations and reductions in strategic weapons. Moreover, I hope we
can promptly conclude an adequately verified comprehensive ban on
all nuclear tests, and also strive to achieve greater openness about our
respective strategic policies. It is also important to renew efforts for
progress in the negotiations for a balanced reduction of forces in Cen-
tral Europe.
We also have a responsibility to pursue policies that will prevent
the troubled areas of the world from exploding into dangerous con-
flicts. The United States will work to promote a peaceful settlement in
the Middle East on the basis of appropriate UN resolutions. Similarly in
Southern Africa we are encouraging all parties to negotiate a peaceful
settlement which promotes security and justice for all.
It is my belief that the USSR can contribute to the realization of
progress toward peace in both of these critical areas.
My Administration attaches importance to the improvement of
our bilateral economic relations, on the basis of mutual and equivalent
benefits to the peoples of both our great countries. At the same time we
cannot be indifferent to the fate of freedom and individual human
rights.
We represent different social systems and our nations are different
in background and experience. Competition over ideals and ideas is in-
evitable between our societies. But it need not prevent a common effort
to shape a world that is more peaceful, just and humane. We live in a

18.
Editorial Note
On January 27, 1977, the Department of State issued a statement, in
response to a question posed at a January 26 news briefing, concerning
the Soviet Union’s treatment of Nobel Prize winning scientist Andrey
Sakharov. The statement warned that any “attempts by Soviet author-
ities to intimidate Mr. Sakharov will not silence legitimate criticism in
the Soviet Union and will conflict with accepted international
standards in the field of human rights.” (Department of State Bulletin,
During a January 31 news conference held at the Department of
State, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance discussed the Carter administra-
tion’s response to human rights concerns, specifically Sakharov’s case:
“Q. Jim Anderson, UPI. Mr. Secretary, on the question of interna-
tional civil rights, is this Administration going to continue the practice
of speaking out on cases such as the Sakharov episode? Or are you
going to continue the practice of your predecessor, exerting quiet diplo-
matic pressure and using his concept of linkage?
“Secretary Vance: On the issue of human rights, the President has
often expressed his deep concern in this area and has reaffirmed that
deep concern in the inauguration address.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“We will speak frankly about injustice both at home and abroad.
We do not intend, however, to be strident or polemical, but we do be-
lieve that an abiding respect for human rights is a human value of fun-
damental importance and that it must be nourished. We will not com-
ment on each and every issue, but we will from time to time comment
when we see a threat to human rights, when we believe it constructive
to do so.
“Q. Mr. Secretary, Barry Schweid of AP. On the same subject, one
of the local pundits yesterday called it sudden diplomacy, suggesting
that this speaking out hasn’t been very well thought out, particularly its
impact on diplomacy.
“You refer to your trip to Moscow. Do you think the statement you
have made on Sakharov and your general view on human rights will
have an impact, a negative impact, on negotiations with the Soviet
Union? Indeed, isn’t that what Mr. Dobrynin [Anatoliy F. Dobrynin,
Soviet Ambassador to the U.S.] called to tell you the other day?
“Secretary Vance: I do not believe that it will have a negative im-
pact. As I indicated, we will from time to time speak out. I have dis-
cussed the matter with Mr. Dobrynin, but I am sure that our discus-
sions with the Soviet Union on a whole range of matters will not be
adversely affected by what we have said.”
After discussion of several issues, Vance again responded to ques-
tions relating to human rights violations:
“Q. Marvin Kalb, CBS. The President said yesterday that perhaps
the statement about Sakharov should have been made by him or by
you. Yet the day before the State Department made its statement on
Sakharov, it did come out with a statement on Czechoslovakia, which
apparently had been cleared. Are you not running the danger, sir, of
setting up what amounts to a double standard of the manner in which
you respond to violations of human rights in the Soviet Union and in
smaller countries where there is not a direct, vital interest conflict?
“Secretary Vance: This is a very complex area. As I indicated, we
will not be speaking out in every case. We will speak out when we be-
lieve it advisable to do so, but that will not be, as I said, in each and
every case. It is an area where, as I said, I think we have an obligation to
make our views frankly known; but we hope we can do it without
being strident, as I said, or intrusive in an improper way.
“Q. Isn’t that really setting up a kind of double standard where the
Department, or the Administration, might feel itself more free in con-
demning human rights in smaller countries where there is not a vital
interest affected?
“Secretary Vance: No. I hope we will not have a double standard. I
think what we have done so far would indicate we have not.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
“Q. Jim Klurfeld from Newsday. On this same situation, there
were reports that you were unhappy with the statement made on the
Sakharov situation. I just wonder if you can tell us who did clear that
statement. I think the President indicated yesterday he did not clear it.
Who did clear it? And whether you feel that this is an instance in which
you should not have spoken out.
“Secretary Vance: Let me say I did not see it; it was cleared at lower
levels. I am not going to give the name of the individual. I have the re-
sponsibility in this Department, and therefore I accept that responsi-
bility fully. Let me say that I respect Mr. Sakharov very deeply; I re-
spect his, Mr. Sakharov’s, principles and his pursuit of those principles.
“Q. Your predecessor frequently said in speeches that not only is it
inadvisable but rather it is counterproductive to speak out, specifically
in the case of Soviet emigration—or emigration from the Soviet Union
by minorities, including Jews, which dropped sharply after the United
States tried to exert pressure. Do you subscribe to that theory, particu-
larly, that speaking out is actually counterproductive?
“Secretary Vance: No, I do not share that view.
“Q. If you don’t share that view, could you say what your view is
on that specific aspect of the problem?
“Secretary Vance: My view is that at times we will feel it appro-
priate and necessary to speak out and there will be other times when
In a January 31 evening report to President Jimmy Carter, Vance
summarized the major themes of the press conference:
“You may already have seen the first press reports on my press
conference this morning so I will not review in detail with you what
transpired. The questions asked were along predictable lines, although
I was struck by the degree of interest, even sharpness, on human rights
issues. Since we have announced that this administration will speak
out on selected international human rights issues, we will of course be
asked continually why we are commenting on some and not on others.
I am confident, however, that we have a credible rationale for making
public statements on human rights questions and that the country ex-
pects your administration to pay more attention to such issues in the
foreign affairs field. We have chosen Pat Derian to be the State Depart-
ment Human Rights Coordinator which will give us a well qualified
and sensitive person to follow human rights issues worldwide.”
(Carter Library, Plains File, Subject File, Box 37, State Department Eve-

19.
Memorandum for the Record
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy and National Security Issues for the 95th Congress
PARTICIPANTS
President Carter
Secretary of State Vance
Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Senator Edward Brooke, Massachusetts
Senator Frank Church, Idaho
Senator Clifford Case, New Jersey
Senator John Sparkman, Alabama
Representative Clement Zablocki, Wisconsin
Representative Clarence Long, Maryland
Representative Dante Fascell, Florida
Representative Lee Hamilton, Indiana
Representative William Broomfield, Michigan
Representative C.W. “Bill” Young, Florida
Douglas Bennett, Congressional Relations, State Department
Jerrold Schecter, Associate Press Secretary, National Security Council/
Congressional Liaison
The PRESIDENT opened the meeting by saying he needed the ad-
vice of the Congressmen, and “I want to work closely with you.” Over
the past few months the President said he has been an active student of
foreign policy and he wants to conduct “an aggressive foreign policy.”
The President noted the unique quality of Dr. Kissinger who did a lot of
things on his own. However, the President said his administration will
have a different “team” style. He mentioned Secretary Vance, Vice
President Mondale, Dr. Brzezinski and others as team members. The
President told the Congressmen that Paul Warnke would be the head
of ACDA and chief SALT negotiator because “he is the best man to do
this.”
Reporting on Vice President Mondale’s trip, PRESIDENT CAR-
TER said the meetings were “substantive” and the “agenda was iden-
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
tical as if I had been there myself.” He noted that FRG Chancellor
Schmidt at first felt it was a token visit, but after spending four hours
with his Cabinet and the Mondale mission, Schmidt was impressed
with the substance of the discussions.
“I’ve enjoyed being President so far, and I hope to maintain that
status,” said President Carter, “but I know a mistake can get immedi-
ately magnified. You have been here a long time and I reserve the right
to come to you with special problems. I have a genuine desire to work
closely with you. Cy Vance has my permanent authorization to tell you
my plans on foreign policy.” Then the President ran down a list of
issues under consideration, including SALT, Rhodesia, Panama, Mid-
dle East, Cyprus and NATO.
SECRETARY VANCE spoke to the Congressmen about an imme-
diate problem in Egypt growing out of President Sadat’s removal of
subsidy for basic commodities. This resulted in price increases which
caused riots in the country. President Sadat did not handle the situation
forcefully and had to lower the prices again to prevent rioting. He was
damaged by the way he handled the situation. Egyptian Foreign Min-
ister Fahmy asked our Ambassador in Egypt for additional economic
aid. Secretary Vance explained that the Administration proposes to
shift funds from long-term development to short-term commodity
assistance in order to help Egypt. The total would be $190 million. Pres-
ident Sadat is the key to the Middle East situation, explained Secretary
Vance.
The PRESIDENT said that everybody knows that Sadat has dem-
onstrated a good attitude and that strengthening him would pay
dividends.
REPRESENTATIVE HAMILTON noted that while there are polit-
ical reasons to support Sadat, we are making a mistake for the long-
range. The commodity import program is difficult to administer and
has been “very slippery.” He said that such long-range economic
projects as power plants, irrigation projects and industrial credit
should not be knocked out because they will be the basis for a sound
Egyptian economy. “If the political situation requires it, then reluc-
tantly I guess we must make the move for short-term commodity aid.”
SENATOR CASE said there is no disagreement with Secretary
Vance’s request in the short-term, but we should reconsider our long-
term goals.
REPRESENTATIVE FASCELL said $190 million is not a lot of
money and the political pay-off is obvious, but where we go is impor-
tant. “Egypt is the biggest sinkhole in the Middle East and this is short-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
term Band-aid money.” We must look at long-term goals. How much
money for an international consortium? How much program money?
How far do we go into the short-term economic program? “We got to
$900 million before cut off and we didn’t make a dent,” said Fascell.
REPRESENTATIVE LONG said when somebody throws himself
on your doorstep, do something. It is surprising they survive at all.
Egypt is the most harem scarem country I know. We are inviting the
Egyptians to eat up the seed corn. Then Representative Long said that
the two nuclear reactors for Egypt ought to be cancelled.
PRESIDENT CARTER said that the request for nuclear reactors for
Egypt and Israel had been left over from the previous Administration
and were being reviewed but he gave no indication of how he would
act as a result of the review. Rather, the President stressed the current
situation in Egypt in terms of the need for food commodities and aid, “I
consider it to be a crisis.” The President said that Dr. Kissinger’s
achievement was to break Egypt away from the Soviets, and more and
more Saudi Arabia is taking a tremendous interest in the Middle East.
The President said he is asking Dr. Brzezinski to evolve a comprehen-
sive four-year goal for our foreign policy. “I want to know where we
will be in the Middle East, China, Cyprus and all the major issues.” He
told the Congressmen he will make them aware of these goals and the
preparation of these goals. He said such a compilation would “help me
to express our common purposes and what we want to achieve.”
DR. BRZEZINSKI explained that the four-year goals in the past
have always been statements of broad generalities but “we are trying
to make these goals more specific with a little more deliberation and
specificity.”
REPRESENTATIVE WILLIAM YOUNG asked Secretary Vance if
Foreign Minister Fahmy asked for additional funds. VANCE said yes,
but that to reply rapidly it would have to come from the aid program
that had already been approved.
SENATOR BROOKE said that President Sadat has his priorities
and that granting of immediate commodity aid would be a symbolic
move.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
REPRESENTATIVE HAMILTON said that along with granting
emergency aid the Egyptians be committed to capital projects in the
Suez Canal area.
PRESIDENT CARTER then discussed the need to cut back on
spending on weapons. He said he hoped, with the aid of Congress, to
achieve an overall world-wide reduction in arms transfers. “We are the
only nation that can take the lead on arms transfers,” the President said.
SECRETARY VANCE said we are in the process of reviewing our
own policies on how to proceed on arms transfers. The principle he
wants to see carried out, said Secretary Vance, is for arms transfers to
be designed to carry out our foreign policy, not to be used as an eco-
nomic tool. We are putting our thoughts together to get a handle on
arms sales problems in the world.
SECRETARY VANCE said he discussed this problem with Soviet
Ambassador Dobrynin in reference to the Middle East. Dobrynin did
not express opposition but coupled reduction of arms sales with a polit-
ical solution in the Middle East.
REPRESENTATIVE LONG said, “We have a tremendous respon-
sibility to make a start on this. If we say, “Let’s have a treaty to limit
arms transfers, a rough translation would be, ‘let’s not do anything’”.
He then raised the question of Egypt’s purchase of $1. billion worth of
jets from France. “They make no contribution to peace in the Middle
East. Why do we give day-to-day aid to Egypt while they buy expen-
sive jets,” asked Long.
SECRETARY VANCE. “I have not talked to the heads of state
about arms purchases but I will on my trip.”
There was a general discussion of developing a pause in arms sales
and SECRETARY VANCE pointed out that President Ford had ap-
proved the sale of weapons to Israel which include the CBU (cluster
bombs) and the FLIR (forward looking infrared), along with tanks and
artillery, and a decision will have to be made on whether to go forward
with this commitment.
and Syria (February 20–21). Documentation on Vance’s trip is printed in Foreign Relations,
would lift the ban on the sale of CBU and FLIR to Israel. (Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. De-
cides to Sell Some Arms to Israel That it Blocked in Past,” The New York Times, October 12,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
SENATOR BROOKE noted that the President’s proposal to limit
arms transfers is a laudatory one, but he warned that we appear to be
inferior in megatonnage and delivery vehicles to the Soviet Union.
PRESIDENT CARTER said there had been some response in Ger-
many and France during Vice President Mondale’s trip on limiting
arms sales. “They were not effusive but they responded well,” said the
President, “and we must see that France and Germany do not rush in to
fill the gap when we limit sales. We are so far ahead that we have a
great range of possibilities to moderate our arms sales.”
SECRETARY VANCE. The simple step would be to change the
procedures so that arms manufacturers must get advance permission
from the Department before they proceed. Now they get people
overseas steamed up in an early stage and then come back here and sell
their systems.
SENATOR CHURCH. Arms sales are out of real proportion to the
needs of the countries that are buying them. Sometimes it seems that
we are exporting only arms and wheat but there is a serious problem
with the internal forces in our own country. We have to recognize that
aircraft companies have spent millions under the table to stimulate
sales.
PRESIDENT CARTER stressed that consistency and frankness
with Congress and the American people and a multinational approach
are vital. THE PRESIDENT said he favored the idea of prior approval of
American companies before they offer arms development to foreign
countries. The PRESIDENT also made these points: (1) he wants to hold
down the volume of nuclear weapons and the volume of nuclear capa-
bility. He said this goal was pursued with France and Germany and he
was meeting with Ambassador Dobrynin later in the morning to
discuss this problem. (2) “The African situation is explosive and we
will follow the British lead in Rhodesia. Ambassador Young will be at
two different conferences in Africa. He is not going to negotiate but he
will let them know about our sincerity for majority rule. I want to see
the Byrd amendment10 repealed and I will give my backing for the re-
Kissinger and he told me Sadat was helpful and he considered him
useful. I will have a better chance to answer your question after I talk
with him.
ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI. The question is how trustworthy is
Sadat compared to others. We are dealing with a political reality, for
the first time in 22 years Egypt’s foreign policy is not based on playing
the Russians off against us. Egypt is susceptible to an accommodation
with Israel and has moved away from Arab socialism. The long range
problem is radicalization of the country and it is a perilous race. A
weak economy can produce political instability and bring a radical re-
gime to power that will take a more extreme view.
REPRESENTATIVE HAMILTON talked of the need to deny and
delay arms sales to Israel and the Middle East in general including
F–18’s to Iran and F–16’s to Saudi Arabia.
SECRETARY VANCE said, “we will sink the peninsula if we keep
selling arms.”
REPRESENTATIVE ZABLOCKI discussed his bill dealing with
nuclear non-proliferation and the Arab boycott. He talked about di-
viding the package to deal with the boycott earlier and then nuclear
non-proliferation.
SECRETARY VANCE said work on the boycott provision will
have been completed when he returns from the Middle East and then I
will testify.
circumventing UN trade sanctions instituted in 1966 against Southern Rhodesia.

20.
Editorial Note
At his first press conference, held in the Old Executive Office
cussed the impact addressing human rights concerns might have on
U.S.-Soviet relations:
“Q. Mr. President, there have been a series of actions taken in re-
cent days by the Soviet Union, including the expulsion of American
journalists and the arrest of Alexander Ginsburg, actions that we have
taken issue with in one form or another. How concerned are you that
by being outspoken on issues of human rights that we may jeopardize
possibly our relations with the Soviet Union on other matters?
“The President. Well, this brings up the question that is referred to
as linkage. I think we come out better in dealing with the Soviet Union
if I am consistently and completely dedicated to the enhancement of
human rights, not only as it deals with the Soviet Union but all other
countries. I think this can legitimately be severed from our inclination
to work with the Soviet Union, for instance, in reducing dependence
upon atomic weapons and also in seeking mutual and balanced force
reductions in Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“I don’t want the two to be tied together. I think the previous ad-
ministration, under Secretary Kissinger, thought that there ought to be
this linkage; that if you mentioned human rights or if you failed to in-
vite Mr. Solzhenitsyn to the White House that you might endanger the
progress of the SALT talks.
“I don’t feel that way. I think it ought to be clear, and I have made
clear directly in communication to Mr. Brezhnev and in my meeting
with Ambassador Dobrynin, that I was reserving the right to speak out
strong and forcefully whenever human rights are threatened—not
every instance, but when I think it is advisable. This is not intended as a
public relations attack on the Soviet Union, and I would hope that their
leaders could recognize the American people’s deep concern about
human rights.
“I think in many other countries of the world there has been some
progress. I think in the Soviet Union there has already been some
progress. The number of Jews, for instance, who have been permitted
to emigrate from the Soviet Union in the last few months has increased.
“If this trend should continue, I would be encouraged. But I would
have to take this position of being independent in my own public pro-
nouncements. I’ve got a lot to learn. I was concerned the other day, for
instance, when the AP reporter [George Krimsky] was expelled from
Moscow. I had at first thought to retaliate by expelling the AP reporter
from Washington. But I found out that was not the right approach to
take.
“But we have got to be firm, and we have got to be forceful. But I
don’t want to tie everything together in one package so that we are
timid about insisting on human rights.
“Q. Do you interpret this in any way as a kind of testing of you by
the Soviet Union?
“The President. No, I don’t. I don’t interpret it as a testing. I regret
the fact that the Soviet Union saw fit to expel a newspaper reporter. I
regret very deeply the fact that the Soviet Union has now incarcerated
Mr. Ginsburg, who has been one of the leaders in the Soviet Union in
representing the case of the dissidents. But I can’t go in with armed
forces and try to change the internal mechanism of the Soviet
Government.
“But I don’t think it is designed to aggravate me or to test me or to
test the will of this country. My commitment to human rights is clear. I
will maintain that clarity to the maximum extent possible.
“I don’t want to mislead the American people in dealing with the
Soviets or with others. We can’t expect overnight success. It requires
long, tedious, labored, very carefully considered progress. I am not
looking for magic answers but my determination is very deep.” (Public

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
The press conference was broadcast live on radio and television.
The President noted in his personal diary: “I had my first press confer-
ence. I felt completely at ease and leveled with the press the best I
could, describing frankly some of the crucial issues that face our
country. The major emphasis was on SALT talks and human rights. I
spelled out in general terms our positions on these issues and intend to
keep the press conferences on schedule and not evade issues any more
than necessary for national security.” (White House Diary, pages 17–18)

21.
Memorandum From the White House Press Secretary
(Powell) to President Carter
Washington, February 21, 1977
RE
Soviet Dissidents
It seems to me that the Soviets should understand your feeling that
it is necessary to build domestic political support for initiatives in arms
control and for detente in general. One of the reasons Ford-Kissinger
failed in this effort and had to back away from detente was because
the American people would not support a policy which seemed to
abandon our position in support of basic human rights.
Surely the Soviets are sophisticated enough to understand that the
domestic political flexibility we need to make progress in other areas is
enhanced by your position on human rights.
Perhaps this could be conveyed to Dobrynin by you on an informal
basis—by phone, for example. An even less formal way would be
through Brzezinski. I could even do it through their Embassy Press

22.
Statement by Secretary of State Vance Before the Senate
Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign
Operations
Washington, February 24, 1977
It is my pleasure to begin today, before this distinguished com-
mittee, my testimony to the Congress on the Carter Administration’s
approach to foreign assistance.
Our foreign assistance programs are diverse in substance, serve a
variety of objectives, and are aimed at a wide range of targets. In re-
viewing our foreign assistance program we should ask ourselves cer-
tain key questions:
—How do these programs fit together?
—What are the results of our aid in human terms?
—What ends are served?
—In short, is our aid money being wisely spent?
24 evening report to the President, Vance noted that the questions posed “covered the
broad range from policy considerations to details on the financial composition of several
of the items in our AID budget.” He added, “Human rights was the subject of a number
of questions, with the Committee appearing to understand the difficulties that one faces
in balancing human rights objectives with security and development objectives.” (Carter
Vance provided similar overviews of the administration’s assistance programs to the
House Committee on Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations on March 2
and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance on

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
I hope to begin this difficult process of self-examination and coop-
erative dialogue with the Congress today—to provide you with a sense
of how the Administration sees the total range of our foreign assistance
programs as part of a broad foreign policy framework including:
—Our efforts at development cooperation in the context of an in-
creasingly important North-South dialogue;
—Our ability to play a constructive role in the resolution of re-
gional conflict in the Middle East, southern Africa, and other trouble
spots in the world; and
—Our basic national security.
Our Basic Objectives
The foreign assistance efforts of the Carter Administration are
guided by some fundamental foreign policy objectives:
—To demonstrate America’s compassion for the poor and dispos-
sessed around the world—those who, through no fault of their own,
are exposed to daily suffering and humiliation and are struggling to
survive;
—To make our fair contribution to the enormous task of the so-
cial, economic, and technological development of poor countries, an
investment which in this interdependent world can pay us handsome
dividends;
—To foster a climate of constructive cooperation, dialogue, and re-
ciprocal benefit in our North-South diplomacy;
—To contribute to the cause of peace by providing incentives, in
terms of economic and physical security, for the resolution of old, and
potential, disputes;
—To maintain and foster the environment of international peace
and security essential to social, economic, and political progress
through selective military assistance that assures our friends and allies
adequate self-defense, while preserving regional arms balances;
—To take the lead in encouraging the evolution of a world order
based on an open economic system, a political structure reflecting a just
balance of rights and obligations for all nations, and social progress and
human rights for individuals wherever they might be.
This wide range of objectives is essential to the national interest of
the United States in the complicated interdependent world in which we
live.
Our own economic welfare is vitally affected by what happens
elsewhere in the world. The standard of living of the American worker
and the American consumer requires cooperation with the developing
world—in expanding supplies of food, energy, and raw materials and
in controlling population growth and wasteful use of scarce natural re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
sources. The stability of the U.S. economy depends greatly on respon-
sible economic policies in the rest of the world, including the devel-
oping nations. The fortunes of all national economies, including our
own, are linked to continued expansion of the highly integrated inter-
national system of trade, investment, and finance. And in a world in
which social and economic progress has become a central issue of our
time, our national security is linked to progress in the rest of the world.
In addition, economic issues have assumed increasing political im-
portance. Disadvantaged people everywhere are rejecting the proposi-
tion that poverty must be their fate, and governments everywhere are
putting the goal of economic development at the top of their national
agendas. We have experienced severe worldwide economic disloca-
tion: simultaneous inflation and recession and abrupt increases in en-
ergy prices have curtailed economic growth generally, but most pain-
fully in the poorest countries. Equality of economic opportunity has
become the paramount goal of diplomacy for 150 developing nations,
just as it has been the goal of disadvantaged citizens and regions in
American history.
We cannot effectively promote multilateral diplomacy, control the
proliferation of nuclear arms, defuse international terrorism, reduce
the buildup of conventional weapons, or protect our security interests
in the oceans or space in a hungry, angry, and bitter world. We can
achieve cooperation on these security issues only if we are doing our
fair and reasonable share in the process of international development
cooperation—only if we are seen as encouraging, not frustrating, the
development aspirations of others.
In an imperfect world, the objectives we pose for our foreign policy
are not always consistent. We cannot pursue all of them as fully as we
might like all the time. In concrete instances we face a series of difficult
choices. Some of these choices pit our best intentions against our most
pragmatic calculations.
For example, both we and the poorer countries favor economic de-
velopment, and we generally agree that development requires sound
domestic policies as well as international transfers of resources to
the poor countries. Moreover, one of our principal objectives is to see
that the poorest people of the developing nations benefit from our
assistance.
Our task is to achieve those ends without interfering in the internal
affairs of other countries, mindful of the fact that there are limits to
what we can achieve no matter how noble our motives.
Similarly, we hold strongly to the principles of basic human rights.
We are working to fulfill both the letter and spirit of current legislation
relating human rights concerns to foreign assistance. This committee it-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
self spoke to this issue when it wrote in its own report last summer
that:2
. . . should we profane our ideals in the interest of short-term secu-
rity, we would cause the erosion of our greatest strength—that of a na-
tion guided by dictates of reason and moral principles.
But in that report the committee also noted that we can best
achieve our purpose through conscientious and systematic review of
assistance programs on a country-by-country basis. In each case we
must balance a political concern for human rights against economic or
security goals. No formula can resolve the larger conflict of commit-
ments, but prudent and dedicated attention to both the basic objectives
and the day-to-day operations of our programs can make specific prob-
lems tractable.
This committee and the Congress have advocated “new direc-
tions” in our bilateral foreign aid programs. These directions call for
increasing emphasis on the poor majority, increasing attention to
human rights, and adherence to the moral principles that give us pride
and dignity as a nation. The spirit of “new directions” underlies our
general approach to all our aid programs.
The Carter Administration accepts the challenge that Congress has
posed. We ask your cooperation in making “new directions” a reality—
and in helping us resolve the difficult policy choices we face.
The challenge of the “new directions” means that, in 1977, we
cannot talk simply in the dry terms of this or that funding level as if the
power to budget and spend were the power to wish ourselves into a
perfect world. We are interested in results in human as well as eco-
nomic terms.
[Omitted here is a description of the various development assist-
ance programs.]
together with additional views, to accompany H.R. 14260, foreign assistance and related
programs appropriations bill, 1977.
ment Assistance Policy contains the provisions of the “New Directions” mandate, which
set out functional categories—such as population planning and agricultural produc-
tion—as criteria for foreign assistance. (Congress and the Nation, vol. IV, 1973–1976, pp.
851–852) See also Implementation of “New Directions” in Development Assistance: Report to
the Committee on International Relations Prepared by AID. Committee Print, 94th Cong., 1st
Sess. 1975.

23.
Editorial Note
During the course of his remarks before an audience of Depart-
ment of State employees on February 24, 1977, President Jimmy Carter
underscored his dedication to improving relations with adversaries in
pursuit of peace and informing the American public about his adminis-
tration’s foreign policy:
“The final point I want to make before I answer your questions is
this: We have some potential adversaries and some past adversaries
with whom we want to have better relationships. And that applies to
Vietnam and Laos and Cambodia. It applies even to North Korea and
to Cuba. It applies to the People’s Republic of China and to Russia and
to countries like Iraq. With some we have relations; some, as you know,
we do not. But our constant search will be to find common ground on
which we can reach agreement so that we can set an example for the
rest of the world in a friendly and mutually respectful attitude.
“I have been pleased so far at the response that has been received
from our embryonic efforts to carve out grounds for understanding
and peace. I think so far the Soviet Union has responded well. And we
will continue these kinds of efforts, sometimes anticipating discourage-
ments. But we will not be deterred, and we will not be discouraged
ourselves.
“I want the American people to be a part of it. I am going to have a
press conference at least twice a month. I will have frequent fireside
chats. My next one will be devoted exclusively to foreign affairs and de-
fense matters. And I am going to have trips around our country where I
might meet in town meeting forums. And we will have call-in type
radio programs so that people can ask me questions about domestic
and foreign affairs and so that to the best of my ability I can give them
straight answers.
“I think that when our country speaks, it ought to speak with a
strong voice. And when a foreign policy is evolved, even though it
might be the right foreign policy, exclusively by the President and the
Secretary of State, and then promulgated to the world without the un-
derstanding or participation of the Congress, the other Cabinet
members or the people of our country, the rest of the world knows that
the President and the Secretary of State, powerful people, still speak
with a hollow voice. So to the extent that you are involved in the evolu-
tion of an idea or a new approach or a consistent old approach, to that
extent, we will all be strengthened.
“We are partners. I can’t succeed as President unless you succeed.
And if you make a serious mistake, I am the one who will be the focal
point for that criticism and that despair and that disillusionment that

26.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, March 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Weekly National Security Report #3
1. Opinions
Foreign Policy Design. Judging from press reactions—both domestic
and foreign—there is considerable appreciation of your dedication to
more effective and far-reaching strategic arms control; there is aware-
ness of the depth and sincerity of your concern over nuclear prolifera-
tion; there is remarkably widespread support for your position on
human rights, which has done so much to revarnish America’s moral
credentials.
Moreover, through the various missions undertaken immediately
after the inaugural (to Southern Africa, to the Middle East, to Panama,
and to the Aegean) you have signaled clearly that the Administration
will be activist, and that you yourself will be in the tradition of those
presidents who have exercised a personally active leadership in foreign
affairs.
However, I do not believe that at this stage the larger design of
what you wish to accomplish has emerged with sufficiently sharp re-
lief. I discern two immediate needs, both of which might well be cor-
rected in your forthcoming foreign policy speech:
1. You need to express a more coherent vision of what we aim to
accomplish, of what our priorities are, and of how you define the
present historical era within which US foreign policy has to be shaped;
2. You need to convey to the public your awareness of the com-
plexity of the problems that we confront; disappointments and set-
backs are normal in international affairs and accomplishments tend to
be the exception. We are setting in motion a process, and the public
must be made to understand that the President and his associates un-
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
derstand that the problems we face will be with us for a long time to
come, that there will be no easy solutions, and that the effort to build a
more cooperative world framework will be tedious, painful, and fre-
quently disappointing.
I think it is necessary to emphasize these themes especially be-
cause we are likely to confront two short-term dangers:
1. Given our disagreements with the French and the Germans over
nuclear proliferation, and given the likelihood of some bitter disap-
pointments with the British and the French over the Concorde, it is
possible that in the short-term our relations with our principal allies
may in fact deteriorate. Since this will be coinciding with the forth-
coming summit, we should anticipate some rough sailing in alliance re-
lations. This may be unavoidable but it is bound to produce some ad-
verse comments, especially since we have put so much stress on giving
priority attention to better relations with our friends. Your critics, both
at home and abroad, will certainly emphasize such frictions as evi-
dence of our inability to do what we said we would strive to accom-
plish. A more specific policy implication of the foregoing might be a
more concerted effort on our part to try to minimize the negative fallout
from both the nuclear proliferation and the Concorde problems, as well
as more stress on those aspects on which we are in fundamental agree-
ment with our allies.
2. Secondly, it is likely that in the foreseeable future our negotia-
tions with the Soviets over SALT may prove more rocky and difficult
than the public has been led to expect. The Brezhnev response to you
might be a foretaste of some very hard bargaining, and it is quite con-
ceivable that our first report to the American people on SALT negotia-
tions will have to emphasize not areas of agreement but the reasons
why we have been unable to agree. Indeed, one of the forthcoming
paradoxes may be that Paul Warnke before too long will be engaged
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
not in “selling” a SALT agreement to hard-nosed skeptics who will be
accusing him of excessive softness, but that he will be justifying to his
friends in the arms control community why it was impossible for the
United States to accept disadvantageous Soviet terms. Such an ironical
twist, incidentally, might make Warnke even more useful than you had
expected!
All of the foregoing points to the proposition that the time is now
ripe for doing precisely what you have determined to do: to deliver a
formal, comprehensive, and systematic speech. In my judgment, it
should be short on promises, it should be analytical, and it should
seek to integrate the various strands discussed above into a broader
approach.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
3. Concerns
Human Rights and AID. We are concerned that the issue of aid and
human rights may get out of control next week. Deputy Secretary
Christopher will testify on Monday before Humphrey’s Subcommittee
on Foreign Assistance of the Senate concerning military assistance. We
expect him to be pressured on the Philippines and Korea and possibly
other countries.
On Tuesday8 Representative Reuss will begin hearings on our
multilateral aid. He will be pressing for a commitment to use our influ-
ence in the Inter-American Development Bank, World Bank and pos-
sibly the IMF to shut down economic development assistance to human
rights violators. He is expected to specifically attack a paper mill
project in Argentina (we cut our military sales credits to Argentina as a
gesture of our concern about human rights in that country).
We have not yet established policy in these areas and we are con-
cerned that the witnesses may be forced by the Congress to make policy
ad hoc. This could have far-reaching consequences, not only with coun-
tries with whom we have important security relationships but also for
the basic concept of multilateral assistance.
Efforts to use multilateral institutions in the human rights field
have many pitfalls. Such a highly interventionist approach is directly
contrary to the reason we have supported multilateral aid—in order to
at UN.”

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
insulate economic development from politics. The less developed
countries will react negatively. For example, countries that despise the
regime in Chile nonetheless opposed our efforts to use the Inter-
American Development Bank to bring pressure on the Chilean
government.
Finally there is a serious conflict of values. Do we deprive people
of jobs and economic progress because their governments suppress
human rights?10
We need time to sort these issues out. I will be sending you a PRM
for your signature next week on the overall subject of human rights. I
believe Administration witnesses should be instructed to inform the
Congress that you have directed an urgent study of actions we can take
in the field of human rights and ask for time before having to take a po-
sition on how and whether various assistance instruments might be
employed by this Administration.
On a separate point, your desire for a modest increase in US eco-
nomic assistance is running into problems on the Hill. You may want to
use your Cabinet and Leadership meetings next week to emphasize
your support of this program. Frank Moore supports this idea.
4. Reactions
Human Rights. Bukovsky’s courtesy call at the White House re-
ceived front-page and prominent inside-page coverage overseas. Ac-
counts in West European newspapers carefully detailed that photo-
graphs were permitted only with Mr. Mondale and that you limited
your time to the Soviet dissident to ten minutes. In Paris, Le Figaro re-
ferred to the “skillful protocol adopted” which, it said, was “obviously
intended to humor Moscow.” France-Soir quoted the President as tell-
ing Bukovsky that he would defend human rights “not only in the
USSR but in the whole world.” The Times of London reported that “the
impact of the occasion was indisputably diluted, doubtless by direct
Presidential order.” Coverage in the Italian press appeared to be some-
what more dramatic than elsewhere but did not vary much in sub-
stance from treatment in other European countries.
Notwithstanding the Bukovsky visit, the foreign press played the
human rights issue as definitely broadened in focus beyond the Soviet
Union. It is not clear where this feeling comes from, since, in fact nearly

27.
Statement by the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher)
Before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance
Washington, March 7, 1977
Human Rights: An Important Concern of U.S. Foreign Policy
I am pleased to be here today to affirm this Administration’s com-
mitment to making human rights an important concern of U.S. foreign
policy. President Carter began this Administration with the inaugural
pledge that “Because we are free we can never be indifferent to the fate
in the original. In a February 9 action memorandum to Christopher, Jenkins proposed
that Christopher testify before the subcommittee, chaired by Senator Humphrey, owing
to Christopher’s eventual “direct supervision over the [Department’s] Office of Human
partment transmitted an advance copy of Christopher’s remarks to all diplomatic posts
D770077–0054) For the record of the Humphrey subcommittee hearings, see Hearings Be-
fore the Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United
States Senate, Ninety-Fifth Congress, First Session, on Human Rights Issues and Their Relation-
Printing Office, 1977).

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
of freedom elsewhere.” Then, in his confirmation hearings, Secretary
Vance stated that “we must have policies based upon fundamental
values. In particular, we must stand for human rights.”
The concern for human rights will be woven into the fabric of our
foreign policy. If we are to do justice to our goals, we must act always
with a concern to achieve practical results and with an awareness of the
other demands on our diplomacy. When it is desirable to do so, we will
speak out, trying to be neither strident nor polemical. This is not a
one-way street, and we must expect that at times others may criticize
us. We may decide to communicate by quiet diplomacy with the
country involved to see what can be accomplished that way. Or we
may prefer to approach the problem not bilaterally, but through multi-
lateral channels. In some instances of human rights violations, assist-
ance programs may be curtailed, but we must also recognize that to be
evenhanded, we should not just penalize but also inspire, persuade,
and reward.
Already our commitment has prompted definite actions. In pur-
suit of the goal of majority rule and equal rights in Southern Rhodesia,
we have urged the Congress to repeal the Byrd amendment. The State
Department expressed concern for the fate of human rights activists in
Eastern Europe, and President Carter wrote to Nobel Peace Prize
winner Andrey Sakharov to convey directly our hopes for the promo-
tion of human rights. As part of a continuing review process, we de-
cided to cut the level of security assistance to several countries because
of concern over human rights violations. We will be instructing our
Embassies to press the cause of human rights through private contacts.
We are playing an active part in the work of the [U.N.] Human Rights
Commission.
As an example of our humanitarian concern for the uprooted and
dispossessed, I would observe that during fiscal year 1976 our gov-
ernment has expended some $475 million on assistance to refugees on a
worldwide basis, and the United States accepted 31,000 refugees for
permanent resettlement in this country. We are of course continuing
our generous assistance to refugees in the current year.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We know that the Congress shares this commitment to human
rights and deserves special credit for its attention to this issue in recent
years.
The complexity of the challenge compels collaboration between us.
By working together more closely and effectively we can restore confi-
dence both at home and abroad in our undertaking to encourage re-
spect for human rights. The Administration, as well as the Congress,
must reflect in our policies the values of the American people.
We recognize that these first steps we have taken are just that.
Change takes time—as demonstrated by the evolution of human rights
within our own country: from religious freedom through the Bill of
Rights, the abolition of slavery, universal suffrage, the four freedoms,
the civil rights movement, and the struggle against poverty to the
Equal Rights Amendment. It is a long, hard climb. But the course is
firmly set.
There should be no mistake: The undertaking to promote human
rights is now an integral part of our foreign policy. We know that do-
mestic support for our policies will falter if they do not reflect tradi-
tional American values. But I want it to be clear that this is not a policy
of convenience, adopted because of its popularity at home. A commit-
ment to human rights protects the domestic vitality of these values,
keeping clear our image of ourselves and encouraging us to make the
democratic system work. It helps us to maintain leadership of the free
societies that share similar values. And it serves as a pole of attraction
to other states and peoples.
The question is neither the direction nor the strength of our com-
mitment. The question we must answer is how to summon the states-
manship and the moral courage to deal with the practical dilemmas
and complexities in promoting human rights in our foreign relations.
Today I want to discuss briefly the complexities in linking human
rights considerations to economic and security assistance.
The United States recognizes a wide range of human rights and be-
lieves all must be promoted. Our most concentrated areas of concern
have been violations of the integrity of the person—officially sanc-
tioned murders, tortures, or detentions without trial. These, of course,
are areas emphasized by the legislation you approved. Political rights
and civil protection are also accorded high priority.
At times it is inevitable that these concerns will conflict with our
commitment to the goal of economic development. As Secretary Vance
has stated, one of our fundamental foreign policy objectives is “to dem-
onstrate America’s compassion for the poor and the dispossessed
around the world—those who, through no fault of their own, are

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
exposed to daily suffering and humiliation and are struggling to
survive.”
Other conflicts in policy may arise when the security of the United
States is linked to that of a country whose human rights priorities are
deficient. It should be uppermost in our minds that security assistance
is rendered to maintain or enhance our own security, not to strengthen
the hand of a repressive regime, although we must face up to that as an
undesired and unintended consequence in certain cases.
We are working to fulfill both the letter and the spirit of current
legislation relating human rights concerns to foreign assistance. We can
best achieve this purpose through conscientious and systematic review
of assistance programs on a country-by-country basis, in each case bal-
ancing a political concern for human rights against economic or secu-
rity goals. In multilateral development banks the United States must
work to maintain a broad international consensus and to avoid destruc-
tive bloc politics that would impair the pursuit of the banks’ develop-
ment objectives. No formula can resolve the larger conflicts of these po-
sitions, but prudent and dedicated attention to both the basic objectives
and the day-to-day operations of our programs can make specific
problems more tractable.
We have been developing a series of questions by which to chart
the direction of our policy and our progress. Taken together as points
of reference, they will make us surer of our basic course and less likely
to be driven from it by the force of a particular circumstance. The ques-
tions we are considering include:
1. Will our action be useful in promoting the cause of human
rights? Will it actually improve the human rights situation at hand? Or
is it likely to make it worse?
2. What will be the most effective means of expressing our views?
Quiet diplomacy? A public pronouncement? Withdrawal of aid or
other tangible sanctions?
3. Even when there is only a remote chance that our action will be
influential, does our sense of values, our American ethic, prompt us to
speak out or take action?
4. Will others support us? Can we expect the aid of national and in-
ternational organizations dedicated to furthering human rights?
5. Have we steered away from the self-righteous and strident, re-
membering that our own record is not unblemished?
6. Finally, have we remembered national security interests and
kept our sense of perspective, realizing that human rights cannot
236.

28.
Editorial Note
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brze-
zinski provided a background briefing to the press at the U.S. Mission
to the United Nations in New York the afternoon of March 17, 1977, in
advance of President Jimmy Carter’s address before the United Nations

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
General Assembly that evening. After a short introduction by Associate
Press Secretary Jerry Schecter, Brzezinski indicated that he would de-
scribe the nature and basic purpose of the speech, outline the concep-
tual structure, and draw attention to specific themes:
“Insofar as the first point is concerned—the nature and basic pur-
pose of the speech—it is seen by us as a basic effort to define the Presi-
dent’s broad agenda for the future. It is not designed per se to advance
specific proposals, though it does, as I will note subsequently, contain
proposals. But it is primarily to set the framework of directions, to de-
fine the broad aspirations of the Administration in the field of interna-
tional politics.
“In so doing, he has chosen this particular forum for his address in
order also to underline his fundamental support for the institutions of
the United Nations, for multilateral international cooperation. That
was a very deliberate choice of the setting for his first major address in
foreign policy.
“In the course of this address, he also wishes to outline his substan-
tive priorities.
“And the speech, as you all know from having read it, focuses on
three substantive priorities of his foreign policy—namely, the issue of
arms control; secondly, the issue of North/South economic develop-
ment; and, thirdly, the issue of human rights.
“In talking about the basic purpose and the fundamental thrust of
the speech, let me make two additional points. The President has al-
ready demonstrated, by sending Vice President Mondale on his trip,
that his basic focus is on close international cooperation, in the first in-
stance, with our principal allies but, beyond that, with the international
community as a whole. And secondly, the President in this speech, as
well as in his other statements, has already reasserted the basic role of
the President as the articulator of foreign policy and this he has done
quite consciously and, in so doing, is also assuming the traditional role
of the President as the public educator on policy issues. And his state-
ments on foreign policy, this one as well as others, are designed also to
enlighten public opinion, the public at large, on the nature of the funda-
mental problems that we confront and the kind of solutions which pa-
tiently, prudently, have to be sought in dealing with these problems.
“Let me secondly now say a word or two of the structure, the con-
ceptual structure of the speech as it is perceived by us. It is essentially
based on five fundamental parts.
“The first is an explicit affirmation of the President’s recognition of
the essential intractability and complexity of international problems,
his recognition that there are no easy solutions to existing difficulties—
that the process of dealing with them will be a prolonged one, requiring
sustained commitment from the American people.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“Secondly, the speech expresses the need for international cooper-
ation in dealing with these problems. It takes as its point of departure
the premise that while the United States can actively serve as an ener-
gizer, it cannot solve these problems by itself and that wider interna-
tional cooperation is needed. And, in so doing, the President engages in
a brief tour d’horizon of the fundamental areas in which international
cooperation is either to be expected or is needed.
“And then, thirdly, he goes on to outline the three substantive pri-
orities to which I’ve already made reference: arms control, economic
development, and human rights.” (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Schecter/Friendly (Press) File, Subject
File, Box 1, Brzezinski Briefings and Backgrounders (Press and Public):
For the text of the President’s speech, see Document 29.
29.
Address by President Carter Before the United Nations
General Assembly
New York, March 17, 1977
Thank you, Mr. Secretary General.
Last night I was in Clinton, Massachusetts, at a Town Hall meeting
where people of that small town decide their political and economic
future.
Tonight I speak to a similar meeting where people representing
nations all over the world come here to decide their political and eco-
nomic future.
I am proud to be with you tonight in this house where the shared
hopes of the world can find a voice. I have come here to express my
inal. The President spoke at 7: p.m. in the General Assembly Hall at the Headquarters
of the United Nations; Waldheim introduced the President. Following the address,
Carter attended a reception hosted by Waldheim. Documentation concerning Depart-
ment of State and NSC efforts in preparing the President’s address is in the National Ar-
chives, RG 59, Policy and Planning Staff—Office of the Director, Records of Anthony
brary, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, Huntington, Box 37,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
own support and the continuing support of my country for the ideals of
the United Nations.
We are proud that for the 32 years since its creation, the United Na-
tions has met on American soil. And we share with you the commit-
ments of freedom, self-government, human dignity, mutual toleration,
and the peaceful resolution of disputes—which the founding principles
of the United Nations and also Secretary General Kurt Waldheim so
well represent.
No one nation by itself can build a world which reflects all these
fine values. But the United States, my own country, has a reservoir of
strength—economic strength, which we are willing to share; military
strength, which we hope never to use again; and the strength of ideals,
which are determined fully to maintain the backbone of our own for-
eign policy.
It is now 8 weeks since I became President. I have brought to office
a firm commitment to a more open foreign policy. And I believe that
the American people expect me to speak frankly about the policies that
we intend to pursue, and it is in that spirit that I speak to you tonight
about our own hopes for the future.
I see a hopeful world, a world dominated by increasing demands
for basic freedoms, for fundamental rights, for higher standards of
human existence. We are eager to take part in the shaping of that world.
But in seeking such a better world, we are not blind to the reality of
disagreement, nor to the persisting dangers that confront us all. Every
headline reminds us of bitter divisions, of national hostilities, of territo-
rial conflicts, of ideological competition.
In the Middle East, peace is a quarter of a century overdue. A gath-
ering racial conflict threatens southern Africa; new tensions are rising
in the Horn of Africa. Disputes in the eastern Mediterranean remain to
be resolved.
Perhaps even more ominous is the staggering arms race. The So-
viet Union and the United States have accumulated thousands of nu-
clear weapons. Our two nations now have five times more missile war-
heads today than we had just 8 years ago. But we are not five times
more secure. On the contrary, the arms race has only increased the risk
of conflict.
We can only improve this world if we are realistic about its com-
plexities. The disagreements that we face are deeply rooted, and they
often raise difficult philosophical as well as territorial issues. They will
not be solved easily. They will not be solved quickly. The arms race is
now embedded in the very fabric of international affairs and can only
be contained with the greatest difficulty. Poverty and inequality are of
such monumental scope that it will take decades of deliberate and de-
termined effort even to improve the situation substantially.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I stress these dangers and these difficulties because I want all of us
to dedicate ourselves to a prolonged and persistent effort designed first
to maintain peace and to reduce the arms race; second, to build a better
and a more cooperative international economic system; and third, to
work with potential adversaries as well as our close friends to advance
the cause of human rights.
In seeking these goals, I realize that the United States cannot solve
the problems of the world. We can sometimes help others resolve their
differences, but we cannot do so by imposing our own particular
solutions.
In the coming months, there is important work for all of us in ad-
vancing international cooperation and economic progress in the cause
of peace.
Later this spring, the leaders of several industrial nations of Eu-
rope, North America, and Japan will confer at a summit meeting in
London on a broad range of issues. We must promote the health of the
industrial economies. We must seek to restrain inflation and bring
ways of managing our own domestic economies for the benefit of the
global economy.
We must move forward with multilateral trade negotiations in
Geneva.
The United States will support the efforts of our friends to
strengthen the democratic institutions in Europe, and particularly in
Portugal and Spain.
We will work closely with our European friends on the forth-
coming Review Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We want to make certain that the provisions of the Helsinki agreement
are fully implemented and that progress is made to further East-West
cooperation.
In the Middle East we are doing our best to clarify areas of dis-
agreement, to surface underlying consensus, and to help to develop
mutually acceptable principles that can form a flexible framework for a
just and a permanent settlement.
In southern Africa, we will work to help attain majority rule
through peaceful means. We believe that such fundamental transfor-
mation can be achieved, to the advantage of both the blacks and whites
who live in that region of the world. Anything less than that may bring
a protracted racial war, with devastating consequences to all.
This week the Government of the United States took action to
bring our country into full compliance with United Nations sanctions

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
against the illegal regime in Rhodesia. And I will sign that bill Friday in
Washington.
We will put our relations with Latin America on a more construc-
tive footing, recognizing the global character of the region’s problems.
We are also working to resolve in amicable negotiations the future
of the Panama Canal.
We will continue our efforts to develop further our relationships
with the People’s Republic of China. We recognize our parallel stra-
tegic interests in maintaining stability in Asia, and we will act in the
spirit of the Shanghai Communique.
In Southeast Asia and in the Pacific, we will strengthen our associ-
ation with our traditional friends, and we will seek to improve relations
with our former adversaries.
We have a mission now in Vietnam seeking peaceful resolution of
the differences that have separated us for so long.
Throughout the world, we are ready to normalize our relation-
ships and to seek reconciliation with all states which are ready to work
with us in promoting global progress and global peace.
Above all, the search for peace requires a much more deliberate ef-
fort to contain the global arms race. Let me speak in this context, first, of
the U.S.-Soviet Union relationship, and then of the wider need to con-
tain the proliferation of arms throughout the global community.
I intend to pursue the strategic arms limitation talks between the
United States and the Soviet Union with determination and with
energy.
Our Secretary of State will visit Moscow in just a few days.
dent signed it into law on March 18. The legislation reinstated the embargo against the
importation of Rhodesian chrome and other strategic minerals, but retained the sub-
stance of the Byrd Amendment that barred the President from refusing to import stra-
tegic materials from other non-communist countries. See footnote 10, Document 19.
signing ceremony, held in the Cabinet Room, see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp.
451–452. See also Austin Scott, “Embargo Restored on Chrome Import,” The Washington

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
SALT is extraordinarily complicated. But the basic fact is that
while negotiations remain deadlocked, the arms race goes on; the secu-
rity of both countries and the entire world is threatened.
My preference would be for strict controls or even a freeze on new
types and new generations of weaponry and with a deep reduction in
the strategic arms of both sides. Such a major step towards not only
arms limitation but arms reduction would be welcomed by mankind as
a giant step towards peace.
Alternatively, and perhaps much more easily, we could conclude a
limited agreement based on those elements of the Vladivostok accord
on which we can find complete consensus, and set aside for prompt
consideration and subsequent negotiations the more contentious issues
and also the deeper reductions in nuclear weapons which I favor.
We will also explore the possibility of a total cessation of nuclear
testing. While our ultimate goal is for all nuclear powers to end testing,
we do not regard this as a prerequisite for the suspension of tests by the
two principal nuclear powers, the Soviet Union and the United States.
We should, however, also pursue a broad, permanent multilateral
agreement on this issue.
We will also seek to establish Soviet willingness to reach agree-
ment with us on mutual military restraint in the Indian Ocean, as well
as on such matters as arms exports to the troubled areas of the world.
In proposing such accommodations I remain fully aware that
American-Soviet relations will continue to be highly competitive—but
I believe that our competition must be balanced by cooperation in pre-
serving peace, and thus our mutual survival.
I will seek such cooperation with the Soviet Union—earnestly,
constantly, and sincerely.
However, the effort to contain the arms race is not a matter just for
the United States and Soviet Union alone. There must be a wider effort
to reduce the flow of weapons to all the troubled spots of this globe.
Accordingly, we will try to reach broader agreements among pro-
ducer and consumer nations to limit the export of conventional arms,
and we, ourselves, will take the initiative on our own because the
United States has become one of the major arms suppliers of the world.
We are deeply committed to halting the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. And we will undertake a new effort to reach multilateral
agreements designed to provide legitimate supplies of nuclear fuels for
the production of energy, while controlling the poisonous and dan-
gerous atomic wastes.
Working with other nations represented here, we hope to advance
the cause of peace. We will make a strong and a positive contribution at

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
the upcoming Special Session on Disarmament which I understand will
commence next year.
But the search for peace also means the search for justice. One of
the greatest challenges before us as a nation, and therefore one of our
greatest opportunities, is to participate in molding a global economic
system which will bring greater prosperity to all the people of all
countries.
I come from a part of the United States which is largely agrarian
and which for many years did not have the advantages of adequate
transportation or capital or management skills or education which
were available in the industrial States of our country.
So, I can sympathize with the leaders of the developing nations,
and I want them to know that we will do our part.
To this end, the United States will be advancing proposals aimed
at meeting the basic human needs of the developing world and helping
them to increase their productive capacity. I have asked Congress to
provide $7½ billion of foreign assistance in the coming year, and I will
work to ensure sustained American assistance as the process of global
economic development continues. I am also urging the Congress of
our country to increase our contributions to the United Nations Devel-
opment Program and meet in full our pledges to multilateral lending
institutions, especially the International Development Association of
the World Bank.
We remain committed to an open international trading system,
one which does not ignore domestic concerns in the United States. We
have extended duty-free treatment to many products from the devel-
oping countries. In the multilateral trade agreements in Geneva we
have offered substantial trade concessions on the goods of primary in-
terest to developing countries. And in accordance with the Tokyo
Declaration, we are also examining ways to provide additional con-
sideration for the special needs of developing countries.
The United States is willing to consider, with a positive and open
attitude, the negotiation on agreements to stabilize commodity prices,
including the establishment of a common funding arrangement for fi-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
nancing buffer stocks where they are a part of individual negotiated
agreements.
I also believe that the developing countries must acquire fuller par-
ticipation in the global economic decisionmaking process. Some
progress has already been made in this regard by expanding participa-
tion of developing countries in the International Monetary Fund.
We must use our collective natural resources wisely and construc-
tively. We’ve not always done so. Today our oceans are being plun-
dered and defiled. With a renewed spirit of cooperation and hope, we
join in the Conference of the Law of the Sea12 in order to correct past
mistakes of generations gone by and to ensure that all nations can share
the bounties of the eternal oceans in the future.
We must also recognize that the world is facing serious shortages
of energy. This is truly a global problem. For our part, we are deter-
mined to reduce waste and to work with others toward a fair and
proper sharing of the benefits and costs of energy resources.
The search for peace and justice also means respect for human dig-
nity. All the signatories of the U.N. Charter have pledged themselves to
observe and to respect basic human rights. Thus, no member of the
United Nations can claim that mistreatment of its citizens is solely its
own business. Equally, no member can avoid its responsibilities to re-
view and to speak when torture or unwarranted deprivation occurs in
any part of the world.
The basic thrust of human affairs points toward a more universal
demand for fundamental human rights. The United States has a histor-
ical birthright to be associated with this process.
We in the United States accept this responsibility in the fullest and
the most constructive sense. Ours is a commitment, and not just a polit-
ical posture. I know perhaps as well as anyone that our own ideals in
the area of human rights have not always been attained in the United
States, but the American people have an abiding commitment to the
full realization of these ideals. And we are determined, therefore, to
deal with our deficiencies quickly and openly. We have nothing to
conceal.
To demonstrate this commitment, I will seek congressional ap-
proval and sign the U.N. covenants on economic, social, and cultural
rights, and the covenants on civil and political rights. And I will work
closely with our own Congress in seeking to support the ratification not
only of these two instruments but the United Nations Genocide Con-
vention and the Treaty for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
crimination, as well. I have just removed all restrictions on American
travel abroad, and we are moving now to liberalize almost completely
travel opportunities to America.
The United Nations is a global forum dedicated to the peace
and well-being of every individual—no matter how weak, no matter
how poor. But we have allowed its human rights machinery to be ig-
nored and sometimes politicized. There is much that can be done to
strengthen it.
The Human Rights Commission should be prepared to meet more
often. And all nations should be prepared to offer its fullest cooperation
to the Human Rights Commission, to welcome its investigations, to
work with its officials, and to act on its reports.
I would like to see the entire United Nations Human Rights Divi-
sion moved back here to the central headquarters, where its activities
will be in the forefront of our attention and where the attention of the
press corps can stimulate us to deal honestly with this sensitive issue.
The proposal made 12 years ago by the Government of Costa Rica, to
establish a U.N. High Commission[er] for Human Rights, also deserves
our renewed attention and our support.
Strengthened international machinery will help us to close the gap
between promise and performance in protecting human rights. When
gross or widespread violation takes place—contrary to international
commitments—it is of concern to all. The solemn commitments of the
United Nations Charter, of the United Nations Universal Declaration
for Human Rights, of the Helsinki Accords, and of many other inter-
national instruments must be taken just as seriously as commercial or
security agreements.
This issue is important in itself. It should not block progress on
other important matters affecting the security and well-being of our
people and of world peace. It is obvious that the reduction of tension,
the control of nuclear arms, the achievement of harmony in the trou-
bled areas of the world, and the provision of food, good health, and
education will independently contribute to advancing the human
condition.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
In our relationships with other countries, these mutual concerns
will be reflected in our political, our cultural, and our economic
attitudes.
These then are our basic priorities as we work with other members
to strengthen and to improve the United Nations.
First, we will strive for peace in the troubled areas of the world;
second, we will aggressively seek to control the weaponry of war;
third, we will promote a new system of international economic
progress and cooperation; and fourth, we will be steadfast in our dedi-
cation to the dignity and well-being of people throughout the world.
I believe that this is a foreign policy that is consistent with my own
Nation’s historic values and commitments. And I believe that it is a for-
eign policy that is consonant with the ideals of the United Nations.
Thank you very much.

30.
Minutes of a Policy Review Committee Meeting
SUBJECT
Latin America
PARTICIPANTS
State
Treasury
Warren Christopher
Anthony Solomon
Terence Todman
Edward Bittner
William Luers
Arms Control and Disarmament
Defense
Agency
Charles Duncan
Leon Sloss
Major Gen. Richard E. Cavazos
Commerce
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Frank Weil
General George S. Brown
NSC
Lt. General William Smith
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
CIA
David Aaron
Deputy Director Enno Knoche
Thomas Thornton
Robert Hopkins
Robert A. Pastor
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
Overall Approach
The first and longest topic of discussion was the question of how the
United States should relate to Latin America. The participants agreed that
the new approach should be based on a recognition of the global nature
of the region’s problems, and U.S. policy should be aimed at working
with Latin American governments on the North-South economic issues
which are of greatest concern to them. At the same time, constructive
bilateral relationships should be encouraged.
He suggested that the best overall policy may be a non-policy. To
follow the remarks in the President’s United Nations speech, the U.S.
should treat Latin America in a global context, rather than think about a
regional policy. The President’s Pan American Day speech on April 14
Room. No drafting information appears on the minutes; however, Pastor sent the
minutes to Brzezinski under a March 25 memorandum and requested that Brzezinski
comment “late today or perhaps tomorrow.”
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
provides the natural culmination of this process and the opportunity to
suggest this approach.
He then initiated a discussion of whether the U.S. had a special re-
lationship with Latin America or not.
Assistant Secretary Todman suggested that we drop the rhetoric
about a special relationship and deal with Latin America on bilateral,
regional, or global levels depending on the issues. In the major eco-
nomic areas, it is necessary to deal on a global basis and develop a
single policy, and this is also the case on nuclear proliferation and im-
migration. But because of the geographical proximity, Latin America
impinges on us more directly than other areas. For example, we share a
border with Mexico and that requires special policies. We have certain
regional institutions, and they require special policies.
Under Secretary Anthony Solomon agreed that we had special
problems with respect to Mexico and Brazil, but the question of the spe-
cial relationship relates to the region rather than to individual coun-
tries. He suggested that we would need special policies to these two
countries. He said that the arguments against an overall special rela-
tionship to the region are very powerful.
Enno Knoche said that the possible consequences of ending the
special relationship would be that it would tend to encourage Latin
America to form blocs against the U.S., but he added that since this
would not be in Latin America’s long-term interest, he felt such blocs
would not endure.
Deputy Secretary Charles Duncan said the U.S. has had a special
relationship with Latin America, and it still does. General Brown
agreed, but he said that our special military relationships are eroding,
and that we are going to miss them when they are gone. He said that
this relationship—for example, the training assistance program for for-
eign air force personnel—provides an opportunity for us to influence
these governments on human rights and other matters.
Intervention
Todman said that this issue aroused the greatest interest and con-
troversy in Latin America where the U.S. has had a long history of in-
tervention—most recently in the Dominican Republic and Chile. Now,
we are being accused of intervention on behalf of human rights. The
question is: to what extent do we need to intervene?
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Duncan said that we first needed to define our interests in the
hemisphere, and said such a definition would be necessary to decide on
the need for a “special relationship.” Then, he prefers the option of
“limited intervention.”
Brzezinski returned to the question of whether we should have a
special policy to Latin America. He said that the notion of a special
policy is ahistorical. In the past, it has done nothing more than lock us
into a cycle of creating unrealistic expectations and then having to live
with the subsequent disappointments. The Monroe Doctrine which un-
derlies this approach is no longer valid. It represents an imperialistic
legacy which has embittered our relationships.
He recommended that if our relationships are to become healthier,
then we need to put them on a more normal footing. He said that we
can do this by stressing our bilateral relations and in seeing the region’s
problems in a global context, as the President said in his UN speech.
And we should use this as a point of departure in the Pan American
Day speech. What was needed was a normalization of our relations
with Latin America. We did not want another Alliance for Progress.
Christopher said that he agreed with Brzezinski’s assessment.
General Brown agreed and said that we should put the statement
in the context that we have recognized that Latin America had reached
adulthood. Brzezinski warned, however, that such an approach was
also patronizing. Instead, he said that we should encourage Latin
America to diversify its relationships with other countries and regions,
and that we, in turn, should differentiate our approach to different
governments.
Duncan agreed that a bilateral approach makes sense, but he said
the relevant question on intervention is how should we react to the So-
viets in this hemisphere.
Brzezinski said that we should not react reflexively; rather we
should judge our response in terms of the likely consequences if the
U.S. did not intervene. Nevertheless, he does not see a great likelihood
of the U.S. intervening in Latin America in response to Soviet probes.
He said that individual governments have a good sense of their own in-
dependence and therefore our reactions should be contingent on the
way the other Latin Americans respond. But we cannot accept a blanket
policy for all cases. Later, he said, and Solomon agreed, that a statement
on nonintervention might be misinterpreted.
Leon Sloss of ACDA said that he agreed with Brzezinski’s em-
phasis on a global and a bilateral approach, but he said that we should
not discourage some regional institutions which have potential to con-
tribute to the solution of certain problems—for example in arms control
areas.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Brzezinski agreed that we should not discourage regional institu-
tions, but he suggested that the healthiest approach would be a hands-
off one, where the Latin Americans would approach us—instead of we,
them—to pay attention to the regional institutions.
Solomon and Brzezinski agreed that the President should redefine
our relationship rather than renounce it. Solomon said that the only vi-
able regional economic institution was the Inter-American Develop-
ment Bank, and a sign of its relative importance is the fact that Secre-
tary Blumenthal will attend its annual ministerial meeting whereas he
would not attend the one at the Asian Development Bank. Even the
IDB has diversified its relationships—bringing on donors from Europe
and Japan—although we are still the biggest contributor. But in trade or
aid, it is hard to see a special relationship.
David Aaron pressed the issue of the special relationship a couple
of steps further. One implication of a change in strategy would involve
a shift in the distribution of U.S. resources abroad. Secondly, he noted
that there was, in fact, a collective consciousness in Latin America.
Brzezinski said that we should not deceive ourselves. The con-
sciousness is only collective when it is negative and in opposition to the
U.S. Constructive relations demand greater specificity.
—In ideology, we want to show an affinity for democratic states.
—Security considerations demand that we recognize the geopo-
litical importance of Brazil and perhaps the special importance of the
Caribbean to the United States.
—Economically, we need a more diversified strategy.
However, Brzezinski said we should not try to package these clus-
ters of interests into a single policy.
Weil from Commerce agreed.
Relationships With Military Regimes
Christopher applied the approach suggested by Brzezinski to this
next issue. He suggested that we adjust our relations so as to differen-
tiate according to the kind of regime: warm relations with civilian and
democratic governments, normal relations with nonrepressive military
regimes, and cool but correct relations with repressive governments.
Brzezinski agreed, noting that Brazil was not so repressive as is
commonly thought. Duncan and General Brown also agreed with

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Christopher and repeated the need to distinguish between kinds of mil-
itary governments.
David Aaron suggested joining the two agreed approaches—the
movement toward globalism and establishing a closer affinity with de-
mocracies—by a Presidential trip to selected democracies, say in Latin
America as well as in Africa or Asia.
Aaron also said that if we are going to be sincere about moving
toward a global approach, we must make clear that our policies with
respect to democracies or repressive regimes must be the same in Latin
America as in Africa or Asia. Given the special constituencies in the
U.S., that would not be easy. We will have to go out of our way to do
that.
Human Rights
Christopher said that it was very important for us to stay com-
mitted on our policy on human rights, but at the same time, we must
explore affirmative ways to express our policy.
Solomon said that we should work with Congress to make clear
why they should not be thinking about a Latin American policy on
human rights. He and Christopher agreed on the need to obtain more
discretionary authority and make more relevant distinctions in the ap-
plication of our policy. If we define gross violations as torture or de-
grading treatment, instead of denial of due process, then we only single
out seven–ten countries rather than 60–80. Then, we can have some
impact.
Todman said that we should look at aid as a way to improve
human rights conditions in very poor countries. For example in coun-
tries like Haiti, violations of human rights occur often because of im-
poverished conditions, and it does not make much sense for us to cut
off aid in these circumstances.
Arms Transfers
Christopher asked whether the United States, as a declining source
of arms to Latin America, is justified in adopting a special policy on
arms transfers to Latin America.
General Brown reminded everyone that in the early Kennedy
years we tried to get Latin American governments to shift defense ex-
penditures to nation-building, but as sovereign states, they just turned
to other sources to buy arms. As long as they are going to buy, he pre-
ferred that they buy from us rather than the Russians.
Sloss from ACDA said that we must approach this problem glob-
ally at both ends. Discuss it with the Soviets and with other suppliers,
and at the same time urge restraint by purchasers. If this does not work,
he is inclined to agree with George Brown.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Organization of American States
Christopher asked whether the OAS was part of the special
relationship.
Todman thought the OAS was useful, but that it wasted a lot of
time because it is not well-focused. He said he would like to see it
strengthened.
Christopher suggested that we alter our relationship to the OAS to
the way we relate to other regional organizations, like CENTO or
ASEAN.
Solomon asked Todman how he would strengthen the OAS, and
Todman answered that he would eliminate the Permanent Council and
reduce the U.S. contribution, but we should do so after consulting with
the Latin Americans.
Solomon said that in his experience in State and in ARA, every Ad-
ministration had tried to strengthen the OAS and tried to make it more
efficient, by cutting personnel and reorganization. The trouble is that
the Latin Americans are very sensitive to their “perks,” and they per-
ceived every effort to strengthen the OAS as an attempt to weaken it.
He concluded that the OAS was useless, and there was nothing that
could be done.
David Aaron said that if we want to follow the global approach to
its logical conclusion, then our involvement in the OAS, which once
played the role of a mini-UN, should be phased out. We really do not
need it any longer. We should say we want to deal with Latin America
like other regions.
Solomon acknowledged that that would indeed be perceived as
the end to the special relationship, but noted that before doing that, we
should look at the political ramifications and the domestic reaction,
which he predicted would be negative. In conversations he has had
with Latin American leaders, they all acknowledged privately that it
was a worthless organization, but at the same time, they were horrified
at the prospect of its being abolished. But he did not see anything we
could do.
In fact, Latin Americans use the global North-South forum more
and even take the SELA more seriously than they do the OAS.
Christopher said that the OAS was one of those institutions which
would not die a natural death. Whenever it looks like it will, somebody
turns the oxygen back on, and it has another life.
Aaron said that rather than try to leave it, abolish it, or resuscitate
it with new ideas, the U.S. should just ask the OAS to justify itself.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
William Luers from State said that we should be careful in formu-
lating our policy to the OAS and more generally to the hemisphere, lest
our new policy be perceived as a massive rejection of Latin America.
Cultural and Educational Exchanges
Todman said that the value of individual contacts is very impor-
tant to increase mutual understanding.
Christopher asked whether we should return to a more enlight-
ened and generous policy with respect to cultural and educational ex-
changes with Latin America. Todman nodded yes.
Technical Assistance
Christopher asked whether we should put more money into tech-
nical assistance to Latin America.
Weil from Commerce said that question brought the discussion
back to the beginning: What are our interests? If they are not special,
then we should not give special assistance.
Summary and Miscellaneous
Christopher noted that Todman will be meeting with the Cubans
in New York, that the Canal Treaty negotiations will be continuing,
and that we should be increasingly sensitive to Brazil. Any overall
statement needs to take into account our concern for special problems.
He noted that the discussion was a little more philosophical than usual,
but that we were probing for a relationship which adapted to the new
realities.
The next step is the speech at the Organization of American States.

31.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
US-Soviet Relations
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
USSR
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
General Secretary L.I. Brezhnev
Ambassador Malcolm Toon
Minister A.A. Gromyko
Mr. Paul Warnke
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. Phillip Habib
Mr. A.M. Aleksandrov-Agentov
Mr. William Hyland
Mr. G.M. Korniyenko
Mr. William D. Krimer,
Mr. O.M. Sokolov
Interpreter
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
[Omitted here are Brezhnev’s expressions of condolence for the
eign policy remarks in his recent speeches. Last winter, as Governor
Carter prepared to assume the presidency, he had been impressed and
gratified by Brezhnev’s public statement on the importance of good re-
lations between our two countries. In particular, he was encouraged by
viewed in draft by Hyland; approved by Twaddell on April 12. Printed in full in Foreign
attended an NAC meeting in Brussels before arriving in Moscow. Following his meetings
with Brezhnev, Vance met with West German, British, and French officials in Bonn,
London, and Paris before arriving in Washington on April 2. For the text of Vance’s news
conferences while in Moscow, en route to London and Paris, and upon arrival in Wash-
ington; the joint U.S.–Soviet communique´ issued on March 30; Carter’s March 30 press
conference; and Brzezinski’s April 1 news conference, see Department of State Bulletin,

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Brezhnev’s statement at Tula that detente meant a willingness to re-
solve differences and disputes by peaceful means, at conference tables.
The President’s deep conviction, which the Secretary shared and, in his
judgment, was shared by a majority of the American people, was that
our two countries must do everything they could to reduce the danger
of war. The President, like Brezhnev, was a practical man and realized
that the overall state of our relations would be determined largely by
the specifics of the issues on our agenda. These were the “objective real-
ities” of detente which determined where we were going.
The President, like Brezhnev, had been an officer in the armed
forces of his country, and had a deep determination to do all he could to
work toward a reasonable and fair regulation of military competition.
The Secretary well knew that Brezhnev had lived through the
devastation of war, and knew the sorrow and suffering it would bring
to all of our people, the young and the old. The Secretary, too, had ex-
perienced the horrors of war, had seen his friends and comrades die,
and had lived with the responsibility for nuclear weapons for many
years. It was his fervent hope that our children and Brezhnev’s children
would be spared the incalculable horror of a nuclear holocaust. At this
point Brezhnev interrupted to tell a story in connection with alleged So-
viet intentions to attack or threaten the United States. An Oriental tale
related that at a bazaar a man had purposely started the rumor that at
the far end of that bazaar someone was giving away pillows free of
charge. As people heard him, they began running toward that part of
the bazaar, until the man was left all alone. At that moment he began to
wonder whether there might not be something to the rumor that he
himself had started, and he thought that, just in case, he, too, should
start running; who knows, maybe they were indeed giving out free
pillows. Brezhnev said he knew that Americans liked anecdotes, and
that is why he told this story by way of an analogy to those who started
rumors about Soviet-war-like intentions.
The Secretary continued by saying that recently, Brezhnev had
noted that there were objective possibilities for developing equal and
mutually advantageous cooperation in various spheres for the good of
both countries and universal peace. He heartily agreed with such a
view of the situation.
Brezhnev had further said that the question was how soon such a
development would begin. He was firmly convinced that we could
begin that process now. We had an unparalleled opportunity to set our
relations on a fresh course.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
At Tula Brezhnev had also said that detente meant an ability to
take into consideration each other’s legitimate interests. The two sides
were realistic enough to know that we would have differences. But we
shared a fundamental interest in improving our mutual under-
standing. Our differences must not distract us from working for peace.
They also must not divide us.
The Secretary wanted to give Brezhnev a sense of developments in
our country which had affected our national outlook. We have come
through a hotly contested national election which was a process of re-
newal and of developing a new policy consensus in the country. Now a
new government had taken office in Washington, but we were dealing
with the same currents of opinion that had shaped our election debates.
There was support for detente among the American people, but there
were also concerns and apprehensions which had to be overcome.
At this point Brezhnev interrupted again and recalled how at the
very beginning of the “Great Patriotic War”, at the time Hitler had at-
tacked Czechoslovakia and had allied himself with Mussolini, he had
come home from work one day to the place where he lived in rather
humble conditions together with his father. His father was a simple
man, a steel worker, and this story, which Brezhnev was sure his col-
leagues on the Politburo had heard more than once, was well-suited to
illustrate a simple working man’s approach to the psychological ques-
tions of war. His father had asked him “Lyonya, which is the highest
mountain in the world”? He had responded that it was Mt. Everest. His
father then asked how tall was the Eiffel Tower in Paris? He had replied
that it was some 300 meters tall. His father then said that if he and his
friends had been authorized to do so, they would have built a tower
twice as tall as the Eiffel Tower, would have hauled it up to Mt. Everest
and topped it off with a gallows. There they would hang Hitler, and
would instruct everybody to view this scene through a telescope. His
father was obviously unaware of the fact that the curvature of the earth
would make such viewing impossible. His father went on to say they
would then declare that this would be the fate of not only the first insti-
gator of war, but of any other war-monger. After hanging five, six, or
seven such criminals the world would be rid of war. Much later, during
the Nuremberg Trial, when the prosecutor there pronounced the words
“instigator of War”, Brezhnev recalled this heart-to-heart conversation
between a father and a son. It was a true story and, while Brezhnev
apologized for having interrupted, he felt it was a useful story, because
it emphasized the need to defend peace.
The Secretary acknowledged that it was indeed a very useful story.
He continued by saying that President Carter enjoyed the support of

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
the vast majority of the American people—more so than any President
for many years—and therefore he could get support for arms control
agreements. The point he wanted to make was of critical importance,
because it meant that any agreements we could reach here the Presi-
dent could get ratified by Congress.
The Secretary said that what we wanted to set in motion during
our talks was a process of improvement in key arms control issues, in
our bilateral relations, and in international relations. The President had
spoken of his belief that we were all here in good faith to pursue a more
stable peace through new arms limitation negotiations. He felt that we
must be bold and vigorous in achieving control over nuclear weapons.
We were prepared to go far in this joint endeavor and explore new
ideas. The positions the President advocated were an advance over the
past—not only in the strategic arms area, but in stopping all nuclear
testing, and moving ahead on a broad range of other arms control
issues.
Our present talks were a crucial step in demonstrating that detente
was a dynamic, long-term process. It was not static. We, like the Soviet
Union, must give it new meaning, if it were truly to reflect greater mu-
tual understanding. The Secretary would suggest that we begin regen-
eration of detente.
Without going into details now, the Secretary wanted to sketch out
those areas which we would want to explore with the Soviet side. We
will explore ways to address the Backfire and Cruise missile issues, we
will make a comprehensive proposal which would enhance strategic
stability and mutual confidence, we will discuss advance notification of
missile test firings, averting military competition in space, and con-
cerns that certain forms of civil defense can be destabilizing. We also
hoped that our discussions will make a turning point in the long effort
to achieve a total cessation of nuclear testing, a subject in which, the
Secretary knew, the Soviet Union had deep concerns. Conditions may
be right for the United States and the Soviet Union to exercise unique
leadership in getting this process moving. We were moving promptly
to secure Congressional ratification of the Treaty on the Threshold Test
Ban and the Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions. What we accom-
plish during our meetings here would help us in the ratification of
derground Nuclear Weapons Tests, also known as the Threshold Test Ban Treaty
(TTBT),which prohibited underground nuclear tests above a 150 KT limit. On May 28,
1976, Ford and Brezhnev signed the Treaty on Underground Nuclear Explosions for
Peaceful Purposes (PNE), which extended the limitations of the TTBT to underground
tests for peaceful purposes.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
those treaties. Another area where we could work together to move for-
ward was the Indian Ocean. We wanted to explore Soviet interest in
mutual restraint in that area.
The Secretary pointed out that conventional arms exports were
dangerous and wasted vast and increasingly scarce resources. Our two
countries have accounted for a large proportion of such trade. In fact,
the United States occupied first place in the export trade of conven-
tional arms, and the Soviet Union second place. Competition between
us in the export of arms placed stress on our bilateral relations. It
should in any event be a matter of principle for advanced countries to
make a serious effort to restrain and reduce this trade. We would wel-
come an expression of interest on the part of the Soviet side in an ex-
change of views on this subject. In this connection, we believed that the
best way to begin was with suppliers. The United States was ready to
exercise restraint in its own activities. We would be talking to our allies.
The President was interested in Soviet views on prospects for coopera-
tion. In the area of non-proliferation we were gratified by progress in
the London Suppliers’ Group, and in particular with very solid Soviet
participation. These were important problems, and we hoped to con-
tinue in close cooperation.
The Secretary wanted to inform Brezhnev today that in the very
near future we would announce certain policy decisions concerning
nuclear non-proliferation. They will include the indefinite deferral of
commercial reprocessing and recycling of plutonium in the United
States, and the restructuring of the U.S. breeder reactor program to em-
phasize designs other than the plutonium breeder. The Secretary had
instructed our Embassy to inform Minister Gromyko in detail of these
policy decisions. We shared Soviet concern about the dangers of prolif-
eration of nuclear weapons, and we believed that the actions which we
are about to take would constitute a major step forward toward this
end.
We had reviewed the Vienna MBFR negotiations and our MBFR
policy. The Carter Administration strongly supported these negotia-
tions. A satisfactory agreement could enhance the security of both sides
equally. The West had shown its will to move toward agreement. The
December 1975 Western proposal to reduce U.S. nuclear weapons was

32.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, April 1, 1977
SUBJECT
Weekly National Security Report #7
1. Opinions
After two months in office, let me give you a highly subjective as-
sessment of where we stand with our foreign policy:
The public clearly understands that the Carter foreign policy is de-
rived from an affirmative commitment to certain basic human values.
Moreover, you have defined these values as “human rights,” which is
both broader and more flexible than such words as “liberty” or
“freedom.” This gives our foreign policy a wider appeal, more in tune
with the emerging political consciousness of mankind—which is con-
cerned both with liberty and equity.
Starting from that moral base, your basic priorities for our foreign
policy, both in terms of actual substance and specific focus, are co-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
herent and consistent: (1) we will seek to coordinate more closely with
our principal allies in order to provide the foundation for a more stable
international system; (2) we will engage in a North-South dialogue in
order to deal with wider human needs; (3) we will seek accommoda-
tion on the East-West front in order to avoid war and to widen trans-
ideological cooperation. In addition, we will seek to halt the spread of
arms, both conventional and nuclear.
The record is more mixed, in my judgment, when we look at more
specific aspects of this broad policy:
The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
Here I think we have done very well. Our commitment to human
rights has put the Soviet leadership on the defensive in an area where it
had a free ride for at least the last eight years, and perhaps even for
the last fifteen—if we count from the start of the Vietnamese War. The
reason that Brezhnev et al are reacting so strongly to your insistence on
human rights is not because they fear that we will make human rights a
condition for our relations with them; they fear this insistence because
they know that human rights is a compelling idea, and that associating
America with this idea not only strengthens us, but it also generates
pressures from within their own system. Ideologically they are thus on
the defensive.
Moreover, with regards to SALT, by committing ourselves to re-
ductions, we have made the Soviets seem opposed to genuine arms
limitations. In the past, they have often made the United States look as
if it was opposed to arms limitations. The tables have now been turned,
though the chance for a comprehensive agreement this summer are
very uncertain.
The next step should be this: we should ask the Soviets to explain
what specifically they did not like about the package, thus drawing
them into a discussion of it.
The Middle East
Your basic statement has created a flexible framework for dealing
with hitherto intractable issues. By combining the need for a compre-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
hensive peace with minor territorial changes but transitional security
arrangements and with a homeland for the Palestinians, and by doing
so publicly you have made a real breakthrough. The need is now for the
parties concerned to understand that we are committed to these basic
principles and that they provide the point of departure for more sub-
stantive negotiations among themselves. Again, this is a significant
step forward from almost everything that the United States has said on
the subject for at least ten to fifteen years, but persistence on our part
will be required.
Latin America
We are still shaping our basic approach, but I am hopeful. I use the
word “approach” advisedly; it will not be a new policy, something
which every new Administration has tended proudly to proclaim—
and then forget. Instead of focusing on Latin America as something
special, to be protected by the Monroe Doctrine (which most Latin
Americans resent) you are moving towards an approach which stresses
bilateral relations, of various types, with individual Latin American
states, and which deals with their broader problems in a wider global
context. I believe this is responsive to their pride and to their needs.
The major cloud is the deterioration in our relationship with Brazil,
something which ought to be repaired, given Brazil’s present and po-
tential role in the Western Hemisphere. Brazil is an emerging super-
power and it is clearly in the U.S. interest to have it on our side. It can be
a source of stability and influence not only in regard to Latin America
but even in regard to Africa, in which it is likely to become increasingly
engaged.
Trilateral Relations
We have made an excellent start, especially with the Mondale
visit3 which put so much emphasis on genuine consultations. This re-
flected your emphasis on the primacy of these relations; and was fur-
ther underlined by your meetings with Callaghan and Fukuda, and by
your phone calls to Giscard and Schmidt. However, the nuclear prolif-
eration issue has become a serious bone of contention. Your statement
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
next week5 and the subsequent consultations might help to relieve this
irritant, while the forthcoming summit should provide us with the op-
portunity for an affirmative recommitment to basic unity among the
trilateral countries.
I should note, however, that our human rights policy has evoked
rather mixed feelings in Western Europe. This is not surprising, given
West European political traditions and their proximity to the Soviets,
but for some Europeans—especially the Germans—it is a source of
concern.
China
Our policy towards China is yet to unfold and it needs to be un-
folded. Nonetheless, Soviet efforts to promote Sino-Soviet normaliza-
tion and/or reconciliation have so far failed. This gives us the needed
time to develop the required initiatives, though these should be forth-
coming in the course of the spring, lest the Chinese begin to think that
we ignore them or take them for granted. I will be making some con-
crete proposals soon.
South Asia
With the political change in India, we have again the opportunity
for a significant improvement in U.S.-Indian relations. Though my
own view of India’s future remains pessimistic, such an improve-
ment—at least in the short run—is highly desirable.
Africa
It is a morass. Current African events can be seen in terms of two
broad interpretations, both of them probably right but each yielding a
contradictory conclusion. The first is that Africa is in the midst of a
social-political upheaval, with post-colonial structures simply collaps-
broad East-West struggle, with pro-Western regimes being challenged
by the pro-Soviet regimes. This dictates resistance to Soviet efforts.
Both interpretations are probably right, and they point to the conclu-
sion (in my mind) that we should press the Soviets to desist but do so
outside of Africa, through diplomatic leverage, trade denial, etc., but
not through direct involvement in Africa per se. In the meantime, the
situation remains grave and it is possible that pro-Soviet developments
in Ethiopia may soon be matched by a collapse of the pro-Western gov-
ernment in Zaire. This, together with the likelihood of very little
progress in Southern Africa, portends a rather dark future.
Defense
Our basic position is strong, and a comprehensive reassessment of
our force posture and fundamental strategic concepts is now under
way. Under Brown’s direction, I feel quite confident that by late sum-
mer we will be well under way towards a renovated and relevant stra-
tegic doctrine. However, in the conventional field and in long-range
rapid strike capabilities much remains to be done, and NATO stand-
ardization is not moving forward as much as it should.
North-South Relations
We are yet to define our basic position. You made a good start in
your UN speech, but the basic North-South strategy is yet to be
shaped. I think it is quite clear that on this issue there will be major divi-
sions within the Cabinet, and probably a tough fight in Congress. How-
ever, if one looks ten or twenty years ahead, it is clear that the United
States needs desperately to fashion a comprehensive and long-term
North-South strategy. Such a strategy is an essential component of your
wider architectural effort.
International Economics
The Summit will be vital in this respect, especially with protec-
tionism becoming increasingly appealing. The United States has to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
provide definite and clear-headed leadership, and our weaker allies
(and all of them are much weaker than we) will be looking to you for
personal leadership.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
33.
Address by President Carter Before the Permanent Council
of the Organization of American States
Washington, April 14, 1977
Mr. Chairman, members of the Permanent Council, Mr. Secretary Gen-
eral, Permanent Observers of the OAS, Chiefs of the Specialized Organiza-
tions and Agencies, members of the press, distinguished guests:
Hace tres an˜os, tuve el honor y placer de hablar ante la Asemblea General
de la OEA celebrada en mi estado de Georgia. Igual que en Atlanta, hoy seguire´
el consejo de mis compan˜eros, que opinan—para el beneficio de buenas rela-
ciones—serı´a mejor que no hablara en espan˜ol hoy. [Three years ago I had
the honor and pleasure of speaking before the General Assembly of the
OAS held in my State of Georgia. As I did then in Atlanta, I will today
follow the advice of my friends, who have the opinion that, in the in-
terest of good relations, it would be better for me not to speak in
Spanish today.]
Since I can also speak English, I will shift to that language.
[Laughter]
That day in Atlanta, 3 years ago, I shared with you some of the
thoughts that my wife and I had brought back from our visits to several
of the American States. I spoke particularly for the need for constant co-
operation, consultation, and harmony among the nations of this hemi-
sphere. I believe that just as strongly today as President of the United
States as I did 3 years ago as Governor of Georgia.
I am delighted to be with you in this beautiful House of the
Americas. For nearly three decades the OAS has stood for mutual re-
inal. The President spoke at 12: p.m. at the Pan American Union. The Department for-
warded Carter’s remarks to all American Republic diplomatic posts in telegram 85145,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
spect among sovereign nations, for peace, and the rule of law in this
hemisphere. The OAS Charter pledges us to individual liberty and so-
cial justice. I come here now to restate our own commitment to these
goals.
The challenge before us today, however, is not just to reaffirm
those principles but to find ways to make them a reality. To do this, we
must take account of the changes in our relationships that have taken
place over the last 10 years, and we must candidly acknowledge the dif-
ferences that exist among us. We must adapt our current policies and
institutions to those changes so that we can pursue our goals more
effectively.
As nations of the New World, we once believed that we could
prosper in isolation from the Old World. But since the Second World
War, in particular, all of us have taken such vital roles in the world
community that isolation would now be harmful to our own best in-
terests and to other countries. Our joining in the International Mone-
tary Fund, the World Bank, and the General Agreement on Trade and
Tariffs are all signs that we understand this. So is the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development which Raul Prebisch of Argen-
tina made into an important forum of the developing world. Venezuela
is now cochairing the Paris Conference on International Economic
Cooperation. The United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America is a source of many creative ideas on development throughout
the world. The leaders of many Latin American nations have been the
driving force behind improving North-South negotiations.
In all these ways, the nations of Latin America were among the
first in our changing world to see the importance of adapting global in-
stitutions to the new realities of our day.
The problems and the promises of our region have become as di-
verse as the world itself. The economies of most Latin American na-
tions have been developing rapidly, although, of course, at different
rates. Some have an impressive rate of growth. Some—a few are among
the poorest in the developing world. Some have abundant energy re-
sources; others are desperately short of energy. Some of our countries
export primary products only. Some have become major exporters of
advanced manufactured goods while others export little at all. Your
problems of market access, technology transfer, and debt management
sometimes defy regional solutions.
In addition to economic diversity, we have all developed widely
varied forms and philosophies of government. This diversity has
brought national pride and national strength. And as you’ve played
more independent and important roles in world politics, we have all
begun to construct more normal and more balanced and more equal
relationships.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
In the light of these changes, a single United States policy toward
Latin America and the Caribbean makes little sense. What we need is a
wider and a more flexible approach, worked out in close consultation
with you. Together, we will develop policies more suited to each na-
tion’s variety and potential. In this process, I will be particularly con-
cerned that we not seek to divide the nations of Latin America one from
another or to set Latin America apart from the rest of the world. Our
own goal is to address problems in a way which will lead to productive
solutions—globally, regionally, and bilaterally.
Our new approach will be based on three basic elements:
First of all is a high regard for the individuality and the sover-
eignty of each Latin American and Caribbean nation. We will not act
abroad in ways that we would not tolerate at home in our own country.
Second is our respect for human rights, a respect which is also so
much a part of your own tradition. Our values and yours require us to
combat abuses of individual freedom, including those caused by polit-
ical, social, and economic injustice. Our own concern for these values
will naturally influence our relations with the countries of this hemi-
sphere and throughout the world. You will find this country, the
United States of America, eager to stand beside those nations which re-
spect human rights and which promote democratic ideals.
Third is our desire to press forward on the great issues which af-
fect the relations between the developed and the developing nations.
Your economic problems are also global in character and cannot be
dealt with solely on regional terms.
However, some of our own global policies are of particular interest
to other American States. When major decisions are made in these
areas, we will consult with you.
The United States will take a positive and an open attitude toward
the negotiation of agreements to stabilize commodity prices, includ-
ing the establishment of a common funding arrangement for financ-
ing buffer stocks where they are a part of individual and negotiated
agreements.
We will actively pursue the multilateral trade negotiations with
your governments in Geneva, Switzerland. We are committed to mini-
mize trade restrictions and to take into account the specific trade
problems of developing countries and to provide special and more fa-
vorable treatment where feasible and appropriate. We believe that this
is in our mutual interest and that it will create important new opportu-
nities for Latin American trade.
Our own science and technology can be useful to many of your
countries. For instance, we are ready to train your technicians to use
more information gathered by our own satellites, so that you can make

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
better judgments on management of your resources and your environ-
ment. Space communications technology can also be a creative tool in
helping your national television systems to promote your educational
and cultural objectives.
I have asked Congress to meet in full our pledges to the Inter-
American Development Bank and the other multilateral lending insti-
tutions which loan a high proportion of their capital to the relatively
advanced developing countries of Latin America.
And finally, we are directing more and more of our bilateral eco-
nomic assistance to the poorer countries. We are also prepared to ex-
plore with other nations new ways of being helpful on a wide range of
institutional, human development, and technological approaches
which might enable them to deal more effectively with the problems of
the needy. All of us have a special responsibility to help the poorest
countries in the world as well as the poorest people in each of our
countries.
I would like to add a word about private investment. Your gov-
ernments are understandably interested in setting rules that will en-
courage private investors to play an important role in your develop-
ment. We support your efforts and recognize that a new flexibility and
adaptability are required today for foreign investment to be most
useful in combining technology, capital management, and market ex-
perience to meet your development needs. We will do our part in this
field to avoid differences and misunderstandings between your gov-
ernment and ours.
One of the most significant political trends of our time is the rela-
tionship between the developing nations of the world and the industri-
alized countries. We benefit from your advice and counsel, and we
count on you to contribute your constructive leadership and help guide
us in this North-South dialog.
We also hope to work with all nations to halt the spread of nuclear
explosive capabilities. The States of Latin America took the initiative 10
years ago when you set up the first nuclear-free zone in any populated
area of the world. The Treaty of Tlatelolco is a model worthy of our
own admiration. For our part, the United States will sign, and I will

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ask the Senate to ratify, Protocol I of the treaty, prohibiting the place-
ment of nuclear weapons in Latin America.
However, banning the spread of nuclear explosives does not re-
quire giving up the benefits of peaceful nuclear technology. We mean
to work closely with all of you on new technologies to use the atom for
peaceful purposes.
To slow the costly buildup of conventional arms, we are seeking
global policies of restraint. We are showing restraint in our own pol-
icies around the world, and we will be talking to supplier nations and
to prospective buyers about ways to work out a common approach. We
also believe that regional agreements among producers and purchasers
of arms can further such a global effort.
I spent most of this morning working on a new United States
policy to reduce the sale of conventional arms around the world.
Again, you in Latin America have taken the lead. The pledge of eight
South American nations to limit the acquisition of offensive arms in
their region is a striking example. If the eight nations can implement
their pledge, their own people will not be the only ones to benefit. They
will have set a standard for others throughout the world to follow.
These are challenges that face us in the future. There are also
problems that plague us from the past. And we must work together to
solve them.
One that addresses itself to us is the Panama Canal. In the first
days of my own administration, just a few weeks ago, I directed a new
approach to our negotiations with Panama on a new Canal treaty. In
the light of the changes which I discussed before, the Treaty of 1903,6
which combines [defines] our relationship with Panama on the canal, is
no longer appropriate or effective.
I am firmly committed to negotiating in as timely a fashion as pos-
sible a new treaty which will take into account Panama’s legitimate
needs as a sovereign nation and our own interests and yours in the effi-
cient operation of a neutral canal, open on a nondiscriminatory basis to
all users.
Another problem which we must in a way address together is that
of Cuba. We believe that normal conduct of international affairs and
particularly the negotiation of differences require communication with
all countries in the world. To these ends, we are seeking to determine

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
whether relations with Cuba can be improved on a measured and a re-
ciprocal basis.
I am dedicated to freedom of movement between nations. I have
removed restrictions on United States citizens who want to travel
abroad. Today there are no restrictions imposed by our country.
Today I have also removed similar travel restrictions on resident aliens
in the United States.
We seek to encourage international travel, and we must take
greater account of problems that transcend national borders. Drugs
and international crime, including terrorism, challenge traditional con-
cepts of diplomacy. For the well-being of our peoples, we must coop-
erate on these issues. With each passing year they will occupy a more
and more central place in our deliberations.
I have a longstanding interest in the OAS, and I very much want to
see it play an increasingly constructive role.
The General Assembly of the OAS has been an important forum
for the direct exchange of views among our governments. Such minis-
terial consultations are extremely useful. They allow us to apply our
own collective strength to political and economic problems.
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights has performed
valuable services. It deserves increased support from all our gov-
ernments. We believe deeply in the preservation and the enhancement
of human rights, and the United States will work toward coordinated
and multilateral action in this field. The United States will sign, and I
will seek Senate approval of, the American Convention on Human
Rights negotiated several years ago in Costa Rica. And we will sup-
port, in cooperation with international agencies, broadened programs
for aiding political refugees. I urge this organization and all its member
states to take a more active role in the care, protection, and the resettle-
ment of political refugees.
The peacekeeping function is firmly embedded in the OAS Char-
ter. I want to encourage the Secretary General of the OAS to continue
his active and effective involvement in the search for peaceable solu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tions to several long-standing disputes in this hemisphere. The United
States will support his efforts and initiatives.
The OAS, of course, is not the only instrument of cooperation
among the nations of the Americas. The Inter-American Development
Bank is among the most important multilateral mechanisms for pro-
moting development of the world today. By bringing in nations outside
the Western Hemisphere, the IDB bears testimony to Latin America’s
growing involvement with the rest of the world.
Within this hemisphere, many of you are working toward regional
and subregional integration efforts—including those in the Caribbean,
in the Central American Common Market, and the Andean Pact—and
we favor such efforts. They are the first steps toward Bolı´var’s vision
of a hemisphere united.
Let me conclude by bringing up a matter that is particularly close
to me because of my long interest in inter-American affairs. My wife
and I have traveled and made many friends in Mexico and Brazil, the
two largest and most rapidly changing countries in Latin America. And
we have traveled elsewhere and made many friends in Central and
South America. My wife is presently studying Spanish, along with the
wife of the Secretary of State, and I have tried to keep up with my own
Spanish that I learned at school. I have seen clearly how greatly our
country has been blessed and enriched by the people and cultures of
the Caribbean and Latin America. And we are bound together—and I
see it very clearly—in culture, history, and by common purposes and
ideals.
The United States actually has the fourth largest Spanish-speaking
population in the world. I tried to meet many of them during my cam-
paign the last 2 years. And they gave me their support and their en-
couragement and their advice. The novels we read, the music we hear,
the sports that we play—all reflect a growing consciousness of each
other.
These intellectual, social, cultural, and educational exchanges will
continue, either with or without government help. But there are steps
that governments can take to speed up and enhance this process. In the
months ahead, therefore, we plan to explore with your governments—
individually and here in the OAS—new people-to-people programs, an

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
increase in professional and scientific exchanges, and other ways of
strengthening the ties that already link us.
The challenge we face is to awake our institutions to a changing
world. We must focus our attention on the problems which face our
countries and tailor each solution to its problem.
As you know, I am a new President. I’ve got a lot to learn. My heart
and my interest to a major degree is in Latin America. I welcome every
opportunity to strengthen the ties of friendship and a sense of common
purpose and close consultation with the nations and the peoples of the
Caribbean and Latin America.
Many of you are leaders representing your own governments. I
ask for your advice and your counsel and your support as we face
problems together in the future. This means a lot to our country, and it
means a lot to us also to have intimate bilateral and direct relationships
with you.
We look on the OAS, headquartered thankfully here in Wash-
ington, as a channel through which we might learn more and receive
advice and make plans for the future.
Simo´n Bolı´var believed that we would reach our goals only with
our peoples free and our governments working in harmony. I hope that
the steps that I have outlined today and the commitments that I have
made will move us toward those goals of peace and freedom.
Thank you very much.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I

34.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, April 16, 1977
SUBJECT
Weekly National Security Report #9
1. Opinion
Human Rights: For a Broader Interpretation.

35.
Editorial Note
In preparation for President Jimmy Carter’s April 25, 1977, inter-
view with European journalists, President’s Assistant for National Se-
curity Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski provided the President with a the-
matic overview in an April 23 memorandum. Brzezinki indicated that
the interview would help the President “set the scene for the London
summits” and afford him the opportunity to discuss his views on
“industrial-state relations.” He devoted the first portion of the memo-
randum to the upcoming London meetings:
“The three meetings in London are all of a piece. In each, you have
a chance to meet, on a group and personal basis, the leaders of most of
our industrial state allies (you have seen so far Callaghan, Jenkins,
Luns, Trudeau, Fukuda, and Soares). In each meeting, you will be able
to lay out basic American commitments—both the steadfastness of pur-
pose of a new Administration and directions and guidelines for the
future.
“This is a start on a new time of building—different from the late
1940s (all start from an advanced industrial base, and the U.S. no longer
has the same economic pre-eminence); but this time of building is just
as challenging, just as vital, and even more difficult to gain popular
support for new directions.
“Your trip is a direct extension of Vice President Mondale’s trip 92
hours after Inauguration: it is a break with the past, in that there is a
much clearer sense that allies are important in their own right, and that
these relations should have pre-eminence. The past three years of eco-
nomic slump have also reaffirmed the need for strong industrial state
partners, in order to guarantee the security and prosperity of any one

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
nation. Interdependence has gone from being a slogan to being a prac-
tical reality in everyday life.
“Thus the summit meetings will not produce spectacular new ini-
tiatives or proposals for new institutions; that is not what is required,
now. Instead, the various leaders need to begin thinking in common
about problems in common. This can result in a framework for dealing
jointly with basic issues; about building a broad framework of indus-
trial state concerns leading to coordinated action. It is the creating of
ways and working together—ways that can be developed and will en-
dure over the coming years—that is the real ‘news’ to be expected from
the summit, and the groundwork of future progress.
“Your energy policy is part of this new time of building. It will en-
able the United States to play a more effective role in the world. Clearly,
foreign and domestic policies are related more closely together than at
any other time in peacetime history.
“Basic Themes
“A number of basic American themes, to which you have been al-
luding in the past three months, will become clearer at the summit
meetings:
“Leadership and Purpose: The emergence of the United States from a
time of doubt and uncertainty, in which even some of our friends and
allies abroad questioned our ability and willingness to act. An Amer-
ican sense of purpose has returned: but it is more mature, and is di-
rected towards political and economic relations and developments—
the building of new patterns of behavior and action for the future, in a
shared leadership with other nations.
“Economic Actions: The need for coordinated strategies for ending
the recession, and for breaking loose from the ‘stagnation’ pattern that
led to the current difficulties (e.g. 15 million OECD unemployed). In all
of the commercial issues—non-proliferation, arms transfers, defense
procurement, advanced technology—there must also be a sharing of
benefits. In defense procurement, a clear two-way street.
“Institutions: The importance of strengthening the work of existing
institutions, whether NATO (where the issue is following-through on
its potential) or the Multilateral Trade Negotiations, or the OECD, the
IMF, the World Bank, and the IEA.
“Global Problems: The need for common effort on the global
problems that are either here, or are emerging: including the spread of
nuclear weapons (an issue that is inseparable from secure energy re-
sources for all nations), the transfer of conventional arms, the relation-
ship between rich and poor countries. In each, industrial-state leader-
ship is needed.
“Developing World: The importance of not seeing the industrial
states as an exclusive club, but directly concerned with what is hap-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
pening in the developing world. Interdependence extends clearly into
this dimension; and only by building upon the potential in relations
with developing states can we provide for our own future. This means
a better response to poor country needs: especially in the poorest coun-
tries of all. In greater justice, there is greater strength for us all.
“European Unity: Genuine U.S. support for European unity—how-
ever tentative and faltering it may be at the tail end of a recession. This
is no less than a basic respect for European integrity, and a recognition
(based on the past three years in particular) of the vital need for a
strong European Community to help us all meet economic difficulties.
“U.S. Response: The United States is prepared to respond in a forth-
coming way to Western European ideas and interests (as well as those
of Japan). For all of them, U.S. receptivity is an incentive to develop and
speak out on their own perspectives, their own contributions to
common efforts. Already, there has been a virtually unprecedented
series of consultations with the Allies—whether in working with the
Japanese, in the Mondale trip, or in the many consultations held di-
rectly with the North Atlantic Council.
“NATO: A renewed American commitment to the NATO Alliance,
with the emphasis on the strength of alliance unity, the value of ex-
isting strategy and doctrine, and the added value that can be gained
from making NATO work more effectively than ever.
“Democracy and Human Rights: The added strength that all the
Western nations draw from a renewed understanding of the demo-
cratic basis of common action—and of our internal political strength.
For the first time the NATO Allies are all democracies, and—with de-
velopments in countries like Portugal and Greece (and Spain)—the
basic vitality of democracy has been proved again. This has given an
added impetus to the human dimensions of policy: not just human
rights, but also the basic moral purpose of our nations which given
them both legitimacy and strength.
“East-West: Working with Allies also involves East-West relations;
including their interests in U.S. negotiations on SALT; Alliance respon-
sibility for MBFR; better understandings on East-West trade; coordi-
nated policy for Belgrade (which will come up at NATO the day after
you are there)—as a constructive, non-confrontational effort that will
still stress our shared concern for human rights.” (Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 50, Presi-
The interview took place in the Oval Office at the White House at
cluded Fred Emery of The Times, London, Henri Pierre of Le Monde,
Horst-Alexander Siebert of Die Welt, and Vittorio Zucconi of La Stampa,
Turin. During the interview, Pierre inquired as to the President’s gen-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
eral approach toward Europe and the European Community, noting
that some of Carter’s predecessors “seemed to fear that a united Eu-
rope” might rise as a competitor to the United States and impact U.S.
economic and political interests. Pierre asked if Carter held similar
views. Carter responded:
“No. I think within 100 hours of my becoming President, the Vice
President had begun consultations with the leaders of many nations in
Europe. I have already met with Prime Minister Callaghan, with the
leaders of Portugal, with the European Community, NATO. I will meet
with the other leaders within the next 2 weeks. And this will likely be
the only trip I shall take outside our country this year. I have no other
plans at this time.
“I think all these items describe my deep concern about good rela-
tionships with Europe. I see no way that we can have a successful reso-
lution of East-West problems without the full comprehension, under-
standing, participation with our allies and friends in Europe.
“We have, in addition to that, demonstrated, I think, in my own
budget proposals to the Congress, an increasing emphasis on military
capability within NATO. And I intend to stay over after the conference
with the heads of state, to meet with the NATO leaders as well.
“The people of our country, regardless of who happens to be Presi-
dent, have a natural sense that our historical ties and our future are inti-
mately related with the European countries.
“The other part of your question is that I strongly favor, perhaps
more than my predecessors, a close interrelationship among the na-
tions of Europe, the European Community, in particular.
“We have a legitimate reticence about trying to interfere, but I will
do everything within the bounds of propriety to strengthen those nat-
ural ties—economically, politically, militarily—that do exist now
among the countries of Europe and to strengthen them in the future.
And when the nations involved consider it appropriate, I would cer-
tainly welcome the absorption within the European Community of Por-
tugal and Spain.
“So, I think that already I have both come to realize and also have
begun to act on the premise of a strong Europe as essential to our own
good future and have recognized the importance of the bilateral rela-
tionships with the nations involved.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book
I, pages 776–777)
The full text of the interview transcript is ibid., pages 775–783.

36.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, April 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Four-Year Goals: Preliminary Statement
Purpose and Scope
The memorandum which follows is an attempt to define your
four-year foreign policy goals. It is not meant to be a public statement—
and its publication or revelation would be counterproductive. It would
provide your critics with ammunition (both now and four years hence)
and public disclosure would also make it more difficult to attain many
of your goals. Moreover, in some ways any such statement is bound to
be arbitrary and even simplistic—but otherwise it would have to be a
book, with all the explanations, elaborations, and nuances included.
The document is not an interagency consensus statement. It was
prepared, on the basis of the conceptual framework which you and I
have often discussed, by Sam Huntington and myself, with NSC staff
inputs. (Sam is also coordinating the PRM 102 effort.)
As of now, you are the first consumer of this statement. It has not been
cleared with the Secretary of State nor with any other members of the
Cabinet. At this stage, the document is meant only for your personal
consumption. Once revised on the basis of your instructions and fol-
lowing a discussion with your principal advisers, it should become a
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
decision paper from the top down, rather than a consensual statement
filtered upwards through the bureaucracy.
This statement sets out ten central objectives for the next four years. It
does not prescribe specific tactics but it does propose steps for the at-
tainment of these ten central objectives, in addition to some others as
well.
I believe the four year objectives—though ambitious—are realistic.
In any event, they provide both stimulus and discipline for the devel-
opment of specific policy choices for your decision. I should note that
the second of these central objectives—that we cultivate the new “re-
gional influentials”—is likely to be both controversial and possibly
even occasionally in conflict with some of the other goals. Yet I believe
that American interests and global stability require that we nourish a
better relationship with these key states. Not to do so is to deprive our-
selves of potentially very constructive relationships. Given the impor-
tance and sensitivity of this proposal, I attach a special annex (Tab IV),3
pertaining to these states.
Basic Concept
These ten central objectives are derived from a basic concept of
what U.S. foreign policy should be at this historical stage. I want to stress
to you the importance of that concept. A foreign policy to be effective must
rest on a reasonably accurate assessment of the basic historical need.
The Soviets periodically undertake a very deliberate reappraisal of
their foreign policy based on the question: what is the nature of our his-
torical phase? Has that phase changed, and—if so—what are the impli-
cations for the Soviet foreign policy? We should be similarly alert to the
meaning of historical change. U.S. foreign policy in the past was rela-
tively successful because the notions of Atlanticism and containment
did correspond to the major needs of the late 40’s and early 50’s. Ac-
cordingly, this document is based on a unifying theme and you have to
decide whether the definition of that theme—in the section called
“Overall Concept”—is congenial to you.
Action
Accordingly, I would recommend: (1) that you review the docu-
ment, make whatever changes you deem necessary, and give me fur-
ther guidance; (2) that following further revisions in the light of your
directives, the document be used as the basis for discussion with your
principal advisers (such as the Secretary of State), and possibly even
with top Congressional leaders (though perhaps without actual distri-
bution); (3) that you give a comprehensive speech, maybe after the
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
summit, using largely the conceptual part in order to educate the public
and to convey to all concerned that your various actions are part of an
overall scheme (contrary to some criticisms that are now being voiced).
Even then, the document should not be distributed except perhaps
at a restricted NSC meeting itself.
Please indicate whether this approach meets with your approval.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE
COMMENTS
Let me also raise here the possibility that you consider using your
Notre Dame University Address5 to develop the above approach. You
might remember that I proposed a few days ago that you give a concep-
tual speech, attempting to integrate your overall policy, and follow it
shortly thereafter by a town hall meeting specifically on foreign policy.
The Notre Dame date comes roughly two weeks after the summit, and
it might be a good place to summarize your basic conclusions, and then
go on to deliver a more far-reaching and essentially conceptual state-
ment on your foreign policy.
APPROVE
DISAPPROVE
COMMENTS
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff
Washington, undated
[Omitted here is the Table of Contents.]
Four-Year Foreign Policy Objectives
I. OVERALL CONCEPT
U.S. foreign policy can be expressed in terms of several broad pur-
poses. Though interrelated, these purposes imply, though not rigidly, a
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
basic hierarchy. (At a specific level, choices are often necessary—as in
the exemption of South Korea on security grounds from aid cutoff on
human rights grounds).
These broad purposes are:
1. To assure the security of the United States;
2. To enhance peace by reducing international tensions and the
probability of war;
3. To promote the prosperity of the United States;
4. To advance global wellbeing by creating an open, cooperative
and equitable international economic order;
5. To expand fundamental human rights.
The document which follows is designed to promote all of these
broad purposes, and it attempts to translate them into more specific
goals in the political, economic and defense areas.
The basic conceptual frame of reference for the more specific goals
is a historical perspective, which sees the United States as having to
play a creative role in world affairs, in some ways similar to the role
that the United States played following 1945. At that time, the United
States in effect shaped a new international system, replacing the one
that had collapsed during World War II. That new system then en-
dured and worked reasonably well for the next quarter of a century or
so. During much of that time, the basic concept that guided U.S. foreign
policy was a combination of Atlanticism (primacy of the US-European
link) and containment of the Soviet Union.
Faced in the early 70’s with major world changes, the previous Re-
publican Administration then developed a foreign policy focused pri-
marily on a flexible balance of power, and on maneuver. It was also
very pessimistic foreign policy, based on the notion that America had
no permanent friends nor institutions on which it could rely, and that
deeprooted trends were against us.
Your policy, as recommended here, is different. It places emphasis
not so much on maneuver, but on building new structures—new rela-
tionships with friends, with adversaries, with the developing world,
even with the whole world—that we hope will have a measure of per-
manence. It is, therefore, an optimistic policy—we hope to build a
better world—not simply survive in a hostile one. It is a policy of con-
structive global engagement.
Its fundamental premise is that the U.S. needs to play today a role
as constructive as the one it played after World War II, but in a vastly
changed context.
The U.S. has to help in the shaping of a new international system
that cannot be confined to the developed countries but must involve in-
creasingly the entire international community of more than 150 nation
states. Unlike the years 1945–50, this calls not for American dictation

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
but for more subtle inspiration and cooperative leadership on a much
wider front. The international community, in addition to the traditional
dilemmas of war and peace, now confronts global problems never be-
fore faced by mankind.
The need thus is not for a new anti-communist coalition, nor for an
updated Atlanticism, nor for a policy focused only on the new nations,
and certainly not for protectionism and isolationism. Rather, it requires
a broad architectural process for an unstable world organized almost en-
tirely on the principle of national sovereignty and yet increasingly in-
terdependent socially and economically. In that process of widening
cooperation, our relationships will have to involve varying degrees of
intimacy:
1. With our closest friends in the industrial world—countries which
share our values, have political systems similar to ours, and which be-
cause of their wealth have a special burden of responsibility to the rest
of mankind—we will seek to deepen our collaboration;
2. With the emerging states, we will seek to develop close bilateral
relations in some key cases, and to widen and to institutionalize ar-
rangements for more genuine global cooperation;
3. With states with which we compete militarily and ideologically,
we will seek through appropriate arrangements to reduce the chances
of war and to codify more precise rules of reciprocal restraint.
II. TEN CENTRAL OBJECTIVES
With that basic concept as our point of departure, and in keeping
with it, it is recommended that your foreign policy seek to attain during
the coming four years these central ten goals (developed more specif-
ically in the third part of this document):
1. To engage Western Europe, Japan and other advanced democ-
racies in closer political cooperation through the increasing insti-
tutionalization of consultative relationships, and to promote wider
macro-economic coordination pointing towards a stable and open
monetary and trade system. Genuine collaboration with these states is
the foundation stone of U.S. policy, and we must seek to intensify and
to multiply our consultative links;
2. To weave a worldwide web of bilateral, political and, where ap-
propriate, economic cooperation with the new emerging regional
“influentials”—thereby widening, in keeping with new historical cir-
cumstances, our earlier reliance on Atlanticism or, more lately, on tri-
lateralism. These regional influentials include Venezuela, Brazil, Ni-
geria, Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, Indonesia, in addition to our more
traditional friends;
3. To exploit the foregoing in the development of more accommo-
dating North-South relations, both political and economic, through

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
such devices as the Global Development Budget, the institutionaliza-
tion of CIEC, the shaping of links between OECD and OPEC, etc.;
4. To push U.S.-Soviet strategic arms limitation talks into strategic
arms reduction talks, using the foregoing as an entering wedge for a
more stable U.S.-Soviet relationship. At the same time, we should seek
to rebuff Soviet incursions, both by supporting our friends and by ame-
liorating the sources of conflict which the Soviets exploit. We should
match Soviet ideological expansion by a more affirmative American
posture on global human rights, while seeking consistently to make de-
tente both more comprehensive and more reciprocal;
5. To normalize U.S.-Chinese relations in order to preserve the
U.S.-Chinese relationship as a major stabilizing factor in the global
power balance, offsetting Soviet conventional superiority and pre-
venting the Soviet Union from concentrating its resources on a west-
ward (Europe) or southward (Middle East, Africa) expansionary drive;
6. To obtain a comprehensive Middle Eastern settlement, without
which the further radicalization of the Arab world and the reentry of
the Soviet Union into the Middle East cannot for long be avoided, gen-
erating in turn serious consequences for Western Europe, Japan, and
the United States;
7. To set in motion a progressive and peaceful transformation of
South Africa towards a biracial democracy and to forge—in connection
with this process—a coalition of moderate black African leaders in
order to stem continental radicalization and to eliminate the Soviet-
Cuban presence from the continent;
8. To restrict the level of global armaments through international
agreements limiting the excessive flow of arms into the Third World
(though with some consideration for goal No. 2), cooperative interna-
tional restraints on nuclear proliferation, and a comprehensive test ban
on nuclear testing;
9. To enhance global sensitivity to human rights through actions
designed to highlight U.S. observance of such rights and through mul-
tilateral and bilateral initiatives meant to influence other governments
to give higher priority to such human rights;
10. To maintain a defense posture capable of deterring the Soviet
Union both on the strategic and conventional levels from hostile acts
and from political pressure. This will require the U.S. to modernize, ra-
tionalize, and reconceptualize its defense posture in keeping with the
broad changes in world affairs that have already been noted, to im-
prove NATO military strength and readiness, and to develop capabil-
ities to deter or to counter Soviet military intervention in the Third
World.
It should be noted in connection with these broad objectives that
the promotion of human rights is a goal that cross-cuts our relations

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
with the Soviet Union, the developing countries, and particularly the
new regional influentials. In all these cases, our leverage should be
used discreetly to advance human rights but no specific targets can be
prescribed precisely.
Moreover, the point to stress is that human rights is a broad concept.
These two words should mean much more than political liberty, the
right to vote, and protection against arbitrary governmental action.
Human rights, and this we should stress, means also certain basic min-
imum standards of social and economic existence. In effect, human
rights refers to all three (political, social, and economic) and this is why
these words have such universal appeal.
Such a broader, and more flexible definition would have several
advantages: it would retain for us the desirable identification with a
human cause whose time has come, and yet it would avoid some of the
rigidities that are potential in the narrower political definition. It would
give us the freedom to point at the most glaring abuses (e.g., political
suppression in some countries, or total social indifference in others),
though leaving us the necessary margin of flexibility in dealing with
most governments. In general, we should stress that achieving human
rights is a process and that we are watching carefully progress toward
greater respect for human rights, realizing that there is no single
standard for all the countries of the world.
The ten central objectives are refined and time-targeted in the
pages which now follow. If approved by you, all of the specific as well
as broader objectives will become, at appropriate times, the subject of ac-
tion directives from you, requiring the pertinent department to submit
more detailed studies and proposals for implementation.
[Omitted here are Part III: Central Objectives and Specific Steps
and Part IV: Annex on Regional Influentials.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
37.
Address by Secretary of State Vance
Athens, Georgia, April 30, 1977
Human Rights and Foreign Policy
I speak today about the resolve of this Administration to make the
advancement of human rights a central part of our foreign policy.
Many here today have long been advocates of human rights within
our own society. And throughout our nation that struggle for civil
rights continues.
In the early years of our civil rights movement, many Americans
treated the issue as a “Southern” problem. They were wrong. It was
and is a problem for all of us.
Now, as a nation, we must not make a comparable mistake. Protec-
tion of human rights is a challenge for all countries, not just for a few.
Our human rights policy must be understood in order to be effec-
tive. So today I want to set forth the substance of that policy and the re-
sults we hope to achieve.
Our concern for human rights is built upon ancient values. It looks
with hope to a world in which liberty is not just a great cause, but the
common condition. In the past, it may have seemed sufficient to put
our name to international documents that spoke loftily of human
rights. That is not enough. We will go to work, alongside other people
and governments, to protect and enhance the dignity of the individual.
Let me define what we mean by “human rights.”
First, there is the right to be free from governmental violation of
the integrity of the person. Such violations include torture; cruel, in-
human, or degrading treatment or punishment; and arbitrary arrest or
imprisonment. And they include denial of fair public trial and invasion
of the home.
cover memorandum, Brzezinski sent Vance a handwritten note, dated April 26, from the
President. In it, Carter wrote: “The Law Day speech is very good. I’ll do a much broader
speech at Notre Dame. Good luck in Georgia. They’ll like you & the speech. J.C.” (Carter
Vance delivered the address as part of the Law Day ceremonies at the University of
Georgia School of Law. The Department transmitted the text of the address in telegram
98034 to all diplomatic posts, April 30; the telegram is printed in Foreign Relations,
memoirs, Vance explained the purpose of his address: “I wanted to make clear the shape
and substance of our human rights policy, and the fact that it was universal in applica-
tion, yet flexible enough to be adapted to individual situations.” (Hard Choices, p. 46)

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Second, there is the right to the fulfillment of such vital needs as
food, shelter, health care, and education. We recognize that the fulfill-
ment of this right will depend, in part, upon the stage of a nation’s eco-
nomic development. But we also know that this right can be violated by
a government’s action or inaction—for example, through corrupt offi-
cial processes which divert resources to an elite at the expense of the
needy or through indifference to the plight of the poor.
Third, there is the right to enjoy civil and political liberties: free-
dom of thought, of religion, of assembly; freedom of speech; freedom of
the press; freedom of movement both within and outside one’s own
country; freedom to take part in government.
Our policy is to promote all these rights. They are all recognized in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a basic document which
the United States helped fashion and which the United Nations ap-
proved in 1948. There may be disagreement on the priorities these
rights deserve. But I believe that, with work, all of these rights can be-
come complementary and mutually reinforcing.
The philosophy of our human rights policy is revolutionary in the
intellectual sense, reflecting our nation’s origin and progressive values.
As Archibald MacLeish wrote during our Bicentennial a year ago:
“. . . the cause of human liberty is now the one great revolutionary
President Carter put it this way in his speech before the United
Nations:
All the signatories of the United Nations Charter have pledged
themselves to observe and to respect basic human rights. Thus, no
member of the United Nations can claim that mistreatment of its cit-
izens is solely its own business. Equally, no member can avoid its re-
sponsibilities to review and to speak when torture or unwarranted
deprivation occurs in any part of the world.
Since 1945, international practice has confirmed that a nation’s
obligation to respect human rights is a matter of concern in interna-
tional law.
Our obligation under the United Nations Charter is written into
our own legislation. For example, our Foreign Assistance Act now
reads: “. . . a principal goal of the foreign policy of the United States is to
promote the increased observance of internationally recognized human
rights by all countries.”
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
In these ways, our policy is in keeping with our tradition, our in-
ternational obligations, and our laws.
In pursuing a human rights policy, we must always keep in mind
the limits of our power and of our wisdom. A sure formula for defeat of
our goals would be a rigid, hubristic attempt to impose our values
on others. A doctrinaire plan of action would be as damaging as
indifference.
We must be realistic. Our country can only achieve our objectives
if we shape what we do to the case at hand. In each instance, we will
consider these questions as we determine whether and how to act:
1. First, we will ask ourselves, what is the nature of the case that
confronts us? For example:
What kinds of violations or deprivations are there? What is their
extent?
Is there a pattern to the violations? If so, is the trend toward con-
cern for human rights or away from it?
What is the degree of control and responsibility of the government
involved?
And finally, is the government willing to permit independent out-
side investigation?
2. A second set of questions concerns the prospects for effective
action:
Will our action be useful in promoting the overall cause of human
rights?
Will it actually improve the specific conditions at hand? Or will it
be likely to make things worse instead?
Is the country involved receptive to our interest and efforts?
Will others work with us, including official and private interna-
tional organizations dedicated to furthering human rights?
Finally, does our sense of values and decency demand that we
speak out or take action anyway, even though there is only a remote
chance of making our influence felt?
3. We will ask a third set of questions in order to maintain a sense
of perspective:
Have we steered away from the self-righteous and strident, re-
membering that our own record is not unblemished?
Have we been sensitive to genuine security interests, realizing that
outbreak of armed conflict or terrorism could in itself pose a serious
threat to human rights?
Have we considered all the rights at stake? If, for instance, we re-
duce aid to a government which violates the political rights of its cit-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
izens, do we not risk penalizing the hungry and poor, who bear no re-
sponsibility for the abuses of their government?
If we are determined to act, the means available range from quiet
diplomacy in its many forms, through public pronouncements, to with-
holding of assistance. Whenever possible, we will use positive steps of
encouragement and inducement. Our strong support will go to coun-
tries that are working to improve the human condition. We will always
try to act in concert with other countries, through international bodies.
In the end, a decision whether and how to act in the cause of
human rights is a matter for informed and careful judgment. No mech-
anistic formula produces an automatic answer.
It is not our purpose to intervene in the internal affairs of other
countries, but as the President has emphasized, no member of the
United Nations can claim that violation of internationally protected
human rights is solely its own affair. It is our purpose to shape our pol-
icies in accord with our beliefs and to state them without stridency or
apology when we think it is desirable to do so.
Our policy is to be applied within our own society as well as
abroad. We welcome constructive criticism at the same time as we
offer it.
No one should suppose that we are working in a vacuum. We
place great weight on joining with others in the cause of human rights.
The U.N. system is central to this cooperative endeavor. That is
why the President stressed the pursuit of human rights in his speech
before the General Assembly last month. That is why he is calling for
U.S. ratification of four important human rights covenants and conven-
tions and why we are trying to strengthen the human rights machinery
within the United Nations.
And that is an important reason why we have moved to comply
with U.N. sanctions against Rhodesia. In one of our first acts, this Ad-
ministration sought and achieved repeal of the Byrd amendment,5
which had placed us in violation of these sanctions and thus in viola-
tion of international law. We are supporting other diplomatic efforts
within the United Nations to promote basic civil and political rights in
Namibia and throughout southern Africa.
Regional organizations also play a central role in promoting
human rights. The President has announced that the United States will
sign and seek Senate approval of the American Convention on Human
Rights. We will continue to work to strengthen the machinery of the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. This will include ef-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
forts to schedule regular visits to all members of the Organization of
American States, annual debates on human rights conditions, and the
expansion of the inter-American educational program on human
rights.
The United States is seeking increased consultation with other na-
tions for joint programs on economic assistance and more general ef-
forts to promote human rights. We are working to assure that our ef-
forts reach out to all, with particular sensitivity to the problems of
women.
We will meet in Belgrade later this year to review implementation
of the Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Eu-
rope—the so-called Helsinki conference. We will take this occasion to
work for progress there on important human issues: family reunifica-
tion, binational marriages, travel for personal and professional reasons,
and freer access to information.
The United States looks to use of economic assistance—whether
bilateral or through international financial institutions—as a means to
foster basic human rights.
—We have proposed a 20 percent increase in U.S. foreign eco-
nomic assistance for fiscal year 1978.
—We are expanding the program of the Agency for International
Development for “New Initiatives in Human Rights” as a complement
to present efforts to get the benefits of our aid to those most in need
abroad.
—The programs of the United States Information Agency and the
State Department’s Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs stress
support for law in society, a free press, freedom of communication, an
open educational system, and respect for ethnic diversity.
This Administration’s human rights policy has been framed in col-
laboration and consultation with Congress and private organizations.
We have taken steps to assure firsthand contact, consultation, and ob-
servation when Members of Congress travel abroad to review human
rights conditions.
We are implementing current laws that bring human rights con-
siderations directly into our decisions in several international financial
institutions. At the same time, we are working with the Congress to
find the most effective way to fulfill our parallel commitment to inter-
national cooperation in economic development.
Document 58.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
In accordance with human rights provisions of legislation gov-
erning our security assistance programs, we recently announced cuts in
military aid to several countries.
Outside the government, there is much that can be done. We wel-
come the efforts of individual American citizens and private organiza-
tions—such as religious, humanitarian, and professional groups—to
work for human rights with commitments of time, money, and
compassion.
All these initiatives to further human rights abroad would have a
hollow ring if we were not prepared to improve our own performance
at home. So we have removed all restrictions on our citizens’ travel
abroad and are proceeding with plans to liberalize our visa policies.
We support legislation and administrative action to expand our
refugee and asylum policies and to permit more victims of repressive
regimes to enter the United States. During this last year, the United
States spent some $475 million on assistance to refugees around the
world, and we accepted 31,000 refugees for permanent resettlement in
this country.
What results can we expect from all these efforts?
We may justifiably seek a rapid end to such gross violations as
those cited in our law: “torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treat-
ment or punishment, (or) prolonged detention without charges. . . .”
Just last week our Ambassador at the United Nations, Andrew Young,
suggested a series of new ways to confront the practice of torture
around the world.
The promotion of other human rights is a broader challenge. The
results may be slower in coming but are no less worth pursuing. And
we intend to let other countries know where we stand.
We recognize that many nations of the world are organized on au-
thoritarian rather than democratic principles—some large and pow-
erful, others struggling to raise the lives of their people above bare sub-
sistence levels. We can nourish no illusions that a call to the banner of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
human rights will bring sudden transformations in authoritarian
societies.
We are embarked on a long journey. But our faith in the dignity of
the individual encourages us to believe that people in every society, ac-
cording to their own traditions, will in time give their own expression
to this fundamental aspiration.
Our belief is strengthened by the way the Helsinki principles and
the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights have found resonance in the
hearts of people of many countries. Our task is to sustain this faith by
our example and our encouragement.
In his inaugural address three months ago, President Carter said,
“Because we are free we can never be indifferent to the fate of freedom
elsewhere.” Again, at a meeting of the Organization of American States
two weeks ago, he said, “You will find this country . . . eager to stand
beside those nations which respect human rights and which promote
democratic ideals.”
We seek these goals because they are right—and because we, too,
will benefit. Our own well-being, and even our security, are enhanced
in a world that shares common freedoms and in which prosperity and
economic justice create the conditions for peace. And let us remember
that we always risk paying a serious price when we become identified
with repression.
Nations, like individuals, limit their potential when they limit their
goals. The American people understand this. I am confident they will
support foreign policies that reflect our traditional values. To offer less
is to define America in ways we should not accept.
America fought for freedom in 1776 and in two World Wars. We
have offered haven to the oppressed. Millions have come to our shores
in times of trouble. In times of devastation abroad, we have shared our
resources.
Our encouragement and inspiration to other nations and other
peoples have never been limited to the power of our military or the
bounty of our economy. They have been lifted up by the message of our
Revolution, the message of individual human freedom. That message
has been our great national asset in times past. So it should be again.

38.
Editorial Note
On May 5, 1977, President Jimmy Carter, Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance, and Secretary of the Treasury W. Michael Blumenthal departed
Washington for London to attend the G–7 Economic Summit meeting,
the four-nation meeting on Berlin, and the North Atlantic Council
(NAC) meeting. At 9: a.m., Carter addressed the press assembled on
the South Grounds at the White House. He outlined the scope and ob-
jectives for the meetings:
“We will have long discussions about close political interrelation-
ships, consultations, with our closest allies and friends. We’ll be
dealing with problems that concern NATO, the defense of Europe, the
relationships between the East and the West, among close friends and
potential adversaries whom we hope to be our close friends in the
future.
“I’ll be having bilateral private consultations with more than a
dozen leaders of foreign countries. I feel well briefed and well pre-
pared. And my own hope is that I can well and truly represent what the
American people would like to see their President do in discussing
world problems with other world leaders.
“We will be pursuing our long-range goals for world peace, for nu-
clear disarmament, for holding down the sale of conventional
weapons, for preventing the spread of the capability for nuclear explo-
sives among nations that don’t share it, for a discussion about the
proper uses of energy and the sharing of world trade with others, for
loans and direct aid to the less-developed countries, and the establish-
ment of basic mechanisms by which these discussions can continue, not
just at the summit level on special occasions but on a continual day-
to-day interrelationship.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pages
On May 6, Carter traveled to Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, where he
spoke to an audience at the Newcastle Civic Centre at 10: a.m. For his
remarks, see ibid., pages 811–813. That evening, Carter attended a
dinner hosted by British Prime Minister James Callaghan at 10 Down-
ing Street and took part in a question-and-answer session at Winfield
House. In response to a question as to the special interest the United
States would bring to the summit discussions, Carter answered: “Well,
we’re quite concerned about human rights, nonproliferation questions,
and the control of the sale or reduction of the sale of conventional—nu-
clear weapons, and we want to join with our friends from Japan and the
European Community in working out a reasonable approach to stabi-
lizing the world economy.” (Ibid., p. 814)
The Economic Summit meeting took place in London May 7–8 at

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ghan, Prime Minister Pierre Elliot Trudeau of Canada, President Vale´ry
Giscard d’Estaing of France, Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of the Federal
Republic of Germany, Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti of Italy, and
Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda of Japan. Documentation on the summit
meeting, including the minutes of the sessions, is in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy. Related documentation is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI,
Arms Control, and Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western
Europe. The text of the Downing Street Summit Conference declaration
and its annex, issued on May 8, is printed in Public Papers: Carter, 1977,
Book I, pages 819–824. In the declaration, the leaders pledged to create
additional jobs while reducing inflation, undertake stated economic
growth targets or stabilization policies, seek additional resources for
the International Monetary Fund, expand opportunities for trade to
strengthen the international trading system, conserve energy while re-
ducing nuclear proliferation, and achieve a successful end to the Con-
ference on International Economic Cooperation. For Carter’s remarks
following the reading of the joint declaration on May 8, see ibid., pages
On May 9, Carter met with Giscard, Schmidt, and Callaghan at 10
Downing Street to review questions relating to the status of Berlin. Al-
though no record of the meeting has been found, the four leaders, at the
conclusion of the meeting, released the text of a “Joint Declaration on
Berlin.” The text is printed ibid., pages 840–841. Following the conclu-
sion of the four-party meeting, Carter departed for Geneva to meet
with Syrian President Asad before returning to London that evening.
For Carter’s remarks upon arrival at Geneva, see ibid., pages 841–842.
For the text of Carter and Asad’s exchange of remarks preceding their
meeting, see ibid., pages 842–844. For the memorandum of conversa-
tion of the Carter–Asad meeting, which took place at the Interconti-
nental Hotel, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli
Carter and Vance attended the sessions of the North Atlantic
Council meeting on May 10. During the morning session, which began
at 11 a.m. in the Long Gallery at Lancaster House, Carter addressed the
participants. After brief introductory remarks, Carter underscored the
importance of relations among the industrial democracies in light of
potential military and political challenges of the upcoming decade:
“At the center of this effort must be strong ties between Europe
and North America. In maintaining and strengthening these ties, my
administration will be guided by certain principles. Simply stated:
“—We will continue to make the Alliance the heart of our foreign
policy.
“—We will remain a reliable and faithful ally.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
“—We will join with you to strengthen the Alliance—politically,
economically, and militarily.
“—We will ask for and listen to the advice of our allies. And we
will give our views in return, candidly and as friends.
“This effort rests on a strong foundation. The state of the Alliance
is good. Its strategy and doctrine are solid. We derive added strength
and new pride from the fact that all 15 of our member countries are
now democracies. Our alliance is a pact for peace and a pact for
freedom.
“The Alliance is even stronger because of solid progress toward
Western European unification and the expanding role of the European
Community in world affairs. The United States welcomes this develop-
ment and will work closely with the Community.” (Public Papers:
Carter, 1977, Book I, page 849)
Carter devoted the remainder of his remarks to outlining the areas
of cooperation in political and defense matters. He underscored the
complexity of East-West relations, adding that the approach to this re-
lationship “must be guided both by a humane vision and by a sense of
history. Our humane vision leads us to seek broad cooperation with
Communist states for the good of mankind. Our sense of history
teaches us that we and the Soviet Union will continue to compete. Yet if
we manage this dual relationship properly, we can hope that coopera-
tion will eventually overshadow competition, leading to an increas-
ingly stable relationship between our countries and the Soviet Union.”
(Ibid.) The President listed arms control, arms limitation, and human
rights as areas for cooperation with the Soviet Union, recognizing that
any success in these areas depended upon close consultation with the
NATO members. He also proposed that the Council undertake a re-
view of East-West relations that might assess future trends and impli-
cations. Turning to defense matters, Carter stressed: “Achieving our
political goals depends on a credible defense and deterrent. The United
States supports the existing strategy of flexible response and forward
defense. We will continue to provide our share of the powerful forces
adequate to fulfill this strategy. We will maintain an effective strategic
deterrent, we will keep diverse and modern theatre nuclear forces in
Europe, and we will maintain and improve conventional forces based
here.” (Ibid., page 850) He underscored cooperation in this area, as
well, notably in the “development, production, and procurement of Al-
liance defense equipment.” (Ibid., page 851) He reiterated these themes
in his closing statement:
“To conclude:
“It is not enough for us to share common purposes; we must also
strengthen the institutions that fulfill those purposes. We are met today
to renew our dedication to one of the most important of those institu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tions and to plan for actions that will help it to meet new challenges.
Some of these actions can be taken in the near future. Others can be de-
veloped for review at our meeting next year at this time. I would be
glad to offer Washington as the site of that meeting.
“The French writer and aviator, Saint-Exupe´ry, wrote that ‘the
noblest task of mankind is to unite mankind.’ In that spirit, I am confi-
dent that we will succeed.” (Ibid., page 852)
The President provided a summation of his entire visit during re-
marks to news correspondents on May 10. In reference to that
morning’s address, Carter commented:
“I think as far as the NATO meeting was concerned, most of the
nations were relieved to know that the reluctance on the part of the
United States 3 or 4 years ago to participate fully in NATO is now past,
that we are a full partner, that our financial commitment to conven-
tional forces in NATO are stronger than they were before. And I think
that if they carry out the suggestions that I made this morning—and
they were adopted unanimously—to do an analysis of NATO for the
1980s, to do a complete analysis of the relationship between the
Western democratic societies and the Eastern Communist societies, and
also to share the benefits of NATO as far as the purchase of equipment
and so forth is concerned—these, of course, will be made back in Wash-
ington next year for the next NATO summit meeting.” (Ibid.)
The text of the NATO communique´, released at the conclusion of
the meeting on May 11, is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June
ington, made at a May 12 news conference, is printed in Public Papers:
Carter, 1977, Book I, page 860.

39.
Memorandum of Conversation
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
BETWEEN DR. BRZEZINSKI AND LEADERS
OF THE AMERICAN JEWISH COMMUNITY
PARTICIPANTS
Alexander Schindler
Melvin Dubinsky
Israel Miller
Jacob Sheinkman
Arthur Hertzberg
Herman Rosenbaum
Max Fisher
Richard Maass
Jerold Hoffberger
Arthur Levine
Yehuda Hellman
Ed Sanders
Mrs. Bernice S. Tannenbaum
Joe Sternstein
Harry Smith
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Robert Lipshutz
Stuart Eizenstat
Joyce Starr
William B. Quandt
Rabbi Schindler opened the discussion by noting that the crisis
over arms supply had now abated, but that apprehension continued in
the American Jewish community concerning a possible peace plan that
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the Administration would present at some point, combined with pres-
sure to implement it. This plan, he believes, would consist of calling for
peace in return for substantially complete Israeli withdrawal and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian state on the West Bank,
which would be headed by the PLO. He asked for reassurances that
this was not American governmental thinking.
Dr. Brzezinski replied that it was natural that some apprehensions
exist at a time when we stand on the threshold of possibly important
historical developments. In his view, the question of Israel’s ability to
survive as a strong and independent country, and the issue of whether
the United States would support Israel, have been settled. The question
is now whether Israel’s permanence can be translated into a lasting
peace. The kind of peace, and how it might be implemented, and the
consequences that would follow from peace, must now be considered
carefully. Peace, as difficult as it may be to achieve, will be much better
than the continuing stalemate without peace. Israel’s role, he noted,
would be absolutely essential. In a peaceful Middle East, Israel could
become the Switzerland of the Middle East. One needs to consider the
trade-off between peace and stalemate. Stalemate runs the risk of war,
continuing high military expenditures, and dependency on the United
States. Movement toward peace can help to allay some of the concerns
that now exist. The President feels that our relationship with Israel is a
unique one and that it has spiritual and organic qualities.
On the question of whether the United States has a plan, if by that
one means a blueprint that we are preparing to impose on the parties,
the answer, Dr. Brzezinski stated, is an unequivocal “No.” If by plan
one means some concept of a peace settlement, the answer is “Yes.”
Our concept is based on a historical vision of how the conflict can be re-
solved and the President has spoken openly of this, as did Prime Min-
ister Rabin when he was here. We have been thinking in terms of a
meaningful peace, of establishing a framework for negotiations, and
we have identified and repeated that negotiations will have to deal
with the nature of peace, territory and security, and the Palestinian
question. We have talked to Israeli and Arab leaders on these issues,
pressing the Arabs to be more explicit on peace and the Israelis to be
more explicit on territory and the Palestinians. That is where we are
today. We hope that we can find some areas of complementarity and
that we will then be able to prepare for a Geneva Conference. We
cannot be certain of success, but it is an act of historical obligation to try
to think constructively about a settlement. The parties themselves,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
however, will have to negotiate the final settlement, but we are trying
to get them to think about the issues clearly.
Mr. Hertzberg noted that the American-Jewish leadership does not
favor immobilism. All agree on the need for peace, and the President’s
statements that peace must be real have been viewed in a very positive
way. The concern in the American Jewish community stems from the
statement that the United States is asking Israel to be more explicit on
the Palestinians and on territory. There is concern about the idea of a
Palestinian entity which might be led by the PLO. The United States
should not be the party to decide on such a state, but rather should try
to end the conflict in a way that will be stable.
Dr. Brzezinski noted that one should not conclude that our prefer-
ence is for a PLO-dominated state. Since we have no plan, we cannot
define precisely how the Palestinian issue might be resolved, but we
have some preferences that the West Bank and Jordan be linked. The
question is how to get there. Should the United States push for this out-
come, or should Israel dictate it, or should the Arabs themselves reach
this conclusion? Clearly, the last is the best outcome. Arab views seem
to be more realistic and Arab leaders recognize that a volatile situation
in the West Bank is not in their interests. The facts of the situation are
forcing the Arabs to think realistically. Dr. Brzezinski stated that his
personal view is that a situation should not be imposed on the Pales-
tinians, which they would reject and then turn to the Soviet Union. It
would be better to have an Arab consensus on an outcome that Pales-
tinian moderates could accept. The present Arab leadership is the most
moderate that has existed since 1947.
In response to a question, Dr. Brzezinski noted that the American
objective now is to establish a framework within which the parties will
be able to deal with the issues. The President’s statements have not re-
solved issues yet, but they have begun a probing of the issues. His use
of words has been cautious and he has not prejudged outcomes, but he
has tried to clarify underlying issues. Once the parties get to the negoti-
ating table, we hope that the negotiations will not break down. There
has to be an understood basis for negotiation, and this is the reason for
developing the conceptual framework. He noted that the United States
will not try to develop a blueprint, nor will it threaten Israel with the
question of its survival, but we will talk frankly and honestly with Is-
rael, and we will say the same thing to both Israel and the Arabs.
Responding to a comment on defensible borders, Dr. Brzezinski
noted that he did not personally use that term. Israel has good defense
lines today, but they are not borders. The borders of the final peace set-
tlement, if they are recognized, will not be defensible in the same sense
that they are today, but if Israel retains the current lines that she now
occupies, these will never become recognized borders. So defensible

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
borders in any simple sense do not make much sense. Instead, one
must try to think about what borders might be recognized and what
recognition would be worth, combined with other arrangements for se-
curity that might be made. In the age of nationalism, he noted, territory
is integrally tied to the sense of nationhood. Only Germany has ac-
cepted major territorial losses, and that was in context of total defeat
and a recognition of guilt that went with the defeat. This is not the case
with the Arabs, and we cannot expect them to abandon their claims to
substantial amounts of their territory. Instead of referring to defensible
borders, we should talk of mutually accepted borders, legitimacy, and
should try to develop arrangements to support the agreements which
will provide for fool-proof security. The President has been hinting at
this. Security arrangements for Israel might include a binding US com-
mitment. Israel is not totally independent and if Israel must be de-
pendent, it might be best to make the US tie to Israel a binding one. One
way would be through treaties.
A question was then raised concerning American arms supply,
and Dr. Brzezinski said that it was difficult to be specific. He argued
against the notion that the Defense Department was deliberately ob-
structive, citing the recent case of the Chariot tank where allegations of
obstruction had not been well founded. On the question of the co-
production of the F–16, he declined to answer, stating that this would
have to be dealt with in the broad framework that the President has
tried to set out whereby our policy aims at gaining the confidence of Is-
raelis and Arabs, while, at the same time, trying on a global basis for
arms reductions.
Mr. Fisher remarked that he hoped the United States would ask for
more than moderation in words from the Arabs and that we would also
look for moderation in terms of their action toward Israel. Dr. Brzezin-
ski responded by acknowledging that Arab culture seems to favor
some verbal exaggeration, and that on occasion Arab leaders seem to
tell different things to different audiences. We are trying, however, to
move the Arabs to take binding public positions from which they find it
difficult to retreat. Concerning Arab intentions, Dr. Brzezinski noted
that some Arabs may still hope that Israel can ultimately be destroyed
in a second phase to follow a peace agreement. We will therefore insist
on more than verbal assurances of their intentions, and will demand
that objective barriers be created to make the second phase, if that is
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
their intention, an impossibility. We want to make phase two an impos-
sibility and phase one so attractive that they will commit themselves
to it.
Dr. Brzezinski agreed to a statement that Rabbi Schindler could
use with the press to describe the Administration’s attitude. The agreed
statement is as follows:
“We had a comprehensive discussion of the Middle East situation,
including US-Israel relations, in the course of which Dr. Brzezinski
reaffirmed the Administration’s underlying commitment to the secu-
rity of Israel, and particularly to the special and organic relationship
that binds the United States to Israel. He further noted that the Admin-
istration’s statements on the questions of territory, the Palestinians, and
peace do not represent a blueprint to be imposed, but rather are a con-
ceptual framework within which the parties can negotiate a peaceful
settlement to the Middle East conflict.”
40.
Address by President Carter
South Bend, Indiana, May 22, 1977
UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME
To Father Hesburgh and the great faculty of Notre Dame, to those who
have been honored this afternoon with the degree from your great university,
p.m. at the commencement exercises at the University of Notre Dame Athletic and Con-
vocation Center. Father Hesburgh conferred an honorary doctor of laws degree on the
President and then offered opening remarks. On March 18, Hesburgh had sent Carter a
memorandum congratulating him on the United Nations address (see Document 29) and
noting that the Overseas Development Council, which Hesburgh chaired, planned to re-
lease The United States and World Development: Agenda 1977, the fifth in the ODC’s annual
assessments of the relationship between the United States and the developing world.
Hesburgh commented that the report might prove useful in Carter’s elucidation of the
“basic human needs” strategy as referenced in the United Nations address. Carter sent
Hesburgh’s memorandum to Eizenstat and Fallows under a March 28 handwritten note:
“Begin working on a Notre Dame speech outline for May—use ‘Human Rights’ in its
broadest sense. This ODC report is good basis for ideas. J.C.” (Carter Library, Hertzberg
tional materials regarding the speech preparation are ibid. According to the minutes of
the May 23 Cabinet meeting, Brzezinski “commended the White House speech writers
and Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher for their work preparing the Presi-
dent’s Notre Dame speech. He said that the speech reflects an ongoing effort to reassert
the moral and political leadership of the United States—perhaps for the first time in fif-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
to the graduate and undergraduate group who, I understand, is the largest in
the history of this great institution, friends and parents:
[Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks in which
he referenced his honorary degree and praised Father Hesburgh for his
commitment to civil rights and human rights. He also acknowledged
the other honorary degree recipients and their support for human
rights.]
Last week, I spoke in California about the domestic agenda for our
Nation: to provide more efficiently for the needs of our people, to dem-
onstrate—against the dark faith of our times—that our Government
can be both competent and more humane.
But I want to speak to you today about the strands that connect our
actions overseas with our essential character as a nation. I believe we
can have a foreign policy that is democratic, that is based on funda-
mental values, and that uses power and influence, which we have, for
humane purposes. We can also have a foreign policy that the American
people both support and, for a change, know about and understand.
I have a quiet confidence in our own political system. Because we
know that democracy works, we can reject the arguments of those
rulers who deny human rights to their people.
We are confident that democracy’s example will be compelling,
and so we seek to bring that example closer to those from whom in the
past few years we have been separated and who are not yet convinced
about the advantages of our kind of life.
We are confident that the democratic methods are the most effec-
tive, and so we are not tempted to employ improper tactics here at
home or abroad.
We are confident of our own strength, so we can seek substantial
mutual reductions in the nuclear arms race.
And we are confident of the good sense of American people, and
so we let them share in the process of making foreign policy decisions.
We can thus speak with the voices of 215 million, and not just of an iso-
lated handful.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Democracy’s great recent successes—in India, Portugal, Spain,
Greece—show that our confidence in this system is not misplaced.
Being confident of our own future, we are now free of that inordinate
fear of communism which once led us to embrace any dictator who
joined us in that fear. I’m glad that that’s being changed.
For too many years, we’ve been willing to adopt the flawed and er-
roneous principles and tactics of our adversaries, sometimes aban-
doning our own values for theirs. We’ve fought fire with fire, never
thinking that fire is better quenched with water. This approach failed,
with Vietnam the best example of its intellectual and moral poverty.
But through failure we have now found our way back to our own prin-
ciples and values, and we have regained our lost confidence.
By the measure of history, our Nation’s 200 years are very brief,
and our rise to world eminence is briefer still. It dates from 1945, when
Europe and the old international order lay in ruins. Before then,
America was largely on the periphery of world affairs. But since then,
we have inescapably been at the center of world affairs.
Our policy during this period was guided by two principles: a be-
lief that Soviet expansion was almost inevitable but that it must be con-
tained, and the corresponding belief in the importance of an almost ex-
clusive alliance among non-Communist nations on both sides of the
Atlantic. That system could not last forever unchanged. Historical
trends have weakened its foundation. The unifying threat of conflict
with the Soviet Union has become less intensive, even though the com-
petition has become more extensive.
The Vietnamese war produced a profound moral crisis, sapping
worldwide faith in our own policy and our system of life, a crisis of
confidence made even more grave by the covert pessimism of some of
our leaders.
In less than a generation, we’ve seen the world change dramat-
ically. The daily lives and aspirations of most human beings have been
transformed. Colonialism is nearly gone. A new sense of national iden-
tity now exists in almost 100 new countries that have been formed in
the last generation. Knowledge has become more widespread. Aspira-
tions are higher. As more people have been freed from traditional con-
straints, more have been determined to achieve, for the first time in
their lives, social justice.
The world is still divided by ideological disputes, dominated by
regional conflicts, and threatened by danger that we will not resolve
the differences of race and wealth without violence or without drawing
into combat the major military powers. We can no longer separate the
traditional issues of war and peace from the new global questions of
justice, equity, and human rights.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
It is a new world, but America should not fear it. It is a new world,
and we should help to shape it. It is a new world that calls for a new
American foreign policy—a policy based on constant decency in its
values and on optimism in our historical vision.
We can no longer have a policy solely for the industrial nations as
the foundation of global stability, but we must respond to the new re-
ality of a politically awakening world.
We can no longer expect that the other 150 nations will follow the
dictates of the powerful, but we must continue—confidently—our ef-
forts to inspire, to persuade, and to lead.
Our policy must reflect our belief that the world can hope for more
than simple survival and our belief that dignity and freedom are funda-
mental spiritual requirements. Our policy must shape an international
system that will last longer than secret deals.
We cannot make this kind of policy by manipulation. Our policy
must be open; it must be candid; it must be one of constructive global
involvement, resting on five cardinal principles.
I’ve tried to make these premises clear to the American people
since last January. Let me review what we have been doing and discuss
what we intend to do.
First, we have reaffirmed America’s commitment to human rights
as a fundamental tenet of our foreign policy. In ancestry, religion, color,
place of origin, and cultural background, we Americans are as diverse a
nation as the world has even seen. No common mystique of blood or
soil unites us. What draws us together, perhaps more than anything
else, is a belief in human freedom. We want the world to know that our
Nation stands for more than financial prosperity.
This does not mean that we can conduct our foreign policy by rigid
moral maxims. We live in a world that is imperfect and which will
always be imperfect—a world that is complex and confused and which
will always be complex and confused.
I understand fully the limits of moral suasion. We have no illusion
that changes will come easily or soon. But I also believe that it is a mis-
take to undervalue the power of words and of the ideas that words em-
body. In our own history, that power has ranged from Thomas Paine’s
“Common Sense” to Martin Luther King, Jr.’s “I Have a Dream.”
In the life of the human spirit, words are action, much more so than
many of us may realize who live in countries where freedom of expres-
sion is taken for granted. The leaders of totalitarian nations understand
this very well. The proof is that words are precisely the action for which
dissidents in those countries are being persecuted.
Nonetheless, we can already see dramatic, worldwide advances in
the protection of the individual from the arbitrary power of the state.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
For us to ignore this trend would be to lose influence and moral au-
thority in the world. To lead it will be to regain the moral stature that
we once had.
The great democracies are not free because we are strong and pros-
perous. I believe we are strong and influential and prosperous because
we are free.
Throughout the world today, in free nations and in totalitarian
countries as well, there is a preoccupation with the subject of human
freedom, human rights. And I believe it is incumbent on us in this
country to keep that discussion, that debate, that contention alive. No
other country is as well-qualified as we to set an example. We have our
own shortcomings and faults, and we should strive constantly and
with courage to make sure that we are legitimately proud of what we
have.
Second, we’ve moved deliberately to reinforce the bonds among
our democracies. In our recent meetings in London, we agreed to
widen our economic cooperation, to promote free trade, to strengthen
the world’s monetary system, to seek ways of avoiding nuclear prolif-
eration. We prepared constructive proposals for the forthcoming
meetings on North-South problems of poverty, development, and
global well-being. And we agreed on joint efforts to reinforce and to
modernize our common defense.
You may be interested in knowing that at this NATO meeting, for
the first time in more than 25 years, all members are democracies. Even
more important, all of us reaffirmed our basic optimism in the future of
the democratic system. Our spirit of confidence is spreading. Together,
our democracies can help to shape the wider architecture of global
cooperation.
Third, we’ve moved to engage the Soviet Union in a joint effort to
halt the strategic arms race. This race is not only dangerous, it’s morally
deplorable. We must put an end to it.
I know it will not be easy to reach agreements. Our goal is to be fair
to both sides, to produce reciprocal stability, parity, and security. We
desire a freeze on further modernization and production of weapons
and a continuing, substantial reduction of strategic nuclear weapons as
well. We want a comprehensive ban on all nuclear testing, a prohibition
against all chemical warfare, no attack capability against space satel-
lites, and arms limitations in the Indian Ocean.
We hope that we can take joint steps with all nations toward a final
agreement eliminating nuclear weapons completely from our arsenals
of death. We will persist in this effort.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Now, I believe in de´tente with the Soviet Union. To me it means
progress toward peace. But the effects of de´tente should not be limited
to our own two countries alone. We hope to persuade the Soviet Union
that one country cannot impose its system of society upon another,
either through direct military intervention or through the use of a
client state’s military force, as was the case with Cuban intervention in
Angola.
Cooperation also implies obligation. We hope that the Soviet
Union will join with us and other nations in playing a larger role in
aiding the developing world, for common aid efforts will help us build
a bridge of mutual confidence in one another.
Fourth, we are taking deliberate steps to improve the chances of
lasting peace in the Middle East. Through wide-ranging consultation
with leaders of the countries involved—Israel, Syria, Jordan, and
Egypt—we have found some areas of agreement and some movement
toward consensus. The negotiations must continue.
Through my own public comments, I’ve also tried to suggest a
more flexible framework for the discussion of the three key issues
which have so far been so intractable: the nature of a comprehensive
peace—what is peace; what does it mean to the Israelis; what does it
mean to their Arab neighbors; secondly, the relationship between secu-
rity and borders—how can the dispute over border delineations be es-
tablished and settled with a feeling of security on both sides; and the
issue of the Palestinian homeland.
The historic friendship that the United States has with Israel is not
dependent on domestic politics in either nation; it’s derived from our
common respect for human freedom and from a common search for
permanent peace.
We will continue to promote a settlement which all of us need. Our
own policy will not be affected by changes in leadership in any of the
countries in the Middle East. Therefore, we expect Israel and her
neighbors to continue to be bound by United Nations Resolutions 242
and 338, which they have previously accepted.
This may be the most propitious time for a genuine settlement
since the beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict almost 30 years ago. To
let this opportunity pass could mean disaster not only for the Middle
East but, perhaps, for the international political and economic order as
well.
fulfillment of the UN Charter required the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. UN Security Council Resolution 338, adopted in October 1973, called for ne-
gotiations among Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and Syria aimed toward establishing a just and
durable peace in the Middle East.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
And fifth, we are attempting, even at the risk of some friction with
our friends, to reduce the danger of nuclear proliferation and the
worldwide spread of conventional weapons.
At the recent summit, we set in motion an international effort to
determine the best ways of harnessing nuclear energy for peaceful use
while reducing the risks that its products will be diverted to the making
of explosives.
We’ve already completed a comprehensive review of our own
policy on arms transfers. Competition in arms sales is inimical to peace
and destructive of the economic development of the poorer countries.
We will, as a matter of national policy now in our country, seek to
reduce the annual dollar volume of arms sales, to restrict the transfer of
advanced weapons, and to reduce the extent of our coproduction ar-
rangements about weapons with foreign states. And just as important,
we are trying to get other nations, both free and otherwise, to join us in
this effort.
But all of this that I’ve described is just the beginning. It’s a begin-
ning aimed towards a clear goal: to create a wider framework of inter-
national cooperation suited to the new and rapidly changing historical
circumstances.
We will cooperate more closely with the newly influential coun-
tries in Latin America, Africa, and Asia. We need their friendship and
cooperation in a common effort as the structure of world power
changes.
More than 100 years ago, Abraham Lincoln said that our Nation
could not exist half slave and half free. We know a peaceful world
cannot long exist one-third rich and two-thirds hungry.
Most nations share our faith that, in the long run, expanded and
equitable trade will best help the developing countries to help them-
selves. But the immediate problems of hunger, disease, illiteracy, and
repression are here now.
of U.S. policy regarding the international transfer of conventional arms and PD/NSC–13,
“Conventional Arms Transfer Policy,” issued on May 13, which outlined the implemen-
tation of the administration’s policy of conventional arms restraint. PRM/NSC–12 is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI, Arms Control. PD/
NSC–13, in which he indicated that the United States would now perceive arms transfers
as an “exceptional foreign policy implement,” see Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The Western democracies, the OPEC nations, and the developed
Communist countries can cooperate through existing international in-
stitutions in providing more effective aid. This is an excellent alterna-
tive to war.
We have a special need for cooperation and consultation with
other nations in this hemisphere—to the north and to the south. We do
not need another slogan. Although these are our close friends and
neighbors, our links with them are the same links of equality that we
forge for the rest of the world. We will be dealing with them as part of a
new, worldwide mosaic of global, regional, and bilateral relations.
It’s important that we make progress toward normalizing relations
with the People’s Republic of China. We see the American and Chinese
relationship as a central element of our global policy and China as a key
force for global peace. We wish to cooperate closely with the creative
Chinese people on the problems that confront all mankind. And we
hope to find a formula which can bridge some of the difficulties that
still separate us.
Finally, let me say that we are committed to a peaceful resolution
of the crisis in southern Africa. The time has come for the principle of
majority rule to be the basis for political order, recognizing that in a
democratic system the rights of the minority must also be protected.
To be peaceful, change must come promptly. The United States is
determined to work together with our European allies and with the
concerned African States to shape a congenial international framework
for the rapid and progressive transformation of southern African so-
ciety and to help protect it from unwarranted outside interference.
Let me conclude by summarizing: Our policy is based on an histor-
ical vision of America’s role. Our policy is derived from a larger view of
global change. Our policy is rooted in our moral values, which never
change. Our policy is reinforced by our material wealth and by our mil-
itary power. Our policy is designed to serve mankind. And it is a policy
that I hope will make you proud to be Americans.
Thank you.

41.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, May 24, 1977
These are the paragraphs which I hope you will find helpful. They
are designed to accomplish three purposes:
1. Continue the President’s Notre Dame theme of combining a vi-
sion of America’s international role with the realities of a novel interna-
tional system;2
2. Establish an agenda for U.S. and OECD activity on North-South
issues over the next year which, without hiding the difficulties of the
concept, examines and develops a set of proposals around the theme of
basic human needs; and
3. Establishes that this theme will be a major element in the contin-
uing North-South dialogue post CIEC3 for constructive and legitimate
reasons—not for tactical reasons of “splitting” the Group of 77.
Zbigniew Brzezinski
Attachment
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff
Washington, undated
As the Administration of President Carter has reviewed the major
issues currently on the North-South agenda and begun to establish its
own set of priorities, it has found one issue slighted in all the talk about
a new international economic order. The issue has various names: the
“absolute poverty” problem, the problem of “basic human needs,” the
problem of “the forgotten forty percent.” Whatever we choose to call it,
it is the problem of those one billion persons living at the razor’s edge
of existence. Again, as President Carter noted at Notre Dame, most na-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tions share our faith that, in the longer run, expanded trade will best
help developing countries to help themselves. But the immediate
problems of hunger, disease, high infant mortality, illiteracy and
stunted “life chances” cannot and should not be expected to await a
longer-run answer.
If our nations did not have the knowledge and the resources
needed to overcome these problems of meeting basic human needs
within the next two decades, perhaps we could excuse ourselves from
making any special effort to overcome the so-called “absolute poverty”
problem.
But the knowledge of the development process and the knowledge
of how to construct a viable approach to the resolution of this acute
poverty problem is now within our grasp. What is missing is the joint
willingness of developed and developing countries to recognize that
the North-South dialogue is about human beings as well as nation-states,
and that “equality of opportunity” for a richer and more meaningful
life only makes sense as it applies to people.
In order to give proper focus to this aspect of the North-South dia-
logue, the United States proposes to proceed as follows. First, we, our-
selves, will develop specific programs to overcome the absolute pov-
erty problem globally. We have already determined the essential
ingredients and objectives of such a program. It must deal with:
—Basic education, particularly in rural areas;
—Essential health services, again with emphasis on rural areas;
—increased food production and the provision of adequate
nutrition;
—clean water.
At the June meeting of the OECD, we plan to ask the member
countries to jointly cooperate with us in developing these programs as
a principal part of the OECD’s general work program.
Within a year, we would hope to be able to present to the devel-
oping countries a major set of programs for discussion. Our objective
would be then to develop a joint effort that will effectively tackle the
problem of meeting the basic human needs of the world’s poorest bil-
lion people. We recognize that this effort will require a substantial com-
mitment of political will and resources on the part of all countries who
choose to participate—North and South; developing and developed.
To carry this out and to conduct the North-South dialogue, we be-
lieve that serious consideration should be given to developing appro-

42.
Paper Prepared by the President’s Assistant (Jordan)
Washington, June 1977
[Omitted here are the title page and the table of contents.]
REVIEW OF FOREIGN POLICY INITIATIVES
Because you have chosen to be active in many areas of foreign
policy during your first year in office, there will evolve in the near fu-
ture a number of critical decisions that will have to be made. And each
of these decisions will be difficult politically and will have domestic im-
plications that will require the support and understanding of the Amer-
ican people and the Congress.
The most significant of these decisions relate to specific countries
and/or areas of the world. As best I can determine, those decisions
which will require action on our part and/or the political support of the
people and Congress are:
—The Middle East
—SALT II
—AFRICA
—Normalization of relations with Cuba and Vietnam
—Treaty with Panama
—Withdrawal of troops from Korea
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
It is my own contention that this confluence of foreign policy ini-
tiatives and decisions will require a comprehensive and well coordi-
nated domestic political strategy if our policies are to gain the under-
standing and support of the American people and the Congress.
It is important that we understand the political dimensions of the
challenges we face on these specific issues:
1. There is a limited public understanding of most foreign policy issues.
This is certainly the case with SALT II and the Middle East. This is not
altogether bad as it provides us an opportunity to present these issues
to the public in a politically advantageous way. At the same time, most
of these issues assume a simplistic political coloration. If you favor nor-
malization of relations with Cuba or Vietnam, you are a “liberal”; if you
oppose
normalization
with
these
same
countries,
you
are
“conservative”.
2. To the extent that the issues we are dealing with have a “liberal” or
“conservative” connotation, our position on these particular issues is consist-
ently “liberal”. We must do what we can to present these issues to the
public in a non-ideological way and not allow them to undermine your
own image as a moderate-conservative.
3. Congressional support in some form is needed to accomplish most of
your foreign policy objectives. A modest amount of time invested in con-
sultation with key members of Congress will go a long way toward
winning the support of Congress on many issues. Whereas members of
Congress do not mind—and sometimes relish—a confrontation with
the President on some local project or matter of obvious direct benefit
to their district or state, very few wish to differ publicly with the Presi-
dent on a foreign policy matter.
4. We have very little control over the schedule and time-frame in which
most of these foreign policy issues will be resolved. Consequently, a contin-
uing problem and challenge will be to attempt to separate out the key
foreign policy issues from domestic programs so the two will not be-
come politically entwined in the Congress. This dictates a continuing
focus on the historical bipartisan nature of U.S. foreign policy so the Re-
publican members of Congress will be less tempted to demagogue
these issues during the 1978 elections.
5. Conservatives are much better organized than liberals and will gener-
ally oppose our foreign policy initiatives. To effectively counter conserva-
tive opposition, we will have to take the initiative in providing coordi-
nation of our resources and political leadership. Our resources at
present are considerable, but they are scattered among a variety of

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
groups and institutions. To the extent our policy goals are being pur-
sued, they are being pursued unilaterally by groups and people and
without coordination. The very fact that your administration is active
simultaneously in many areas of foreign policy dictates a comprehen-
sive, long-range political strategy for winning the support of the Amer-
ican people and the Congress. To accomplish this goal, I would recom-
mend a three step process:
I. CONSULTATION. Early consultation with Congress and inter-
ested/affected constituent groups is critical to the political success of
these policies. In almost every instance, Senate ratification of a treaty
and/or military and economic support which requires the support of
Congress will be required to accomplish these foreign policy objectives.
Consequently, it is important that we invest a small amount of time on
a continuing basis in consultation with members of Congress and
groups/organizations.
II. PUBLIC EDUCATION. Public understanding of most of these
issues is very limited. To the extent these issues are understood and/or
perceived by the general public, they are viewed in very simplistic
terms. This is a mixed blessing. On one hand, it becomes necessary to
explain complex issues to the American people. On the other hand, be-
cause these issues are not well understood, a tremendous opportunity
exists to educate the public to a certain point of view. In the final
analysis, I suspect that we could demonstrate a direct correlation be-
tween the trust the American people have for their President and the
degree to which they are willing to trust that President’s judgement on
complex issues of foreign policy.
In terms of public education, we have a tremendous number of re-
sources. They include:
—Fireside chats
—Town meetings
—Speaking opportunities for President, Vice-President, First Fam-
ily, Cabinet, etc.
—Public service media opportunities
—Groups outside government who support particular policies
—Democratic National Committee
—Mailing lists
—Etc.
III. POLITICAL PLANNING AND COORDINATION. Once foreign
policy goals are established, it is critical that political strategies in sup-
port of those goals be developed and implemented. And it is important
that the resources available to the Administration—both inside and

43.
Editorial Note
On June 6, 1977, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance addressed the
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe in order to discuss
the administration’s approach to the forthcoming CSCE Review Con-
ference, scheduled to take place in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in October
1977. Vance asserted that he wanted to underline the “continuing im-
portance” the Carter administration placed on the implementation of
the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference (see footnote 7, Document 4):
“You are fully aware of this Administration’s interest in pro-
moting more stable and mutually beneficial relations between the
peoples of East and West. The Helsinki Final Act provides one frame-
work for such cooperation.
“You are also aware of our commitment to honor and promote the
rights of individuals, the human rights of all peoples, no matter what
their political or social origins and affiliations. The Conference on Secu-
rity and Cooperation in Europe has provided a multilateral mechanism
through which to pursue these aims.”
After praising the continued cooperation between the executive
and legislative branches concerning the multiple issues related to the
Helsinki Accords, Vance then stated the administration’s objectives for
the upcoming meeting:
“—We seek full implementation of all the commitments contained
in the Helsinki Final Act. None can be called more binding, more vital,
than others. All three of the so-called baskets are important.
“—We seek incremental improvements in relations between East
and West on all the fronts surveyed at Helsinki: political, economic, sci-
entific, cultural, security, and humanitarian.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
“—We seek to move forward on all these fronts simultaneously:
the freer flow of people and ideas is as important to long-term security
and cooperation as, for example, advance notice of major military ma-
neuvers; the humanitarian pledges at Helsinki are as important as, say,
the promises of greater commercial cooperation.
“—There will be consideration of new proposals. But we must not
be diverted from assessment of how fully the specific undertakings of
Helsinki have been carried out by all the signatories.”
Vance referenced the ambitiousness of the agenda, conceding that
differences in “understanding and priority” might exist among partici-
pants. Although discussion of differences would be desirable, he as-
serted that such discussions could not “serve as a diversion or a cloak
for inaction” in terms of reviewing progress made and anticipating
subsequent implementation of other goals. He then continued:
“At Belgrade we will assess on the spot how best to be effective
and persuasive in pursuing our objectives. Between public diplomacy
and quiet diplomacy, we will strive for maximum practical impact. We
will avoid grandiose new proposals that have little chance of being ac-
ceptable. Propaganda ploys, debating points have no place in our
strategy. We will state our goals and our assessments clearly, without
polemics. It would serve no one’s interests if such serious and far-
reaching questions were dealt with in anything other than a serious
and straightforward manner.”
Vance concluded his remarks by noting that the administration’s
report on the implementation of the Final Act, a copy of which he had
provided to the Commission, detailed and assessed the steps the
United States had taken. He underscored the reality that no nation’s
record “is perfect,” and added that the United States would accept
“constructive criticism” of its own policy. Referencing his April 30 Law
Day address, which he delivered at the University of Georgia (see Doc-
ument 37), Vance stated that action in the cause of human rights “is a
matter for informed and careful judgment. No mechanistic formula
produces an automatic answer.” He concluded:
“So it will be in our decisions about working for implementation of
the commitments contained in the Helsinki Final Act, those dealing
with our political, economic, and military relations, as well as those af-
fecting human rights.
“Respect for the undertakings solemnly accepted at CSCE is an ef-
fort to which our government is firmly committed, in the full knowl-
edge that the pursuit of security and cooperation in Europe poses a test
of our perseverance as much as of our ideals. I am confident that we
will, together, persevere.” (Department of State Bulletin, June 27, 1977,
pages 669–670)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
44.
Address by Vice President Mondale
San Francisco, California, June 17, 1977
A Framework for Middle East Peace: Shaping A More Stable World
In the last several months, I’ve undertaken two extended foreign
trips on behalf of the President to Europe and Japan. The more I travel,
and the more nations I visit, the more I come to believe that the peoples
of the world are not really so different—that all of us dream the same
dreams for our children and that the real key to peace and cooperation
in the world lies in better understanding between people. Diplomats
and heads of state and elected officials must play a role, but we should
never underestimate the power of ideas and education and greater un-
derstanding to break down the barriers of suspicion and fear that too
often separate the nations of the world.
Your programs in the school system, on television, the lectures and
seminars you hold, your model U.N. conference for students are all an
important part of that effort. And I’m particularly pleased to see that
you’re joining together with a number of groups involved in interna-
tional relations in a new World Affairs Center here in San Francisco,
and I wish you every success in that venture. And so the contributions
of an organization such as yours toward increased understanding in
the world are really crucial, not only to the foreign policy efforts of this
nation but to the search for peace.
With the words of his Inaugural Address, President Carter identi-
fied at the very outset of his Administration the guiding spirit of this
nation’s foreign policy:
Our nation can be strong abroad only if it is strong at home, and
we know that the best way to enhance freedom in other lands is to dem-
onstrate here that our democratic system is worthy of emulation. To be
true to ourselves, we must be true to others.
And he elaborated on the basic premises of our relations with
other nations in his speech at Notre Dame3 this May:
the original. Mondale spoke before the World Affairs Council of Northern California.
Additional information about the address is in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mon-
dale Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Special Assistant for Speech Writing, Speech Text
Files, World Affairs Council of Northern California, June 17, 1977.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
—Our policy must be rooted in our people’s basic commitment to
human rights.
—Our policy must be based on close cooperation with the Western
industrial democracies. With them we share basic values; with them
also we share a recognition that global problems cannot be solved
without close cooperation among us. This was the message the Presi-
dent had me take to Europe and Japan in the first week of the Adminis-
tration, and this was the spirit which guided the President and his col-
leagues at the London summit last month.
—Our policy must seek to improve relations with the Soviet Union
and China. It must do so in a balanced and reciprocal way, while we
maintain a strong defense.
—Our policy must recognize that the cleavage between North and
South is as important as between East and West. We must reach out to
the world’s developing nations, seeking to narrow the gap between
rich and poor.
—Finally, our policy must provide incentives for all nations to rise
above ideology or narrow conceptions of self-interest and work to-
gether to resolve regional conflicts and to meet global problems that
confront all people.
As an Administration, we are only five months old. However,
these months have been a period of intense activity. We are committed
to shaping effective policies that truly reflect America’s values and ob-
jectives, and we are committed to implementing policies with other na-
tions so as to shape a more peaceful and stable world.
One of our first tasks has been to insure that our foreign policy re-
flects the commitment to basic human rights that we, as Americans,
share. That commitment to the inherent dignity of the individual is at
the heart of the American tradition. From it flows the democratic lib-
erties that we cherish—such as the right to worship freely; freedom of
speech, of the press, of assembly, and due process of law. Those are the
basic strengths of our nation.
We have survived as a free nation because we have remained com-
mitted to the defense of fundamental moral values we cherish as a
people. And unless our foreign policy reflects those values it will not
earn the support of the American people. Without that support, no for-
eign policy—no matter how brilliantly conceived—can succeed.
I believe we have restored that commitment to human rights. I am
proud that the United States today stands among those who uphold
human rights and human dignity in the world. I am proud that no for-
eign leader today has any doubt that the United States condemns tor-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ture, political imprisonment, and repression by any government, any-
where in the world. We believe that basic human rights transcend
ideology. We believe all nations, regardless of political systems, must
respect those rights.
Just as respect for human rights is central to our foreign policy
values, so progress toward a just and lasting Middle East settlement is
essential to the prospect of a more peaceful world. The President has
asked me to describe what we are trying to do to achieve peace in
the Middle East. We want the American people to have the fullest pos-
sible understanding of our approach, for your support is crucial to its
success.
President Carter has now met with the leaders of Egypt, Syria,
Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. The President met with Prime Minister
Rabin of Israel, and we hope that we will soon meet with the new Prime
Minister.
With the exception of the meeting with President Asad which was
held in Geneva, I have participated in all of them and have sensed these
leaders’ great desire for peace and their longing for the benefits that
peace can bring to nations too long mobilized for war. Yet at the same
time, we also found deep fears and suspicions which must be overcome
if peace is to be achieved in that strategic and troubled region of the
world.
A genuine and lasting peace in the Middle East is of essential in-
terest to all Americans. Conflict there carries the threat of a global con-
frontation and runs the risk of nuclear war. As we have seen, war in the
Middle East has profound economic consequences. It can, and has,
damaged the economies of the entire world. It has been a tragedy for
the nations of the region. Even short of war, continued confrontation
encourages radicalization and instability.
Genuine peace is needed by all parties to the conflict. The Arab na-
tions need peace. Israel, above all, has a profound interest in peace;
there is no question about that.
Israel’s Survival
For almost three decades, Israel has borne the burden of constant
war. More than half its entire budget is dedicated to defense. Its citizens
memoranda of conversation with Hussein, see ibid., Documents 30 and 31. For the mem-
orandum of conversation with Asad, see ibid., Document 32. For the separate memo-
randa of conversation with Princes Fahd and Saud, see ibid., Documents 36 and 37.
tive April 22.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
bear the highest average tax burden in the world—more than 60 per-
cent of their income goes for taxes.
And yet, at the same time, this valiant nation has managed to
create a miracle in the desert. With ingenuity, hard work, and skill it
has created a land that could be a model for economic development
and for political liberty to be emulated throughout the Middle East. De-
mocracy has thrived in Israel despite the kind of adversity that has
crushed freedom in other lands.
And yet, what of the future? Is it a future in which Israel’s three
million people try, by force of arms alone, to hold out against the hos-
tility and growing power of the Arab world? Or can a process of recon-
ciliation be started—a process in which peace protects Israel’s security,
a peace in which the urge for revenge and recrimination is replaced by
mutual recognition and respect?
America has a special responsibility and a special opportunity to
help bring about this kind of peace. This comes about first of all because
of our unique and profound relationship with the State of Israel since
its creation more than a generation ago. Our sense of shared values and
purposes means that, for Americans, the question of Israel’s survival is
not a political question but rather stands as a moral imperative of our
foreign policy.
Key Elements for an Agreement
And yet, our special relationship with Israel has not been directed
against any other country. We have been able to enjoy the friendship of
much of the Arab world, where we and our close allies have important
interests.
It is precisely because of our close ties with both Israel and her
Arab neighbors that we are uniquely placed to promote the search for
peace, to work for an improved understanding of each side’s legitimate
concerns, and to help them work out what we hope will be a basis for
negotiation leading to a final peace in the Middle East.
When this Administration entered office on January 20, we found
that the situation in the Middle East called for a new approach. The
step-by-step diplomacy of our predecessors had defused the imme-
diate tensions produced by the war in 1973. But it was also evident that
it would be increasingly difficult to achieve small diplomatic conces-
sions when the ultimate shape of a peace agreement remained obscure.
At the same time, it was unlikely that an agreement on a lasting peace
could be achieved at one stroke.
U.N. Security Council Resolution 242, which is supported by all
the parties, provides a basis for the negotiations which are required if

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
there is to be a settlement. But Resolution 242 does not by itself pro-
vide all that is required. We, therefore, decided to work with the parties
concerned to outline the overall framework for an enduring peace. Our
concept was to use this framework as the basis for a phased negotiation
and implementation of specific steps toward peace.
A major impediment to this approach lay in the fact that the posi-
tions of all sides were frozen. The words and phrases used by the
parties had become encrusted with the fallout of countless diplomatic
battles.
We have tried to regain momentum in this process. We have en-
couraged Arabs and Israelis to begin thinking again seriously about the
elements of peace and not to remain committed to particular words and
formulations.
To this end the President has tried to describe our understanding
of what the key elements of an overall framework for an agreement
might be:
—A commitment to a genuine and lasting peace demonstrated by
concrete acts to normalize relations among the countries of the area;
—The establishment of borders for Israel which are recognized by
all and which can be kept secure;
—A fair solution to the problem of the Palestinians.
The President has set forth these elements not to dictate a peace or
to impose our views but to stimulate fresh thought.
Relations Among Middle East Countries
President Carter has gone further than any of his predecessors to
stress with Arab leaders the essential point that peace must mean more
than merely an end to hostilities, stating as he did in Clinton, Massa-
chusetts, last March:
. . . the first prerequisite of a lasting peace is the recognition of Is-
rael by her neighbors, Israel’s right to exist, Israel’s right to exist perma-
nently, Israel’s right to exist in peace. That means that over a period of
months or years that the borders between Israel and Syria, Israel and
Lebanon, Israel and Jordan, Israel and Egypt must be opened up to
travel, to tourism, to cultural exchange, to trade, so that no matter who
the leaders might be in those countries, the people themselves will have
formed a mutual understanding and comprehension and a sense of a
common purpose to avoid the repetitious wars and death that have af-
flicted that region so long. That’s the first prerequisite of peace.
We have found that the Arab leaders did not insist that this kind of
peace is something that only future generations could consider. Some

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
leaders—such as King Hussein [of Jordan] during his visit to Wash-
ington—have made clear their commitment to a “just, a lasting peace,
one which would enable all the people in [the Middle East] to divert
their energies and resources to build and attain a brighter future. . . .”
So we believe that we have made some progress in getting Arab
leaders to recognize Israel’s right to exist and to recognize—however
reluctantly—that this commitment is essential to a genuine peace; that
peace must be structured in such a way that it can survive even if some
leaders were to nurture aims to destroy Israel. Still, we have a long way
to go. The Arabs have been insistent that Israel withdraw from the terri-
tories it occupied in the 1967 war. We have made clear our view that Is-
rael should not be asked to withdraw unless it can secure, in return,
real peace from its neighbors.
Borders and Security Arrangements
The question of withdrawal is, in essence, the question of borders.
For peace to be enduring, borders must be inviolable. Nations must feel
secure behind their borders. Borders must be recognized by all.
A crucial dilemma has been how to provide borders that are both
secure and acceptable to all. It is understandable that Israel, having
fought a war in every decade since its birth, wants borders that can be
defended as easily as possible. But no borders will be secure if neigh-
boring countries do not accept them.
The problem is that borders that might afford Israel the maximum
security in military terms would not be accepted as legitimate by Is-
rael’s neighbors. Borders that Israel’s neighbors would recognize, Israel
has not been willing to accept as forming an adequate line of defense.
For this reason, the President has tried to separate the two issues.
On the one hand, there must be recognized borders. But, in addition,
there could be separate lines of defense or other measures that could
enhance Israel’s security. The arrangements in the Sinai and in the
Golan Heights provide models of how Israel’s security might be en-
hanced until confidence in a lasting peace can be fully developed.
We would urge all the parties to think realistically about security
arrangements to reduce the fear of surprise attack, to make acts of ag-
gression difficult if not impossible, and to limit the military forces that
would confront one another in sensitive areas.
This approach recognizes the fact that there is a profound asym-
metry in what the two sides in the Middle East are seeking. On the one
hand, a principal Arab concern is to regain lost territory. On the other,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Israel wishes peace and recognition. Territory is tangible and once
ceded difficult to regain short of war. Peace, on the other hand, can be
ephemeral. Peaceful intentions can change overnight unless a solid
foundation of cooperation and a firm pattern of reinforcing relation-
ships can be established to insure that all have a stake in continuing
tranquillity.
We believe that separating the imperatives of security from the re-
quirement of recognized borders is an important advance toward
reconciling the differences between the two sides. It is in this way that
Israel could return to approximately the borders that existed prior to
the war of 1967, albeit with minor modifications as negotiated among
the parties, and yet retain security lines or other arrangements that
would insure Israel’s safety as full confidence developed in a compre-
hensive peace. Thus, with borders explicitly recognized and buttressed
by security measures and with the process of peace unfolding, Israel’s
security would be greater than it is today.
Future of the Palestinians
A further major issue is that of the future of the Palestinian people.
It has been the source of continuing tragedy in the Middle East. There
are two prerequisites for a lasting peace in this regard.
—First, there must be a demonstrated willingness on the part of
the Palestinians to live in peace alongside Israel.
—Second, the Palestinians must be given a stake in peace so that
they will turn away from the violence of the past and toward a future in
which they can express their legitimate political aspirations peacefully.
Thus, if the Palestinians are willing to exist in peace and are pre-
pared to demonstrate that willingness by recognizing Israel’s right to
exist in peace, the President has made clear that, in the context of a
peace settlement, we believe the Palestinians should be given a chance
to shed their status as homeless refugees and to partake fully of the
benefits of peace in the Middle East, including the possibility of some
arrangement for a Palestinian homeland or entity—preferably in asso-
ciation with Jordan.
How this would be accomplished and the exact character of such
an entity is, of course, something that would have to be decided by the
parties themselves in the course of negotiation. However, the President
has suggested that the viability of this concept and the security of the
region might be enhanced if this involved an association with Jordan.
But I emphasize that the specifics are for the parties themselves to
decide.
Necessity of Negotiating
This leads me to a further crucial aspect of our approach—the ne-
cessity of direct negotiations among the parties concerned. We cannot

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
conceive of genuine peace existing between countries who will not talk
to one another. If they are prepared for peace, the first proof is a will-
ingness to negotiate their differences.
This is why we believe it is so important to proceed with the
holding of a Geneva conference this year. That conference provides the
forum for these nations to begin the working out of these problems to-
gether directly, face-to-face. We have a continuing objective to convene
such a conference before the end of this year.
Underlying this entire effort to promote the process of negotiation
is our determination to maintain the military security of Israel. There
must be no question in anyone’s mind that the United States will do
what is necessary to insure the adequacy of Israel’s military posture
and its capacity for self-defense.
We recognize that America has a special responsibility in this re-
gard. In fact, in promulgating our overall policy to curb the interna-
tional traffic in arms, the President specifically directed the gov-
ernment that we will honor our historic responsibilities to assure the
security of the State of Israel. Let there be no doubt about this commit-
ment by this Administration.
We do not intend to use our military aid as pressure on Israel. If we
have differences over military aid—and we may have some—it will be
on military grounds or economic grounds but not political grounds. If
we have differences
over
diplomatic
strategy—and
that
could
happen—we will work this out on a political level. We will not alter our
commitment to Israel’s military security.
Let me conclude by saying that we hope the concepts I have been
discussing here today—concepts which the President has advanced at
talks with Israeli and Arab leaders—will stimulate them to develop
ideas of their own. We realize that peace cannot be imposed from the
outside, and we do not intend to present the parties with a plan or a
timetable or a map. Peace can only come from a genuine recognition by
all parties that their interests are served by reconciliation and not by
war, by faith in the future rather than bitterness over the past.
America can try to help establish the basis of trust necessary for
peace. We can try to improve the atmosphere for communication. We
can offer ideas, but we cannot, in the end, determine whether peace or
war is the fate of the Middle East. That can only be decided by Israel
and her Arab neighbors.
We believe that both sides want peace. As the President has said
[at Notre Dame on May 22]:
This may be the most propitious time for a genuine settlement
since the beginning of the Arab-Israeli conflict almost 30 years ago. To
let this opportunity pass could mean disaster, not only for the Middle

45.
Editorial Note
On June 19, 1977, reporters Bob Clark and Barrie Dunsmore of the
American Broadcasting Company’s (ABC) News Division interviewed
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance on the ABC television and radio public
affairs program “Issues and Answers.” During the interview, Clark
commented that Vice President Walter Mondale had stated in his June
17 address to the World Affairs Council of Northern California (see
Document 44) that the United States would not use the threat of re-
ducing military aid to induce the Government of Israel to give up the
occupied territories. Referring to the position of incoming Israeli Prime
Minister Menahem Begin concerning the occupied territories, Clark in-
quired as to whether the United States would need to “apply pressure
of some sort if it is going to play a significant role” in securing peace in
the Middle East. Vance responded:

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
“I’m going to answer your question, but let me say something first
because I’d like to sort of set this in a framework.
“When our Administration came into office, we decided that we
were not merely going to react to situations, but that we were going to
shape an agenda of items which we considered to be the highest pri-
ority and would proceed to deal with those issues.
“The first of those items was that dealing with the question of re-
gional peace, which could affect, in the long run, world peace. And the
Middle East was one of those obvious areas which involved regional
peace. Another was, of course, Africa, where we’re also working.
“Secondly, we agreed that we would work to achieve progress in
the arms control area because of its importance not only to the big
powers but to the world in general, and therefore, we agreed to attack
both the problem of strategic arms and of conventional arms.
“Thirdly, we decided that we must work with our colleagues to try
and control the spread of nuclear weapons throughout the world, and
we have been working to that end.
“Fourthly, we decided it was of utmost importance to strengthen
the alliance with our allies, and the most important example of that is
NATO. We have been working in that area, as you well know.
“Fifthly, we decided that it was important to promote cooperation
rather than confrontation with the Third World. Much of what we have
been doing at CIEC [Conference on International Economic Coopera-
tion], in the OAS, in the meeting which I am going to be attending in the
OECD [Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development]
is related to this. This is the whole range of so-called North-South
problems that are dealing with these terribly complicated economic re-
lationships which arise out of our relationships with the Third World.
“Next, we believe that we must seek normalization of relations
with as many countries as possible, because without a dialogue—a dip-
lomatic dialogue—there’s no way even to advance our own interests,
let alone hear what the concerns of the others are.
“And the last was, of course, the promotion of human rights.
“Now I just wanted to give you this sort of agenda of items which
we have been using and proceeding along during this first stage.
“Now let me return, if I might, to the question of the Middle East. I
think it’s too early yet to say what the foreign policy of Mr. Begin is
going to be. He is coming to the United States, hopefully, at the end of
the month of July. I think we must wait until he comes and we have a
chance to hear firsthand what his foreign policy is, what he is prepared
to do with respect to the negotiation of a peace in the Middle East, be-
fore we jump to any conclusions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“I would note that I’ve read the press in the last day or so that Mr.
Begin’s coalition has apparently endorsed a policy which says that they
are prepared to enter into peace negotiations without any precondi-
tions. We will look forward to seeing Mr. Begin when he comes and to
finding out specifically what flexibility there is.
“Mr. Clark: Mr. Secretary, the Vice President said flatly that we
will not use the threat of reducing military aid to Israel to get them to
give up occupied territories.
“Secretary Vance: That’s right.
“Mr. Clark: Does that mean that we would continue to sell arms to
Israel, and to Arab countries to the extent that they buy them from us,
regardless of whether there is any progress toward peace in the Middle
East?
“Secretary Vance: We have urged all of the parties, and I have
talked with the parties myself, about the need for restraint and reduc-
tion in arms sales in the area—and we will continue to do so. But let
there be no question: We have a deep commitment to Israel that we will
provide to Israel the arms which are necessary for its self-defense, and
we will abide by that without any question. And I don’t want any lack
of clarity on that point.
“Mr. Dunsmore: Well, let me put the question to you this way
then, sir: At the end of the 1973 war, the United States went on an alert
to prevent the Russians from intervening, which in effect was saying
we would be prepared to go to war. If there’s another war in the Middle
East, and it comes about, at least in part, because the Israelis have not
been prepared to make what we consider to be reasonable concessions,
would we go to war to save them?
“Secretary Vance: That is a question which is an iffy question,
which I am not going to answer.
“Let me say that we have told Israel that we stand behind her, that
we will do everything that’s necessary to preserve her security and in-
tegrity, should it be challenged. I think that sufficiently answers your
question.
“Mr. Dunsmore: It’s a cliche of the Middle East that it’s up to the
parties themselves to settle it, but left to their own devices they’ve had
four wars. Surely there must be some kind of friendly persuasion that
we are planning on both sides.
“Secretary Vance: We clearly feel that we have a role to play here
as a country which has good relationships with both sides—with both
Israel and her Arab neighbors. We believe that we can work with the
parties to try and help them find common ground. We are committed
to do everything within our power to bring this about.

46.
Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, June 26, 1977
MEMORANDUM ON SOME POSSIBLE MEASURES FOR
STABILIZING US-SOVIET RELATIONS
Given present strains in US-Soviet relations, the uncertainties in-
volved in current Soviet political changes, and the fundamental limita-
tions of the SALT negotiations, what actions by the United States might
have a useful stabilizing effect? Following are some measures for
consideration:
1. Brezhnev Meeting: It seems evident that the idea has been of per-
sistent interest to Brezhnev, and, if he would be willing to accept a
non-negotiating, “get-acquainted” session not tied to SALT, with as
little build-up of advance expectations as possible, it might have intan-
gible but considerable benefits in dispelling misconceptions. It is pos-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
sible, but not likely, that Brezhnev would handle himself as gruffly as
he did in Paris, but the gamble seems worth taking.
2. SALT: It seems desirable to consider what measures could be
taken before September to encourage the Russians to consider more ac-
tively possible areas of movement on their part, without ourselves ap-
pearing over-eager. One such measure might be to use the exploratory
channel of non-governmental scientists who have been involved in the
joint study group on arms control with the Soviet Academy of Sciences
for the past 14 years. They have an invitation from the Soviet Academy,
which could be used to arrange a meeting in August, primarily for the
purpose of eliciting responses from the Soviet side. The group could in-
clude such men as Paul Doty, Herbert York, Wolfgang Panofsky,
Franklin Long, Sidney Drell—all responsible men who have served in
government, know the issues, and who could have access to such offi-
cials as Korniyenko, as well as the Academy scientists.
3. Technology: This is a subject of preeminent interest to the Soviet
leadership, and the possibility of some movement in this field would be
a stabilizing incentive. Two illustrative possibilities:
A. Vladimir Kirillin, Deputy Prime Minister and head of the State
Committee on Science and Technology, is coming to Washington in
July. For him to be received by the President would be of more than
symbolic importance. (We could also use the occasion to stress our in-
terest in having Brezhnev receive Ambassador Toon, and it would be
more effective to make the point in this way than to make it as a
pre-condition.) Kirillin is a good man, a cryogenics scientist of repute,
sober, reasonable, and influential.
B. Frank Press has developed some ideas on how the Soviet Union
could be given remote access to the Cyber 76 computer for use in its
weather observation system. This would by-pass the security objec-
tions to having the computer on Soviet territory, and would yield re-
sults of considerable benefit to us.
4. Steps to Increase Soviet Involvement in Global and North-South
Issues: This is a large subject, which needs more detailed examination
than is possible in this memorandum, but it is worth consideration as
an expression of our long-term interest in drawing the Soviet Union
into more responsible and constructive participation in international

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
efforts to deal with global problems. Although the Soviet response at
the present time is likely to be limited, the effort to involve them, if ad-
vanced seriously and not propagandistically, will have present use-
fulness as a mark of our intentions, and may have substantial effects
over time. Once we have completed our preparations, we could con-
sider sending someone like Under Secretary Cooper to Moscow to
discuss a number of concrete proposals. We could also shift the em-
phasis in some of our bilateral cooperative agreements to areas of pri-
mary interest to the Third World—e.g., earthquake prediction, tsunami
research, health care delivery in developing areas, etc. (See attached
memorandum from Anthony Lake on “Prospects for Expanded Soviet
Bloc Role in North-South Problems.”)
5. Invigoration of US-Soviet Working Groups: Among the working
groups set up in the course of our Moscow meeting in March, some are
proceeding as well as can be expected (Comprehensive Test Ban,
Chemical Weapons, Indian Ocean) but some could be invigorated
(Conventional Arms Transfers, Anti-Satellite Weapons, Radiological
Weapons) with both symbolic and practical benefits. (This might also
be true for the working groups on Civil Defense and Prior Notification
of Missile Launching.) These have not had a high priority, but they
could be made to demonstrate our seriousness of purpose and the net-
work of issues of possible overlapping interest. (On the Anti-Satellite
Weapons issue, a decision would be required whether to proceed with
these discussions now, or to hold them pending resolution of other
space issues involved in PRM–23.)
6. Examination and Development of Bilateral Scientific Agreements: Al-
though our experience with these agreements has been mixed, some
among them have been clearly successful and mutually advantageous;
perhaps some should be dropped; and others could be made much
more useful than they have been, with proper high-level support.
Even taking into account the uneven results, they serve to dramatize
the network of overlapping interests which connect the United States
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and the Soviet Union, despite transient vicissitudes. The Bilateral Agree-
ments include the following: Environmental Protection, Medical Sci-
ence and Public Health, Artificial Heart Research and Development,
Science and Technical Cooperation, Space Cooperation, Agriculture,
Transportation, Studies of the World Ocean, Atomic Energy, Energy,
and Housing and Other Construction. (Frank Press is engaged in a re-
view of the Agreement on Science and Technical Cooperation and the
Agreement on Space Cooperation. On the basis of his review, a pro-
gram could be developed for increased support to those agreements
which have been, or could be made, mutually beneficial.)
7. Some Miscellaneous Possibilities:12
A. The Soviet Union has been interested in opening a banking of-
fice in New York to perform deposit and loan functions. US banks are
interested in expanding their services in Moscow. There are no legal
barriers to this, and we could endorse and facilitate the project.
B. We could begin to plan with the Soviet Union for a distin-
guished representation at the 60th Anniversary ceremonies in Moscow
next November. This is an event of great personal interest to Brezhnev.
C. An expansion of scientific, academic and cultural exchanges
would be well received by the Soviet Union, and could have substantial
benefits, providing equitable treatment is assured for our exchangees.
D. A clarification of visa policy would eliminate some irritants in
our relations and would be consistent with our CSCE obligations and
general policies on contacts.
E. It is possible that the negotiations with the Soviet Union on Civil
Aviation arrangements could be moved off dead center if we decided,
on further examination, that the pooling proposal could be made to
meet present CAB objections.
F. It is possible that the Yakutsk Liquified Natural Gas Project
could be redesigned in a way that would merit support. This could be
examined with the participating US firms and in consultations with
Japan.
G. In any forthcoming announcements concerning weapons pro-
curement or deployment, consideration should be given to the effect
we desire these announcements to have upon the Soviet Union.

47.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, June 28, 1977
SUBJECT
1976–1980 Goals for US Foreign Policy
Our overriding goals are to make the world safer and more hu-
mane. There are thus three general concerns which animate our foreign
policy:
—Pursuit of peace.
—Promotion of equitable economic development and well-being.
—Protection of individual rights.
These are long-term goals. What is most notable about your ap-
proach to foreign policy is precisely your emphasis on undertaking
now so many major efforts aimed at the quality of life in succeeding
generations.
This means a very ambitious and far-reaching agenda. Many of the
beginning steps now being taken will not bear tangible fruit for some
time to come. But unless we start now, there will be no prospect of
success.
PURSUIT OF PEACE
The pursuit of peace operates at several levels. Above all it in-
volves the evolution of relationships with the Soviet Union. The opening
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
months of the Administration have produced several areas of friction;
to some extent this reflects Soviet difficulty in adjusting to the new style
and emphasis of your Administration. There are also genuine areas of
new contention—particularly on the theme of human rights. But the
basic interests of both the US and USSR in avoiding crisis and tension
remain unaltered.
—Arms Control. SALT is the centerpiece of the process. We have
found a framework for agreement and now must establish enough con-
fidence between the US and USSR to achieve agreements that reduce, not
merely limit, our strategic arsenals. Achieving such agreements is a major
goal, as is a comprehensive test ban. We will also work on other detente
and disarmament related issues, including an MBFR agreement, in-
creasing East-West trade and all the issues involved in the Helsinki Final
Act.
We would also hope, over the next four years, to reach better im-
plicit understandings with Moscow of “rules of the game” governing
Soviet and US activities in third areas. Explicit agreement might be
found on the Indian Ocean.
A halt to the pace of nuclear proliferation and agreements on the re-
duction in conventional arms transfers by the major developed country
suppliers are key complementary processes, as well as ends in them-
selves. We can legitimately hope to freeze the number of nuclear
weapons-capable states at six, at least for the coming four years. Energy
issues complicate our negotiations with our OECD colleagues on nu-
clear non-proliferation, and long-term progress will be slow and uncer-
tain. We can hope to stabilize and possibly reduce the total volume of
arms sales through strong negotiating efforts. Since Saudi Arabia, Iran
and Israel are the big three of the arms sales, peace in the Middle East
will be the key to any longer-term substantial reductions.
In addition to curtailing the weaponry of war and US-Soviet con-
flict, we must work to contain regional, local, or civil wars which
threaten to involve the great powers, or which could seriously weaken
our friends. This means meeting security commitments and main-
taining military strength, as well as exploring initiatives in various
trouble spots as they arise. Hence a policy keyed to the following cen-
tral points:
—Middle East. Your talks with Arab and Israeli leaders have
cleared the air for constructive discussion. Even recognizing the
sudden complications of a new Israeli government, we have to build on
that basis to explore mutually advantageous solutions, and launch ne-
gotiations for a lasting Middle East settlement. It is hard to be sanguine
about a lasting settlement, but we must try to achieve one within the
next year or so. At minimum, we must continue to try to avert another
war.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
—Africa. We have begun and should continue to achieve a peaceful
resolution to problems in southern Africa. A peaceful settlement in
Rhodesia and elections and independence for Namibia, both by 1978, and the
beginning of a peaceful evolution toward greater social, political and eco-
nomic equality and justice in South Africa itself are all high on our agenda.
As a matter both of principle and practical politics, it is important to us
that uncontrolled racial violence not develop in any of these areas. In
the Horn of Africa there is serious potential instability and our policies
will continue to aim at preventing warfare and limiting an expansion of
Soviet influence.
—Elsewhere. We will work with our NATO allies towards a medi-
ated settlement of the Cyprus and Greek/Turkish problems in the Aegean
and a resumption of our defense cooperation with Turkey; take a more
active role in mediating inter-American state conflicts such as those be-
tween Belize and Guatemala; seek, from a possibly skeptical Congress,
approval for the anticipated Canal treaty with Panama, which will pro-
tect our interest in a secure, open, and neutral Canal.
The world is unusually free of armed conflict at the present time.
We will watch carefully the potential development of crises or conflicts
in all areas with the objective of working toward their peaceful resolu-
tion. The North Korean posture toward our troop withdrawals from the
South; Soviet actions around Berlin; a possible internal crisis in Pakistan;
and internal political transitions in Yugoslavia, Saudi Arabia, and Iran
will be particularly sensitive.
Stress on process, rather than on single events, is central to pro-
moting our relations with more estranged nations. Aside from our on-
going pursuit of detente with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, we
hope to establish formal ties with most, if not all, those countries with
whom we presently have tensions or no relations: Vietnam, Cuba, the
People’s Republic of China, Angola, North Korea, Mongolia, Albania,
and others. Of these, China is the most important and we hope to have
formal diplomatic relations with Peking within the next four years,
with due consideration for the security of Taiwan.
No pursuit of lasting peace is possible without a firm foundation
of economic and political strength among our allies. The Administration
set the proper tone with the Vice President’s post-Inaugural trip to
Western Europe and Japan, your meetings with key leaders in Wash-
ington, and the London Summit.
We must follow-up during the next four years with attention to
several continuing concerns. Those include: (1) maintaining support for
the process of European economic and political integration through

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
backing for the European Community, more open and substantive consul-
tations, and policies which help close the economic gap among OECD na-
tions; (2) doing our part to assure a stronger and more effective NATO
through such efforts as serious consideration of standardization and ra-
tionalization of equipment; and (3) encouraging those European nations,
that face the possibility of Communist participation in their gov-
ernments, to remain Western-oriented democracies.
On more specific matters, we should try to defuse tension with the
West Europeans and, where relevant, the Japanese on such issues as
trade, nuclear proliferation, arms sales, human rights. Here, as in more
general concerns, the key will be substantive prior consultations, sensi-
tivity to real divergences in national interest and the realization that the
US may have to modify some domestic and other diplomatic goals to
retain good relations with our allies.
PROVISION FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND WELL-BEING
We will concentrate increased attention on economic issues—both
involving the global economy and specific regions and problems.
That implies:
—More and Better Management of Global Concerns. We will give
higher priority to a range of transnational issues and revive momentum
for international cooperation.
Projections for a food gap four or eight years hence persist, despite
bumper crops this year. We are acting now to help assure increased
food production (especially in developing nations), improved distribu-
tion of available food, and better nutrition, (both for the malnourished
“Pepsi generation” of the affluent West and the undernourished needy
of the Third World). We will hope specifically to have an international
food reserve program3 in operation and to have set in motion major inter-
national efforts to increase agricultural production in South Asia and Africa
within the next four years. A substantial increase in bilateral and multi-
lateral aid is necessary to achieve these and other basic human need
programs.
You have mapped out a National Energy Plan; organizations like
the International Energy Agency are at work to assure cooperation

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
among consuming countries. A major objective for this Administration
must be substantial progress in energy conservation at home and abroad and
an increase and diversification in sources of supply, with particular atten-
tion to safe development of nuclear technology. At the same time we
will aim at limiting further major price increases by the OPEC states
and at strengthening the coordination within the IEA to deal with any
new embargo or restraints on production by the oil producers.
The priorities of energy must not obscure concern for the environ-
ment. Domestic and diplomatic efforts must and can be mutually reen-
forcing to help assure clean air and clean water. International confer-
ences on clean water and desert control this year are setting priorities
for the next decade and more in these areas. A “law of the sea” will
also serve that end, as well as open new access to new resources. Our
goal should be to get the kind of LOS treaty which will meet our real na-
tional interests, however, and not one which limits and restricts our
access to the seabed resources.
—New Relationship with the Third World. The UN system is increas-
ingly the focus of our dialogue with the developing countries. We are
trying to strengthen the effectiveness of the UN and its related
agencies. There is some risk of domestic hostility in this effort, and we
must work with Congress and the public to avert erosion of the US role in
the UN and other multilateral institutions. We may want to fashion new
forums for constructive discussion of shared concerns in finance, invest-
ment, energy, economic development, trade and commodities—lest
discourse lapse into polemic at the General Assembly. We particularly
want to negotiate agreements to stabilize prices of key commodities,
possibly linked by a common fund.
pp. 656–662. Two days later, the President delivered an address before a joint session of
Congress. In it, he asserted that the Executive and Legislative branches must “work to-
gether even more closely to deal with the greatest domestic challenge that our Nation will
face in our lifetime. We must act now—together—to devise and to implement a compre-
hensive national energy plan to cope with a crisis that otherwise could overwhelm us.”
Carter referenced the seven goals—designed to reduce energy consumption and to in-
crease the uses of alternative sources of power—outlined in his televised address and rec-
ommended that Congress “adopt these goals by joint resolution as a demonstration of
our mutual commitment to achieve them.” (Ibid., pp. 663–664) The full text of Carter’s
address, as well as a fact sheet on the energy program, are ibid., pp. 663–688.
The UN Conference on Desertification was scheduled to take place in Nairobi, Kenya,
August 29–September 9.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
More attention to basic human needs in economic development may
both take the cutting edge off confrontation and—more importantly—
help the invisible one billion poor of the world. At CIEC and OECD
Ministerials, we opened the door for greater US and global emphasis
on this human dimension of development. The US will provide sub-
stantial and effective amounts of foreign assistance, and we will urge
other OECD countries, particularly Japan, to increase their development
assistance. We will also intensify the process begun at the London
Summit, CIEC and the OECD to urge the Comecon countries, particularly
the USSR, to become more constructively involved in North-South and devel-
opment efforts. We will also expect the LDCs to make the tough policy
decisions to implement a human needs strategy. The US will adopt pol-
icies on multilateral trade and technology transfer issues which benefit the
LDCs (or at least the poorest among them) at the same time as they ben-
efit us. We also favor organization of international institutions dealing
with resource transfers to enable the LDCs to have major roles in nego-
tiations on international development issues. We will also increase our
focus on women and the disproportionate deprivation of opportunity
they too often endure, both in considering the ways in which our re-
sources are used abroad and in the nomination of candidates for UN
agency positions.
An important objective of this, as of previous administrations in
the last decade, must be to promote family planning and population limita-
tion in areas of high growth. There is often little we can do about this
problem but our concern, technology, and support should be offered to
anyone who needs it.
—More Coordination and Cooperation Among the Trilateral Economies.
We will make little progress on global concerns or the related North-
South Dialogue without sustained economic growth among OECD in-
dustrial nations. The roster of objectives is as vital as it is familiar:
helping the world trading system work better, via successful conclu-
sion as soon as possible of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations; improving
operation of the international monetary order through general guidelines
on exchange rates and expanded financial facilities (perhaps in both the IMF
and the OECD); and giving more serious consideration to a clearer
global framework for investment. Important as these efforts at systemic re-
form are, we must concentrate particularly on problems that have di-
rect impact on our own citizens: unemployment, inflation, and urban
malaise.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
Provision of basic human needs brings us directly to promotion of
internationally recognized human rights. US policy must thus stress the
broad scope of economic, social, political, and civil rights.
Implementation of a human rights policy requires both consist-
ency in our fundamental objectives and flexibility in how we deal with
specific circumstances. Our goal should be a clear improvement in the
practices of as many countries as possible, countries which at present are
failing in their observance of the most fundamental human rights. We
will engage other nations in the effort—both on a bilateral basis and
through multilateral organizations such as the United Nations, the Or-
ganization of American States, the Conference on Security and Cooper-
ation in Europe, and international financial institutions.
Underpinning all these specific objectives is the need for enhanced
public confidence in our foreign policy. Without this support, we will be
unable to achieve these goals.
The collective effect of attending to peace, economic development,
and individual rights is a new design for American diplomacy, drawn
from the values and standards of the American people. It is a far
reaching outline for action—clear in some areas, needing more defini-
tion in others.
—There is overlap and interaction among our goals. Pursuit of peace
through US-Soviet agreement on strategic arms, for example, depends
in part on American domestic confidence that our policy reflects our
traditional concern for human rights. Our goals regarding conventional
arms sales, human rights, nuclear proliferation, and energy may collide
in very complex ways when applied, for example, in the Middle East.
—Diplomacy also deserves public dialogue. A shift from secrecy to
raising issues for discussion with the Congress and the people before
making decisions is already evident. In time, it should strengthen
public support, buttress Congressional backing, give credence to calls
for allied consultation, and educate the American people on the trade-
offs between some short-term costs and longer-term objectives.
—Finally, diplomacy succeeds most surely when it takes into account do-
mestic priorities. Conflicts and contradictions are inevitable in the sort-
ing out of goals—whether for foreign or domestic policy.
To be effective, we must weigh such obvious trade-offs as in-
creasing economic aid for the LDC’s at the apparent expense of our
own citizens or decreasing arms transfers at the possible cost of closing
US factories and adding to our own unemployed. There are also oppor-
tunities for positive reinforcement of our domestic and diplomatic
goals: through creative international initiatives on such problems as
our cities, youth unemployment, basic human needs, food, and energy.

48.
Editorial Note
On June 29, 1977, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance addressed a
meeting of the Asia Society in New York. Founded by John D. Rocke-
feller III during the 1950s, the Asia Society helped to improve American
understanding of Asian cultures. Vance begin his remarks, entitled
“America’s Role in Consolidating a Peaceful Balance and Promoting
Economic Growth in Asia,” by noting that American prospects for
“sustaining and developing relationships” with East Asian nations
were more promising than at any time since World War II. The Carter
administration sought to capitalize upon positive developments in
U.S.-Asian relationships, while preventing negative trends that might
upset the “presently favorable regional environment.” U.S. interests in
Asia, he asserted, “are enduring, and they are substantial.” He
continued:
“I hope to leave you with these understandings:
“—First, the United States is and will remain an Asian and Pacific
power.
“—Second, the United States will continue its key role in contrib-
uting to peace and stability in Asia and the Pacific.
“—Third, the United States seeks normal and friendly relations
with the countries in the area on the basis of reciprocity and mutual
respect.
“—Fourth, the United States will pursue mutual expansion of
trade and investment across the Pacific, recognizing the growing inter-
dependence of the economies of the United States and the region.
“—Fifth, we will use our influence to improve the human condi-
tions of the peoples of Asia.
“In all of this, there can be no doubt of the enduring vitality of our
country’s relationships with the peoples of Asia and the Pacific.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
“To the people of Asia I say tonight without qualification that our
nation has recovered its self-confidence at home. And we have not
abandoned our interest in Asia.
“We are and will remain a Pacific nation, by virtue of our geog-
raphy, our history, our commerce, and our interests. Roughly one-
quarter of all our trade is now with East Asia and the Pacific; last year
we sold $22 billion worth of our products in the region. For the last five
years more of our trade has been with that region than with any other,
including the European Community.
“To be able to speak of peace and stability in Asia is a welcome
change. But serious problems persist. Our tasks are to help consolidate
the emerging peaceful balance in Asia and to promote economic
growth that offers promise to its peoples.
“The United States will pursue its relations with the nations of
Asia with an open mind. We will continue to work closely with allies
and friends. And we hope to normalize relations on a mutually con-
structive basis with those who have been adversaries.
“The United States recognizes the importance of its continuing
contribution to Asian security. We will maintain a strong military pres-
ence in the area.” (Department of State Bulletin, August 1, 1977, pages
The complete text of Vance’s address is ibid., pages 141–145. The
Department transmitted the text of the speech to all East Asian and Pa-
cific diplomatic posts in telegram 151507, June 29. (National Archives,

49.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Western Europe: An Overview
The issues you will face with Chancellor Schmidt (and later with
Prime Minister Andreotti) are not limited to those two countries. They
are part of wider developments in Western Europe—and the relations
of these countries with us—that have been characterized as malaise or
stagnation.
Today’s problems have several causes. Among them are:
—The mismanagement of the U.S. economy during the Vietnam
War (particularly 1967–71) helped hasten the end of the effective
workings of an international economic system that had prospered—
with American strength and leadership—since the War. Since then, the
central pivot of stability and confidence in the global economic system
has been missing.
—The oil price rises of 1973–75 deepened gathering economic
problems, pushing inflation into double digits and unemployment to
levels not seen in post-Marshall Plan Europe. And these countries, after
all, have much more searing memories of the 1930’s economic failure
than in the United States.
—In Europe—as here—there are few economic answers to what
seem endemic problems; in Europe, even more than here, there has
been a loss of confidence in the ability of institutions and leaders to
solve the new economic riddle of “stagflation.” Only Germany, among
the major states, is relatively untouched: but there the fear of economic
collapse is deepest of all.
—Political institutions also seem unable to cope with basic social
problems. With recession, there has been a widening gap between eco-
nomic expectations that had come to be taken for granted (particularly
in welfare states), and the ability of governments to deliver. These
problems are particularly acute among the young—which is one reason
the issue of youth unemployment was put in the agenda at the London
Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Summit. As governments conspicuously have failed to come to grips
with economic and social problems—which are only partly of their
making—loss of confidence has spread widely. Ironically, one of the
most talented groups of European statesmen in recent memory pre-
sides over a collection of governments facing constant challenge—from
both left and right. Protest voting has become almost the rule.
—In several European countries, the major political parties them-
selves are overdue for renewal (especially in Italy and from the center
to the right in France); or they are so riven with factionalism—as in
Britain—that even talented leaders are unable to effect reforms that will
broaden their political base.
—At the same time, economic difficulty struck in the middle of a
hopeful development: the progressive modernization of most Euro-
pean societies—searching for means of coping with post-industrial
problems in labor-management relations, social organization, and cul-
tural development.
—The European Community, meanwhile, lost the economic basis
of its past success, at about the point when it was seeking to build a
broader European political society on its economic strength. Yet instead
of stepping back to re-establish the economic strength of the Commu-
nity and its member nations, they are concentrating upon enlarging the
Community and holding European elections. While both are worthy
objectives—which politically we must support—they are being used as
a substitute for the economic strength, cooperation, and purpose that
the Community’s founders and best minds have always known must
be the basis of an effective Community.
Communist Parties (and Internal Reform)
It is against this background that the growth of West European
Communist Parties is so unsettling. If West European economies were
strong—and if there were strong confidence in the economic and polit-
ical role of the United States on the Continent—there would be far less
uneasiness about the French and Italian Communist parties (and
far more optimism about dealing with them, based on democratic
successes in Portugal and Spain). There would be more confidence
that left-wing movements—engaged in needed transformation of
societies—could in the process contain or simply pre-empt the influ-
ence of the Communists.
As it is, there is too little optimism in Europe that moribund gov-
ernments can cope with the discipline of the Communist parties—
acting with or without support from Moscow. The French Socialists
and the Italian Christian Democrats each believe they can somehow de-
rive strength from the more energetic Communists, without suc-
cumbing to them. In normal times, the intellectual left in these coun-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tries would be fighting anti-democratic movements tooth and nail.
Now it, too, has lost its spirit and courage.
If Communists do gain or share power, the political impact will de-
rive in large part from what this change will say about the perceived
poverty of democratic alternatives. A victory by the Socialist-
Communist coalition in France next March would very likely hasten
the entry of the Italian Communists into the government in some form.
It would almost surely drive Germany to the right—thereby polarizing
the European Community and NATO (in addition to the problems a
Mitterand Government would directly pose for those institutions). The
United States and Germany would be bound even more closely to-
gether, and would be effectively isolated in the Atlantic relationship,
along with a more conservative but ineffectual Britain. A further fear is
that the United States would in some way withdraw from the Conti-
nent—a fear that is actually greater than the fear that the Soviet Union
would gain direct advantages from Communists in a West European
government.
The prospect of Communists in government also raises longer-
range questions: which groups will manage social, economic, and polit-
ical change in the major West European countries? Will they have
enough political strength to manage these changes effectively? And
who will provide the sense of direction and purpose for the European
Community—assuming that it continues at all as more than a loose
customs union?
Relations with the United States
At the heart of the Atlantic relationship, our European friends and
allies look to us most for two kinds of “security”: military and
economic.
1. Military security is more than just the continuation of our com-
mitment to NATO, to its doctrines, and to deterrence of the Soviet
Union. Here your London NATO visit—with your emphasis on reas-
surance and the steadfastness of American purpose—had a positive
impact; and except for Germany, our allies place a lower estimate on the
chances of a European war than we do.
Even more important as a political factor in Atlantic relations, our
allies need to have confidence in our ability to manage relations with
the Soviet Union. Almost without exception, they have been noticeably
uneasy during the past few months—in part reflecting disquiet at the
beginning of every new Administration.
But, there is also deep concern over the course of the SALT negoti-
ations—as much for what “failure” would imply politically in East-
West relations as for what it could mean in strategic terms. And wide-
spread European concern earlier this year about our resolve in Africa

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
was heightened by worries that we are not able to manage the overall
U.S.-Soviet relationship.
Less important, but more visible, is widespread European uneas-
iness about your human rights policies (especially in Germany and
France). This uneasiness is only in part based on different tactics or dif-
ferent concerns (as with the ethnic Germans in the East). It is more a
fear that basic relations with Moscow will be damaged. Brezhnev has
been quick to exploit these fears: in his visit to Paris, in his courting of
the Germans, and in the effort to split us off from our allies at the Bel-
grade conference by presenting a “non-confrontational” alternative to
Soviet-American bickering on human rights. In fact, however, your
human rights position will in time be seen as a basic underpinning of
European society—i.e., as supporting democratic structures and prac-
tices. It is already proving to be a weapon against the West European
Communist parties.
For our allies, the alternatives to our effective managing of rela-
tions with Moscow are not pleasant: a return to earlier tensions; pres-
sures to build up defenses (which their economies and their popula-
tions would not tolerate); damage to independent initiatives with the
East (particularly by Germany and France); disruption of trading rela-
tions with the East; and perhaps even being left holding the sizeable
debts of the Soviet Union and East European states.
Difficulties in U.S.-Soviet relations also remind our allies that they
have very little influence over the course of these relations—on which
so much depends for them. Thus our Indian Ocean policy illustrated
for Britain and France that security decisions are being taken about an
area in which they have interests and involvements, but without their
playing a real role. If it can happen there, what about in Europe?
2. Economic security for our allies in Europe depends in large part
on their confidence that we can cope effectively with our own problems,
that we will not export our problems to Europe (e.g., through protec-
tionism), and that we will in fact see our economic future as bound up
with Europe’s. The London Summit was an excellent beginning—but
only that. The Europeans are waiting to see:
—Can we continue our economic recovery—without excessive in-
creases in exports to Europe or succumbing to protectionist efforts to
decrease their exports to us?
—Will we adopt a truly effective energy program to reduce depend-
ence? (This deep concern is partly psychological: constant European
pressing on this point goes far beyond the merits or value of an effec-
tive energy program, to the heart of our determination—or lack of it—
to take the energy problem seriously.)
—Will we help finance weak European economies to avoid their
having to impose import restrictions or undertake drastically restric-
tive measures?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—Are we truly committed to revitalizing international institu-
tions, like the IMF, and are we prepared to follow through on the com-
mitments made (jointly) in London?
—Will we approach the multilateral trade negotiations in ways
which avoid threatening fundamental EC institutions like the Common
Agricultural Policy?3
—Are we capable of preventing another Middle East war, that
would cripple the European economy in another oil embargo?
—Can we understand—and account for—their long-range fears of
being swamped by a more productive and innovative economy? Con-
corde, non-proliferation, defense procurement, and arms transfer policy
are thus seen by many Europeans (especially in France) as interrelated.
These issues raise real questions about the capacity of European econ-
omies to compete with the United States in an age increasingly domi-
nated (in exportable goods) by high technology.
—Conversely, can we work with Western Europe (and Japan) so
that the restoration of their economic strength will not lead to another
period of intense economic competition (like that of 1970–73), in which
the United States again defaults on its pledges to respect and support a
strong European Community?
—Can we work out differences on North-South issues with them
and the LDCs to prevent economic disruptions adverse to the more
vulnerable European economies?
U.S. Leadership
Your Administration holds out great promise for Europe—and
what it can derive from renewed American strength of will and pur-
pose. You have effectively put Vietnam and Watergate behind us, and
have offered the promise of new vigor in a host of areas. The “Euro-
pean first” strategy is attractive—but there is still a lot of cynicism
about what you will do in practice. Even after the Summit, many Euro-
peans are still from “Missouri.”
The issue is complicated by what has long been European ambiva-
lence about American leadership: when it is not there (as during the
Vietnam/Watergate years), there is deep concern about our will and
purpose; but when we exercise leadership, there is contrary concern
about specific actions and U.S. dominance. Thus many Europeans could
welcome the vigor of your early decisions, and yet object to policies like

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
the one on non-proliferation that seem to strike at their economic in-
terests. This contrary European reaction has happened in past Admin-
istrations—and it will happen again.
Unlike times in the past, however, the relative economic and polit-
ical weight of the United States is not enough on its own to carry the
day—against the ambivalence of Europeans, but perhaps to their ulti-
mate self-interest.
Now, more than before, U.S. leadership must involve prodding,
cajoling, consulting—and a lot of stroking. At times it will be valuable
to accept European views of policy that are different from ours—
simply as part of the relationship (as we did in not objecting to the most
recent EC statement on the Middle East). You are the only Western
leader with a firm mandate for the next four years—and you pay the
penalty that weak European leaders will lean upon you, while at the
same time trying to have their own way. There will be a further failure
of European will if we seem not to respond to European needs, but little
thanks if we do.
Above all else, you (and the government behind you) must con-
vince the Europeans that you know what you are doing, that you have
a sense of where you are going—and can articulate it—and have the
strength to carry it through, beginning at home. You must convince
them that you have some economic answers—even though they clearly
do not; and you must convince them that you can manage all those
other relations (with the Soviet Union, and in the Middle East) on
which for them so much depends.
But even with economic recovery—and with a clear demonstration
of your competence, purpose, and openness—the Europeans must do
the rest for themselves (and you can encourage greater European lead-
ership). But their doing this is complicated by the fact that the partic-
ular leaders you are dealing with this year have their own agendas of
simply staying in power. We must find a way to reach beyond their
short-term needs, to build relations with countries that will outlast this
group of leaders.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
50.
Address by Secretary of State Vance
St. Louis, Missouri, July 1, 1977
The United States and Africa: Building Positive Relations
This is a special occasion for me to meet with you and to discuss
with you such an important subject: American relations with Africa.
Before I turn to our main topic, I would like to add a personal note
about the man who has led this organization and who has been a voice
for justice and freedom for nearly five decades. I speak of Roy Wilkins
[outgoing executive director of the NAACP]—a personal friend, a man
I have admired through the years.
Roy Wilkins has not finished his work. There remains an impor-
tant agenda which he helped fashion—an agenda of human rights and
social justice. I know that President Carter and others in his Adminis-
tration will continue to seek his help, be inspired by his strength, and
strive for what he believes to be just.
While guiding the NAACP, Roy never lost sight of the importance
which Africa has had for our nation. Africa matters very much to the
United States. This is a fact more and more Americans are coming to
understand.
You in the NAACP have recognized this fact since the first days of
your organization, almost 70 years ago—in sponsoring the first Pan Af-
rican Congress in 1919; in your calls, during the days of the Marshall
plan, for effective assistance, as well, to Africa, the Caribbean, and
other developing areas.
We in a new Administration hope that we can show similar vision
as we build our policies toward Africa.
We proceed from a basic proposition: that our policies must recog-
nize the unique identity of Africa. We can be neither right, nor effective,
if we treat Africa simply as one part of the Third World, or as a testing
ground of East-West competition.
in the original. Vance delivered his address before the annual convention of the NAACP.
The Department transmitted the text of Vance’s speech to all African diplomatic posts in
1039) For the text of the question-and-answer session following Vance’s address, see De-
together African leaders to address the status of Africa during the postwar period, specif-
ically the former German colonies. Attendees endorsed the right of Africans to partici-
pate in their own governments and charged the League of Nations with upholding this
right.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
African reality is incredibly diverse. But out of this diversity comes
a general fact of great importance: Africa has an enormous potential—
in human talent, in resources to be developed, in energy to be
harnessed.
Let us consider how this is true in terms of our own national in-
terests; for Africa’s potential is tied to our own.
—The success or failure of the search for racial justice and peace in
southern Africa will have profound effects among the American
people. And our participation in that search is based on the values of
our own society.
—The role of the African nations at the United Nations, and in
other multilateral bodies, is pivotal. One-third of the U.N. member
states are African.
—Africa’s mineral and agricultural wealth already provides a sub-
stantial portion of our imports of such commodities as copper, cobalt,
and manganese for our industries, and cocoa and coffee for our homes.
And Africa supplies 38 percent of our crude petroleum imports.
—Our direct investment in sub-Saharan Africa has increased
nearly sixfold over the past 15 years; our trade now is almost 12 times
what it was then. And the pattern of our trade with Africa includes an
even larger share for black Africa. Trade with South Africa in 1960 was
39 percent of our commerce with Africa; now, our trade with Nigeria
alone is double the value of that with South Africa.
—Beyond these political and economic ties that bind our futures,
there are the social and cultural links from which we have benefited
greatly. Our society and culture are enriched by the heritage so many
Americans find in Africa. We experience this enrichment every day—in
our literature, our art, our music, and our social values.
During the past few months, as we have considered the specific
policies I will discuss today, a number of broad points have emerged.
They define the general nature of our approach.
First, the most effective policies toward Africa are affirmative policies.
They should not be reactive to what other powers do, nor to crises as
they arise. Daily headlines should not set our agenda for progress. A
negative, reactive American policy that seeks only to oppose Soviet or
Cuban involvement in Africa would be both dangerous and futile. Our
best course is to help resolve the problems which create opportunities
for external intervention.
Second, our objective must be to foster a prosperous and strong Africa
that is at peace with itself and at peace with the world. The long-term success
of our African policy will depend more on our actual assistance to Af-
rican development and our ability to help Africans resolve their dis-
putes than on maneuvers for short-term diplomatic advantage.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Third, our policies should recognize and encourage African nationalism.
Having won independence, African nations will defend it against chal-
lenges from any source. If we try to impose American solutions for Af-
rican problems, we may sow division among the Africans and under-
mine their ability to oppose efforts at domination by others. We will not
do so.
Fourth, our policies must reflect our national values. Our deep belief in
human rights—political, economic, and social—leads us to policies that
support their promotion throughout Africa. This means concern for in-
dividuals whose rights are threatened anywhere on the continent. And
it means making our best effort peacefully to promote racial justice in
southern Africa. In this we join the many African nations who, having
won their freedom, are determined that all of Africa shall be free.
Fifth, our ties with Africa are not only political, but cultural and eco-
nomic as well. It is the latter two that are most enduring.
And finally, we will seek openness in our dealings with African states.
We are willing to discuss any issue, African or global; to broaden our
dialogue with African nations; and to try to work with them, even
when we may not agree.
Only thus can we promote our views without rancor. Our renewed
relations with the People’s Republic of the Congo, our experience at the
recent conference on southern Africa in Maputo [U.N.-sponsored Inter-
national Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Na-
mibia, May 16–21], and our work with African delegations at the
United Nations all demonstrate the value of this approach.
In the end, of course, our Africa policy will be judged by results,
not intentions.
Assistance for Human Needs
One of Africa’s principal concerns is that its basic human needs be
met. Despite its vast resources, it is still one of the least developed areas
of the world. Eighteen of the twenty-eight least developed countries in
the world are African.
We are prepared to help.
In addition to our growing trade and investment relationships
with African nations, we are committed to providing economic assist-
ance that will directly improve the lives of those most in need. Turning
this principle into practice cannot be accomplished overnight. But it
must be done.
Our economic assistance to Africa is being increased from $271
We hope that assistance from our European friends will also increase,
and expect to consult with them on how we all can make the most effec-
tive contributions.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
To help our aid reach rural villages, we will emphasize support for
the development and sharing of appropriate technology and tech-
niques. I have in mind such devices as small farm machinery now being
manufactured in Senegal, Upper Volta, Mali, and elsewhere; hand-
hydraulic palm oil presses in Nigeria; and basic agricultural extension
methods that have succeeded in one nation and could be applied in an-
other. We will also expand support for agricultural research in Africa
and try to assure that our own technical assistance is appropriate to Af-
rican requirements.
We also acknowledge the needs of African states for advanced
techniques that will enable them to develop and process more of their
own natural resources.
Our Agency for International Development, headed by Governor
[John J.] Gilligan, is determined to cut down on red tape in approving
assistance projects, so it can respond quickly and effectively. Greater at-
tention will be given to projects which can be started quickly and re-
quire minimal outside technical assistance or expensive equipment.
Men and women are more important than machines. Africa’s nat-
ural resources will be developed by Africa’s people. Human develop-
ment is thus the key to Africa’s future. While we will provide addi-
tional opportunities for Africans to study here, emphasis will be on
programs of training and education in Africa.
We must also remember the importance of Africa’s infrastructure.
It is a vast continent, and improved transport and communications are
essential to its welfare.
I am aware, as I indicate these directions for our programs, how
tempting, but mistaken, it would be to design blueprints for another
continent’s development. We can only work effectively if we work co-
operatively with African governments in behalf of their development
priorities. Accordingly, we will seek to increase our contribution to the
African Development Fund. And we are requesting from the Congress
$200 million for the Sahel, to be managed in coordination with the Club
du Sahel.
The long drought in the Sahel devastated the economies of some of
the poorest countries in the world. Now these countries are working to-
gether to become self-sufficient in food production and to develop the
ability to withstand future droughts.
In the Club du Sahel, the African states plan together for the re-
gion. The donor nations participate in the planning and determine how
each can assist most effectively. They then commit the resources neces-
sary to meet their goals. In this process, we are discovering the great
value of encouraging coordination among African states; of planning
with them and with other donors; and of concentrating on regional

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
problems rather than isolated projects. For it will be essential that sen-
sible and effective programs be planned and implemented.
America can fully support African development only if we meet
the kind of commitments I have outlined. I hope that every citizen with
an interest in Africa will make it clear, to the Congress and to us in the
executive branch, that he or she wants those commitments met.
Promotion of Human Rights
While we address the reality of human need in Africa, we must
also do what we can in behalf of human justice there.
We will be firm in our support of individual human rights. Our
concern is not limited to any one region of the continent.
We must understand the diversity of African social and value
systems. Gross violations of individual human dignity are no more ac-
ceptable in African terms than in ours. One of the most significant
events in modern African history—and in the international effort to
promote human rights—was the recent decision by Commonwealth
countries to condemn the “massive violation of human rights” in
Uganda. Many African nations took part in this decision. Their action
should be applauded.
Abuse of human rights is wrong on any grounds. It is particularly
offensive when it is on the basis of race. In southern Africa, issues of
race, of justice, and of self-determination have built to a crisis.
—The conflict in Rhodesia is growing. Rhodesian incursions into
neighboring countries exacerbate an already dangerous situation and
deserve the condemnation they have received. The choice between ne-
gotiated settlement and violent solution must be made now. The same
is true for Namibia. Many lives—black and white—hang in the balance.
—The risk of increased foreign involvement is real.
—Violence within South Africa grows. There may be more time
there than in Rhodesia and Namibia for people of goodwill to achieve a
solution. But progress must soon be made, or goodwill could be lost.
—Crisis within the region has brought pressure for stronger action
at the United Nations, and appeals to our responsibilities under its
charter.
This is the reality we face. The dangers, our interests, and our
values, as well as the desires of the Africans themselves, require our in-
volvement—and our most dedicated and practical efforts.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
We cannot impose solutions in southern Africa. We cannot dictate
terms to any of the parties; our leverage is limited.
But we are among the few governments in the world that can talk
to both white and black Africans frankly and yet with a measure of
trust. We would lose our ability to be helpful if we lost that trust. It is
therefore essential that our policies of encouraging justice for people of
all races in southern Africa be clear to all.
After careful consideration, this Administration has decided to
pursue actively solutions to all three southern African problems—
Rhodesia, Namibia, and the situation within South Africa itself. These
problems must be addressed together, for they are intertwined.
Some have argued that apartheid in South Africa should be ig-
nored for the time being, in order to concentrate on achieving progress
on Rhodesia and Namibia. Such a policy would be wrong and would
not work.
—It would be blind to the reality that the beginning of progress
must be made soon within South Africa, if there is to be a possibility of
peaceful solutions in the longer run;
—It could mislead the South Africans about our real concerns;
—It would prejudice our relations with our African friends;
—It would do a disservice to our own beliefs; and
—It would discourage those of all races who are working for
peaceful progress within South Africa.
We believe that we can effectively influence South Africa on
Rhodesia and Namibia while expressing our concerns about apartheid.
Implicit in that belief is the judgment that progress in all three areas is
strongly in the interest of the South African Government.
We believe that whites as well as blacks must have a future in Na-
mibia, Zimbabwe, and South Africa. We also believe that their security
lies in progress. Intransigence will only lead to greater insecurity.
We will welcome and recognize positive action by South Africa on
each of these three issues. But the need is real for progress on all of them.
Let me review briefly our approach to each.
Rhodesia
We are actively supporting a British initiative to achieve a negoti-
ated settlement of the Rhodesian crisis. In coming weeks, we will be
seeking agreement on a constitution that would allow free elections,
open to all parties and in which all of voting age could participate
equally. These elections would establish the government of an inde-
pendent Zimbabwe. Our goal is that this be accomplished during 1978.
This constitution should include a justiciable bill of rights and an
independent judiciary, so that the rights of all citizens, of all races, are
protected.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We also hope to lend greater assistance to the peoples of neigh-
boring nations whose lives have been disrupted by the crisis in
southern Africa.
Namibia
In Namibia a solution leading to independence is being sought
through the efforts of the five Western members of the Security
Council, with South Africa, the United Nations, and other interested
parties, including the South West Africa People’s Organization. That
solution would include free elections in which the United Nations is in-
volved, freedom for political prisoners, repeal of discriminatory laws
and regulations, and the withdrawal of instruments of South African
authority as the elections are held and independence achieved.
On the basis of our discussions thus far, we are encouraged by the
prospects for an independent Namibia, one which will take its rightful
place in the African and world community. We welcome the indica-
tions of flexibility on the part of South Africa. We are gratified by the
confidence shown by many African governments in the efforts of the
United States and Western associates on the Security Council. Differ-
ences remain, however, and progress will require a willingness on all
sides to be openminded and forthcoming. But we will persevere.
South Africa
While pursuing these efforts for peace and justice in Namibia and
Rhodesia, we have also expressed to the South African Government
our firm belief in the benefits of a progressive transformation of South
African society. This would mean an end to racial discrimination and
the establishment of a new course toward full political participation by
all South Africans.
The specific form of government through which this participation
could be expressed is a matter for the people of South Africa to decide.
There are many ways in which the individual rights of all citizens
within South Africa could be protected. The key to the future is that
South African citizens of all races now begin a dialogue on how to
achieve this better future.
The South African Government’s policy of establishing separate
homelands for black South Africans was devised without reference to
the wishes of the blacks themselves. For this reason, and because we do
not believe it constitutes a fair or viable solution to South Africa’s
problems, we oppose this policy. We did not recognize the Transkei,
and we will not recognize Bophuthatswana if its independence is pro-
claimed in December, as scheduled.
We deeply hope that the South African Government will play a
progressive role on the three issues I have discussed. We will applaud
such efforts. If there is no progress, our relations will inevitably suffer.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
We cannot defend a government that is based on a system of racial
domination and remain true to ourselves. For our policy toward South
Africa is reinforced by change in our own society. The activities of the
NAACP are a testament to the inseparability of our foreign and do-
mestic goals. It is also entirely fitting that Andy Young [U.S. Ambas-
sador to the United Nations], who has done so much in the struggle
against our divisions at home, should now be contributing so well to
the design and effectiveness of our policies abroad.
I have heard some suggest that we must support the white gov-
ernments in southern Africa, come what may, since they are anti-
Communist. In fact, the continued denial of racial justice in southern
Africa encourages the possibilities for outside intervention.
Similarly, when such crises as the recent invasion of Zaire arise,4
we see no advantage in unilateral responses and emphasizing their
East-West implications. We prefer to work with African nations, and
with our European allies, in positive efforts to resolve such disputes. As
President Carter recently said, it is best to fight fire with water.
The history of the past 15 years suggests that efforts by outside
powers to dominate African nations will fail. Our challenge is to
find ways of being supportive without becoming interventionist or
intrusive.
We see no benefit if we interject ourselves into regional disputes.
We hope that they can be resolved through the diplomatic efforts of the
parties themselves in an African setting.
We are aware of the African concern that we have sometimes
seemed more interested in the activities of other outside powers in Af-
rica than in Africa itself. They know that some argue we should almost
automatically respond in kind to the increase in Soviet arms and Cuban
personnel in Africa.
We cannot ignore this increase—and we oppose it. All sides
should be aware that when outside powers pour substantial quantities
of arms and military personnel into Africa, it greatly enhances the
danger that disputes will be resolved militarily rather than through
mediation by African states or by the OAU [Organization of African
Unity].
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
This danger is particularly great in the Horn, where there has been
an escalation of arms transfers from the outside. The current difficulties
in Ethiopia, and the tensions among nations in the area, present com-
plex diplomatic challenges. We seek friendship with all the gov-
ernments of that region. We have established an embassy in the new
nation of Djibouti. Its peaceful accession to independence marks a step
toward stability in what remains a troubled area.
We will consider sympathetically appeals for assistance from
states which are threatened by a buildup of foreign military equipment
and advisers on their borders, in the Horn and elsewhere in Africa. But
we hope such local arms races and the consequent dangers of deep-
ening outside involvement can be limited.
In accordance with the policy recently announced by the Presi-
dent, arms transfers to Africa will be an exceptional tool of our policy
and will be used only after the most careful consideration.
We hope that all the major powers will join us in supporting Af-
rican nationalism, rather than fragmenting it, and in concentrating on
economic assistance rather than arms.
Our approach is to build positive relations with the Africans pri-
marily through support for their political independence and economic
development and through the strengthening of our economic, cultural,
and social ties. Our new and positive relationships with nations like Ni-
geria encourage us in this course. Our efforts to build such relations
may not seize the headlines. But this quiet strategy will produce
long-term benefits.
Our relations will be closest with those nations whose views and
actions are most congruent with ours. We will never forget or take old
friends for granted. Their continuing friendship is a fundamental con-
cern; they can rely on our support. When the territorial integrity of a
friendly state is threatened, we will continue to respond to requests for
appropriate assistance.
We do not insist that there is only one road to economic progress
or one way of expressing the political will of a people. In so diverse a
continent, we must be prepared to work with peoples and govern-
ments of distinctive and differing beliefs.
American representatives in Africa met last May to compare notes
and discuss new policy ideas. They agreed that almost everywhere in
lomats from African posts in order to discuss U.S. policies toward Africa. Young also at-
tended the meeting. (Michael T. Kaufman, “Young, Opening African Trip, Meets in Ivory

51.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, July 8, 1977
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #20
1. Opinion
A Time of Testing
I believe that your first period of true testing in international af-
fairs is now upon us. With the Soviets, with our European Allies, and
with the Middle East, you confront important obstacles to achieving
the objectives you have set for yourself and for carrying through the
lines of policy which you have publicly articulated.
How you handle each of these issues will have an important im-
pact on all of them in terms of how other world leaders assess the na-
ture of your statecraft. It is worthwhile to examine each of these issues
separately in some detail.
Brezhnev and SALT
For reasons that are in part tactical but which may have more pro-
found motivation, the Soviets have sought to put you in a box. While
we are conducting “business as usual” on many fronts (CTB, the Indian
Ocean, Scientific Cooperation, etc.), the Soviets, including Brezhnev,
have been publicly unresponsive to our many initiatives and, indeed,
have claimed our relationship is poor. They have tied an improvement
in these relations quite specifically to SALT, making our acceptance of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
their position the litmus test. At the same time, since May they have, in
effect, adjourned the substantive discussion of major SALT issues until
September at the earliest, while continuing their public attacks on our
SALT position and dismissing the B–1 decision. Their strategy appears
to be to put maximum pressure on you at the eleventh hour of the ex-
isting agreement and, in the meantime, keep up a drumfire of public
pressure in the hopes that American opinion will cause you to compro-
mise on key points.
Looking backward, it may well be that the Soviets have misinter-
preted our willingness to compromise last May on a three-part SALT
agreement. Coming only six weeks after we tabled our comprehensive
proposal they may have felt that the rough treatment they gave us at
the time paid off and may believe that further public pressure along
those lines may pay off again. They seem to be adopting a similar atti-
tude on the summit: we wanting it and they putting it off.
Our Nervous Allies
Our European allies are always anxious. If we do not get along
with the Soviets, they are concerned about the threat to them. If we get
along well with the Soviets, they fear condominium over them. The
allies are particularly anxious with a change of Administrations. The
Soviets traditionally have sought to drive a wedge between the United
States and the Europeans at each change of Administration by sug-
gesting either that we will not defend their interests or that we are in-
competent to do so.
The Soviets are making the same effort again. Their opportunities
are enhanced by the political and personal insecurities of several West
European leaders. That this is, in fact, a campaign is clear by the fact
that they are using the human rights issue on which Schmidt, in partic-
ular, is vulnerable because of his desire to liberate ethnic Germans in
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
The human rights issue is being portrayed by the Soviets as a cam-
paign which you undertook “out of the blue.” It is important to bear in
mind that we have had indications that make clear that there was a
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
basic decision to crack down on Soviet dissidents in the middle of last
year. In fact, Sakharov’s letter to you was provoked by widespread
fear among the dissidents that the Soviets were about to launch such a
campaign. While the reasons for the antidissident campaign are not
clear, and are most probably domestic in nature, the effort to blame
your Human Rights policy is a Soviet tactic to drive a wedge between
you and our allies.
The Middle East
There is no question but that your objectives and your approach in
the Middle East face a serious test in the next several weeks. There is
strong Israeli and domestic opposition to the objectives you have set
forward and the way in which we have sought to stimulate movement.
The delicacy of the issues, and the fact that the Arabs and the Israelis
interpret the same things differently, has made the need for a steady
U.S. course all the more important if our policy is to remain clear. For
example, it is unfortunate that we are now receiving reports that your
efforts to explain our position to American Jewish leaders yesterday is
being interpreted by some of them as signifying that pushing you hard
enough pays off.
The Challenge
In SALT, the Middle East, and on human rights, it may well be that
ultimately we will have to adjust our objectives and our approach.
However, the way we do this is extremely important. If we appear to
be responding to the latest pressure, we will simply invite greater pres-
sure, and unfortunately each area impacts on the other. Everyone is
taking our measure and assessing our steadfastness: the Soviets in gen-
eral, the Middle Easterners in regard to their problem; our allies be-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
cause of their dependence on us; and even the Chinese are talking
tough.
Personally, I do not believe that any significant alteration in our
approach is yet required on any of these issues. But if we should decide
to make changes, it is crucially important that we do so in a deliberate
manner.
Thus, in the next several weeks, we should give extraordinary care
to public as well as background remarks concerning SALT, the Middle
East, and our relations with our allies. We should spread the word
throughout the government that we wish to convey a patient, deter-
mined, yet relaxed attitude toward these major issues. Also, you should
take the time to lay out at some depth your views to our allies (like
Schmidt), so that they sense their larger strategic dimension instead of
just listening to them. As for possible modifications in our approach,
you will have an opportunity to consider them when you receive the
results of the PRC’s work on the Middle East, Human Rights, and
separate memoranda being prepared for you on US-Soviet relations
(the assessment and the list of your initiatives).
Whither the Federal Republic of Germany?
The second of the two opinion pieces this week was written by Colonel
William Odom of my staff. Bill served a total of 8 years in both East and
West Germany. He was also an Assistant Army Attache in Moscow
from 1972 to 1974. His opinion piece is interesting—and timely—
reading in light of Chancellor Schmidt’s impending visit.
“The division of Germany at the end of World War II put the major
issue of Europe in this century on ice: the emergence of German power
and the relative decline of Britain and France. Furthermore, the Federal
Republic broke with the traditional ambivalence about Germany’s
place in the East or the West by choosing the West. In the intervening
three decades, many political leaders in the West have come to assume
nity has its economic center of gravity in Germany. The FRG stabilizes
the EC and plays a key role in the international monetary system.
German economic wealth causes no less concern in both Eastern and
Western Europe than Germany military power. Thus, the possibility of
German political pre-eminence in Europe is again a shadow haunting
Europe.
The FRG domestic political crisis has several sources. First, economic
prosperity, the German salve for defeat in the last war, has recently
been threatened by the specter of inflation and unemployment, seri-
ously undermining the public confidence. Even a change of political
leadership will not likely change the popular mood. Second, the SPD
Ostpolitik has not produced the kinds of results that were promised, ei-
ther in inter-German relations or in relations with Moscow. That makes
the SPD vulnerable to attack by the German right, especially the
southern German CSU which is Catholic and anti-Communist. More-
over, the SPD is ex-Marxist and has a northern Protestant following,
making the SPD’s cultural ties to the East German populace suspect as
being more natural than ties to Bavaria. Third, some FDP members of
the SPD coalition are already openly dealing with the opposition
CDU/CSU. The weakness of the SPD’s political base is now also re-
flected in the loss of control of the Bundesrat. Thus, Helmut Schmidt is
in serious political trouble, but the CDU/CSU does not offer a strong
alternative.
U.S. policy toward Europe and USSR puts additional pressures on
the FRG at a time when its ability to manage them is declining steadily.
The nuclear energy question, of course, touches the issue of economic
prosperity for the Bonn leaders no less than our demand that they risk
inflation by loosening up credits and stimulating imports. In the MBFR
negotiations, we have recently joined with the NATO participants to
overcome Bonn’s resistance to tabling manpower strengths by national
totals, a move Genscher (of the FDP) has opposed because it could be
one more step toward allowing Soviet eventual success in using MBFR

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
to put a lid on FRG military forces levels (something the German right
can associate with the Versailles Treaty limitations). Moreover, German
paranoia is encouraged by what may look like a tacit negotiating ar-
rangement between NATO and the Soviets intended to keep Germany
weak and divided. At the same time, Schmidt acts as if detente were
were his private preserve and openly castigates the U.S. human rights
policy.
The three interacting developments—(1) German military and eco-
nomic power combined with political weakness, (2) the crisis of Ostpol-
itik, and (3) the tensions created by U.S. policies—make Bonn uncom-
fortable with the West and frustrated by the East. This is a step back
toward the traditional German predicament of being in the middle. At
the same time, the interaction of external and domestic political factors
could damage the fragile roots of West German democracy. Economic
deprivation, fear of Communism, and growing disillusionment with
the Western democracies, including the U.S., could in the long run feed
anti-democratic and authoritarian sentiments in schizophrenic Ger-
many. The Soviet Union, to be sure, will attempt to exploit the
emerging opportunity to loosen Bonn’s ties with the U.S.”
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
52.
Remarks by President Carter
Charleston, South Carolina, July 21, 1977
[Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.]
And I want to talk to you today about the hopes and problems that
we as southerners and as Americans share together. I feel a special kin-
ship with your State legislators. For 4 years I was a member of the
Georgia Senate, and I still prize State government not only for the
talents of those who work in it but, as Fritz Hollings says, for the
closeness to the people it represents.
Our Southern States have a proud tradition of local, independent
government, and now you’re the heirs of that tradition. But we in the
South have also felt, perhaps more directly than many others, some of
the rapid changes that have taken place in this modern age. More and
3: p.m. in the Gaillard Municipal Auditorium before members of the Southern Legisla-
tive Conference attending their annual meeting.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
more our own lives are shaped by events in other cities, decisions in
other States, tensions in other parts of the world.
And as Americans we cannot overlook the way that our fate is
bound to that of other nations. This interdependence stretches from the
health of our economy, through war and peace, to the security of our
own energy supplies. It’s a new world in which we cannot afford to be
narrow in our vision, limited in our foresight, or selfish in our purpose.
When I took office almost exactly 6 months ago, our Nation was
faced with a series of problems around the world—in southern Africa,
the Middle East, in our relationships with our NATO allies, and
on such tough questions as nuclear proliferation, negotiations with
our former adversaries, a Panama Canal treaty, human rights, world
poverty.
We have openly and publicly addressed these and other many dif-
ficult and controversial issues—some of which had been either skirted
or postponed in the past.
As I pointed out in a recent press conference, a period of debate,
disagreement, probing was inevitable. Our goal has not been to reach
easy or transient agreements, but to find solutions that are meaningful,
balanced, and lasting.
Now, a President has a responsibility to present to the people of
this Nation reports and summations of complex and important matters.
I feel more secure as President making decisions if I know that either
the most difficult, the most complex questions that face me have been
understood and debated by you and understood and debated by the
Congress.
In the past I think our Nation’s leaders have been guilty of making
decisions in secret. And even when the decision turns out to be the
right one, it makes the President, the Secretary of State speak with a
weak voice when they speak alone.
Today, I want to discuss a vitally important aspect of our foreign
relations, the one that may most directly shape the chances for peace
for us and for our children. I would like to spell out my view of what
we have done and where we are going in our relations with the Soviet
Union and to reaffirm the basic principles of our national policy.
I don’t have any apology for talking about foreign affairs at a
southern legislative conference, because foreign affairs and those diffi-
cult decisions ought never to be made with a concept that we can
abandon common sense and the sound judgment and the constructive
influence of the American people.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
For decades, the central problems of our foreign policy revolved
around antagonism between two coalitions, one headed by the United
States and the other headed by the Soviet Union.
Our national security was often defined almost exclusively in
terms of military competition with the Soviet Union. This competition
is still critical, because it does involve issues which could lead to war.
But however important this relationship of military balance, it cannot
be our sole preoccupation to the exclusion of other world issues which
also concern us both.
Even if we succeed in relaxing tensions with the U.S.S.R., we could
still awake one day to find that nuclear weapons have been spread to
dozens of other nations who may not be as responsible as are we. Or we
could struggle to limit the conventional arsenals of our two nations, to
reduce the danger of war, only to undo our efforts by continuing
without constraint to export armaments around the world.
As two industrial giants, we face long-term, worldwide energy
crises. Whatever our political differences, both of us are compelled to
begin conserving world energy and developing alternatives to oil and
gas.
Despite deep and continuing differences in world outlook, both
of us should accept the new responsibilities imposed on us by the
changing nature of international relations.
Europe and Japan rose from the rubble of war to become great eco-
nomic powers. Communist parties and governments have become
more widespread and more varied and, I might say, more independent
from one another. Newly independent nations emerged into what has
now become known as the Third World. Their role in world affairs is
becoming increasingly significant.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union have learned that our
countries and our people, in spite of great resources, are not all-
powerful. We’ve learned that this world, no matter how technology has
shrunk distances, is nevertheless too large and too varied to come
under the sway of either one or two super powers. And what is perhaps
more important of all, we have, for our part, learned, all of us, this fact,
these facts in a spirit not of increasing resignation, but of increasing
maturity.
I mention these familiar changes with which you are familiar be-
cause I think that to understand today’s Soviet-American relationship,
we must place it in perspective, both historically and in terms of the
overall global scene.
The whole history of Soviet-American relations teaches us that we
will be misled if we base our long-range policies on the mood of the
moment, whether that mood be euphoric or grim. All of us can re-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
member times when relations seemed especially dangerous and other
times when they seemed especially bright.
We’ve crossed those peaks and valleys before. And we can see
that, on balance, the trend in the last third of a century has been
positive.
The profound differences in what our two governments believe
about freedom and power and the inner lives of human beings, those
differences are likely to remain; and so are other elements of competi-
tion between the United States and the Soviet Union. That competition
is real and deeply rooted in the history and the values of our respective
societies. But it’s also true that our two countries share many important
overlapping interests. Our job—my job, your job—is to explore those
shared interests and use them to enlarge the areas of cooperation be-
tween us on a basis of equality and mutual respect.
As we negotiate with the Soviet Union, we will be guided by a vi-
sion of a gentler, freer, and more bountiful world. But we will have no
illusions about the nature of the world as it really is. The basis for com-
plete mutual trust between us does not yet exist. Therefore, the agree-
ments that we reach must be anchored on each side in enlightened self-
interest—what’s best for us, what’s best for the Soviet Union. That’s
why we search for areas of agreement where our real interests and
those of the Soviets coincide.
We want to see the Soviets further engaged in the growing pattern
of international activities designed to deal with human problems—not
only because they can be of real help but because we both should be
seeking for a greater stake in the creation of a constructive and peaceful
world order.
When I took office, many Americans were growing disillusioned
with de´tente—President Ford had even quit using the word, and by ex-
tension, people were concerned with the whole course of our relations
with the Soviet Union. Also, and perhaps more seriously, world respect
for the essential rightness of American foreign policy had been shaken
by the events of a decade—Vietnam, Cambodia, CIA, Watergate. At the
same time, we were beginning to regain our sense of confidence and
our purpose and unity as a nation.
In this situation, I decided that it was time for honest discussions
about international issues with the American people. I felt that it was
urgent to restore the moral bearings of American foreign policy. And I
felt that it was important to put the U.S. and Soviet relationship, in par-
ticular, on a more reciprocal, realistic, and, ultimately, more productive
basis for both nations.
It’s not a question of a “hard” policy or of a “soft” policy, but of a
clear-eyed recognition of how most effectively to protect our own secu-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
rity and to create the kind of international order that I’ve just described.
This is our goal.
We’ve looked at the problems in Soviet-American relations in a
fresh way, and we’ve sought to deal with them boldly and construc-
tively with proposals intended to produce concrete results. I’d like to
point out just a few of them.
In the talks on strategic arms limitations, the SALT talks, we ad-
vanced a comprehensive proposal for genuine reductions, limitations,
and a freeze on new technology which would maintain balanced stra-
tegic strength.
We have urged a complete end to all nuclear tests, and these nego-
tiations are now underway. Agreement here could be a milestone in
U.S.-Soviet relations.
We’re working together toward a ban on chemical and biological
warfare and the elimination of inventories of these destructive mate-
rials. We have proposed to curb the sales and transfers of conventional
weapons to other countries, and we’ve asked France, Britain, and other
countries to join with us in this effort.
We are attempting to halt the threatening proliferation of nuclear
weapons among the nations of the world which don’t yet have the
ability to set off nuclear explosives.
We’ve undertaken serious negotiations on arms limitations in the
Indian Ocean. We’ve encouraged the Soviets to sign, along with us, the
Treaty of Tlatelolco, which would ban the introduction of nuclear
weapons into the southern part of the Western Hemisphere.
We have begun regular consultations with the Soviet leaders as co-
chairmen of the prospective Geneva conference to promote peace in the
Middle East.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
We and our allies are negotiating together with the Soviet Union
and their allies in the Warsaw Pact nations to reduce the level of mili-
tary forces in Europe.
We’ve renewed the 1972 agreement for cooperation in science and
technology, and a similar agreement for cooperation in outer space.
We’re seeking ways to cooperate in improving world health and in
relieving world hunger.
In the strategic arms limitation talks, confirming and then building
on Vladivostok accords, we need to make steady progress toward our
long-term goals of genuine reductions and strict limitations, while
maintaining the basic strategic balance.
We’ve outlined proposals incorporating significant new elements
of arms control, deep reductions in the arsenals of both sides, freezing
of deployment and technology, and restraining certain elements in the
strategic posture of both sides that threaten to destabilize the balance
which now exists.
The Vladivostok negotiations of 1974 left some issues unresolved
and subject to honest differences of interpretation. Meanwhile, new de-
velopments in technology have created new concerns—the cruise mis-
sile, the very large intercontinental ballistic missiles of the Soviets.
The Soviets are worried about our cruise missiles, and we are con-
cerned about the security of our own deterrent capability. Our cruise
missiles are aimed at compensating for the growing threat to our deter-
rent, represented by the build-up of strategic Soviet offensive weapons
forces. If these threats can be controlled, and I believe they can, then we
are prepared to limit our own strategic programs. But if an agreement
cannot be reached, there should be no doubt that the United States can
and will do what it must to protect our security and to ensure the ade-
quacy of our strategic posture.
Our new proposals go beyond those that have been made before.
In many areas we are in fact addressing for the first time the tough,
complex core of longstanding problems. We are trying for the first
time to reach agreements that will not be overturned by the next

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
technological breakthrough. We are trying, in a word, for genuine
accommodation.
But none of these proposals that I’ve outlined to you involves a
sacrifice of security. All of them are meant to increase the security of
both sides. Our view is that a SALT agreement which just reflects the
lowest common denominator that can be agreed upon easily will only
create an illusion of progress and, eventually, a backlash against the en-
tire arms control process. Our view is that genuine progress in SALT
will not merely stabilize competition in weapons but can also provide a
basis for improvement in political relations as well.
When I say that these efforts are intended to relax tensions, I’m not
speaking only of military security. I mean as well the concern among
our own individual citizens, Soviet and American, that comes from the
knowledge which all of you have that the leaders of our two countries
have the capacity to destroy human society through misunder-
standings or mistakes. If we can relax this tension by reducing the nu-
clear threat, not only will we make the world a safer place but we’ll also
free ourselves to concentrate on constructive action to give the world a
better life.
We’ve made some progress toward our goals, but to be frank, we
also hear some negative comments from the Soviet side about SALT
and about our more general relations. If these comments are based on a
misconception about our motives, then we will redouble our efforts to
make our motives clear; but if the Soviets are merely making comments
designed as propaganda to put pressure on us, let no one doubt that we
will persevere.
What matters ultimately is whether we can create a relationship of
cooperation that will be rooted in the national interests of both sides.
We shape our own policies to accommodate a constantly changing
world, and we hope the Soviets will do the same. Together we can give
this change a positive direction.
Increased trade between the United States and the Soviet Union
would help us both. The American-Soviet Joint Commercial Commis-
sion has resumed its meetings after a long interlude. I hope that con-
ditions can be created that will make possible steps toward expanded
trade.
In southern Africa we have pressed for Soviet and Cuban restraint.
Throughout the nonaligned world, our goal is not to encourage dissen-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
sion or to redivide the world into opposing ideological camps, but to
expand the realm of independent, economically self-reliant nations,
and to oppose attempts at new kinds of subjugation.
Part of the Soviet Union leaders’ current attitude may be due to
their apparent—and incorrect—belief that our concern for human
rights is aimed specifically at them or is an attack on their vital
interests.
There are no hidden meanings in our commitment to human
rights.
We stand on what we have said on the subject of human rights.
Our policy is exactly what it appears to be: the positive and sincere ex-
pression of our deepest beliefs as a people. It’s addressed not to any
particular people or area of the world, but to all countries equally, yes,
including our own country.
And it’s specifically not designed to heat up the arms race or bring
back the cold war.
On the contrary, I believe that an atmosphere of peaceful coopera-
tion is far more conducive to an increased respect for human rights
than an atmosphere of belligerence or hatred or warlike confrontation.
The experience of our own country this last century has proved this
over and over again.
We have no illusions that the process will be quick or that change
will come easily. But we are confident that if we do not abandon the
struggle, the cause of personal freedom and human dignity will be en-
hanced in all nations of the world. We’re going to do that.
In the past 6 months we’ve made clear our determination—both to
give voice to Americans’ fundamental beliefs and to obtain lasting so-
lutions to East-West differences. If this chance to emphasize peace and
cooperation instead of animosity and division is allowed to pass, it will
not have been our choice.
We must always combine realism with principle. Our actions must
be faithful to the essential values to which our own society is dedicated,
because our faith in those values is the source of our confidence that
this relationship will evolve in a more constructive direction.
I cannot forecast whether all our efforts will succeed. But there are
things which give me hope, and in conclusion I would like to mention
them very briefly.
This place where I now stand is one of the oldest cities in the
United States. It’s a beautiful town of whose culture and urban charm
all Americans are proud—just as the people of the Soviet Union are
justly proud of such ancient cities as Tbilisi or Novgorod, which there
they lovingly preserve, as you do in Charleston, and into which they in-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
fuse a new life that makes these cities far more than just dead remnants
of a glorious historical past.
Although there are deep differences in our values and ideas, we
Americans and Russians belong to the same civilization whose origins
stretch back hundreds of years.
Beyond all the disagreements between us—and beyond the cool
calculations of mutual self-interest that our two countries bring to the
negotiating table—is the invisible human reality that must bring us
closer together. I mean the yearning for peace, real peace, that is in the
very bones of us all.
I’m absolutely certain that the people of the Soviet Union, who
have suffered so grievously in war, feel this yearning for peace. And in
this they are at one with the people of the United States. It’s up to all of
us to help make that unspoken passion into something more than just a
dream. And that responsibility falls most heavily on those like you, of
course, but particularly like President Brezhnev and me, who hold in
our hands the terrible power conferred on us by the modern engines of
war.
Mr. Brezhnev said something very interesting recently, and I quote
from his speech: “It is our belief, our firm belief,” he said, “that realism
in politics and the will for de´tente and progress will ultimately tri-
umph, and mankind will be able to step into the 21st century in condi-
tions of peace, stable as never before.”
I see no hidden meaning in that. I credit its sincerity. And I express
the same hope and belief that Mr. Brezhnev expressed. With all the dif-
ficulties, all the conflicts, I believe that our planet must finally obey the
Biblical injunction to “follow after the things which make for peace.”
Thank you very much.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
53.
Remarks by Secretary of Defense Brown
San Francisco, California, July 29, 1977
The Framework for National Security Decisionmaking
The headlines always deal with specific issues such as the B–1 or
the so-called neutron bomb. But today I want to talk more about the
framework within which those decisions are made more than about the
decisions themselves.
As you well know, the security of the United States is the first re-
sponsibility of any Administration. The reason is obvious: Unless the
safety of the nation is assured, we can have no reasonable chance of re-
sponding effectively to more than our most basic domestic needs.
For the last 6 months, with that priority in mind, the President has
spent more time on national security than on any other single issue. No
doubt, most of you have heard or read about some of the results—the
meetings in Moscow on SALT [Strategic Arms Limitation Talks], the
decision to withdraw U.S. ground forces from Korea, the drive to halt
the proliferation of nuclear weapons, renewed negotiations over the
Panama Canal, even discussions with Cuba and Vietnam.
I have heard two conclusions drawn from these activities. The first
is that ours is a purely reactive posture that deals with problems only
once they have become acute. The second is that beneath the velvet
glove of our diplomacy there is another velvet glove. Both conclusions
are wrong. Let me tell you why.
Most Americans now recognize why the United States, which be-
came heavily involved in world affairs during and after World War II,
are in the original. Brown spoke before the World Affairs Council of Northern California.
For the text of the question-and-answer session following Brown’s remarks, see ibid., pp.
and the development of enhanced radiation weapons (ERW). Documentation about ERW
is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. V, European Security,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
continues to remain involved—inextricably—despite Vietnam and the
other difficult, if less searing, experiences of the last decade.
We cannot afford to see the rest of the world dominated by another
power. Our safety depends in large part on an orderly diffusion of
power rather than an attempt to concentrate it in our own hands, let
alone having it fall into a single power center elsewhere. We need inde-
pendence, territorial integrity, and freedom from external attack not
only for ourselves but for others as well. We recognize that need
through our treaty and nontreaty commitments.
We would, in my view, find it virtually impossible to preserve our
internal liberties if we were an island of democracy in a sea of totalitar-
ianism. We could hardly hope to maintain a stable and expanding
economy if we were deprived of external markets. Defense in this mo-
dern age would become an almost intolerable burden if we did not
have allies to contribute both resources and strategic locations to the
collective security. In a time of instant communications, we could
hardly insist on human rights at home and silently watch their viola-
tion abroad.
Maybe it has become a cliche, but we do in fact inhabit an interde-
pendent world. Our own actions have widespread international effects.
Decisions by other nations can have a major impact on us as well. The
oil embargo of 1973 and the subsequent increase in our petroleum im-
ports—which now make up half our oil consumption—constitute only
the more obvious index of interdependence. We are bound to care—
and care deeply—about what happens in many parts of the world. Be-
cause of our power and influence, other nations are bound to care
about us; some of them will always seek our involvement in their
problems. Isolation today is about as relevant for the United States as
the one-horse shay.
Perhaps we have been too much of an international busybody in
the recent past. But no one can doubt that there remains much to busy
us in this dynamic world.
The Soviet Challenge
Our principal long-term problem continues to be the Soviet Union.
Whether we like it or not, the Soviet leadership seems intent on chal-
lenging us to a major military competition. To quote a friend and col-
league—someone whose professional efforts over the past 15 years
have been focused on arms control and who during most of that time
has considered that U.S. actions were driving the competition: The
principal factor driving the arms race now is the Soviet military
buildup, strategic and tactical.
The most evident—and dangerous—features of this challenge
arise from the steady annual increases, in real terms, in the Soviet de-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
fense budget, the buildup and improvement of Soviet strategic nuclear
forces, the modernization of Soviet ground and tactical air forces in
Eastern Europe, and the growing sophistication of Soviet naval forces,
which include a gradually expanding capability to project military
power at considerable distances from Russia itself.
Whatever the motives behind it, the challenge is serious; we must
not underestimate it. At the same time, we should recognize that the re-
sulting competition is not an all-out contest compared with arms races
of the past. It isn’t a purely military competition either.
We are spending a little more than 5 percent of GNP on our de-
fense establishment. Our best current estimate is that the Soviets are al-
locating between 11 and 13 percent of a much smaller GNP to their mil-
itary effort, with the bulk of it designed to give them a capability
against the United States and its immediate allies, although a signifi-
cant amount reflects the problem posed by the People’s Republic of
China.
Both sides—and especially the United States—could invest a great
deal more in defense. As of now, however, it would be a mistake to con-
centrate all our attention or the bulk of our resources on the arms race.
The competition reaches into other areas also, and we have compara-
tive advantages in them, whereas in the military arena the present bal-
ance and prospective potentials of the two sides are close. In fact we
welcome peaceful competition because when it comes to industrial, ag-
ricultural, and technological strength; to the efficiency as well as the
humaneness of our system; and to relative political influence, we have
it all over the Soviet Union, and we can act with the confidence and re-
straint that knowledge justifies.
We must take account of the Soviet challenge at all times. Failure to
do so will be dangerous and could be fatal. But there are other trends in
the world that could have long-term effects, either helpful or perilous
to our security; we must recognize them as well.
We have every reason to be encouraged by the revival of freedom
in Greece, Portugal, and Spain. We may possibly find some hope in the
possible rejection by the Eurocommunists—a posture we must view
with caution—of Moscow as the sole font of wisdom and authority. It is
even conceivable that some “Socialist” nations, particularly those that
do not live right in the shadow of the U.S.S.R., are becoming dissatis-
fied with having no alternative to dealing with and depending on the
hardcore Soviet bloc for their security and well-being. That is the good
news.
The bad news is that we also face a number of more dangerous de-
velopments. Nuclear weapons already are an unprecedented threat to
mankind; their continued proliferation—horizontal as well as ver-
tical—can only make matters worse. More generally, the violent settle-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ment of disputes seems to be on the increase. Subversion, terrorism,
and organized national force are on almost constant display. And their
lethality is being heightened by the expanding trade in nonnuclear
weapons and technologies. We live in a tough neighborhood.
Current Issues and the U.S. Role
It is a neighborhood where, as the result of earlier and often ne-
glected developments, a number of current and potentially explosive
issues beg for a solution one way or another. The differences in the
Middle East may have been narrowed; they have not disappeared. Ra-
cial tensions and clashes in Africa are mounting. The Sino-Soviet dis-
pute is quiescent but by no means extinct. The rising price of oil con-
tinues to send periodic shocks through the international economy. We
still lack an agreed international law of the seas.
The list could be made even longer and more forbidding. But the
main point about it is this: While many of the issues may be specialized
or regional in nature—and may not even involve the Soviet Union to
begin with—they can escalate rapidly to the superpower level unless
they are contained, defused, and eventually resolved. We should be
concerned about them for many reasons. We must, in any event, be
concerned about them on national security grounds.
The analogy of the two scorpions in a bottle may not precisely cap-
ture the current situation. (It undoubtedly oversimplified the real situa-
tion of the past as well. Now, as then, there are lots of other bugs, ants,
crickets, butterflies, and also a few vipers in the bottle.) Nonetheless,
we should be wary of letting the two scorpions and their bottle be put
on top of a powder magazine built over a match factory. The scorpions
may be cautious, but someone else could strike a match.
It would be tempting to turn our backs altogether on this turbulent
and dangerous world. But that choice is no longer open to us. The
United States is bound to have a substantial but finite influence on the
rest of the world. If other nations do not catch colds when the United
States sneezes, they will certainly feel the draft.
Our highest hopes for a world of peace and order have not been re-
alized. But our worst fears have not materialized. Utopia is not just
around the corner, but Armageddon is not inevitable either. Despite
constraints and mistakes, our record of accomplishments has been, on
the whole, a good one. Now is not the time to turn away from it.
As a nation, we are less inclined than in the 1960’s to see a threat in
every alien event—and that is a part of wisdom. But wisdom and in-
ertia are not the same thing. It is true that we could adopt a passive
strategy, reacting to events only in the hope of staying out of trouble
rather than acting to shape them. But that is not the President’s style.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
He does not propose to be an observer or arbitrator; neither do I. He
likes to take initiatives; in my own area of responsibility, so do I.
We have learned that we cannot mold the international environ-
ment at all precisely to our preferences, however altruistic those prefer-
ences may be. But we can still try to help create a world that accepts and
respects certain fundamental rights of nations—rights such as national
sovereignty, territorial integrity, and freedom from unprovoked attack.
We may not have a grand design—and I certainly don’t want to pro-
pose a pentagonal model—but we can still seek a reasonably peaceful
and stable international environment.
If that is our goal, as I believe it is, then we must pay attention to
the major issues and trends I have noted. The peaceful settlement of
disputes is to our interest; it is to everyone’s interest. At the same time,
we must adapt to where necessary, and control if possible, the trends
which could threaten the nation’s security. A strong national defense is
part, but only one part, of that process. Short-term diplomacy and
longer run programs to create a more benign international environ-
ment must have equal priority. Once that is understood, the outlines of
our strategy and posture should become evident.
Our actions can be the more restrained, the greater our strength.
The glove may be velvet, but friends and foes will find that there is—
and will continue to be—a firm hand inside it.
The Approach to Issues and Trends
As we come to grips with current issues and provide support to
our diplomacy, it is essential that we in the national security commu-
nity abandon old stereotypes. Lord Keynes once claimed that: “Prac-
tical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellec-
tual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist. . . .”
Where one issue in particular is concerned, some of us give the impres-
sion of becoming the slaves, if not to a defunct economist at least to
some strategist from a bygone age.
I refer to the Panama Canal. On this issue, in this day and age, it is
surely unreasonable to cling to obsolete asserted rights and outmoded
claimed privileges at the risk of losing everything—or of preserving
our position only at a terrible cost in blood, treasure, and long-term
hostility. The issue of the Panama Canal is not the sanctity of treaties or
the maintenance of essential U.S. security interests; we have success-
fully insisted on both.
Successful completion of negotiations will result in the United
States and the Republic of Panama signing a new treaty binding the
two parties until the year 2000. The treaty will guarantee the neutrality
of the canal, the access of all U.S. ships to it in peace and war, and U.S.
protection of it in collaboration with Panama.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
If we do not obtain such a treaty, those rights will just as surely be
in jeopardy. According to the best informed military opinion, we can’t
defend the canal from a hostile Panama. It is too vulnerable to a sack of
dynamite—or to a glove in the gears. Our relations with Latin America
will deteriorate. We will be worse off without a reasonable revision of
the existing treaty than with one.
Accordingly, the real issue before us is whether we, as a party to
the original treaty, have the imagination, the magnanimity, and the re-
alism to recognize that a number of fundamental social and ethical con-
ditions have changed and that it is in our self-interest to renegotiate the
treaty.
I believe we have those qualities and that on this issue, as on
others, we can make progress in defusing what could otherwise be-
come an explosive situation into which troublemakers might be drawn.
Where longer term trends are concerned, the desirability of con-
troling nuclear proliferation cannot be in question from the standpoint
of national security. The President’s determination to conserve energy
supplies and reduce our dependence on foreign oil makes equally good
sense on the same grounds. So do efforts to review outstanding issues
with old foes and former adversaries.
The Role of Defense
Finally, if we are to achieve a reasonable settlement of explosive
current issues and have the time to affect longer run trends before they
become explosive, we and our allies have work to do in the realm of de-
fense. If we are to bring other and more constructive instruments to
bear on international problems, our collective security system must be
effective, reliable, and durable.
Strength breeds the confidence not only to talk but also to institute
constructive change. I regret, in this connection, that I cannot review in
detail my trip to the Republic of Korea and Japan. First, I must report
on it to the President. But this much I can say: The situation on the Ko-
rean Peninsula and in northeast Asia has changed greatly since 1950.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
The Sino-Soviet dispute is now a fact of life. No one should doubt that
the United States will remain a major power in the western Pacific and
East Asia. Our capability for the rapid deployment of U.S. forces has
been enhanced and will be strengthened still further.
Elements of our tactical Air Force will remain in South Korea, and
other units—ground, naval, and air—will be in the theater. The Re-
public of Korea, for its part, now has twice the population and five
times the GNP of North Korea. Above all, we will continue to work
with our Korean ally to assure that any attack from the North can be de-
feated even after the 4–5-year period during which the U.S. ground
forces will be withdrawn from the peninsula. Surely those are powerful
conditions of deterrence and stability.
Make no mistake about it; we are determined to maintain and
modernize our collective security system. We are equally determined,
to the extent that the arms competition cannot be brought under con-
trol, to strengthen the competitive position of the United States.
Where our allies have developed the necessary strengths, we will
adjust the collective burdens to assure that our long-term security ar-
rangements remain commensurate with the capabilities and stakes of
the partners. Otherwise those arrangements cannot endure.
Where technology has produced total or partial substitutes for
more traditional weapons systems, and has done the job efficiently, we
will—with all due caution—begin the substitution. That, in fact, is the
main basis for planning to turn over some of the functions of the pene-
trating manned bomber to long-range cruise missiles and canceling
production of the B–1.
Where inefficiencies exist, as in our use of scarce personnel and our
maintenance of an excessive base structure—and other overhead—we
will attack them as vigorously as our other problems. Furthermore, we
will not be deterred from that attack—although we may on occasion be
delayed—by domestic political obstacles.
Most important of all, where increases in hostile foreign forces
threaten our ability to maintain the conditions of collective security, we
will insure the restoration of our position. Nothing in history suggests
that we can reach our goals from a position of weakness.
We are not in a position of weakness in those functions and regions
we consider vital to our security. The strategic nuclear balance, despite
the Soviet buildup, remains in equilibrium. The balance of tactical
power in Europe is more precarious, but it has not yet tilted against
NATO to the point where deterrence of the Warsaw Pact is threatened.
If another war begins in the Middle East, it will not be because of a lack
of Israeli strength. The situation in Korea, in our judgment, is and can
be kept militarily stable, despite increases in North Korean offensive

54.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, August 26, 1977
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy: The First Six Months
On vacation I read articles reviewing your first six months’ foreign
policy which struck me as so silly and superficial—focusing largely on
how good or bad our relations were with other governments and
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
urging you to improve them—that I thought it might be useful to re-
view what had really gone on in the last six months, to see whether
more useful lessons could be drawn.
1. Risk of War. The media have always been preoccupied with
whether Soviet leaders smile or frown at the US. But events since 1945
suggest that the ups and downs of detente are not the main factor
shaping the danger of conflict between these two countries: The super-
powers are drawn into adversary confrontation more by local crises in
other areas than by coolness in their bilateral relations. So in assessing
how your policy in the last six months has affected the risk of conflict,
we should look to what has happened in potential crisis areas:
(a) Middle East. In the last six months the US developed a clear
policy regarding the principles that should govern a general Middle
East settlement. The Arab countries responded with a modest show of
flexibility; the Israeli election produced a government less flexible than
its predecessors, and its stance is popular at home. So the search for a
settlement will be even longer and more difficult than seemed likely a
few months ago. But you have defined the kind of settlement that is
needed, which is a necessary first step.
(b) Korea. Your announced decision to withdraw US forces from
Korea involved both potential pluses and minuses. The pluses were
twofold: Withdrawal of one brigade in 1978 should permit significant
savings if that brigade is disbanded (as one brigade of each of the other
two lightly-armed US Army divisions has been disbanded); whether or
not this is done, eventual withdrawal of all US forces will give us the
option of confining US involvement in any future Korean war to air
and sea action. The minus is that the North Korean government may be
more inclined to consider a pre-emptive attack. If the timing of further
withdrawals after 1978 can be made dependent on North Korean ac-
tions and attitudes, we will have committed ourselves to the right
long-term course without enhancing the risk of conflict.
(c) Europe. Six months ago there seemed some danger that the bal-
ance of power in Central Europe would shift sufficiently in favor of the
USSR to encourage Soviet leaders to mount growing pressure on the
West (or perhaps to intervene in a grey situation such as Yugoslavia, if
the occasion arose). This risk has been reduced by the program to build
up NATO forces that you launched in London.
2. Economic. The most likely threat to the industrial democracies is
not war, but a long-term deterioration in their economic circumstances,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
due to continuing stagflation. Policies to which the US contributed in
the last six months have somewhat reduced this danger:
(a) Macro-Economic Policies. At London, the seven leading indus-
trial nations committed themselves to sensible growth and stabilization
targets for 1977. These commitments strengthened pro-growth groups
in the German and Japanese governments, and hence contributed to the
German and Japanese expansionist decisions which will probably be
taken soon, and which should yield good growth records in 1978, after
a dismal German growth record in 1977. Summit stabilization pledges
probably also strengthened the commitment of the French, British, and
Italian governments to needed and painful anti-inflationary policies.
(b) Financial Indebtedness. In your first six months, the US played a
large role in bringing about international agreement to establish a new
$10 billion IMF facility to make loans to developed and developing
countries that are running deficits. This has been a major success, even
if one has to look among the corset ads to find press articles about it.
(c) Trade. Bob Strauss’ agreement with the European Commission
has gotten the long-stalled Tokyo Round trade negotiations moving
again, although there are still serious obstacles ahead.
(d) Energy. Your domestic energy program6 set the stage for a con-
tinuing attack by the main industrial countries on one of the main
threats to growth and price stability in the industrial world: the imbal-
ance between global energy supply and demand.
None of this is going soon to solve the economic problems facing
the industrial countries, particularly the weaker European nations. But
our policies in the first six months have helped to get things moving in
the right direction. And they have helped to strengthen the interna-
tional institutions—IMF, Summitry, GATT—within which further
progress can be sought.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
3. Arms Control and Non-Proliferation. In the last six months the US
recognized the long-term importance of these two areas and acted ac-
cordingly, seeking the basic changes that are needed, rather than the
quick fixes that make good news stories.
—Instead of accepting a quick and relatively meaningless deal on
arms control, the new Administration sought a major reduction in stra-
tegic force levels that would enhance nuclear stability, even if it took
longer to achieve.
—We are launching the long-term international study of how to
meet peaceful nuclear energy needs without proliferation pledged at
the Summit. If this study eventually suggests creation of a major new
international institution to provide assurances of nuclear fuel to im-
porting countries and to store spent fuel, it could be one of the most im-
portant new advances in global architecture since the 1940s.
4. Defense Policy. The last six months have seen major shifts in de-
fense policy, which will make it more effective in supporting US for-
eign policy:
—A shift from the previous Administration’s undue emphasis on
strategic forces to greater stress on general purpose forces, the type of
military power that counts most in an age of nuclear parity.
—Within general purpose forces, increased emphasis on Europe-
oriented forces, which are badly in need of improvement.
There’s a lot more work to be done in strengthening US conven-
tional forces, particularly ground forces in Europe and air and naval
forces in the Eastern Mediterranean. But our policy has begun to reflect
the right priorities.
5. North-South Relations. The last Administration focused on cos-
metic gestures to respond to LDC concerns in UN debates. In its first six
months, this Administration focused on substance:
(a) IBRD. You reversed the previous Administration’s position and
committed the US to support a large general increase in the World
Bank’s resources.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
(b) Aid. You pledged the US to a large increase in aid8 and commis-
sioned internal and external studies9 as to how it might best be
achieved.
(c) Commodities. The US settled on a sensible commodity stabiliza-
tion policy which, if agreed to by others, should reduce price fluctua-
tions that are equally harmful to developed and developing countries.
6. Public Confidence. You have restored a measure of public confi-
dence in US foreign policy by aligning it in greater degree with tradi-
tional American values. I am sceptical that your human rights policy
will do much to change dictatorships around the world and that US Af-
rican policy will avert continuing turmoil in Southern Africa; but I’m
also sceptical that either of these policies does any harm, and both pol-
icies do considerable good at home—in re-establishing the connection
between US foreign policy and US public opinion that was fractured by
the seeming opportunism of the last Administration.
7. The Rest. Compared to these accomplishments, the matters on
which the media tend to focus seem trivial:
—Doubtless Giscard and Schmidt have moments of irritation with
your ideas. This hasn’t prevented the important accomplishments
noted above; indeed, it may well be the price of these accomplishments.
And it seems to be tapering down, if not a thing of the past, to judge
from Schmidt’s last visit.
—Brezhnev is annoyed by your human rights campaign. But
nothing in the past record of Soviet policy suggests that this will pre-
vent him or his successors from entering into any agreements with us
that they conceive to be in the Soviet interest—any more than a US re-
treat from human rights would cause him to offer us substantive con-
cessions. He is probably also put out because you have made clear that
progress in the US-Soviet relations depends on concrete agreements;
but this was an overdue change in past US policy.
8. Conclusion. The success or failure of foreign policy isn’t deter-
mined by whether heads of government do or don’t say nice things
about us. It’s determined by whether we’re successful in building the
world order to which you pledged yourself in the campaign. This
means looking for areas of common interest, particularly with the in-
dustrial democracies—but also with developing and Communist coun-
tration planned to seek an increase in bilateral and multilateral aid over the next 5 years;

55.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, September 21, 1977
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko
Your meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko could be a turning
point. Soviet policy is apparently confused and uncertain. Brezhnev
claims he has serious concerns about you and about the general thrust
of our policies. The talks with Gromyko, therefore, are an opportunity
for you to shape the relationship personally and directly. But the talks
will also be the first chance for the top leadership to assess you person-
ally. Gromyko’s report of his meeting here in Washington thus will be a
critical input to the politburo and Brezhnev’s future decisions.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The Soviet Perspective
Over the next month or so, Brezhnev will be putting the finishing
touches on whatever programmatic statement he and the politburo in-
tend to issue in honor of the new constitution and the 60th anniversary
of the Bolshevik Revolution. These occasions tend to take on more than
a purely ceremonial significance. Probably, there will be an appraisal of
the general international situation, and in particular, the future course
of Soviet-American relations. While the Soviets could opt for a freeze in
relations, Brezhnev’s preference probably is to reinstate “detente.”
—He knows that you will certainly be in office to deal with his suc-
cessor; moreover, the Soviets cannot ignore the fact that the US has
emerged from the Vietnam-Watergate turmoil with a new sense of con-
fidence and thus in a far better strategic position to endure a period of
stagnation or even confrontation.
—In contrast to our situation, the Soviets are approaching the end
of the Brezhnev period which will be symbolized by the new constitu-
tion. While this period has been marked by certain Soviet successes in
containing dissent at home and in East Europe and in expanding Soviet
influence, in the past several years troubles have also grown—in rela-
tions with the US, in the Middle East, in India and Africa. The growth
of Soviet military power has not provided a basis for permanent polit-
ical influence, in part because international concerns have broadened to
include newer issues in which the USSR risks irrelevancy. And, finally,
the USSR is constrained by the fact that it finds itself deeply indebted to
and dependent on the Western world for its economic growth.
Your Objectives
Since the Soviets, including Brezhnev, profess confusion over your pol-
icies, you may want to use this as an opening theme:
(1) laying out the general line of your policy;
(2) relating it to Soviet-American relations, and
(3) indicating quite frankly some specific problems we have with
Soviet behavior.
1. American Foreign Policy
Your policies have been designed to be responsive to the rapid
changes occurring in the world and to reflect the new sense of confi-
dence and moral consciousness among our people:
—We recognize that a number of the challenges that arise from this
process of change impose special responsibilities on the most advanced
industrial countries—for example, non-proliferation, economic and so-
cial justice, the desire for individual liberty, and the gap between rich

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
and poor nations, transcend ideological boundaries and the traditional
great power rivalries.
—The US identifies with these aspirations and will pursue policies
to help shape the process in a constructive manner.
—This is the context in which we view the question of human
rights.
—A major part of your UN speech4 will deal with the global
agenda.
A second element in your policy will be the continuing close rela-
tionship with our allies in Europe and Asia; we intend to give the alli-
ances a new sense of purpose by cooperating not only in the traditional
areas of military and political affairs, but increasingly in new areas.
Third, the US will continue to maintain a strong defense posture.
This is not said as a threat but reflects the realities of the present
period.
Finally, we want to work for a reduction in tensions—both in re-
gional conflicts such as the Middle East and Africa, and in functional
areas of arms control, arms transfer, and non-proliferation.
2. US-Soviet Relations
US-Soviet relations will occupy an important place in your policies
and can contribute to the growth of a new international order.
—We recognize that strong elements of competition and rivalry
persist in that relationship. They have deep historical roots and reflect
the differences in our two societies.
—Recognizing these realities we nevertheless believe that stronger
elements of a cooperative relationship can emerge if we accept the prin-
ciples of restraint and reciprocity. These can be the foundations of a gen-
uine detente; on this basis we can gain domestic support. Otherwise,
relations will be erratic.
The current task is how to give our common interests a new impetus, so
that the cooperative elements will become the predominant feature of the
relationship.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We see the following agenda:
—Soviet policy in the Middle East is a test of whether we can work
together to promote the general international objective of building a
lasting peace, or whether the USSR will be bound by the narrower na-
tional interests of maintaining its alignment with the most radical ele-
ments of Arab politics.
—We will continue to work for a Geneva conference, but the ques-
tion is whether the Soviet Union will use its influence to create the nec-
essary
preconditions—both
procedurally
and
substantively—or
simply try to isolate Israel while fueling an arms race.
—Soviet behavior thus far raises some serious questions for us.
Similarly, we are puzzled by Soviet policy in Africa:
—The US has taken the lead in trying to arrange a peaceful settle-
ment in Southern Africa—but we have had little support from the
USSR—indeed, we have mainly heard criticism.
—Both countries should have learned lessons from Vietnam and
Angola that involvement of the two strongest powers in explosive re-
gions turning regional conflicts into confrontations can only lead to
disasters.
3. Arms Control
The US has taken the initiative in almost every area of arms con-
trol, in SALT, the test ban, and the Indian Ocean, proposals for dis-
cussing ban on interference with satellites, and discussing civil defense.
—Constant criticism from the Soviet Union suggests to us that the
Soviet Union is more interested in making propaganda points than ne-
gotiating: the campaign against our SALT proposals and the neutron
bomb are cases in point.
Nevertheless, we are now prepared to move to a broad front:
—We will continue to press for an end to all nuclear explosions as
soon as possible; the Soviets have only raised political conditions. If we
want to demonstrate a genuine interest in halting proliferation of nu-
clear weapons and reducing the threat of war, then a comprehensive
ban without political conditions, or exceptions for peaceful tests, is an
issue where immediate progress is possible. We do not even rule out a
temporary cessation of all testing to give the negotiation a momentum.
It is now up to the Soviet side.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
In the Indian Ocean, we are also ready to take a new initiative to sta-
bilize the situation immediately and then bring about some reductions;
next week we will present a new plan to the Soviet negotiators.
—In general, we are willing to restrict our activities, if the USSR is
ready to reciprocate.
—For example, we would give assurances that we do not intend to
deploy B–52s in the area if the USSR would, in turn, not deploy strike
aircraft.
—We will not alter our present submarine operations if the USSR
reciprocates.
In short, our approach reflects the basic principle of reciprocity, which
should govern all our relations, and above all be manifested in the SALT
negotiations.
—In SALT, you have had a chance to discuss our most recent
proposal.
—We are not seeking unilateral advantages over the USSR, but the
Soviet Union must recognize that we have some serious concerns about
future strategic relationships; no agreement that ignores these concerns
would ever pass the Congress or obtain popular support. Indeed, we
could not sign such a treaty.
—On the other hand, we have taken account of Soviet concerns,
and have gone more than half way to meet them. Our proposals on
cruise missiles have a far greater impact on US forces than on Soviet
forces.
—The Soviet response has been discouraging; we cannot engage in
a process in which the US makes a series of proposals but the USSR
simply rejects them or picks out an isolated element for agreement.
In sum, arms control and SALT in particular is an area where we
can give the relationship a more positive character. Or, it can become a
wedge that drives us apart and leads to actions that both sides may
regret.
As President, you will have to submit a new defense budget to the
Congress.
—If there is progress on the major arms control issues, you can re-
flect this in your budget.
—If not, then the American people will expect us to respond to the
challenge we see in the unconstrained build up of Soviet military
forces.
4. European Security and Cooperation (CSCE)
(The Soviets are quite nervous about the Belgrade Conference;
they frankly do not know what to expect, so whatever you say on this
issue will be a significant foreshadowing of our line in the Conference.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—We are not seeking a confrontation, nor will we turn this Confer-
ence into a polemical debate.
—What we want is constructive outcome that will show progress
in all areas; we will make some new proposals and are prepared to con-
sider Soviet ideas.
—But the Conference will have to undertake a full and frank re-
view of performance of all participants, including performance in
human rights (Principle VII). If the original agreement is to have any
meaning, then each participant must be willing to submit their record
to a frank scrutiny. We are ready to accept criticism, and in turn, we
have to make our own concerns known.
Our overall goal in CSCE is to set a higher standard of conduct for
all nations to observe—and to underline the proposition that obliga-
tions, once freely undertaken, must be fully respected.
5. Trade
We recognize that over the longer term US-Soviet relations will
have to have a greater economic dimension.
—At present the Congress would not be ready to consider changes
in the law. Later, after Soviet-American relations have developed
more positively, you are prepared to take up the issues of MFN and
credits. Frankly, this depends on Soviet policy in critical areas—the
Middle East and arms control—and also on the question of emigration.
—We will not impose conditions, but merely face the realities of
the mood in this country.
6. In Summary:
We seem to be approaching a crossroads; we hope that the Soviets
are willing to take the more constructive path. The message Gromyko
should carry back is that the US wants a cooperative relationship, but it
depends on whether there is reciprocity and restraint. We want a com-
prehensive and reciprocal detente—and are prepared to work for it
with the Soviets. This is the message, in addition to personal greet-
ings, that Gromyko ought to convey to Brezhnev.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
7. Specific Agenda
The above could serve as a point of departure for a discussion of
more specific issues, and I would assume that you would wish to deal
with them in the following sequence:
—SALT
—CTB
—The Middle East
—Southern Africa
—Other Items (Secretary Vance suggests human rights issues in
the USSR)
56.
Address by President Carter Before the United Nations
General Assembly
New York, October 4, 1977
Mr. President, Mr. Secretary General, assembled delegates, and distin-
guished guests:
Mr. President, I wish to offer first my congratulations on your elec-
tion as President of the 32d General Assembly. It gives my own Gov-
ernment particular satisfaction to work under the leadership of a repre-
sentative from Yugoslavia, a nation with which the United States
enjoys close and valued relations. We pledge our cooperation and will
depend heavily on your experience and skill in guiding these discus-
sions which we are beginning.
Mr. President, I would also like to express again the high esteem in
which we hold Secretary General Waldheim. We continue to benefit
greatly from our close consultations with him, and we place great trust
in his leadership of this organization.
10: a.m. in General Assembly Hall at the Headquarters of the United Nations. Prior to
the address, the President met with Waldheim and General Assembly President Lazar
Mojsov. Additional documentation concerning Department of State and White House ef-
forts in preparing the President’s address is in the National Archives, RG 59, Policy and
Material, Speech Files, Box 1, UN Speech September 1977. The President believed that the
speech was well-received, commenting in his diary: “There’s a different attitude among
the nations of the world toward us, brought about by our own new policies and by the
influence of Andrew Young.” (White House Diary, p. 112)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Thirty-two years ago, in the cold dawn of the Atomic Age, this or-
ganization came into being. Its first and its most urgent purpose has
been to secure peace for an exhausted and ravaged world.
Present conditions in some respects appear quite hopeful, yet the
assurance of peace continues to elude us. Before the end of this century,
a score of nations could possess nuclear weapons. If this should
happen, the world that we leave our children will mock our own hopes
for peace.
The level of nuclear armaments could grow by tens of thousands,
and the same situation could well occur with advanced conventional
weapons. The temptation to use these weapons, for fear that someone
else might do it first, would be almost irresistible.
The ever-growing trade in conventional arms subverts interna-
tional commerce from a force for peace to a caterer for war.
Violence, terrorism, assassination, undeclared wars all threaten to
destroy the restraint and the moderation that must become the domi-
nant characteristic of our age.
Unless we establish a code of international behavior in which the
resort to violence becomes increasingly irrelevant to the pursuit of na-
tional interests, we will crush the world’s dreams for human develop-
ment and the full flowering of human freedom.
We have already become a global community, but only in the
sense that we face common problems and we share for good or evil a
common future. In this community, power to solve the world’s
problems, particularly economic and political power, no longer lies
solely in the hands of a few nations.
Power is now widely shared among many nations with different
cultures and different histories and different aspirations. The question
is whether we will allow our differences to defeat us or whether we will
work together to realize our common hopes for peace.
Today I want to address the major dimensions of peace and the
role the United States intends to play in limiting and reducing all arma-
ments, controlling nuclear technology, restricting the arms trade, and
settling disputes by peaceful means.
When atomic weapons were used for the first time, Winston Chur-
chill described the power of the atom as a revelation long, mercifully
withheld from man. Since then we have learned in Du¨rrenmatt’s
chilling words that “what has once been thought can never be un-
thought.”
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
If we are to have any assurance that our children are to live out
their lives in a world which satisfies our hope—or that they will have a
chance to live at all—we must finally come to terms with this enormous
nuclear force and turn it exclusively to beneficial ends.
Peace will not be assured until the weapons of war are finally put
away. While we work toward that goal, nations will want sufficient
arms to preserve their security.
The United States purpose is to ensure peace. It is for that reason
that our military posture and our alliances will remain as strong as nec-
essary to deter attack. However, the security of the global community
cannot forever rest on a balance of terror.
In the past, war has been accepted as the ultimate arbiter of dis-
putes among nations. But in the nuclear era we can no longer think of
war as merely a continuation of diplomacy by other means. Nuclear
war cannot be measured by the archaic standards of victory or defeat.
This stark reality imposes on the United States and the Soviet
Union an awesome and special responsibility. The United States is en-
gaged, along with other nations, in a broad range of negotiations. In
strategic arms limitation talks, we and the Soviets are within sight of a
significant agreement in limiting the total numbers of weapons and in
restricting certain categories of weapons of special concern to each of
us. We can also start the crucial process of curbing the relentless march
of technological development which makes nuclear weapons ever
more difficult to control.
We must look beyond the present and work to prevent the critical
threats and instabilities of the future. In the principles of self-restraint,
reciprocity, and mutual accommodation of interests, if these are ob-
served, then the United States and the Soviet Union will not only suc-
ceed in limiting weapons but will also create a foundation of better rela-
tions in other spheres of interest.
The United States is willing to go as far as possible, consistent with
our security interest, in limiting and reducing our nuclear weapons. On
a reciprocal basis we are willing now to reduce them by 10 percent or 20
percent, even 50 percent. Then we will work for further reductions to a
world truly free of nuclear weapons.
The United States also recognizes a threat of continued testing of
nuclear explosives.
Negotiations for a comprehensive ban on nuclear explosions are
now being conducted by the United States, the United Kingdom, and
the Soviet Union. As in other areas where vital national security in-
terests are engaged, agreements must be verifiable and fair. They must
be seen by all the parties as serving a longer term interest that justifies
the restraints of the moment.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The longer term interest in this instance is to close one more av-
enue of nuclear competition and thereby demonstrate to all the world
that the major nuclear powers take seriously our obligations to reduce
the threat of nuclear catastrophe.
My country believes that the time has come to end all explosions of
nuclear devices, no matter what their claimed justification, peaceful or
military, and we appreciate the efforts of other nations to reach this
same goal.
During the past 9 months, I have expressed the special importance
that we attach to controlling nuclear proliferation. But I fear that many
do not understand why the United States feels as it does.
Let me try to explain why I deeply believe that this is one of the
greatest challenges that we face in the next quarter of a century.
It’s a truism that nuclear weapons are a powerful deterrent. They
are a deterrent because they threaten. They could be used for terrorism
or blackmail as well as for war. But they threaten not just the intended
enemy, they threaten every nation, combatant or noncombatant alike.
That is why all of us must be concerned.
Let me be frank. The existence of nuclear weapons in the United
States and the Soviet Union, in Great Britain, France, and China, is
something that we cannot undo except by the painstaking process of
negotiation. But the existence of these weapons does not mean that
other nations need to develop their own weapons any more than it pro-
vides a reason for those of us who have them to share them with others.
Rather, it imposes two solemn obligations on the nations which
have the capacity to export nuclear fuel and nuclear technology—the
obligations to meet legitimate energy needs and, in doing so, to ensure
that nothing that we export contributes directly or indirectly to the pro-
duction of nuclear explosives. That is why the supplier nations are
seeking a common policy, and that is why the United States and the So-
viet Union, even as we struggle to find common ground in the SALT
talks, have already moved closer toward agreement and cooperation in
our efforts to limit nuclear proliferation.
I believe that the London Suppliers Group must conclude its work
as it’s presently constituted so that the world security will be safe-
guarded from the pressures of commercial competition. We have
learned it is not enough to safeguard just some facilities or some mate-
rials. Full-scope, comprehensive safeguards are necessary.
Two weeks from now in our own country, more than 30 supplier
and consuming nations will convene for the International Fuel Cycle

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Evaluation, which we proposed last spring. For the next several years
experts will work together on every facet of the nuclear fuel cycle.
The scientists and the policymakers of these nations will face a tre-
mendous challenge. We know that by the year 2000, nuclear power re-
actors could be producing enough plutonium to make tens of thou-
sands of bombs every year.
I believe from my own personal knowledge of this issue that there
are ways to solve the problems that we face. I believe that there are al-
ternative fuel cycles that can be managed safely on a global basis. I
hope, therefore, that the International Fuel Cycle Evaluation will have
the support and the encouragement of every nation.
I’ve heard it said that efforts to control nuclear proliferation are fu-
tile, that the genie is already out of the bottle. I do not believe this to be
true. It should not be forgotten that for 25 years the nuclear club did not
expand its membership. By genuine cooperation, we can make certain
that this terrible club expands no further.
Now, I’ve talked about the special problems of nuclear arms con-
trol and nuclear proliferation at length. Let me turn to the problem of
conventional arms control, which affects potentially or directly every
nation represented in this great hall. This is not a matter for the future,
even the near future, but of the immediate present. Worldwide military
expenditures are now in the neighborhood of $300 billion a year.
Last year the nations of the world spent more than 60 times as
much—60 times as much—equipping each soldier as we spent edu-
cating each child. The industrial nations spent the most money, but the
rate of growth in military spending is faster in the developing world.
While only a handful of states produce sophisticated weapons, the
number of nations which seek to purchase these weapons is expanding
rapidly.
The conventional arms race both causes and feeds on the threat of
larger and more deadly wars. It levies an enormous burden on an al-
ready troubled world economy.
For our part, the United States has now begun to reduce its arms
exports. Our aim is to reduce both the quantity and the deadliness of
the weapons that we sell. We have already taken the first few steps, but
we cannot go very far alone. Nations whose neighbors are purchasing
large quantities of arms feel constrained to do the same. Supplier na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tions who practice restraint in arms sales sometimes find that they
simply lose valuable commercial markets to other suppliers.
We hope to work with other supplier nations to cut back on the
flow of arms and to reduce the rate at which the most advanced and so-
phisticated weapon technologies spread around the world. We do not
expect this task to be easy or to produce instant results. But we are com-
mitted to stop the spiral of increasing sale of weapons.
Equally important, we hope that purchaser nations, individually
and through regional organizations, will limit their arms imports. We
are ready to provide to some nations the necessary means for legitimate
self-defense, but we are also eager to work with any nation or region in
order to decrease the need for more numerous, more deadly, and ever
more expensive weapons.
Fourteen years ago one of my predecessors spoke in this very
room under circumstances that in certain ways resembled these. It was
a time, he said, of comparative calm, and there was an atmosphere of
rising hope about the prospect of controlling nuclear energy.
The first specific step had been taken to limit the nuclear arms
race—a test ban treaty signed by nearly a hundred nations.
But the succeeding years did not live up to the optimistic prospect
John F. Kennedy placed before this assembly, because as a community
of nations, we failed to address the deepest sources of potential conflict
among us.
As we seek to establish the principles of de´tente among the major
nuclear powers, we believe that these principles must also apply in re-
gional conflicts.
The United States is committed to the peaceful settlement of differ-
ences. We are committed to the strengthening of the peacemaking ca-
pabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations, such as the
Organization of African Unity and the Organization of American
States.
The United States supports Great Britain’s efforts to bring about a
peaceful, rapid transition to majority rule and independence in Zim-
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
babwe. We have joined other members of the Security Council last
week and also the Secretary General in efforts to bring about independ-
ence and democratic rule in Namibia. We are pleased with the level of
cooperation that we have achieved with the leaders of the nations in the
area, as well as those people who are struggling for independence.
We urge South Africa and other nations to support the proposed
solution to the problems in Zimbabwe and to cooperate still more
closely in providing for a smooth and prompt transition in Namibia.
But it is essential that all outside nations exercise restraint in their ac-
tions in Zimbabwe and Namibia so that we can bring about this ma-
jority rule and avoid a widening war that could engulf the southern
half of the African Continent.
Of all the regional conflicts in the world, none holds more menace
than the Middle East. War there has already carried the world to the
edge of nuclear confrontation. It has already disrupted the world
economy and imposed severe hardships on the people in the devel-
oped and the developing nations alike.
So, true peace—peace embodied in binding treaties—is essential. It
will be in the interest of the Israelis and the Arabs. It is in the interest of
the American people. It is in the interest of the entire world.
The United Nations Security Council has provided the basis for
peace in Resolutions 242 and 338, but negotiations in good faith by all
parties is needed to give substance to peace.
Such good faith negotiations must be inspired by a recognition
that all nations in the area—Israel and the Arab countries—have a right
to exist in peace, with early establishment of economic and cultural ex-
change and of normal diplomatic relations. Peace must include a
process in which the bitter divisions of generations, even centuries, ha-
treds and suspicions can be overcome. Negotiations cannot be suc-
cessful if any of the parties harbor the deceitful view that peace is
simply an interlude in which to prepare for war.
Good faith negotiations will also require acceptance by all sides of
the fundamental rights and interests of everyone involved.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
For Israel this means borders that are recognized and secure. Secu-
rity arrangements are crucial to a nation that has fought for its survival
in each of the last four decades. The commitment of the United States to
Israel’s security is unquestionable.
For the Arabs, the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people must
be recognized. One of the things that binds the American people to Is-
rael is our shared respect for human rights and the courage with which
Israel has defended such rights. It is clear that a true and lasting peace
in the Middle East must also respect the rights of all peoples of the area.
How these rights are to be defined and implemented is, of course, for
the interested parties to decide in detailed negotiations and not for us
to dictate.
We do not intend to impose, from the outside, a settlement on the
nations of the Middle East.
The United States has been meeting with the foreign ministers of
Israel and the Arab nations involved in the search for peace. We are
staying in close contact with the Soviet Union, with whom we share re-
sponsibility for reconvening the Geneva conference.
As a result of these consultations, the Soviet Union and the United
States have agreed to call for the resumption of the Geneva conference
before the end of this year.
While a number of procedural questions remain, if the parties
continue to act in good faith, I believe that these questions can be
answered.
The major powers have a special responsibility to act with restraint
in areas of the world where they have competing interests, because the
association of these interests with local rivalries and conflicts can lead
to serious confrontation.
In the Indian Ocean area, neither we nor the Soviet Union has a
large military presence, nor is there a rapidly mounting competition be-
tween us.
Restraint in the area may well begin with a mutual effort to stabi-
lize our presence and to avoid an escalation in military competition.
Then both sides can consider how our military activities in the Indian
Ocean, this whole area, might be even further reduced.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
The peaceful settlement of differences is, of course, essential. The
United States is willing to abide by that principle, as in the case of
the recently signed Panama Canal treaties. Once ratified, these trea-
ties can transform the U.S.-Panama relationship into one that perma-
nently protects the interests and respects the sovereignty of both our
countries.
We have all survived and surmounted major challenges since the
United Nations was founded. But we can accelerate progress even in a
world of ever-increasing diversity.
A commitment to strengthen international institutions is vital. But
progress lies also in our own national policies. We can work together to
form a community of peace if we accept the kind of obligations that I
have suggested today.
To summarize: first, an obligation to remove the threat of nuclear
weaponry, to reverse the buildup of armaments and their trade, and to
conclude bilateral and multilateral arms control agreements that can
bring security to all of us. In order to reduce the reliance of nations on
nuclear weaponry, I hereby solemnly declare on behalf of the United
States that we will not use nuclear weapons except in self-defense; that
is, in circumstances of an actual nuclear or conventional attack on the
United States, our territories, or Armed Forces, or such an attack on our
allies.
In addition, we hope that initiatives by the Western nations to se-
cure mutual and balanced force reductions in Europe will be met by
equal response from the Warsaw Pact countries.
Second, an obligation to show restraint in areas of tension, to nego-
tiate disputes and settle them peacefully, and to strengthen peace-
making capabilities of the United Nations and regional organizations.
And finally, an effort by all nations, East as well as West, North as
well as South, to fulfill mankind’s aspirations for human development
and human freedom. It is to meet these basic demands that we build
governments and seek peace.
We must share these obligations for our own mutual survival and
our own mutual prosperity.
We can see a world at peace. We can work for a world without
want. We can build a global community dedicated to these purposes
and to human dignity.

57.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, October 21, 1977
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #33
1. Opinion
We need to look ahead and develop a coherent strategy—in-
cluding priorities, timing, and yes, linkages—for managing our deal-
ings with the Soviet Union, including the barrage of arms control nego-
tiations, and such major political issues as CSCE, human rights, and the
Middle East. We need this strategy to guide our own planning and ac-
tion, and to make sure we do not run into difficulty with Congress and
the public on the Soviet front.
For the American public, how the Soviet connection is managed is
a central standard for evaluating the foreign policy performance and
competence of any administration. The public becomes anxious when
they think things are going badly with the Soviets; but they equally—
and sometimes more so—become nervous when they think things are
going too well because they suspect good relations are being bought
with concessions. Above all, the American public wants a sense that the
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
Soviet connection is under control and that those managing it know
what they want.
Simply put, we may have something of a problem in how the
public sees our conduct of Soviet Affairs. Pat Caddell’s recent poll is
one of a number of straws in the wind. It shows a considerable negative
shift in opinion concerning performance on Soviet policy and the re-
lated area of human rights. To some extent, attitudes toward our Soviet
policy reflect a broader concern (one that you are familiar with) that we
are trying to do too much too quickly on too many different fronts. To
the extent that we can convey coherence and control in our Soviet
policy, we will counter this perception and build public confidence in
our general foreign policy efforts.
A key issue is whether we should try to wrap up CTB with SALT
in the near term. There is a strong connection between them in that both
are about strategic nuclear capabilities—and to conclude both at the
same time would be a powerful realization and demonstration of your
commitment to the control of nuclear weapons. Indeed, at one point we
accelerated our CTB efforts when it seemed that SALT might be indefi-
nitely stalled.
This said, it is not clear that it is feasible to get to a CTB in the de-
sired timeframe without conceding points important to us. Indeed, if
the Soviets sense that we are eager to wrap CTB up with SALT, they
would have a major incentive to link the two and try to wring more
concessions from us. There is also a good risk that Congress and the
public, rather than applauding the simultaneous conclusion of SALT
and CTB as two blows struck for peace, instead will question whether
we bought the double deal with unwarranted concessions. PNE’s, for
example, is an area where we may ultimately have to compromise. But
it is such an article of faith on the left and the right that they should
stop, that any such concession in the SALT II timeframe will be scored
as a retreat.
On balance, I think we need a controlled and phased strategy to
guide us through the minefields I have sketched above. I think that a
step-by-step approach is not only the best way to handle the Soviets
substantively, but also to convey a sense of competence and control to
Congress and to the public, and to avoid the sort of progressive eu-
phoria which, in the past, has been followed with sharp questions and
suspicions about what it really cost. In essence, I am talking of building
and staging our relations and agreements with the Soviets over the
span of your first term in office. The timetable might look something
like this:
—A SALT II agreement, combined with a Summit, in late winter or
early spring after Panama. It could well take us that long to get there in
any event.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—An Indian Ocean stabilization agreement concluded at the same
time or perhaps earlier if it looks desirable. It is a moderate step within
reach which might help maintain momentum in the relationship, while
buying us time on more serious and difficult fronts.
—A grey area systems initiative, possibly linked to MBFR, to
follow shortly after SALT II and demonstrate our continued concern for
Backfire, SS–20’s, etc. We have started planning work on this.
—A CTB agreement in late 1978, perhaps before the elections.
Your Spring Summit meeting could be used to open the way.
—Intensive negotiations in 1979 looking to the expiration of the
SALT II Protocol which coincides with the end of your first term, and is,
therefore, a major political benchmark.
These are the key elements. A comprehensive plan would have to
fit in such negotiations as MBFR, ASAT, CW, radiological weapons,
civil defense, and conventional arms restraints. Each of these could be
fitted into a general scheme of steady and controlled progress in our
dealings with the Soviets. Indeed, if we want to add something to SALT
for a possible Spring Summit, ASAT in some ways is a more directly re-
lated subject and perhaps more feasible on terms acceptable to us, than
CTB.
Finally, a major argument for the approach I am describing is the
need to phase the various negotiations and agreements to give the So-
viets a continuing incentive to moderate their behavior in our relation-
ship generally. The Soviets have gotten used to some pressure on
human rights and their tack now is to down-play the issue and to sug-
gest that we have learned our lesson. You may have to speak out again
publicly on the issue to disabuse the Soviets and to head off domestic
charges that you are backing off human rights. When you do speak out,
the Soviets’ reactions will be moderated to the extent they are en-
meshed with us in a controlled process of negotiations, and have some-
thing to lose.
Similarly, in the period immediately ahead, getting to Geneva on
the Middle East and what happens once we are there will be real tests
of Soviet intentions. How they respond cannot be divorced from SALT
or any other negotiation. Especially disruptive Soviet behavior in the
Middle East could not help but affect SALT and, above all, how any
lations with Latin America, Africa, and Asia were looked at primarily
through the prism of the cold war. And especially with regard to Africa
and Asia, our concerns for close relations with our traditional allies cut
across our inclination to support the movement toward independence
by Europe’s colonies.
In recent years, we have come to look at the problems of the Third
World more in their own right, in terms of realities of the Third World
itself. We can do so because we have come to appreciate better the
limits to the influence of both the Soviet Union and the United States in
the Third World. We must do so because of the growing importance of
the Third World to us, politically as well as economically, and because
address before members of the African Studies Association (ASA) and Latin American
Studies Association (LASA) at their joint meeting.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
only bad policy ensues when we allow either our global fears or our
global hopes to skew our vision of the facts.
This is not to say we should be indifferent to the influence of the
Soviet Union in the Third World or elsewhere. We and the Soviets have
different views of history and of the future; our relationship continues
to have competitive, as well as cooperative, elements.
But in terms of our own self-interest, we must begin to deal with
the developing nations on a basis which takes full account of their
growing importance to us. And we should understand that the deter-
mination of Third World nations to decide their own policies, their
wish to determine their own fates, is a basic protection for the world of
diversity we want to see preserved.
So it is no longer possible to say that East-West relations or ties
among the industrial democracies are more important to us than
North-South policies. For different reasons, they are all vital to U.S. in-
terests and to the kind of world we want for our children. Advance-
ment of our objectives in one area cannot be divorced from progress in
another. Worldwide energy security, for example, affects the economic
welfare of the industrial democracies, the developing world, and the
eastern Communist states. Economic cooperation among the United
States, Europe, and Japan affects growth in the Third World; by the
same token, their economic health is important to our own.
Another way of looking at the importance of the U.S.-Third World
relationship is to enumerate some of those problems which cannot be
solved without their cooperation.
• Controlling the proliferation of nuclear weapons requires the
assistance of India, Iran, Brazil, and Argentina, among others.
• Restraining the dangerous growth of conventional arms races
must be addressed on every continent.
• Human rights, including the economic dimension of those
rights, are a concern to us wherever they are in jeopardy.
• Managing an economically interdependent world to assure
global growth and promote economic equity requires close cooperation
between the governments of the industrial democracies and those of
the developing nations.
Managing the Relationship
For many of these first months in office, the Administration has
been reviewing—and arguing about—how this complex, intercon-
nected relationship with the developing nations can be managed. Let
me summarize some general conclusions we have come up with in six
points.
First, we must adopt a positive and constructive attitude in ad-
dressing international problems encompassing the developing coun-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
tries. We will seek common ground with these countries, for progress
will only be possible when solutions are mutually beneficial to all
parties.
Second, we will recognize in our actions that interdependence is
more than a slogan. It requires us, as we fashion our domestic economic
policies, to take into account their impact on the rest of the world, in-
cluding the Third World. Traditionally, the economies of the devel-
oping countries have relied upon the economic dynamism of the major
industrial economies. We must continue to be reliable on that score. But
it is increasingly true that we have a major stake in the health and vi-
tality of the Third World, as well. No less than 35% of our exports went
to developing countries, while almost half of our imports came from
them.
Third, the structure of the international system is changing, gradu-
ally evolving from a “North” and a “South” into a global community in
which all countries have responsibilities as well as rights. Much of the
North-South rhetoric has, unfortunately, implied that only the indus-
trial nations have obligations. This cannot be true. If fully accepted, it
fosters both paternalism and resentment. Even the phrase “North-
South,” and the dichotomy it sets up, obscures the gradations that exist
among nations. This analysis does not mean we can—or should try to—
split the Group of 77. But as the economies of developing countries ad-
vance from one level to another, it is important that they show in-
creasing concern for the global welfare. They will have a growing stake
in the common good.
Key oil-producing nations, for example, now ponder the dam-
aging effect of rising oil prices on the health of the global economic
system and, therefore, on their own long-term economic development.
Even small oil price rises can easily wipe out the gains which the Third
World could reap from aid, investment, and loans from the industrial
nations. Treasury Secretary Blumenthal calculated the other day that
each percentage point of increase in oil prices adds $400 million to the
U.S. energy cost; it has an even more devastating impact on other
countries.
Each nation must also face its responsibilities to its own citizens,
who are most in need—and our own country is no exception. However
well-functioning the international economic system, development is
fundamentally a challenge for each government and society to address
in its own terms.
U.N. Conference on Trade and Development to present a unified bargaining position in
their negotiations with industrialized countries. It is now composed of 115 developing
countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Fourth, while our policies must be global in their concept, their im-
plementation must be specific to each situation. Policies must be tai-
lored to take into account the great diversities that exist among the de-
veloping countries.
For the economically stronger countries, the most appropriate
areas of cooperation are trade and access to private capital and tech-
nology. Most of Latin America is now in this position. While aid still
plays an important role in the region, its prosperity depends primarily
upon the continuing evolution of an open international financial and
trading system in which developing countries can participate ever
more fully.
For the poorer nations, including most African countries, official
development assistance—foreign aid—remains the vital source of ex-
ternal capital. Africa will benefit from the intention of the World
Bank—and of our own Agency for International Development—to
focus concessional assistance on the nations most in need.
Fifth, we accept the diverse models of economic and political de-
velopment that the less developed countries (LDC’s) have chosen to
benefit their peoples. But we also believe that certain human rights
have universal application. Human rights include not just the basic
rights of due process, together with political freedoms, but also the
right of each human being to a just share of the fruits of one’s country’s
production.
Sixth, we recognize that the economic and social issues we all
face—such as protecting the environment and the oceans—are global
problems from which Communist countries are not immune and to
which they can and should make a positive contribution. Conse-
quently, it will be our policy to encourage a constructive role by the
centrally planned economies—to increase their development assistance
generally and to join us and developing countries in a global develop-
ment effort.
Basic North-South Issues
These six principles only have meaning, of course, in terms of the
specific issues we face: liberalizing trade, insuring adequate balance-
of-payments financing, improving our foreign assistance performance
and reorienting its focus in the direction of poor people, stabilizing
commodity price fluctuations, and facilitating the flow of investment
and technology on terms fair to companies and governments. Under-
lying many of these issues, however, are at least three basic tensions.
1. We frequently face difficult choices between our short-term and
our longer term interests.
2. We sometimes confront a tension between what we consider to
be sound economic policy and, at the same time, our desire to maintain

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
a positive momentum in our political relationships with the developing
nations.
3. On almost every issue, we must find ways to enhance the partic-
ipation of LDC’s in international decisionmaking in a way that is ac-
ceptable to them and to us.
Let me say a word about each.
First, trade-offs between short-term and longer term interests.
We are, as you know, in a period of economic difficulties, both in
the United States and abroad. Governments everywhere are under
pressure to respond to the immediate plight of their citizens, particu-
larly the need to protect jobs. This results in at least two policy di-
lemmas for the United States.
• It is axiomatic that a liberal trade regime is in the interest of both
the developed and the developing nations. Freer trade can promote the
long-term development of the resources the world needs, provide
lower prices and greater choice for consumers, and increase opportu-
nities for producers in all countries. Trade can be an engine for eco-
nomic development and a means for developing nations to participate
in the international economic system. All this is accepted in principle,
as the stated goal of all countries participating in the current multila-
teral trade negotiations in Geneva. But the harsh political reality is that
these longer term benefits are threatened by short-term protectionism.
The United States has been in the forefront in encouraging the ne-
gotiations to move forward. We must continue to do so, while seeking
to cushion the impact of immediate dislocations. In the months ahead
the United States will be vigorously pushing for trade liberalizing
measures in the current trade negotiations in Geneva. We will be giving
special attention to products of interest to LDC’s. And we will do our
best to work with other countries to devise trading rules which pro-
mote trade between the developed and developing world.
• Another example of the need—and the difficulty—in protecting
the future against shorter term pressures is the issue of foreign assist-
ance. Our foreign aid program has undergone many changes over the
past decade, from the large, capital-intensive programs of the 1960’s to
the small programs we now increasingly support—much of which is
focused on rural development.
This Administration intends to give more priority to development
assistance than it received throughout the 1970’s. We see these devel-
opment programs as an integral part of our overall strategy of pro-
moting flows of development finance, as the most efficient and direct
method of transferring resources to countries which do not have full
access to private capital markets, and as the most direct way to attack
poverty.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We believe that larger and more effective foreign assistance pro-
grams—bilateral and multilateral—are in the U.S. national interest and
in the interest of global development. So year by year, it is increasingly
important to convince the Congress and the public that devoting re-
sources to the fight against poverty abroad is tied to the ultimate health
of our economy here at home.
The Administration consequently faces the challenge of demon-
strating to American citizens that foreign assistance works—that it can,
together with other policies, make a difference in the global food, en-
ergy, or population balance and that it can, by mobilizing the assistance
of other donors and encouraging sound domestic policies on the part of
recipients, stimulate growth and equity.
Let me say another word about our approach to foreign assistance.
Our focus on meeting basic human needs, which is an integral part of
our overall human rights policy, is not as simple as it may appear. We
face at least two basic challenges here.
• In some cases, we face a dilemma when we consider foreign
assistance for countries where political and economic human rights are
denied. Our assistance is targeted on improving the economic condi-
tions of poor people. Since aid is generally government-to-government,
the regime concerned inevitably derives some political boost from our
assistance. But we do not want to deprive poor people because of the
nature of their government. In such cases, our decisions must be made
on a pragmatic, case-by-case basis and very human terms.
• In addition, meeting basic human needs is not, in our view, a
welfare program but a way for a country and a society to develop. Ac-
cordingly, we will encourage host governments to make an increasing
commitment of their own to the needs of their poor, at the same time as
we increase our aid to them. Many developing countries faced with
balance-of-payments problems, high energy prices, and the need for
massive domestic investment, may resist placing a priority emphasis
on the well-being of their poor. Because the poor are often excluded
from the political process, their concerns are given less weight by gov-
erning elites. If we place conditions on our aid, these elites could charge
us with attempting to intervene in their internal affairs. Our challenge
is to be sensitive to their concerns, while promoting our views and our
commitment to the poor.
A second dilemma which underlies our North-South efforts is the need
both to maintain a cooperative multilateral political environment for discuss-
ing economic issues while expressing our differences over what are the
soundest and most effective economic policies that can serve our common long-
term interests.
I can think of two cases where this issue has arisen. In the area of
commodity policy, the developing nations have proposed the negotia-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
tion of an integrated commodity program for 18 different raw mate-
rials. The idea is to relate international efforts to address the problem of
each commodity market through a common financing mechanism—a
common fund. This proposal has assumed a strong political signifi-
cance in the North-South dialogue.
The United States and other industrial nations agree with Third
World leaders that commodity issues are of central importance to the
world economy and to the economic development of many countries.
But we are convinced that effective measures can be devised only if
each market is addressed as an individual case and that these indi-
vidual arrangements form the best basis for a common commodity
policy and funding arrangement. Negotiations on this question begin
November 7. We will enter them in the hope that we can advance a
positive and realistic position. We face the challenge of supporting
what we consider sound economic policies, while working to maintain
a constructive negotiating atmosphere.
Another such area is debt. Developing countries have been seeking
generalized forgiveness of past official debt, which many of them see as
a structural impediment to future development.
We seek to respond to such financial needs by arranging addi-
tional resource transfers, through bilateral and multilateral foreign
assistance. But our analysis shows that every debtor is in a different sit-
uation. Some have little problem managing their debts. Others face
only a temporary difficulty in servicing their loans. Still others may face
long-term structural problems characterized by an inadequate net flow
of financial resources.
In cases of extreme and urgent need, obviously we stand prepared
to discuss debt rescheduling. But in the divergent circumstances we
face, we believe any generalized debt forgiveness would be inadvis-
able. First, the benefits to debtors would bear little relationship to their
development needs, since some nations with the largest debts are
growing fast and can more easily service them. Second, by treating all
countries alike, we would, in effect, be discriminating against those
countries which have struggled to pursue policies to reduce their in-
debtedness over time. And third, a general debt moratorium would be
seized upon by those who have traditionally cried “giveaway” at any
effort to transfer resources to the Third World.
neva on November 7. The negotiations were suspended later that month. See Foreign Re-
295. (“Third World’s Hopes for Common Fund Seem Dim as Commodities Parley

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
A third basic issue underlying North-South economic relations is the
need to expand LDC participation in the management of the world economy.
One of the major drives behind the new international economic
order is Third World desire for greater political participation in the
global economy. The developing nations want not only a larger slice of
the global pie, they want to be at the table when the pie is sliced and
have a voice in its apportionment.
We are convinced that it is essential to widen the circle of interna-
tional decisionmaking. We believe that the economic system must be
fair, and equally important, it must be seen as fair. But going from prin-
ciple to practice presents us with difficult issues.
• First, there is the question of how broadbased global economic
management can be. While we live in a world of sovereign nations, it is
also a world of states which are unequal in their ability to influence the
system, for good or bad. Thus it is exceedingly difficult for the interna-
tional community, including developing countries themselves, to select
which developing countries should play the largest role.
• There is also the practical question of which management ar-
rangements and institutions should be expanded. Should the most ad-
vanced developing countries be invited to join the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development? Would they want to?
Should their voice and vote be enlarged in international financial insti-
tutions, and if so, are they willing to undertake commensurate obliga-
tions? Should we make a special effort to incorporate LDC’s into insti-
tutions which have yet to be created—such as for energy or the oceans?
These are some of the issues we are addressing now.
To summarize, I think it is fair to say that despite the increasing
complexities of North-South relations and the conceptual as well as
practical problems we face, the Administration has made considerable
progress in formulating a set of positive development policies.
• We are intent on making substantial increases in our foreign
assistance, while emphasizing the focus on meeting basic human
needs.
• On commodities, we reversed the policy of previous years and
have accepted the principle of a common fund to facilitate buffer
stocks.
• We have agreed to an expansion of World Bank activities, also a
reversal of previous policy.
• The Administration has agreed to the expansion of International
Monetary Fund lending and is now seeking congressional agreement.
• In the trade negotiations, we are willing to reduce trade barriers
on products of special interest to LDC’s.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
• We will vigorously negotiate for a system of internationally coor-
dinated national food reserves.
• And for once, we are taking the United Nations very seriously on
economic and social issues.
The general principles I have suggested tonight are only a short-
hand for reality. This is especially true when one speaks in the abstrac-
tions of economics. Our statistics and our analyses concern the lives of
billions of people in the coming generation—people here in America
and people abroad. If we turn inward, toward protectionism and indif-
ference, the human cost would be intolerably high. That is the essential
problem we will be addressing on almost every foreign policy issue we
now face.
Contributions of scholars such as yourselves can be threefold.
• Your objective analyses of events in Latin America and Africa are
valuable as scholarship. They are also valuable for policymakers trying
to understand the facts with which we must deal.
• Equally valuable would be your thoughts on some of the policy
dilemmas I have discussed. I am quite sincere in hoping each of you
will consider writing me with your views and suggestions. Asking you
to do so is one of the reasons I came here.
• And finally, whatever your views, let me urge you to press them
on decisionmakers in both the executive branch and the Congress and
to contribute to the public debate on these issues.
Such involvement may seem, to many of you, inconsistent with the
objectivity of a scholar. I have no quarrel with such an individual con-
clusion. But before reaching it, I hope you will consider one point.
We are emerging now from the most contentious period in the last
100 years of our nation’s history. The war in Vietnam so engaged the
passions of us all—as it should have done—that we began to think too
easily about all policy issues in terms of simple categories: right or
wrong, interventionism or noninterventionism, realpolitik or idealism.
As I have tried to suggest tonight, the time has passed when we
can think in the simple terms of any doctrine, whether derived from
Munich or Vietnam. The complexities of our challenges, the necessary
breadth of our priorities, and the depth of our dilemmas elude such
simple formulas.
If we are to have a decent public debate on our policies—which we
want—and if we are to show how progressive policies abroad are in
our long-term national interest—as we must—then there can be no sub-
stitute for the participation in those debates of scholars such as your-
selves. For one essence of scholarship is to help us comprehend more
clearly the complexities we must address, without retreat to a world of
comforting simplicity.

59.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, November 18, 1977
MEMORANDUM FOR
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of the Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
SUBJECT
Economic Assistance Strategy
The President has reviewed the interagency paper on foreign aid
and made the following decisions.
1. Strategy #2 is approved. This strategy would concentrate on
helping poor people in poor countries, with flexibility to reach poor
people in middle-income countries as well. (The paper indicates that
this strategy “would provide both bilateral development aid and
PL–4803 to meet the basic human needs of poor people, primarily in
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
poor countries, which would continue to receive top priority, but also
in middle-income countries if enough aid were available. The domi-
nant factor in allocating aid among countries would be where it would
do the most good to help poor people; any aid to governments of
middle-income countries would thus depend on the recipient’s com-
mitment to helping its poor.” The paper also notes that Security Sup-
porting Assistance will continue to be used to advance our political
purposes; that global needs such as food, health, and population will be
emphasized; that concessional aid will be provided for technological
collaboration with both poor and middle-income countries; and that
the international institutions’ hard-loan windows will aid middle-
income countries while their soft-loan windows aid poor countries.)
ACTION: State, AID, OMB
2. The moderate funding option is approved. This would raise bilateral
and multilateral concessional development aid (including SSA) in FY
billion in constant 1977 dollars, or an increase of about one-third in FY
1978 levels of concessional aid in real terms. (The paper notes that this
could result (i) in an increase of 50% in real terms over the FY 1978 con-
tributions to soft-loan windows of multilateral banks; (ii) in an increase
of about 100% in real terms in bilateral development aid over FY 1978
levels; (iii) in SSA remaining about where it is now; and (iv) in an in-
crease in PL–480 sales. The paper points out that this mix of programs
is only one of a number that might be appropriate at this funding
level.)
ACTION: State, Agriculture, AID, OMB
3. The President has asked that a comprehensive program be de-
veloped to describe the need for development assistance to the Amer-
ican people, stressing both the conservative and idealistic implications
of this assistance, and using well-known persons in a wide variety of
fields for this purpose.
phasis on nutrition, family planning, and the developmental aspects of aid.

60.
Editorial Note
On December 20, 1977, President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski held a press briefing at the White House
ident Jimmy Carter’s upcoming trip to Poland (December 29–31), Iran
within the broader context of the administration’s foreign policy. He
explained that the administration understood this trip, and another trip
scheduled for the spring of 1978, as “reflecting a recognition of the need
for the United States to pursue a wider foreign policy more identified
with global change and more responsive to global diversity.” Contin-
uing, he indicated that the President’s May 22 commencement address
at the University of Notre Dame (see Document 40) foreshadowed the
need for this type of policy, adding:
“Our point of departure is the view that we are living in a time in
which the world is experiencing the most extensive and the most inten-
sive transformation in its entire history. There are obviously many
ways of defining the nature of that transformation. But I think it is
doubtlessly true that one of its very key aspects is the phenomenon of
global political awakening.
“In other words, a world that was politically and socially passive is
now becoming truly activist. The consequence of this is a rising cre-
scendo of political and social demands worldwide. It thus represents
an altogether new reality in the totality of our common experience. It is
on the implication of this that I would like to focus my remarks.”
Brzezinski then referenced three substantial phenomena of what
he termed this “global political awakening.” These included the col-
lapse of Western colonialism, the primacy of the nation-state as a form
of political organization, and an increase in world population. He then
identified four additional aspects related to changes in the international
system: the division of the world into key clusters, the dispersal of

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
world power, the “fading of single ideological or revolutionary mod-
els,” and the division of labor in the world economy.
Returning to the concept of a political “awakening,” Brzezinski
concluded his remarks by sketching out the potential impact on U.S.
policy:
“What are the broad policy implications of this? Let me suggest
four basic implications. The first is that the relevance of the West to the
politically awakening world has to be largely on the level of creative in-
novation. That innovation has to operate both on the material as well as
on the spiritual level.
“On the material level, if the world—if the Western world—is
willing to accept the reality of interdependence and channel it into con-
structive directions, it will have a very important role to play and espe-
cially so if it accepts the notion of a certain humanistic responsibility for
changes which are not only profound, but potentially positive. We are
dealing with changes which involve for the first time the emergence of
a community in which there is greater responsiveness to the demands
and needs of other societies than our own. Thus, a great deal depends
on the West’s collective ability to deal with the problems of the South,
particularly in the North-South context and on the level of the material
response. Creative interdependence means reforming the existing insti-
tutions, adjustment and acceptance of certain new realities. On the spir-
itual level, this means acknowledgment of the reality of human rights
defined very broadly, not only in terms of liberty, but also in social
terms.
“Secondly, and closely connected with it, is the need for a wider
economic system. For many years to come I think we will be preoccu-
pied with the very difficult process of how to widen the existing polit-
ical and economic international system. Here again I think it is useful to
reflect on our own domestic experience.
“The last 100 years or so of American social and political experi-
ence involved the widening of participation for political groups, for so-
cial groups in the American system as a whole. Ultimately, and most
recently this process involved blacks and women, but earlier the whole
struggle of the trade union movement was a struggle over participation
and the right to organize.
“On the global scale, we need to widen the scope of the interna-
tional system beyond the purely Atlanticist connection, to reform the
international system that was designed after 1945 for a reality which
has profoundly altered.
“Thirdly, we will have to anticipate the consequences of regional
conflicts and try to deal with them before they escalate. If regional con-
flicts become simultaneously North-South and East-West conflicts,
they will be very difficult to control. We see the potential for such con-

61.
Editorial Note
On December 28, 1977, President Jimmy Carter participated in an
interview with Tom Brokaw of NBC News, Bob Schieffer of CBS News,
Robert MacNeil of the Public Broadcasting Service and co-host of “The
MacNeil–Lerher Report,” and Barbara Walters of ABC News. The in-
terview took place in the Red Room of the White House, beginning at 8
p.m., and was broadcast live on radio and television. The President
began the broadcast by noting:
“This year we have had fireside chats and television programs and
telephone call-in shows and press conferences twice a month from al-
most every State in the Nation. And I’ve been very pleased to stay in
touch with the American people.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
“Tonight we have four distinguished news reporters from the four
major networks in our country. And I want to welcome you here as an-
other opportunity for me to speak to the American people with tough
interrogations from those who understand our country very well.”
The President subsequently fielded questions about his upcoming
trip (see Document 60), the Middle East, the potential for a strategic
arms limitation agreement in 1978, and domestic issues related to the
Federal Reserve and the economy. In response to a question posed by
Walters as to the administration’s top priorities for 1978, Carter indi-
cated that the status of the Panama Canal Treaty existed as one of the
most important issues to resolve:
“About 75 years ago in the middle of the night the American Secre-
tary of State signed the Panama Canal Treaty that presently is in exist-
ence. No Panamanian has ever signed it; no Panamanian ever saw it be-
fore it was signed. It was signed by a Frenchman who benefitted
financially from the terms of the treaty on behalf of the Panamanians.
“That treaty gave us a chance to do a tremendous job in building
the Panama Canal, keeping it open for international shipping. It’s
helped our country a lot. It’s something of which we can be proud.
“Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy recognized that the present
treaty was inadequate. President Johnson started negotiations to
change it. Presidents Nixon and Ford continued. And we concluded it
this year.
“It’s one of the most difficult political questions that we’ll have to
deal with. It’s going to take a lot of time in the Congress to pass it.
“What we wanted was one that treated us and Panama fairly, and
we got it. We wanted a treaty that did not put a financial burden on the
American taxpayer, and we got it. We wanted treaties that would guar-
antee proper operation of the Panama Canal itself, for us and for for-
eign shipping, and we got it. We wanted treaties that would also guar-
antee us permanently the right to take what action we think necessary
to keep the canal safe, to defend it, and to keep it open for us to use, and
we got it.
“We wanted treaties—two treaties there are—that would give us
the right for expeditious passage in time of need or emergency, for our
ships to go to the head of the line and go through the canal without
delay, and we got it. We wanted treaties also that would be acceptable
in the eyes of the international community, particularly in Latin
America, and we got them.
“So, this is what we have tried to do under four Presidents, and we
have finally succeeded. And I would say that would be one of the most
difficult challenges that we have politically this year. It is absolutely
crucial that the Senate ratify these treaties, and I think the terms are
very favorable to us and to Panama.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“Mr. Brokaw. You’ve got all that in the treaty, Mr. President. Do
you have the votes in the Senate?
“The President. I think we will get the votes in the Senate.
“Mr. Brokaw. Do you not now have them?
“The President. I can’t say for sure that we do because many Sen-
ators still haven’t expressed their commitment to me or their opinion.
But I was talking to President Ford this past week, who’s strongly sup-
portive of the treaties, along with Secretary Kissinger and others, and
he said that in his speeches to college groups and others around the Na-
tion, that he is getting an increasingly favorable response from the au-
dience. I think public opinion is building up for the treaties as they
know the terms of them.
“Mr. MacNeil. Could we interpret this as the beginning of a new
campaign on your part to get out and sell the treaty? You’ve been criti-
cized for having left the ground to the opposition somewhat. Are you
going to make a major effort personally to try and sell it?
“The President. Yes. I consider it one of my most important
responsibilities.
“Mr. MacNeil. And you can meet the deadline that President Tor-
rijos has set of April, which he says is urgent, and that Panama’s pa-
tience could be exhausted.
“The President. Well, no, I don’t feel any constraint to operate
under a deadline. But both Senator Byrd and I and the leaders of the
Senate all hope that we can resolve that issue early in the year, certainly
I think by April.
“Ms. Walters. On that—since, by the way, just to get back to my
original questions—it seems that your priorities next year are very sim-
ilar to your priorities this year, energy and the economy. But in Oc-
tober, you and President Torrijos issued a statement—a joint statement
to remove doubts about the rights of the United States to defend the
neutrality of the canal and also the right of ships to pass promptly
through it. A number of Senators have felt that they might be more
comfortable with this if it were actually written into the treaty.
“Would you be willing to see the treaty amended so that it would
reflect this understanding, this statement between you and General
Torrijos?
“The President. No. I think it would be good to have a signed
agreement between me and President Torrijos, and he has indicated he
would be glad to sign that statement that was made, and of course, I
would too. I think the Senate could express an understanding that the
treaty was being approved by them with the understanding that this
was a proper interpretation. But to actually amend the treaty would re-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
quire Panama to have another referendum on the subject, and they’ve
already had one.
“Many people in Panama think that the treaties are too favorable
to the United States. And I don’t think it would be fair to them after
they negotiated in good faith to cause them to have a completely new
referendum. I would certainly hate to have two ratification votes in the
Senate, separated by several months. So, I think that the Senate can
very well express its understanding of what the treaties mean. We can
exchange documents with the Panamanian leader. To amend the
treaties, though, I think would be inadvisable.” (Public Papers: Carter,
The President responded to several additional questions related to
domestic political issues, criticism of his leadership, and his Presiden-
tial style before the interview concluded. The full text of the interview
is ibid., pages 2187–2202. Briefing materials prepared by Press Secre-
tary Jody Powell, Special Assistant Barry Jagoda, and Chief Speech-
writer James Fallows in preparation for the interview are in the Carter
Library, Office of the Staff Secretary, Handwriting File, Presidential

62.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, January 12, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Report for 1977: A Critical Self-Appraisal
I. THE INHERITANCE
The international position of the United States at the end of 1976
was not good.
Our Allies were uneasy about our constancy, our will, and our
ability to lead. Our adversaries were openly speculating about the po-
litical consequences of “the general crisis of capitalism.” The Third
World was generally hostile or disappointed. The American public dis-
trusted our policies and deplored the apparent lack of moral content in
our actions and goals.
More generally, there was a widespread sense abroad that the
United States was fearful of global change, indifferent to the newly sur-
facing aspirations of mankind, and thus unable to exercise creative
leadership, designed to propel historical change in the right directions.
More specifically,
—The Europeans—though the overall relationship with Europe
had been improving since the 1973 “Year of Europe” fiasco2 and the
energy-related political crisis of 1974—were uneasy that the United
States was not genuinely in favor of European unity. There was a
feeling that the U.S. ranked its relations with the Soviet Union above
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
those with its Allies. The two Economic Summits3 had not succeeded in
restoring a sense of confidence that the Western States could overcome
their economic difficulties, either individually or in concert. That eco-
nomic woe was compounded by uncertainty over the course of do-
mestic European politics, especially in southern Europe. The fact that
the Republican administration had seemed to be writing Portugal off as
lost compounded European anxieties.
—The Soviets were projecting a sense of confidence, flushed with
recent success in Angola, and were capitalizing on the centrality which
the Soviet-American relationship had apparently acquired in U.S. for-
eign policy to seek a condominium arrangement over the heads of U.S.
Allies.
—Relations with the countries of Eastern Europe were at a generally
low ebb. The previous Administration tended to see policy toward
these countries as a subordinate to that followed toward the USSR.
President Ford’s comments on Eastern Europe during the television de-
bate further reinforced the feeling that little concern and attention was
devoted to Eastern Europe.
—Our bilateral relations with the PRC were eroding. Trade had
declined from the 1974 high. Government-facilitated scientific and cul-
tural exchanges were fewer in 1976 than in 1975.
—In the Middle East, the Arabs were perplexed by the U.S. failure
to move beyond initial step-by-step arrangements undertaken after the
1973 war. Virtually no movement toward accommodation had taken
place since the Sinai II Agreement of 1975. The severe war in Lebanon
had diverted attention from the peacemaking process.
—The Greece-Turkey-Cyprus triangle presented a specific problem.
Turkey remained deeply embittered, and fearful that the new Adminis-
tration would echo the pro-Greek position of the Congress. Greece had
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
withdrawn its forces from NATO (though in practice this meant lit-
tle); the Turkish DCA was stalled in Congress; and both the Cyprus
intercommunal discussions and Greek-Turkish negotiations were not
moving.
—The United States was badly out of tune with the Third World,
with little awareness of the need for economic, political and social
change or sympathy for ideological diversity. There was overemphasis
on realpolitik and an exaggerated preoccupation with the Soviet threat.
Through the Third World, there was a pervasive feeling of anti-
Americanism.
• The Latin Americans were resentful of continued neglect, and
fearful about the consequences of the emphasis being placed by Wash-
ington on the U.S.-Brazilian relationship. We had failed to come to
grips with the Panama problem.
• The Africans were openly hostile to our policies, to the point that
Nigeria even cancelled an official visit by the U.S. Secretary of State,8
though the Lusaka speech9 was beginning to make a turn-around. The
burden of our misadventure in Angola was still very heavy.
• In South Asia, we were still laboring under the heritage of the
Nixon “tilt” of 197110 and personal animosities between American and
Indian leadership. The Indians were veering ever closer to the Soviet
Union.
• There was no comprehensive approach to Third World economic
problems. While the UNGA Seventh Special Session11 had removed
slam the door. In addition, the U.S. was the world’s number one arms
merchant and showed no signs of diminishing its aggressive sales ef-
fort. Finally, with respect to human rights, the image of the United
States abroad was that of a nation primarily concerned with might and
money, only involved with human rights when these happened to
coincide with other interests.
—International economic issues. By year’s end, the cautious opti-
mism of the summer had given way to growing concern about a slow-
down in world economic growth. The Multilateral Trade Negotiations
(MTN), launched in 1973, were moving at a snail’s pace despite com-
mitments of the principal trading countries to a more energetic negoti-
ating effort. At home, protectionist pressures from sectors impacted
by imports were on the rise. Finally, OPEC announced in late De-
cember a 5–10% price increase on oil, an action which would adversely
affect trade flows and payments balances in 1977.
World opinion reflected these criticisms and concerns. Here is a
brief sampling:
—If the Carter Administration gives more consideration to the
views and worries of Allies and friendly countries, “it will be worth much
more than Kissinger’s ‘Year of Europe’ . . .” (Frankfurter Neue Press, Jan-
uary, 1977)
—The “greatest task facing Japan, the U.S. and Europe this year is to
establish a new cooperative structure . . .” (Tokyo’s Sankei, January,
1977)
—“There has been a feeling among the Allies that if Kissinger’s
policy was flawed, it was his emphasis on the Soviet relationship. They
have long suspected that he went further than necessary to be friendly
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
with the Muscovites. In this lies Carter’s opportunity.” (Joseph Harsh
in the Christian Science Monitor, December, 1976)
—“The USSR . . . has silently forged a formidable war machine.
Will the West be so irresponsible as to let it do this? This is the great
question on the eve of the inauguration of the new U.S. President . . .”
(Paris’ Aurore, January, 1977)
—Kissinger, because of his step-by-step approach, “was able to set
aside the most difficult issues between Egypt and Israel and select the
manageable ones for negotiation. His successor will not be able to do
so. There now is a consensus in the area that there is no room for further
small steps.” (Henry Tanner in the New York Times, December, 1976)
—“There can be no greater tonic to the Third World countries than
the knowledge that we have, at last, come to the end of the Kissinger
era. We hope that Mr. Carter . . . will display a refreshing readiness to
see African problems in far more clear-cut terms of principle than those
at any time reflected in the posture of the State Department during
Kissinger’s tenure.” (The New Nigerian, January, 1977)
—“We think the realities of world politics give Latin America a po-
sition not very high in President Carter’s priorities.” However, “fol-
lowing a policy of indifference . . . anything concrete or substantive that
Carter would do would at least be something . . .” (El Universal, Ca-
racas, January, 1977)
—“Jimmy Carter has promised to make life much more difficult
for would-be buyers of arms from the U.S. . . . But a man with Mr.
Carter’s commitments on cutting unemployment is going to find it very
hard to cut foreign (arms) sales, too.” (Financial Times of London, Jan-
uary 1977)
—“. . . the seeming indifferences of the last Administration to such
value (human rights) contribute to the declined confidence in the for-
eign policy and, eventually to its loss at the polls.” (The Washington
Post, January, 1977)
II. YOUR RESPONSE
U.S. foreign policy was clearly in need of broad renovation. Your
Administration recognized the need to move on a wide front, to deal
with a variety of complex issues—thus making a break with the pre-
dominant pattern of U.S. foreign policy in previous years. That pattern
had largely involved a heavy concentration on the U.S.-Soviet relation-
ship, with most other aspects of foreign policy being derivative of that
relationship.
Instead, the new Administration accepted the reality of complexity
and of change, and it placed emphasis not so much on maneuver, but
on building new relationships with friends, with adversaries, with the
developing world, even with the whole world—in the hope thereby of

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
renovating the existing international system. In so doing, it was moti-
vated by the following central objectives:
1. To engage Western Europe, Japan, and other advanced democ-
racies in closer political cooperation, thereby also promoting wider
macro-economic coordination among them.
2. To weave a worldwide web of bilateral, political, and, where ap-
propriate, economic cooperation with the new emerging regional
powers, thereby extending our earlier reliance on Atlanticism to in-
clude such newly influential countries as Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, Indonesia in a wider pattern of international
cooperation.
3. To exploit the foregoing in the development of more accommo-
dating North-South relations, both political and economic, thereby re-
ducing the hostility toward the United States that in recent years had
developed within the Third World.
4. To push U.S.-Soviet Strategic Arms Limitation Talks into stra-
tegic arms reduction talks, and to widen the scope of American-Soviet
collaboration by engaging the Soviet Union in a wider pattern of nego-
tiating relationships, thereby making detente both more comprehen-
sive and reciprocal.
5. To normalize U.S.-Chinese relations in order to preserve the
U.S.-Chinese relationship as a major stabilizing factor in the global
power balance.
6. To seek a comprehensive Middle Eastern settlement, without
which the further radicalization of the Arab world and the reentry of
the Soviet Union into the Middle East would be difficult to avoid.
7. To set in motion a progressive and peaceful transformation of
South Africa and to forge closer cooperation with the moderate black
African countries.
8. To restrict the level of global armaments and to inhibit nuclear
proliferation through international agreements as well as unilateral
9. To enhance global sensitivity to human rights through pertinent
U.S. actions, comments, and example, thereby also seizing the ideolog-
ical initiative.
10. To renovate the U.S. and NATO defense posture in keeping
with the requirements posed by the Soviet arms buildup.
The basic premise of the foregoing was that the United States
should undertake to play in the world as constructive a role as the one
that it did play shortly after World War II, but in a vastly changed con-
text. The new Administration felt that the U.S. should help in the
shaping of a new international system that cannot be confined to the
developed countries but must involve increasingly the entire interna-
tional community of more than 150 nation-states. Unlike the years
1945–1950, this should call not for American dictation but for more
subtle inspiration and cooperative leadership on a much wider front.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
[Omitted here is Section III. Policy Performance and Evaluation.]
IV. AN OVERVIEW
It is probably fair and not only self-serving to conclude that the
first year in foreign policy was a relative success. Progress has been
made toward deeper and more structural improvements in regard to a
number of key regional, bilateral or global problems. The Administra-
tion has not gone for quick successes or band-aids; on the contrary, it
has undertaken responses which are potentially of a more structural
and enduring kind. The real payoffs will come later but they are likely
to last longer.
Our accomplishments and our shortcomings can perhaps be best
summarized in a brief table:
Our pluses:
—U.S. again identified at home and abroad with moral values,
generating some genuine progress regarding human rights;
—Shaped a new agenda for international action on neglected areas
of human rights, non-proliferation, arms restraint;
—More emphasis on the centrality of Alliance relations in U.S. for-
eign policy and on the priority of North-South accommodation;
—Explicit U.S. support for European unity and progress on NATO
military renovation;
—Novel emphasis on importance of bilateral relations with
France, India and new regional influentials; underscoring our respect
for diversity;
—Generation of genuine momentum for comprehensive peace in
the Middle East;
—Identification with African states and liberation leaders in the
search for a solution to the Southern African conflict—preemption of
Soviet influence in that area.
—Panama Canal treaties and new maturity in our relations with
Latin America;
—Arms sales for the first time under control and substantive talks
underway with Allies and Soviets;
—An active policy to inhibit nuclear proliferation, including the
initiation of INFCE;18
—The initiation of a wide spectrum of U.S.-Soviet negotiations,
even while deemphasizing the primacy of U.S.-Soviet relations in U.S.
foreign policy;

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
—Determined efforts to scale down U.S.-Soviet nuclear arma-
ments, to halt qualitative improvements in nuclear weaponry; and to
obtain a CTB;
—Positive U.S. interest in East European independence and re-
spect for human rights, without subordination to U.S.-Soviet relations;
—Enhancement of U.S. long-range rapid reaction military capability;
—Energetic pursuit of the MTN, joint efforts against inflation, and
stimulation of economic growth.
Our minuses:
—Unnecessary friction with some friendly states over nuclear non-
proliferation;
—Stimulation of fear of U.S. unilateralism and unpredictability;
—Uncertainty about how we reconcile detente and Alliance security;
—Lack of adequate preparation of the Soviets for our new approach;
—Underestimation of domestic reaction to some aspects of our
Middle Eastern policy;
—Absence of concrete economic initiatives on the North-South
front;
—Seeming disinterest in the Far East;
—Some loss of credibility in the energy and non-proliferation
areas;
—Seeming softness in our policy regarding Soviet assertiveness;
—Except for the Notre Dame address, inadequate articulation of
our broad foreign policy assumptions and priorities.
With the above in mind, it is noteworthy to note the nature of the
criticism that has lately been directed at this Administration’s foreign
policy. Almost none of it entails any specific or concrete charge. The
Administration is neither condemned for any particular major failure
(such as the Bay of Pigs) nor for any particular misdeed (destabilization
of Chile, or the fruitless enterprise in Angola, or the ineptitude re-
garding Cyprus). In contrast, it is criticized more generally for a lack of
cohesion, for absence of clearcut priorities, or for shortcomings on the
level of tactical execution.
Some of these charges may, in fact, be justified. It is probably true
that in the first year we undertook too much and thus could not deliver
enough. At the same time, what we undertook was in some respects a
response to what we inherited. Thus, in a sense, the generalized charge
of lack of cohesion involves in some measure an acknowledgment that
there has been an absence of specific failures or misdeeds.
Our own self-criticism—in addition to the ones made earlier—
would tend to be of a different nature: we probably did overstate our
determination to pursue a different and more ambitious SALT agree-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ment than we are now prepared to accept, and we may have thereby
created the false impression in Moscow that being tough with the
Carter Administration in fact pays off. We may have at times over-
stated the importance of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, thereby again
stimulating fears in Western Europe that the United States is preparing
to cut a deal with the Soviet Union not entirely in keeping with Euro-
pean interests. We probably have not put enough emphasis on our rela-
tions with China, and we have failed to exploit the Chinese end of the
U.S.-Soviet-Chinese triangle in order to advance our own interests. We
did occasionally act with insufficient consistency in regard to the
Middle East, and in retrospect the U.S.-Soviet statement was both too
explicit and implied more than was either intended or necessary.
More generally, there is also the wider issue of the total impression
created by our foreign policy. In this connection, it might be useful to
look at alternative U.S. foreign policies in terms of four types, each
based on certain basic preferences and assumptions. I could call them,
to emphasize that they are part of a spectrum (with exaggerations at the
edges), the liberal/liberal model; the liberal; the conservative; and the
conservative/conservative. In a condensed fashion, the foregoing can
be represented as follows:20
Liberal
Liberal
Conservative
Conservative
Basic Priority:
Basic Priority:
Basic Priority:
Basic Priority:
Detente
Close relations
Balance of
Primarily
with Allies and
power
anti-communism
Emphasis on
Third World
SALT and arms
Anti-Soviet focus
Anti-Soviet
control
Both competition
emphasis
as well as accom-
Pro-Chinese
Clear-cut
modation with
Anti-Chinese
preference for
the Soviets
Suspicious of
defense cuts
SALT and arms
Anti SALT and
Moderate
control
arms control
Eagerness to
toughness on
accommodate
SALT
Indifferent to
Hard on Cuba
with Cuba
Cuba
Normalization
Hard on Vietnam
with China
Indifferent to
Vietnam

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Eagerness to
Caution on Cuba
5–10% real
accommodate
and Vietnam
growth per
annum real
Vietnam
annum in defense growth in Defense
Moderate in-
spending
Settle regional
creases—under
Pro B-1
conflicts together
5% per annum—
Foreign aid only
with Soviets
in the defense
Pro human rights
for political and
budget
in Communist
predominantly
Be nice to the
regimes
anti-communist
Third World
Pro human rights
purposes
generally
Indifferent to
Discontinue arms
LDCs
Generally
exports
Limited and
anti-LDC
pragmatic in-
Inclined to keep
Hit hard the con-
volvement of So-
Soviet Union out
Pro South Africa
servative regimes
viets in solution
of regional
on the issue of
of regional
solutions
Pro human rights
human rights
conflict
in Communist
(but ignore viola-
Suspicious of
regimes
tions by radical
Panama Canal
regimes)
Treaty
Anti Panama
Canal Treaty
By and large, at the risk of some simplification, it can be said that
the conservative2 position can be identified with Senator Goldwater;
the conservative position with Senator Jackson and Henry Kissinger;
the liberal policy position has been on the whole characteristic of
your Administration; the liberal2 posture has been associated with
McGovern.
However, lately on a number of issues the dividing line between
your stand and the liberal2 position has become blurred, and in some
respects, your foreign policy has appeared to some people as increas-
ingly fitting the liberal2 model. Some have the impression that accom-
modation with the Soviet Union is your primary objective; that we wish
to settle regional problems by working primarily with the Soviet
Union, that we are not sensitive to Allied concerns; and that we are
harder on human rights only when they are violated by conservative
regimes.
Foreign policy to a large extent is a matter of nuance and tone.
Given the shifts in public opinion within the United States, I think it
would be useful for you to adopt occasionally a tone which would
place you more precisely within the liberal model and even at times
leaning toward the conservative model. Needless to say, my own judg-
ment is that the liberal model corresponds best to the nature of global
change and provides the more fruitful approach for a creative Amer-
ican role in the world. Our ability to adopt that posture, however, will
be greatly weakened politically if we are seen as primarily following a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
liberal2 approach; we can even gain some political support if, from time
to time, we seem to be adopting a somewhat tougher conservative pos-
ture, especially on such matters as the Soviet role in the world, Cuban
“neocolonialism”, or on human rights.
V. THIS YEAR’S PRIORITIES
A recent review with the Vice President has yielded the following
priorities for the next year:
Must Win Issues (Presidential)
—Progress in Middle East negotiations
—Ratification of Panama Canal Treaties
—SALT/CTB
High Priority (Presidential)
—Defense Decisions during Congressional review of the Budget
(e.g., M–X) and a Presidential Address on Defense Issues
—International Economic and Trade Policy (including East-West
Trade)
—Trip to Latin America, Africa
—NATO/Economic Summits and follow-on
—Nuclear Non-Proliferation Legislation
—Human Rights
—Arms Sales
In addition to supporting you on these Presidential Priority
Agenda items, my staff will be bringing to your attention decisions on
gray area systems initiatives, intelligence charters, and Indian Ocean
arms limits. There are three other matters that are emergency or high
priority issues requiring a national strategy and your attention.
—International economic issues: in particular, a defense of the
dollar, a continued freeze on oil prices, coordinated stimulation of the
world economy, MTN agreement (this year), and commodity agree-
ments. These issues may come to have a very important and difficult
political dimension in our relations with West Germany and the oil
producing countries.
—China. We need to find ways to maintain momentum on that as-
pect of our relations where we have common concerns—global security
issues deriving from Soviet efforts to expand their influence. I will be
suggesting that in the spring, about the time of a SALT agreement, I
should visit Peking. The Chinese have explicitly asked for such a visit

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
and it would help balance a SALT agreement politically both in China
and at home. Subsequently, I believe the Vice President should visit
China later this year after the Congressional elections. We can offer
the Chinese little else but visits, until concrete progress on normaliza-
tion opens up.
—Soviet Union. We have invested a great deal of effort in the ex-
pansion of the U.S.-Soviet negotiating relationships. Some of these
have been moving forward in a promising fashion. There is thus some
real hope for a more stable and more generally reciprocal U.S.-Soviet
relationship. At the same time, either by design or simply as a response
to an apparent opportunity, the Soviets have stepped up their efforts to
exploit African turbulence to their own advantage. The Soviet/Cuban
military presence in Ethiopia is particularly dangerous and could then
produce a reaction in this country which could jeopardize not only
SALT but the wider fabric of the emerging U.S.-Soviet relationship. Ac-
cordingly, at some early opportunity, you should communicate your
concerns to Brezhnev, emphasizing to him that there is no such thing as
a selective or compartmentalized detente.
—Greece and Turkey. The new Ecevit Government opens up the
prospect of real progress on Cyprus and the Aegean. However, for
Congressional reasons related to Panama, we don’t want to move too
quickly. We need a quiet planning session with the Turks to map a
coordinated strategy with respect to progress on Cyprus and associ-
ated progress on the Turkish DCA.
Bearing in mind last year’s experience, as well as our overall ap-
praisal, it might also be noteworthy in this connection to note the fol-
lowing. We confront a danger of an alliance developing for the purpose
of stalemating our foreign policy as a whole. The linkage of such issues
as Panama, SALT and the Middle East, not to mention priority issues of
the second order, or a crisis in Ethiopia, could generate a coalition
which might effectively make the case for a “tougher” foreign policy.
Different constituencies would emphasize different aspects but the
total effect could be one of stalemate. Accordingly, you should:
—Somewhat toughen your rhetoric on foreign policy issues, em-
phasizing more the theme of national security and human rights.
—Stand firm in the negotiating process in SALT by insisting on
Soviet concessions regarding Backfire and the numerical aggregates.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Also, adopt a delaying posture regarding China, CTB and MBFR, and
stay away from definitely sensitive areas of international politics (i.e.,
Cuba and Vietnam, which give us nothing and cost a great deal).
—Concentrate on Panama, and on other steps toward peace in the
Middle East, so that ratification of the Panama Treaties and peace
progress in the Middle East would represent tangible accomplishments
before we plunge last into SALT.
—Give a pro-defense speech some time this winter.
[Omitted here is the annex entitled “Record of Goals and Actions.”]
63.
Address by Secretary of State Vance
Los Angeles, January 13, 1978
Foreign Policy Decisions for 1978
Our country, within sight and memory of some Americans still
living, has been transformed from a largely agrarian society to the
world’s greatest industrial power—one in which economic, political,
and social mobility are the accepted order of the day. The fantastic
stories of Horatio Alger, as well as those of H.G. Wells, have come true.
Of course, there is still poverty in America. There is still lack of suffi-
cient opportunity for many. There is still discrimination.
But, day by day, and despite a few deplorable detours, we have
held remarkably to the journey begun by our Founding Fathers—
toward a new nation in a new world in which each citizen might stand
free and equal beside his neighbor, able to make the most of his or her
human potential.
When I am asked about the American people—as I often am by
leaders of other countries—I say that as a people we have today a re-
newed faith in our old dreams, and this is something President Carter
and I believe in very deeply. Because of who and what we are, both the
basic interests and the ideals of our people must be present in our for-
eign policy, or it will not be long sustained.
• We must maintain a defense establishment modern and strong
enough to protect ourselves and our allies.
his address before the Los Angeles World Affairs Council.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
• We must protect American investment overseas and insure con-
tinuing access to vital raw materials.
• We must be strongly competitive economically so that American
families can continue to enjoy their standard of living.
• We must maintain our close relations with our allies, while we
seek at the same time improved contacts with our main competitor, the
Soviet Union, and with the nonaligned nations.
All of this, and more, can be pursued—as we pursue our national
interest—while still expressing the deeper ideals and aspirations that
have led us to our remarkable economic and social progress here at
home.
Our strength lies not only in our ideals but in the practical way we
identify problems and work systematically toward their solution. We
do the best when we are true to ourselves.
That is why America was at her best in the Marshall plan, why we
have felt at home with Food for Peace and the Peace Corps. That is why
I find such broad public support for President Carter’s emphasis upon
human rights—including not only rights to the integrity of the person
and political rights but the rights to food, clothing, shelter, housing,
health, and education.
That is why, with all its difficulties, we have embarked on a course
of diplomacy in the Middle East which may help bring peace to the
people of that region.
That is why we are trying to help bring solutions—not our solu-
tions but solutions through free elections—in Rhodesia and in Nambia
so that people there will have their chance for human emancipation
and development.
That is why we seek arms control arrangements through negotia-
tions and have adopted a conscious policy of restraint on conventional
arms transfers.
That is why we took tangible first steps in 1977 toward other goals,
as well: to stop further nuclear proliferation; to reach agreements on the
control of strategic weapons, agreements that will enhance the security
of our nation and all the world; to reach agreement with our Western
industrial partners on policies leading to economic revival and growth;
to reaffirm our commitment to normalization of relations with the
People’s Republic of China; to reduce military competition in the In-
dian Ocean; to emphasize our support for racial equality and full polit-
ical participation of all the people of South Africa.
The Carter Administration in 1977 made a conscious and delib-
erate effort to construct a foreign policy based upon American interests
and upon American values and ideals.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
In 1978, there are actions, decisions, and choices which we must
make here in America—some of them difficult—which will help deter-
mine how such a policy can be nourished and further evolve.
Panama Canal Treaties
One involves the decision of the U.S. Senate on the Panama Canal
treaties—treaties which are the culmination of 14 years’ work by four
American Presidents of both major political parties and their Secre-
taries of State. This is a decision which is being watched not only by all
the nations of Latin America—all of which favor the treaties—but by
other nations around the world.
Through these treaties, we can secure—definitively and perma-
nently—our right to use the canal and to protect it. It is a place for us to
put the lie, once and for all, to the wornout charge that we Americans
are interested only in making the Southern Hemisphere safe for our
own economic interests.
Imagine, if you will, that a foreign country controlled and adminis-
tered a 10-mile-wide strip of land running the length of the Mississippi
River. How long do you think the people of this country would will-
ingly accept such a situation? This is an issue requiring understanding
and foresight.
If we ratify the treaties, we can make clear to the world that dis-
putes can and should be settled peaceably—through the rule of law
and negotiation. And, most importantly, we can insure and safeguard
the long-term usefulness and viability of the canal itself to all who use
it, including ourselves.
Economic Relations
Another decision we must make is one regarding our economic re-
lations with the rest of the world.
In 1978 we shall be moving toward a conclusion of the Tokyo
Round of trade negotiations with other importing and exporting
countries.
In 1962, when President Kennedy argued for the passage of the
historic Trade Expansion Act, which led to 10 years of worldwide
economic expansion, he rightly pointed out that “a rising tide lifts all
boats.”
Today the world is badly in need of economic recovery. Other
major nations are suffering rates of inflation and unemployment which
rival or are even higher than ours. The Tokyo Round, of and by itself,
will not instantly restore worldwide economic prosperity. It will, how-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
ever, encourage new investment and profitable exchange. If it fails and
falls victim to a new wave of international protectionism, we can be
sure that many of the “boats” will founder and some may sink.
I know that this is not an abstract, theoretical matter for the Amer-
ican worker or businessman or farmer who depends for his family’s
living on production of steel, CB radios, color television sets, micro-
wave ovens, textiles, footwear, automobiles, computers, sugar, and
many other items. The changing world economy has made other na-
tions competitive in production of these products, and we are feeling
the result of it.
The Carter Administration knows this and is doing its best to help
the American industries and people affected. The new steel program,
announced in December, is a part of that. So are our present discus-
sions with Japan on reducing its import barriers and increasing its rate
of growth.
But we and others must help ourselves in ways that do not throw
the world back into the kind of disastrous protectionist spiral that we
all experienced in the Great Depression.
Under economic pressure, one country, and then another, in the
1930’s closed its borders to foreign goods. High tariffs increased the
price of everything to everyone, everywhere. Then we closed our banks
and our businesses and our farms as we fell into worldwide depres-
sion. The great ports of our country were, as you well know, empty and
forlorn places.
A new wave of protectionism would imperil the American profits
and 10 million jobs which depend on those exports. The hardest hit of
all would be the American farmer, who is having a hard time staying in
the black right now. California is an agricultural state.
I have just learned that there is more acreage under cultivation in
the United States to produce food which we sell to Japan than there is
total acreage under cultivation in Japan. If Japan, for instance, were to
close its borders to our food and fiber as part of a trade war, farms and
the U.S. steel industry. In addition to loan guarantees, tax breaks, and economic assist-
ance to communities impacted by steel layoffs, the plan also featured a “trigger” or refer-
ence price system designed to eliminate the importation of lower-priced steel into the
United States. Solomon, during a December 6 news conference, explained that the refer-
ence prices, pegged to the costs of production of the most efficient steel producers, would
“trigger” a government investigation if countries exported steel to the United States
below the set reference price. (James L. Rowe, Jr., “Administration Warns Against
ibid., Documents 97 and 98.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
rural communities in this State and elsewhere in America would be se-
verely harmed.
So we must make the necessary decision to keep our commitment
to both domestic and world economies which are open to competition
and which reward productivity. That will involve knocking down bar-
riers to our products elsewhere in the world. But it will also involve our
acceptance of the fact that to buy from us, other countries must be able
to sell to us.
Third World
We also have decisions to make—beyond those surrounding the
Panama Canal treaties and the Tokyo Round—about a whole range of
relations with the so-called Third World. These countries, most of them
gaining their independence after World War II, are increasingly in-
volved in our daily lives.
You know how the amount and cost of oil from these countries af-
fect this country.
We also get more than 50% of the tin, aluminum, and manganese
we need from less developed countries and substantial amounts of our
lead, tungsten, and copper.
In addition, we depend on the emerging countries for an impor-
tant share of our exports. Recent figures show, for instance, we ex-
ported $29 billion in goods to the non-oil-producing developing coun-
tries. This was three times the 1970 figure, three times our exports to
Japan, and $3 billion more than our exports to all of industrialized Eu-
rope. These exports, of course, mean American jobs.
At the same time, it is in the developing world that many of the
so-called global problems are most evident and threatening.
Inefficient and wasteful use of the Earth’s resources, pollution of
the oceans and atmosphere, nuclear proliferation, unchecked arms
competitions—all of these are problems which involve not only these
countries but also the safety of the human race.
Most countries of the Third World have too little food; many lack
the means to produce enough of their own. Almost all have exploding
populations.
Even the most optimistic projections for the future point to popula-
tion increases in the Third World of some 75% by the year 2000.
Perhaps even more troubling, this growth seems certain to be concen-
trated in already hard-pressed urban centers. Imagine, if you will, as
the projections indicate, a Mexico City with 32 million people; Sao
Paulo with 26 million; and Calcutta, Bombay, Rio de Janeiro, Seoul, Pe-
king, and Shanghai each with some 19 million in 22 years.
In the years immediately ahead, many of the key nations of the
Third World will be even more a part of our daily dialogue than they
are today. We must decide how we shall relate to them.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
These countries believe that they should no longer be the “hewers
of wood and drawers of water” for the rich Western nations, and we
understand this. In the past year, we have reduced their suspicion of
the United States and, thereby, lessened the likelihood that we could be
faced with attempts at new cartels, built around raw materials and
commodities other than oil, and unending political and economic
hostility.
The countries of the Third World now feel that we regard them as
important and sovereign nations and that we identify with their human
aspirations. The emerging nations of the world can be constructive
partners of the United States.
Make no mistake about it. These countries are not early-day minia-
tures of the United States. Many will choose paths of political and eco-
nomic development which we will not approve. But a majority, at least,
will be looking to us for understanding and assistance as they seek to
build modern societies.
Will we be willing to share our technology with these countries?
Will we be ready to help stabilize the basic commodity prices on which
many of their economies are based? Will we treat their products fairly
in the international marketplace? Will we be willing to support their
national economic development plans when they do not always suit
our own tastes? All these questions are complex and some pose diffi-
cult problems. But this Administration fully realizes that we shall harm
our own interests and we shall not be true to our own values if we fail
to address these issues sympathetically.
Southern Africa
An immediate and tangible test of our intentions toward the Third
World lies in southern Africa. I speak of the three principal problems of
Rhodesia, Namibia, and the situation within South Africa itself. We
cannot impose solutions in southern Africa. We cannot dictate terms to
any of the parties; our leverage is limited.
But we are among the few governments in the world that can talk
to both white and black Africans frankly and yet with a measure of
trust. We would lose our ability to be helpful if we lost that trust. It is,
therefore, essential that our policies of encouraging justice for people of
all races in southern Africa be clear to all.
After careful consideration, this Administration is actively pur-
suing solutions to all three southern African problems. These problems
must be addressed together, for they are intertwined.
Some have argued that apartheid in South Africa should be ig-
nored for the time being in order to concentrate on achieving progress
on Rhodesia and Namibia. Such a policy would be wrong and would
not work. It would be blind to the reality that the beginning of progress

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
must be made soon within South Africa if there is to be a possibility of
peaceful solutions in the longer run. It could mislead the South Af-
ricans about our real concerns. It would prejudice our relations with
our African friends. It would do a disservice to our own beliefs. And it
would discourage those of all races who are working for peaceful
progress within South Africa.
We believe that we can effectively influence South Africa on
Rhodesia and Namibia while expressing our concerns about apartheid.
We believe that whites as well as blacks must have a future in Na-
mibia, Zimbabwe, and South Africa. We also believe that their security
lies in progress. Intransigence will only lead to greater insecurity.
We will welcome and recognize positive action by South Africa on
each of these three issues. But the need is real for progress on all of
them, and we shall need the continued support of the American people
for a policy which can encourage and press for that progress.
Arms Limitation
Another decision facing us, as a people, is one which is now re-
flected in our discussions on strategic arms limitation with the Soviet
Union. Security is the issue here. We pursue our security in two ways:
• By maintaining a military establishment which will see to the
safety of ourselves and our allies and
• By arms control.
What we cannot achieve by mutual, equal limitations, we insure
by our own strength.
Thus, we have to think of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
(SALT) as a process. It is a process of discovering whether we can work
out some of our security problems with the Soviet Union. It is a process
also in the sense that we try to solve what strategic problems we can at
each stage; then, we move on to the next stage and the next level of
problems.
We do not seek reductions in arms for their own sake but only
when reductions promote security. But there can be an important result
from arms reductions alongside an increase in our security: the poten-
tial for us and for others, including those in the developing world, to
cut spending on armaments and to reorder priorities.
If we have the courage and patience to see it through, I believe we
can both lower the threshold of international danger and release new
resources for the works of peace through SALT and other such negotia-
tions. But we must summon the will to do it. For it is in our relations
with the Soviet Union that war and peace issues and decisions are most
involved.
Our policies toward the Soviet Union are based upon a realistic ap-
preciation that this is a serious competitive relationship and that Soviet

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
objectives in the world are very different from ours. It is also important
to recognize, however, that there are specific matters on which our in-
terests are not in conflict—not least, in the avoidance of nuclear war.
In the cause of peace and of our own interest, we have engaged the
Soviet Union on a wide range of concrete matters intended in the first
instance to stabilize the military competition and to regulate the polit-
ical competition. These are our first objectives, because they go to the
heart of the issue of war and peace.
Beyond these objectives, we seek to enlarge areas of common un-
derstanding and common action on a range of international issues, in-
cluding human rights; cooperation on matters affecting the lives of
people everywhere, such as disease, food supply, pollution of the envi-
ronment, and the application of science and technology.
Progress in these fields is uneven and may take a long time, but we
draw patience and a long-term perspective from our realization of how
far we have come from the intense and dangerous cold war spirit that
prevailed only a few decades ago.
The alternative to this active dialogue with the Soviets implies a re-
turn to the tensions and mutual isolation of the cold war. Many of you
and the leadership of this Administration remember what that period
was like. In good conscience, we cannot recommend that we lead the
country back to the troubles and fear of that era.
Middle East
Tomorrow I leave for Jerusalem to assist at an event that we all
would have regarded as impossible just a few short months ago. The
Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Israel will sit down together, around a
conference table, to start the detailed negotiation of peace between Is-
rael and the Arab states. After three decades of estrangement and hos-
tility, the process of reconciliation has begun.
I am sure that you, as all Americans and peoples the world over,
have been as moved as I was by the dramatic events of the weeks just
past. President Sadat’s sudden and spectacular visit to Jerusalem cap-
tured the imagination of all of us; it was an act of vision and statesman-
ship. The warmth of his reception by Prime Minister Begin and the
people of Israel, surmounting the bitter memories of four wars which
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
had brought tragedy to every family, gave clear testimony to the desire
for peace.
President Sadat’s initiative and Prime Minister Begin’s response
have set in motion a negotiating process which began with the Cairo
preparatory conference in December and will continue at ministerial
level in a Military Committee in Cairo and a Political Committee in Je-
rusalem. Both Egypt and Israel have emphasized that they view the ne-
gotiations now underway as laying the groundwork for negotiations
among all parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict, looking toward a compre-
hensive peace in the Middle East.
After his discussion with President Sadat last week, President
Carter made clear the task facing the Middle Eastern Political Com-
mittee meeting in Jerusalem.
• First, true peace must be based on normal relations among the
parties to the peace. Peace means more than just an end to belligerency.
• Second, there must be withdrawal by Israel from territories occu-
pied in 1967 and agreement on secure and recognized borders for all
parties in the context of normal and peaceful relations in accordance
with U.N. Resolutions 242 and 338.
• Third, there must be a resolution of the Palestinian problem in all
its aspects; it must recognize the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people and enable the Palestinians to participate in the determination
of their own future.
I believe that these principles, as stated by the President, should be
acceptable to the governments and peoples on both sides of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.
To move from principles to concrete achievement will require flex-
ibility and courage, qualities of statesmanship of which the leaders of
Egypt and Israel have already given full display.
For our part, we stand ready to help Arabs and Israelis achieve
their peace. It is important to our national interests that we do so; our
values and character as a people demand no less than our greatest ef-
fort to help resolve this tragic conflict.
We will participate actively in the work of the Jerusalem meeting,
as the parties have asked us to do. When difficulties in the negotiations
arise, we may be able to make some helpful suggestions to bridge the
gaps between the parties; however, we will not impose a blueprint for

64.
Editorial Note
his State of the Union address before both Houses of Congress. His re-
marks were broadcast live on radio and television. After an introduc-
tion by Speaker of the House of Representatives Thomas “Tip” O’Neill,
the President devoted the first portion of his address to domestic items,
including the establishment of a Department of Education and civil
service reform, before emphasizing the main themes of his administra-
tion’s foreign policy:
“In our foreign policy, the separation of people from government
has been in the past a source of weakness and error. In a democratic
system like ours, foreign policy decisions must be able to stand the test
of public examination and public debate. If we make a mistake in this
administration, it will be on the side of frankness and openness with
the American people.
“In our modern world, when the deaths of literally millions of
people can result from a few terrifying seconds of destruction, the path
of national strength and security is identical to the path of peace.
“Tonight, I am happy to report that because we are strong, our Na-
tion is at peace with the world.
“We are a confident nation. We’ve restored a moral basis for our
foreign policy. The very heart of our identity as a nation is our firm
commitment to human rights.
“We stand for human rights because we believe that government
has as a purpose to promote the well-being of its citizens. This is true in
our domestic policy; it’s also true in our foreign policy. The world must
know that in support of human rights, the United States will stand
firm.
“We expect no quick or easy results, but there has been significant
movement toward greater freedom and humanity in several parts of
the world.
“Thousands of political prisoners have been freed. The leaders of
the world—even our ideological adversaries—now see that their atti-
tude toward fundamental human rights affects their standing in the in-
ternational community, and it affects their relations with the United
States.
“To serve the interests of every American, our foreign policy has
three major goals.
“The first and prime concern is and will remain the security of our
country.
“Security is based on our national will, and security is based on the
strength of our Armed Forces. We have the will, and militarily we are
very strong.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
“Security also comes through the strength of our alliances. We
have reconfirmed our commitment to the defense of Europe, and this
year we will demonstrate that commitment by further modernizing
and strengthening our military capabilities there.
“Security can also be enhanced by agreements with potential ad-
versaries which reduce the threat of nuclear disaster while maintaining
our own relative strategic capability.
“In areas of peaceful competition with the Soviet Union, we will
continue to more than hold our own.
“At the same time, we are negotiating with quiet confidence,
without haste, with careful determination, to ease the tensions between
us and to ensure greater stability and security.
“The strategic arms limitation talks have been long and difficult.
We want a mutual limit on both the quality and the quantity of the
giant nuclear arsenals of both nations, and then we want actual reduc-
tions in strategic arms as a major step toward the ultimate elimination
of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth.
“If these talks result in an agreement this year—and I trust they
will—I pledge to you that the agreement will maintain and enhance the
stability of the world’s strategic balance and the security of the United
States.
“For 30 years, concerted but unsuccessful efforts have been made
to ban the testing of atomic explosives—both military weapons and
peaceful nuclear devices.
“We are hard at work with Great Britain and the Soviet Union on
an agreement which will stop testing and will protect our national se-
curity and provide for adequate verification of compliance. We are now
making, I believe, good progress toward this comprehensive ban on
nuclear explosions.
“We are also working vigorously to halt the proliferation of nu-
clear weapons among the nations of the world which do not now have
them and to reduce the deadly global traffic in conventional arms sales.
Our stand for peace is suspect if we are also the principal arms mer-
chant of the world. So, we’ve decided to cut down our arms transfers
abroad on a year-by-year basis and to work with other major arms ex-
porters to encourage their similar constraint.
“Every American has a stake in our second major goal—a world at
peace. In a nuclear age, each of us is threatened when peace is not se-
cured everywhere. We are trying to promote harmony in those parts of
the world where major differences exist among other nations and
threaten international peace.
“In the Middle East, we are contributing our good offices to main-
tain the momentum of the current negotiations and to keep open the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
lines of communication among the Middle Eastern leaders. The whole
world has a great stake in the success of these efforts. This is a precious
opportunity for a historic settlement of a longstanding conflict—an op-
portunity which may never come again in our lifetime.
“Our role has been difficult and sometimes thankless and contro-
versial. But it has been constructive and it has been necessary, and it
will continue.
“Our third major foreign policy goal is one that touches the life
of every American citizen every day—world economic growth and
stability.
“This requires strong economic performance by the industrialized
democracies like ourselves and progress in resolving the global energy
crisis. Last fall, with the help of others, we succeeded in our vigorous
efforts to maintain the stability of the price of oil. But as many foreign
leaders have emphasized to me personally and, I am sure, to you, the
greatest future contribution that America can make to the world
economy would be an effective energy conservation program here at
home. We will not hesitate to take the actions needed to protect the in-
tegrity of the American dollar.
“We are trying to develop a more just international system. And in
this spirit, we are supporting the struggle for human development in
Africa, in Asia, and in Latin America.
“Finally, the world is watching to see how we act on one of our
most important and controversial items of business—approval of the
Panama Canal treaties. The treaties now before the Senate are the result
of the work of four administrations—two Democratic, two Republican.
“They guarantee that the canal will be open always for unre-
stricted use by the ships of the world. Our ships have the right to go
to the head of the line for priority of passage in times of emergency
or need. We retain the permanent right to defend the canal with our
own military forces, if necessary, to guarantee its openness and its
neutrality.
“The treaties are to the clear advantage of ourselves, the Panama-
nians, and the other users of the canal. Ratifying the Panama Canal
treaties will demonstrate our good faith to the world, discourage the
spread of hostile ideologies in this hemisphere, and directly contribute
to the economic well-being and the security of the United States.”
The President then acknowledged the applause from the audience
before referencing two moments that had taken place during his recent
trip to the Middle East, South Asia, and Europe that also “confirmed
the final aims” of U.S. foreign policy:
“One was in a little village in India, where I met a people as pas-
sionately attached to their rights and liberties as we are, but whose chil-

65.
Report by President Carter to the Congress
Washington, January 20, 1978
To the Congress of the United States:
I will be working closely with the Congress in 1978 to enact a pro-
gram addressed to the immediate and the long-term needs of our
economy. I am proposing tax reductions and reforms to continue our
strong economic recovery, to encourage increased investment by
American businesses, and to create a simpler and fairer tax system. I
am seeking legislation to address the special problems of the disad-
vantaged and the unemployed. And I am taking new steps to combat
inflation.
This report to the Congress on the condition of the economy sets
forth the overall framework within which my economic proposals were
formulated. It outlines, for you and for the Nation, my economic prior-
ities for the years ahead and my strategies for achieving them.
[Omitted here are sections of the report focusing on domestic eco-
nomic issues.]
dent’s annual report to Congress on economic policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICIES THAT PROMOTE
ECONOMIC RECOVERY THROUGHOUT THE WORLD
Outside the United States, the world economy has seen a hesitant
recovery from the deep recession of 1974–75. The rapid pace of eco-
nomic growth that was widespread over most of the postwar years has
all but disappeared. Unemployment is high, and in most industrial
countries except the United States it is rising. Inflation is at high levels
and declining only very slowly.
The imbalances in the international economic system continue to
strain the world economy. Because of the surpluses of oil-exporting
countries, many countries have sizable deficits, including the United
States. Some industrial nations are also running large and persistent
surpluses—thus increasing the pressures on countries in deficit. These
imbalances have been a major factor contributing to disorder in ex-
change markets in recent months.
The condition of the world economy requires above all that na-
tions work together to develop mutually beneficial solutions to global
problems. If we fail to work together, we will lose the gains in living
standards arising from the expansion of world commerce over the past
three decades. If the world economy becomes a collection of isolated
and weak nations, we will all lose.
The first priority in our international economic policy is continued
economic recovery throughout the industrial world. Growth of the U.S.
economy—the largest and strongest in the world—is of vital impor-
tance. The economic program that I have proposed will ensure that
America remains a leader and a source of strength in the world
economy. It is important that other strong nations join with us to take
direct actions to spur demand within their own economies. World re-
covery cannot proceed if nations rely upon exports as the principal
source of economic expansion.
At the same time all countries must continue the battle against in-
flation. This will require prudent fiscal and monetary policies. Such
policies must be supplemented by steps to reduce structural unem-
ployment, measures to avoid bottlenecks by encouraging investment,
and cooperation in the accumulation of commodity reserves to insulate
the world from unforeseen shocks.
Reducing the widespread imbalances in international payments
will require several parallel steps. To begin with, each individual
country must ensure that its own policies help relieve the strains. The
United States will do its part. In 1977 we had a current account deficit of
about $18 billion. While not a cause for alarm, this is a matter of con-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
cern. We can take a most constructive step toward correcting this def-
icit by moving quickly to enact the National Energy Plan.
Countries in surplus should also do their part. Balance of pay-
ments surpluses in some countries have contributed to the economic
stagnation among their trading partners. Where their own economies
have slack, it is appropriate for nations in surplus to stimulate the
growth of domestic demand—thereby increasing their imports and im-
proving the prospects for growth in deficit countries. In some coun-
tries, lifting restraints on imports from abroad and reducing excessive
government efforts to promote exports would be useful. After consul-
tations with the United States, the Japanese have indicated they will
take a series of steps toward reducing their large surplus.
The system of flexible exchange rates for currencies also can be
helpful in correcting unsustainable imbalances in payments among
countries. Since its inception in 1973, this system has operated well
under unprecedented strains.
During 1977 the U.S. dollar has fallen in value against several key
currencies. The decline in the dollar’s value has occurred primarily
against the currencies of those nations that have large trade and pay-
ments surpluses, and was not surprising in view of our large payments
deficit and their surpluses. Late in 1977, however, movements in our
exchange rate became both disorderly and excessively rapid. The
United States reaffirmed its intention to step in when conditions in ex-
change markets become disorderly and to work in close cooperation
with our friends abroad in this effort.
Under the flexible exchange rate system basic economic forces
must continue to be the fundamental determinant of the value of cur-
rencies. However, we will not permit speculative activities in currency
markets to disrupt our economy or those of our trading partners. We
recognize fully our obligation in this regard, and we have taken steps to
fulfill it.
Although substantial progress can be made toward a balanced
world economy, some imbalances will persist for a substantial period
of time. Financing requirements will remain large while adjustments
occur. The private markets can and will continue to channel the bulk of
the financing from surplus to deficit countries. But it is essential that
adequate official financing also be available, in case of need, to en-
courage countries with severe payments problems to adopt orderly
and responsible corrective measures. To meet this critical need the
United States has strongly supported a proposal to strengthen the In-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ternational Monetary Fund by the establishment of a new Supplemen-
tary Financing Facility.
The United States also will continue to contribute resources to pro-
mote growth in the economies of the developing nations. International
assistance efforts—through bilateral aid and multilateral institutions—
must continue to expand. We must also keep our doors open to imports
from developing countries, so that their economies can grow and
prosper through expanded trade.
A keystone of our international economic policy is to work with
our trading partners to protect a free and open trading system. The
American economy benefits by exporting those products that we make
efficiently, and by importing those that we produce least efficiently. An
open trading system increases our real incomes, strengthens competi-
tion in our markets, and contributes to combating inflation.
The United States will firmly resist the demands for protection that
inevitably develop when the world economy suffers from high unem-
ployment. The ensuing decline in world trade would worsen our
problem of inflation, create inefficiencies in American enterprise, and
lead to fewer jobs for American workers. But international competition
must be fair. We have already taken and we will, when necessary, con-
tinue to take steps to ensure that our businesses and workers do not
suffer from unfair trade practices.
I place great importance on the Multilateral Trade Negotiations
now under way in Geneva. I believe our negotiators will bring home
agreements that are fair and balanced and that will benefit our
economy immensely over the years to come. The importance of these
discussions can hardly be overemphasized. The trading system that
emerges from the negotiations will set the tone for international com-
merce well into the 1980s. Our commitment to a successful conclusion
to these talks underscores our long-term emphasis on the retention and
expansion of open and fair trade among nations.
THE CHALLENGE BEFORE US
In this message I have outlined my fundamental economic goals
and the strategy for attaining them. It is an ambitious, but I believe a re-
alistic, agenda for the future. It calls for a broad range of actions to im-
prove the health and fairness of the American economy. And it calls
upon the American people to participate actively in many of these
efforts.

66.
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 24, 1978
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy Priorities and East-West Relations
The drift of the discussion on “our priorities” at the staff meeting
last week provokes me to comment on a number of items, first on the
drift, then on priorities, and finally on the East-West relationship.
There was some talk of the shift of emphasis to Western Europe
and “security” that occurred in 1973, talk in answer to your question
about the “priorities” of the previous administration. The fundamental
reason for that shift, however, was not underscored, not even men-
tioned. Kissinger had to shift. He did not want to. During the October
War, he became hysterical at both the Soviets and the NATO allies be-
cause they were not following his script. He called the West Europeans
“jackals” and “hyenas” when they did not dance to his tune during the
Middle East War. The Europeans simply had taken him at his word: he
asserted that he and the Soviets had established a special relationship
to make the world safe. A little war in the Middle East was surely man-
ageable by the superpowers. SALT was not NATO business; why
should the Middle East be different? Henry cut out the allies, and they
drew their conclusions. They cut him out of their economic affairs (oil)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and left the security field entirely to him. I watched this from Moscow.
NATO diplomats in Moscow refused to believe that this was a crisis.
Neutral attaches blamed the U.S. for making it into a crisis. During the
first days of the Egyptian offensive, Soviet generals told me that if the
U.S. and USSR stick together, we can overcome any other state that
troubles us. (This “condominium” preference was voiced most recently
at Belgrade by Vorontsov when he suggested that the U.S. and the
USSR work out a draft alone; then all other attendees would have to ac-
cept it!) After the Israeli counter-offensive, and our strategic alert,
these same generals lectured me on the dangers of war!
The lesson was clear. Neither SALT nor trade nor credits had bas-
ically altered the competitive character of the East-West relationship.
The OPEC embargo forced Henry to consider the North-South axis
however much he had previously tried to ignore it. The Vietnam “end
game” was additional evidence, for those who cared to understand,
that his East-West scheme was based on dubious assumptions.
I repeat this, although you know it well, because it refutes those
who argue, as Rosenfeld, Kraft, and others do, that the outlines of our
present foreign policy (“priorities,” if you will) are a legacy from Kiss-
inger. Our legacy today is Henry’s failure, not his outline of a new di-
rection. His efforts failed: (a) to stabilize the strategic balance; (b) to
moderate Soviet competitive behavior in the Middle East, Africa, and
Southeast Asia; (c) to produce significant U.S.-Soviet economic interac-
tion; (d) to address the North-South economic and political issues. At
the same time, his East-West policy exacerbated tensions in our own al-
liance system while facilitating Soviet management of the Warsaw
Pact.
Detente has not only produced mixed results from our viewpoint;
it has also failed to meet key Soviet objectives. The crux of the policy for
Moscow is taken from two sources: “Two Tactics of Social Democracy”
and the “law of primitive socialist accumulation.” In 1905 and in the
mid 1920s, the question was the same: could a weak “working class”
(or socialist sector) politically lead (economically exploit) the stronger
peasant (capitalist) class? The Leninist answer was yes, with correct
party leadership. Soviet policy toward the West in the 1970s is de-
signed for a similar correlation of political and economic forces, but
the peasantry. The collapse in South Vietnam and the swing of U.S. mil-
itary attention back to Europe altered the “military question.” The
Middle East, of course, was also a strategic setback. The only thing left
of detente was SALT, and SALT’s importance for Moscow was every-
thing but arms control. It had become the single factor that might pre-
vent the alteration of the East-West relationship by the changing North-
South and East-West relationships. The Soviet slogan was and remains,
“the most important thing today is to prevent nuclear war” (omitting to
observe, of course, that it is the “least likely” kind of war today). And it
means, “If the U.S. doesn’t give us priority attention over West-West
and North-South, we have the military might to regain American
attention.”
As I understood your statement of the “priorities” of this Adminis-
tration, it took basic account of these realities of strategic and economic
relationships which Henry had reluctantly faced after 1973 but could
not adapt to without surrendering the primacy of “cooperation” over
“competition” on the East-West front.
Human rights meant recognition of the necessity of a national con-
sensus for the main thrusts of any foreign policy, and it meant recogni-
tion that some foreign policies and alliances are not viable for the U.S. if
our political values conflict too sharply.
Emphasis on the tri-lateral region meant recognition of the true
sources of our economic, political, and potentially, our military power.
And it meant recognizing that a large number of problems of interde-
pendency have been neglected for some time.
A new context for the East-West relationship meant evading the Soviet
strategy taken from “two tactics” and “primitive socialist accumula-
tion.” It meant leaving the cooperative door open, but it also excluded
the practice of paying the Soviets to behave, to refrain from bully-boy
tactics in international affairs.
Attention to the North-South dimension meant a lot of things, many of
which strike me as still muddled and confused, but it put priority on
the OPEC connection in the international economic structure, and it
seemed to recognize changing power realities in the third world as
more than a simple function of the East-West competition.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
foreseeable future. Looking back over the year, however, I find a
number of mistakes in our managing of these priorities.
The opening shots on the East-West front last spring were well
aimed, and we appeared launched on a promising campaign, clarifying
the realities of the relationship and the price of the game. By summer,
however, our policy was shot through with schizophrenia. Dropping
off the comprehensive SALT proposal and allowing confusion to creep
into the human rights policy, muting it, put the Administration right
back in Henry’s position. On the one hand, it appeared that we might
indeed make the East-West relationship fit the realities of a “new con-
text.” On the other hand, we seemed to believe that politically we need
a SALT deal as badly as the Soviets do. Moreover, putting SALT above
the West-West relationship (NATO) was bound to create difficulties
with the allies, as it clearly is doing. And it was bound to give the Chi-
nese cause to lecture us just the way they lectured Henry about the
USSR.
The proliferation of other arms talks, in a different context, could
be a strong gambit, but in the present context, it may be confusing to
our allies, the Soviets and to our own public and the Congress. It locks
us more firmly in Henry’s predicament of an unrealistic promise of
what the talks will yield and prevents their effective use as part of a po-
litical strategy.
The only part of the East-West front where we have avoided a mis-
step is in economic interaction. The Jackson-Vanik amendment6 is
saving us from ourselves by preventing movement while we are not or-
ganized for a coherent strategy in trade, credits and technology. Here
we need both a strategy and an Executive Branch organization for con-
trolling the East-West economic interaction in and for cooperation with
the Congress. In the best event, the returns on this front will be modest,
but certainly we can avoid “giving away the farm,” or creating that
impression.
How can we overcome this schizophrenia in East-West relations?
First, we must realize that politically Moscow needs SALT much
worse than we do. We only need SALT if it is something like the com-
prehensive proposal, i.e., if it constrains and reduces in a very signifi-
cant—not a marginal—way. The Soviets greatly need the talks politi-
cally as “the centerpiece” of East-West relations. For Moscow, SALT
must represent to the American public the only thing that is saving the
West from the Soviet military arsenal: it must keep our political atten-
tion. Otherwise, the East-West relation will appear less important,

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
which it is, except when Moscow rattles its sabre occasionally, some-
thing that Henry discovered can happen with or without SALT.
This year, we should slowly build public patience on the SALT
front. Moscow will be faced with paying a price for our attention. As
long as we are even and deliberate, the Soviets will stay with the nego-
tiation process. They simply have no viable alternative except a rap-
prochement with China, something that will not solve the economic
and political stagnation in either China or the USSR.
On the economic front there should be lots of anticipation and very
little movement. In the interim, we must get the legislation and the
Executive organization in place to implement effectively a national
strategy in the economic relations in the event that Moscow chooses to
try to avoid historical irrelevancy by opening its economy to the West
on some principles other than “primitive socialist accumulation.”
Effective management of the East-West relation seems to require
two kinds of tensions. First, in our relationship with the USSR, the
seeking, not the reaching, is the most important thing about negotia-
tions, be they economic or arms control. I am most impressed at the
moderation in Soviet behavior that comes when they are anticipating
some gain, some policy goal, not after they achieve it. The Soviet antici-
pation of the 1974 trade agreement was enormous, and their manners
were much better than usual. The let down from the collapse of the
trade agreement was probably not much greater than it would have
been had the deal been completed.
The second kind of tension is between the U.S. and the NATO
allies over European security. The alliance thrives when we are threat-
ening to pull out and when the Soviets look menacing. We need a little
of both, but not too much of either.
Our priorities in 1977 seemed most likely to create an effective mix
of these tensions. The confusion seems to have come from alternative
views of the past: the Kissinger aspirations of 1972 versus the realities
of post-1973. Given Soviet internal conditions and objective interna-
tional conditions, Brezhnev does not have the option of meeting those
earlier aspirations. We must keep the cooperative door open but expect
little response. That won’t make spectacular press for our policy, but it
will make good history.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
67.
Address by President Carter to the Nation
Washington, February 1, 1978
Panama Canal Treaties
Good evening.
Seventy-five years ago, our Nation signed a treaty which gave us
rights to build a canal across Panama, to take the historic step of joining
the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The results of the agreement have
been of great benefit to ourselves and to other nations throughout the
world who navigate the high seas.
The building of the canal was one of the greatest engineering feats
of history. Although massive in concept and construction, it’s relatively
simple in design and has been reliable and efficient in operation. We
Americans are justly and deeply proud of this great achievement.
The canal has also been a source of pride and benefit to the people
of Panama—but a cause of some continuing discontent. Because we
have controlled a 10-mile-wide strip of land across the heart of their
country and because they considered the original terms of the agree-
ment to be unfair, the people of Panama have been dissatisfied with the
treaty. It was drafted here in our country and was not signed by any
Panamanian. Our own Secretary of State who did sign the original
treaty said it was “vastly advantageous to the United States and . . . not
so advantageous to Panama.”
In 1964, after consulting with former Presidents Truman and Ei-
senhower, President Johnson committed our Nation to work towards a
new treaty with the Republic of Panama. And last summer, after 14
years of negotiation under two Democratic Presidents and two Repub-
lican Presidents, we reached and signed an agreement that is fair and
beneficial to both countries. The United States Senate will soon be de-
bating whether these treaties should be ratified.
inal. The President spoke at 9 p.m. from the Library at the White House. His remarks
were broadcast live on radio and television. In his diary entry for January 11, the Presi-
dent noted: “Senator Byrd suggested that instead of having a fireside chat on Panama
that I deliver the speech in the Senate chamber. George Washington did this a couple of
times, and Byrd said he’d be willing to have television cameras there to cover it as a news
event. First he wants to check with [Alan] Cranston, Baker, and the others, but it’s an in-
triguing and interesting proposition.” (White House Diary, p. 163)
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Throughout the negotiations, we were determined that our na-
tional security interests would be protected; that the canal would
always be open and neutral and available to ships of all nations; that in
time of need or emergency our warships would have the right to go
to the head of the line for priority passage through the canal; and that
our military forces would have the permanent right to defend the canal
if it should ever be in danger. The new treaties meet all of these
requirements.
Let me outline the terms of the agreement. There are two treaties—
one covering the rest of this century, and the other guaranteeing the
safety, openness, and neutrality of the canal after the year 1999, when
Panama will be in charge of its operation.
For the rest of this century, we will operate the canal through a
nine-person board of directors. Five members will be from the United
States and four will be from Panama. Within the area of the present
Canal Zone, we have the right to select whatever lands and waters our
military and civilian forces need to maintain, to operate, and to defend
the canal.
About 75 percent of those who now maintain and operate the canal
are Panamanians; over the next 22 years, as we manage the canal to-
gether, this percentage will increase. The Americans who work on the
canal will continue to have their rights of employment, promotion, and
retirement carefully protected.
We will share with Panama some of the fees paid by shippers who
use the canal. As in the past, the canal should continue to be self-
supporting.
This is not a partisan issue. The treaties are strongly backed by
President Gerald Ford and by Former Secretaries of State Dean Rusk
and Henry Kissinger. They are endorsed by our business and profes-
sional leaders, especially those who recognize the benefits of good will
and trade with other nations in this hemisphere. And they were en-
dorsed overwhelmingly by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
which, this week, moved closer to ratification by approving the treaties,
although with some recommended changes which we do not feel are
needed.
And the treaties are supported enthusiastically by every member
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff—General George Brown, the Chairman,
General Bernard Rogers, Chief of Staff of the Army, Admiral James

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Holloway, Chief of Naval Operations, General David Jones, Chief of
Staff of the Air Force, and General Louis Wilson, Commandant of the
Marine Corps—responsible men whose profession is the defense of this
Nation and the preservation of our security.
The treaties also have been overwhelmingly supported through-
out Latin America, but predictably, they are opposed abroad by some
who are unfriendly to the United States and who would like to see dis-
order in Panama and a disruption of our political, economic, and mili-
tary ties with our friends in Central and South America and in the
Caribbean.
I know that the treaties also have been opposed by many Amer-
icans. Much of that opposition is based on misunderstanding and mis-
information. I’ve found that when the full terms of the agreement are
known, most people are convinced that the national interests of our
country will be served best by ratifying the treaties.
Tonight, I want you to hear the facts. I want to answer the most se-
rious questions and tell you why I feel the Panama Canal treaties
should be approved.
The most important reason—the only reason—to ratify the treaties
is that they are in the highest national interest of the United States and
will strengthen our position in the world. Our security interests will be
stronger. Our trade opportunities will be improved. We will demon-
strate that as a large and powerful country, we are able to deal fairly
and honorably with a proud but smaller sovereign nation. We will
honor our commitment to those engaged in world commerce that the
Panama Canal will be open and available for use by their ships—at a
reasonable and competitive cost—both now and in the future.
Let me answer specifically the most common questions about the
treaties.
Will our Nation have the right to protect and defend the canal
against any armed attack or threat to the security of the canal or of ships
going through it?
The answer is yes, and is contained in both treaties and also in the
statement of understanding between the leaders of our two nations.
The first treaty says, and I quote: “The United States of America
and the Republic of Panama commit themselves to protect and defend

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
the Panama Canal. Each Party shall act, in accordance with its constitu-
tional processes, to meet the danger resulting from an armed attack or
other actions which threaten the security of the Panama Canal or [of]
ships transiting it.”
The neutrality treaty says, and I quote again: “The United States of
America and the Republic of Panama agree to maintain the regime of
neutrality established in this Treaty, which shall be maintained in order
that the Canal shall remain permanently neutral. . . .”
And to explain exactly what that means, the statement of under-
standing says, and I quote again: “Under (the Neutrality Treaty),
Panama and the United States have the responsibility to assure that the
Panama Canal will remain open and secure to ships of all nations. The
correct interpretation of this principle is that each of the two countries
shall, in accordance with their respective constitutional processes, de-
fend the Canal against any threat to the regime of neutrality, and conse-
quently [shall] have the right to act against the Canal or against the
peaceful transit of vessels through the Canal.”
It is obvious that we can take whatever military action is necessary
to make sure that the canal always remains open and safe.
Of course, this does not give the United States any right to inter-
vene in the internal affairs of Panama, nor would our military action
ever be directed against the territorial integrity or the political inde-
pendence of Panama.
Military experts agree that even with the Panamanian Armed
Forces joined with us as brothers against a common enemy, it would
take a large number of American troops to ward off a heavy attack. I, as
President, would not hesitate to deploy whatever armed forces are nec-
essary to defend the canal, and I have no doubt that even in a sustained
combat, that we would be successful. But there is a much better way
than sending our sons and grandsons to fight in the jungles of Panama.
We would serve our interests better by implementing the new
treaties, an action that will help to avoid any attack on the Panama
Canal.
What we want is the permanent right to use the canal—and we can
defend this right through the treaties—through real cooperation with
Panama. The citizens of Panama and their government have already
shown their support of the new partnership, and a protocol to the neu-
trality treaty will be signed by many other nations, thereby showing
their strong approval.
The new treaties will naturally change Panama from a passive and
sometimes deeply resentful bystander into an active and interested
partner, whose vital interests will be served by a well-operated canal.
This agreement leads to cooperation and not confrontation between
our country and Panama.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Another question is: Why should we give away the Panama Canal
Zone? As many people say, “We bought it, we paid for it, it’s ours.”
I must repeat a very important point: We do not own the Panama
Canal Zone. We have never had sovereignty over it. We have only had
the right to use it.
The Canal Zone cannot be compared with United States territory.
We bought Alaska from the Russians, and no one has ever doubted that
we own it. We bought the Louisiana Purchases—Territories from
France, and that’s an integral part of the United States.
From the beginning, we have made an annual payment to Panama
to use their land. You do not pay rent on your own land. The Panama
Canal Zone has always been Panamanian territory. The U.S. Supreme
Court and previous American Presidents have repeatedly acknowl-
edged the sovereignty of Panama over the Canal Zone.
We’ve never needed to own the Panama Canal Zone, any more
than we need to own a 10-mile-wide strip of land all the way through
Canada from Alaska when we build an international gas pipeline.
The new treaties give us what we do need—not ownership of the
canal, but the right to use it and to protect it. As the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff has said, “The strategic value of the canal lies in its
use.”
There’s another question: Can our naval ships, our warships, in
time of need or emergency, get through the canal immediately instead
of waiting in line?
The treaties answer that clearly by guaranteeing that our ships will
always have expeditious transit through the canal. To make sure that
there could be no possible disagreement about what these words mean,
the joint statement says that expeditious transit, and I quote, “is in-
tended . . . to assure the transit of such vessels through the Canal as
quickly as possible, without any impediment, with expedited treat-
ment, and in case of need or emergency, to go to the head of the line of
vessels in order to transit the Canal rapidly.”
Will the treaties affect our standing in Latin America? Will they
create a so-called power vacuum, which our enemies might move in to
fill? They will do just the opposite. The treaties will increase our Na-
tion’s influence in this hemisphere, will help to reduce any mistrust
and disagreement, and they will remove a major source of anti-
American feeling.
The new agreement has already provided vivid proof to the people
of this hemisphere that a new era of friendship and cooperation is be-
ginning and that what they regard as the last remnant of alleged Amer-
ican colonialism is being removed.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Last fall, I met individually with the leaders of 18 countries in this
hemisphere. Between the United States and Latin America there is al-
ready a new sense of equality, a new sense of trust and mutual respect
that exists because of the Panama Canal treaties. This opens up a fine
opportunity for us in good will, trade, jobs, exports, and political
cooperation.
If the treaties should be rejected, this would all be lost, and disap-
pointment and despair among our good neighbors and traditional
friends would be severe.
In the peaceful struggle against alien ideologies like communism,
these treaties are a step in the right direction. Nothing could strengthen
our competitors and adversaries in this hemisphere more than for us to
reject this agreement.
What if a new sea-level canal should be needed in the future? This
question has been studied over and over throughout this century, from
before the time the canal was built up through the last few years. Every
study has reached the same conclusion—that the best place to build a
sea-level canal is in Panama.
The treaties say that if we want to build such a canal, we will build
it in Panama, and if any canal is to be built in Panama, that we, the
United States, will have the right to participate in the project.
This is a clear benefit to us, for it ensures that, say, 10 or 20 years
from now, no unfriendly but wealthy power will be able to purchase
the right to build a sea-level canal, to bypass the existing canal, perhaps
leaving that other nation in control of the only usable waterway across
the isthmus.
Are we paying Panama to take the canal? We are not. Under the
new treaty, any payments to Panama will come from tolls paid by ships
which use the canal.
What about the present and the future stability and the capability
of the Panamanian Government? Do the people of Panama themselves
support the agreement?
Well, as you know, Panama and her people have been our histor-
ical allies and friends. The present leader of Panama has been in office
for more than 9 years, and he heads a stable government which has en-
couraged the development of free enterprise in Panama. Democratic
elections will be held this August to choose the members of the Pana-
manian Assembly, who will in turn elect a President and a Vice Presi-
dent by majority vote. In the past, regimes have changed in Panama,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
but for 75 years, no Panamanian government has ever wanted to close
the canal.
Panama wants the canal open and neutral—perhaps even more
than we do. The canal’s continued operation is very important to us,
but it is much more than that to Panama. To Panama, it’s crucial. Much
of her economy flows directly or indirectly from the canal. Panama
would be no more likely to neglect or to close the canal than we would
be to close the Interstate Highway System here in the United States.
In an open and free referendum last October, which was moni-
tored very carefully by the United Nations, the people of Panama gave
the new treaties their support.
The major threat to the canal comes not from any government of
Panama, but from misguided persons who may try to fan the flames of
dissatisfaction with the terms of the old treaty.
There’s a final question—about the deeper meaning of the treaties
themselves, to us and to Panama.
Recently, I discussed the treaties with David McCullough, author
of “The Path Between the Seas,” the great history of the Panama Canal.
He believes that the canal is something that we built and have looked
after these many years; it is “ours” in that sense, which is very different
from just ownership.
So, when we talk of the canal, whether we are old, young, for or
against the treaties, we are talking about very deep and elemental
feelings about our own strength.
Still, we Americans want a more humane and stable world. We be-
lieve in good will and fairness, as well as strength. This agreement with
Panama is something we want because we know it is right. This is not
merely the surest way to protect and save the canal, it’s a strong, posi-
tive act of a people who are still confident, still creative, still great.
This new partnership can become a source of national pride and
self-respect in much the same way that building the canal was 75 years
ago. It’s the spirit in which we act that is so very important.
Theodore Roosevelt, who was President when America built the
canal, saw history itself as a force, and the history of our own time and
the changes it has brought would not be lost on him. He knew that
change was inevitable and necessary. Change is growth. The true con-
servative, he once remarked, keeps his face to the future.
But if Theodore Roosevelt were to endorse the treaties, as I’m quite
sure he would, it would be mainly because he could see the decision as
Simon and Schuster, 1977).

68.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, February 9, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #46
1. Opinion
Strategic Deterioration
You should start giving more serious thought to, and personally
engage in some discussion of, three developments which cumulatively
may adversely affect the overall global position of the United States.
These are:
1. Growing indications of political instability in Western Europe;2
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
2. The potential consequences of major Soviet/Cuban success in
Ethiopia;3
3. Our failure to exploit politically our relatively favored position
in the U.S.-Soviet-Chinese triangle.
The cumulative effect of these trends could be very serious inter-
nationally and then domestically. By the fall we could be under attack
for having presided over a grave deterioration in the U.S. global posi-
tion. In that setting, SALT will not have a chance, and our ability to deal
with other issues will be severely reduced.
The linchpin of our policy towards the Soviet Union has been a
strong Western Europe, closely tied to the United States; moreover, in
recent years we have subtly and cautiously exploited Soviet fears of
China to encourage Soviet restraint. Given present trends, our first
asset—Western Europe—may be partially undermined from within.
At the same time, we have failed almost entirely to take advantage
of the opportunity inherent in the Sino-Soviet hostility, while concen-
trating heavily on enlarging the scope of U.S.-Soviet negotiations.
Political trends in Western Europe are ominous. The Italians have
in effect cut a deal with the Communist party that will bring them into
the Parliamentary coalition. The French left coalition of the Socialist
and Communist is the favorite to win the March elections. German
politics are increasingly manifesting neutralism and anti-U.S. symp-
toms, while Schmidt’s economic policy is not helpful to the West’s
overall political and economic strength. Our initiative for NATO force
improvements—though desirable—increasingly looks like we are
using military measures to prop up a politically weakening alliance. In
sum, by the end of March we could see major Communist advances in
Europe, and then an important backlash at home with the Administra-
tion being criticized for doing too little too late.
At the same time, demonstrable Soviet success in the African Horn
is likely to have a very direct psychological and political impact on
Egypt, Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Iran. It will simply demonstrate to all
concerned that the Soviet Union has the will and the capacity to assert
itself. This will encourage Libya and Algeria to act more aggressively; it
will also make more likely increased Cuban involvement in the Rhode-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
sian conflict. In effect, first through a proxy (as in Angola) and now
more directly (as in Ethiopia) the Soviet Union will be demonstrating
that containment has now been fully breached.
Finally, in part because of Chinese rigidity, and in part because (in
my judgment) of excessive sensitivity to the Soviets, we have slighted
the Chinese connection. Even if normalization has to proceed slowly,
and Vance’s trip to Peking bears this out, there is no reason why the
consultative relationship—resting quite frankly on a shared concern
over Soviet aggressiveness—should not be cultivated. This is why I
favor your instructing me to visit China sometime in March or April to
engage in quiet consultations (not bilateral negotiations—and the Chi-
nese would have to agree to this in advance) regarding global issues,
thereby also sending a signal to the Soviets which might prove helpful
on such matters as the Horn or SALT. (Domestically, it would be
viewed as a hardnosed act, and hence useful.)
The above paragraphs are primarily designed to help you focus on
the larger aspect of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, and to point to some
serious dangers on the horizon.
In terms of action, I think we need to spend some time reviewing
the larger picture, especially in regards to Europe, and hence:
1. I hope the next NSC meeting might provide such an opportu-
nity, even if the specific issues will relate largely to SALT and the Af-
rican Horn. In addition, I am initiating some urgent reviews within
NSC of our European position;
2. The SCC will meet this Friday13 and prepare specific recommen-
dations for you regarding the African Horn;
3. I would suggest that you talk to the Vice President and to Harold
Brown regarding the political and strategic aspects of a possible trip by
me to the Far East, since I expect Cy will be skeptical. I believe that such
a trip would be helpful; and a firm decision by you, with the larger stra-
tegic picture in mind, is now needed.
4. We should begin elaborating a public and Congressional strat-
egy to protect us against domestic backlash, should these develop-
ments (some largely beyond our control) occur. I think one approach
would be to have some key senators in to see you for a discussion of
what might be done as a way of sharing with them the limited range of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
options before us and of encouraging them therefore to produce a more
understanding reaction, if these developments take place.
2. National Security Calendar (Attached)
ening the circle of countries which share our human rights values is at
the very core of our security interests. Such nations make strong allies.
Their commitment to human rights gives them an inner strength and
stability which causes them to stand steadfastly with us on the most
difficult issues of our time.
In this first year, I have been impressed by what a subtle, creative,
and flexible process diplomacy can be in advancing the cause of human
rights. Diplomacy is not just words—though words can be highly effec-
tive. It is also an impressive variety of intangible symbols and gestures,
as well as tangible measures.
Diplomacy can be a rich mix, indeed. In the case of our human
rights objectives, we have evolved a mix that is proving effective.
Capsule View of the Diplomacy
Frank Discussion. The primary ingredient of human rights diplo-
macy has a seeming simplicity: We frankly discuss human rights in our
consultations with foreign diplomats and leaders. An obvious tech-
nique, yes. Just words, yes. But I must tell you that many of us have
been amazed at its effectiveness.
A career Foreign Service Officer told me recently that until last Jan-
uary it would have been unusual for our ambassador to raise with the
leader of another country, in face-to-face conversation, the fate of polit-
ical prisoners. Our diplomats tended to shy away from direct high-
level dialogue on such sensitive human rights issues.
That has changed. Time after time in the past year we have had
such conversations. And very often these very frank discussions have
led to beneficial results. Sovereign governments have reexamined con-
ditions in their capitals and provinces, and releases of prisoners and
other positive actions have followed.
When we raise human rights with another government, we take an
affirmative stance. We explain that our people, our Congress, and our
government are deeply troubled by the human rights abuses we be-
lieve to be occurring. And we ask for the other government’s assess-
ment of the situation and the prospects for improvement. Sometimes, it
is true, the response is truculent and defensive. Sometimes, we are

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
charged with “intervening” in the internal affairs of another sovereign
state.
But much more often, the response is a real effort to join issue on
the merits. Frequently, there is candid acknowledgment of the validity
of our interest—an interest rooted in solemn international agreements
that make the way a government treats its own citizens a matter of le-
gitimate international concern.
Just as frequently there is disagreement over the degree and the
causes of the problem. It is often asserted, for example, that terrorism
justifies repression. But usually these differences in perspective are
overtaken by a consideration of possible improvements. By consider-
ation, for example, of whether:
• Those held without trial, often incommunicado and for lengthy
periods, can soon be released or at least charged and tried;
• The return to civilian rule can proceed on schedule; or
• Those responsible for mistreating prisoners will be prosecuted.
Sometimes we achieve explicit understandings on such issues.
More commonly there is an implicit recognition of the need for im-
provement and for further consultations as the situation evolves. Either
way, the raising of the issue has profound significance. Rather than
being conveniently ignored, human rights abuses are brought to the
center of the diplomatic interchange. There, they must be addressed.
I believe the almost geometric increase in world awareness of hu-
man rights issues is perhaps the major accomplishment of our human
rights diplomacy. This new consciousness not only helps curb existing
human rights abuses, it also acts as a deterrent to new violations.
Symbolic Acts. The words of human rights diplomacy can effec-
tively be joined with symbolic acts. For example, trips to other coun-
tries by our senior officials and official invitations to the leaders of
other nations to visit the United States can be used to advance our
human rights objectives. Such visits can mark our recognition that a
country has an outstanding human rights record or provide the oppor-
tunity to discuss human rights problems with the leader of a country
where improvements are urgently needed.
There are a host of other measures that can be used symbolically to
send the desired signal, such as: cultural and educational exchanges;
selection of the site of international conferences; the level of our repre-
sentation at diplomatic events; port visits by our fleet. Carefully used,
such symbols and gestures can help advance the cause of human rights.
There is also significance in our willingness to meet, on appro-
priate occasions, with opposition leaders from countries with serious
human rights problems. My colleagues and I have met with a number
of such leaders in Washington—including some who are living in exile

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
from their homeland. And abroad, our ambassadors regularly meet
with opposition leaders.
These meetings enable us to hear both sides of the story, to learn
how a human rights problem is seen by those directly affected, and to
demonstrate that we are concerned about all the people of the country
involved, not just those in power.
Public Comment. Beyond private diplomatic discourse and im-
portant symbolic steps, the diplomacy of human rights must some-
times include criticism of regimes implicated in serious human rights
violations.
Public comment by our government is an official act that directs
the attention of the entire world to the objectionable practices of an-
other government. We believe that such criticism can have some inhib-
iting effect on such governments. We do not generally prefer this ap-
proach but neither will we shrink from it.
Needless to say, public comment has been our first line of ap-
proach with respect to countries like Cambodia and Uganda, where we
have little or no diplomatic contact but yet where unspeakable viola-
tions of human rights are occurring as a matter of deliberate state
policy. We deplore these policies. We hope other governments which
have the contact that we lack can make known the extent of interna-
tional concern and bring about improvements.
We have also, of course, spoken openly and forthrightly at the Bel-
grade meeting that has been reviewing implementation of the Helsinki
Final Act. That document contemplates a full and frank review of
whether the signatories have lived up to their human rights commit-
ments. It is clear that the Soviet Union and the East European countries,
in varying degrees, have not done so. We have not hesitated to say so
publicly, to request an explanation, and to seek compliance.
Our comments and those of West European governments have
helped sustain the Helsinki accord as a living force in the cause of
human rights, an engine for keeping constant pressure on governments
to respect the rights of their people. Our silence would have effectively
permitted that force to fade away.
In speaking of our public efforts, I should note that we are actively
using our public diplomacy tools such as the U.S. Information Agency
to convey our human rights concerns to various nongovernmental au-
diences abroad. The Voice of America has increased its attention to
these issues. Our embassies and offices abroad have organized sem-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
inars in which thoughtful Americans can directly express their human
rights concerns to people from similar walks of life in foreign countries.
Our human rights initiative has given recognition and a new
stimulus to the longstanding efforts of private nongovernmental orga-
nizations in this field. We applaud these endeavors and recognize that
over time they may well outdistance any governmental effort.
Appropriate Action. When our relationship with another gov-
ernment includes economic and military assistance, we are prepared to
take tangible steps to recognize good human rights performance or to
manifest our concern over human rights violations. When appropriate
or necessary, in other words, we will support our words with actions.
In taking such steps, we are guided and strengthened by important leg-
islative provisions enacted by a Congress overwhelmingly committed
to the cause of human rights.
Taking due account of the needs of the poorest, we have made a
fundamental decision gradually to channel a growing share of our eco-
nomic assistance to countries that respect the human rights of their
people.
On the other hand, when countries we assist consistently curtail
human rights, and where our preferred diplomatic efforts have been
unavailing, we must consider restrictions on the flow of our aid, both
overall levels and individual loans or grants. Thus, over the course of
the past year we have, for example:
• Deferred bilateral economic assistance to certain countries;
• Opposed loans by the World Bank and the other international fi-
nancial institutions to countries that engage in flagrant violations of
human rights; and
• Taken steps to insure that food aid provided to countries with se-
rious human rights problems will reach the needy.
We have also advised other departments of the government on
human rights conditions abroad that may affect their activities. For ex-
ample, a recently enacted statute calls for the Export-Import Bank to
take human rights considerations into account, and the Bank regularly
seeks advice on this issue.
Human rights performance is also an important factor in our deci-
sions on military assistance and commercial arms sales subject to gov-
ernment licensing. We have reduced or declined to increase our mili-
quire the Bank’s Board of Directors to take under consideration the observance of human
rights in determining the extension of loans and guarantees. It also amended the act in

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
tary aid to a number of countries and refused to issue licenses in a
variety of instances.
The diversity of cultures and the different stages of economic and
political maturity tend to produce agonizing, almost incredibly com-
plex, choices in granting or withholding aid. Moreover, human rights,
while a fundamental factor in our foreign policy, cannot always be the
decisive factor. But the difficulty of the decisions will not deter us from
supporting our words with action.
International Support. It is important to note that we are not alone in
pursuing the diplomacy of human rights. Increasingly, other gov-
ernments are standing with us. In the United Nations, in the Organiza-
tion of American States, and in other contexts we have strong partners
in the cause of human rights. Recently, we initiated consultations with
our West European allies and others on how to promote broader inter-
national cooperation in support of human rights. In general, we are
finding strong support for giving human rights a higher priority in in-
ternational relations.
Human Rights Data Base. As I reflect on the first year of human
rights diplomacy, there is one area in which I would like to ask for the
creative thinking and counsel of this great association. I refer to the
need I perceive for an objective, authenticated data base on human
rights conditions in all countries.
Let me put the problem in perspective. With the aid of our em-
bassies around the world, we are constantly trying to gather reliable
and extensive human rights data. Nevertheless, the validity of our in-
formation on human rights conditions in other countries is frequently
challenged. Probably it is inevitable that the data collected by any one
country would be suspect. Coverage is bound to be limited, and there
may be the suspicion that the collecting country has an ax to grind.
What is needed is an objective, widely respected clearinghouse for
human rights information on all countries of the world. This would be
an important resource for us and others interested in taking human
rights conditions in other countries into account in policymaking. It
would thus both inform our decisions and authenticate the existence
and severity of human rights problems.
Perhaps you will be able to suggest how such a clearinghouse
might be created. It is clear that it must be international in scope. What
is not so clear is whether it should be sponsored by a private organiza-
tion or by a group of countries or an international organization. Once
created, I could visualize that such an entity might also play an impor-
tant educational role in improving human rights conditions around the
world. We stand ready to help in creating such an organization.
U.S. Concerns
This then is a capsule view of the diplomacy of human rights. It is a
diplomacy that refuses to “be indifferent to the fate of freedom else-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
where.” It is a diplomacy that has permitted the United States to seize
the initiative for human progress once again. Surveys conducted
abroad have shown time and time again that the renewed interest in
human values expressed by the President and implemented by our dip-
lomatic efforts has had an enormously positive impact on the view
people in foreign countries hold of America and our role in the world.
We are daily concerned with our government’s response to human
rights conditions in other countries. But our credibility—and indeed
the inner health of our society—depends upon facing up to our prob-
lems here at home and seeking to improve our own human rights
situation.
Much of President Carter’s domestic program is directed toward
the enhancement of the human rights of Americans. Proposals for wel-
fare reform, efforts to cut the cost of health care, and the commitment to
full employment are obvious examples. We should also note that,
within the past year, travel restrictions for American citizens abroad
have been eliminated, and visa requirements for foreigners coming to
this country have been significantly eased.
It is well to remember that we are far from perfect. Our ample due
process with all its guarantees does not afford perfect justice. But what-
ever our shortcomings, they are faced frankly and openly. The three
constitutional branches of government have the responsibility to do so.
And the “fourth branch” is there to insure that that responsibility is
met.
Progress to Date
In making human rights a fundamental tenet of our foreign policy
and greatly increasing sensitivity to human rights concerns, we have
helped to create an atmosphere in which human rights progress is
much more likely to occur. We do not take credit for particular im-
provements, but we note the tangible evidence from every continent
that the condition of large numbers of people—of individual, identifi-
able human beings—is less oppressive now than it seemed one year
ago.
Africa. There have been releases of substantial numbers of political
detainees; for example, Sudan, Nigeria, Upper Volta, Mali, and Ghana
are moving toward reestablishment of civilian governments. Most Af-
rican leaders have intensified their efforts to promote agricultural de-
velopment. Nigeria and other African nations are supporting creation
of an African human rights commission under U.N. auspices.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Near East. Morocco moved toward political liberalization after
nearly a decade of rule by decree. Restrictions on freedom of the press
were lifted and significant numbers of political prisoners were re-
leased. Tunisia authorized establishment of the Tunisian League for the
Rights of Man which has been permitted to investigate allegations of
human rights violations. Iran released a substantial number of political
prisoners and agreed to a visit by the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC).
South Asia. There was in India a magnificent resurrection of de-
mocracy. Nepal released political prisoners and lifted newspaper
curbs. Sri Lanka changed its government for the sixth time since inde-
pendence through the free choice of its people. Pakistan released over
11,000 political prisoners.
East Asia. The Indonesian Government released 10,000 political de-
tainees, confirmed its intent to release 20,000 more in accordance with
its previously announced release schedule, and agreed to resumption
of ICRC visits. South Korea released all but one of the Myong Dong
prisoners—opposition political and religious leaders who had opposed
the government. The Philippine Government eased some of its martial
law restrictions and released some detainees. The new Government of
Thailand has eased press restrictions, improved trial procedures, and
stated its intent to seek general elections early next year.
Latin America. Political prisoners were released in Haiti, the Do-
minican Republic, Paraguay, Argentina, and Peru. The military gov-
ernments of Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia announced that elections will
be held in 1978. States of siege were lifted in El Salvador and Nicaragua.
Most Latin American governments have allocated increased resources
to improving the living standards and productivity of their poor
farmers. Some restrictive laws have been repealed in Panama. And El
Salvador, Haiti, and Paraguay agreed to visits by the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights.
Europe. For the first time in NATO’s history, every member of the
alliance is a democracy. New churches have been constructed in Po-
land. Certain countries of Eastern Europe have eased their restrictions
on emigration and family reunification. Some human rights activists in
Poland and Romania have been released from prison. And live televi-
sion programs in Hungary have allowed prominent Westerners to
voice their views on political issues.
Problems
Despite these many improvements and others like them, the fact
remains that the distance covered is dwarfed by the distance that re-
mains to be traveled. I could recount in detail the retrograde human
rights developments of the past year, as well as the horrendous human

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
rights violations that persist across the globe—in many of the countries
I have just mentioned as well as elsewhere.
• Suffice it to say that in all quarters of the world, too many people
are still subject to torture and are suffering in squalid prisons, un-
charged and untried.
• Too many people are hungry, have inadequate shelter, and lack
medical care and educational opportunity.
• Too many people are living under martial law or are otherwise
barred from political participation.
• Too many are denied the right to emigrate or even to travel freely
within their own country.
These problems are the challenges of the future. They will not be
solved easily. But our experience with 1 year of human rights diplo-
macy convinces us that while the journey is long it is not impossible.
Of course none of us can know for sure where the progress of
human rights may lead. But every so often during the past year, as I
have struggled to understand the deep meaning of human rights, I
have felt a fleeting intimation of what untold spiritual and material
riches may lie ahead—perhaps centuries ahead—in a world of true,
universal human freedom. Justice Holmes perhaps had a similar
feeling—and certainly expressed it much better than I ever could—
when he said:
I think it not improbable that man, like the grub that prepares a
chamber for the winged thing it never has seen but is to be—that man
may have cosmic destinies that he does not understand. And so beyond
the vision of battling races and an impoverished earth I catch a
dreaming glimpse of peace.
I think that in the last analysis the cause of human rights has power
and will succeed because, no matter what the obstacle, it tenaciously
allows the world’s people to “catch a dreaming glimpse of peace.”

70.
Paper Prepared by the Policy Planning Staff
Washington, undated
[Omitted here is the Table of Contents.]
I. INTRODUCTION
For a generation our nation’s foreign policy has reflected a strong
and outward looking America. In this tradition, and building upon the
achievements of previous Administrations, we have over the past year
formulated our policies on the critical issues that will shape the re-
mainder of our lives, and those of the next generation.
1. The Complex International Agenda
As we look ahead to the 1980’s our nation faces complex interna-
tional challenges:
—The strategic arms race with the Soviet Union increases super-
power tension and the risk of nuclear war.
—The widening use of nuclear energy, necessary to the economic
well-being of many nations, threatens at the same time to promote the
spread of nuclear weapons.
—Long standing regional disputes pose the constant threat of re-
gional wars, endangering world peace.
—Growing inventories of conventional weapons aggravate re-
gional tensions and waste scarce economic resources.
—Economic recovery in the industrial nations is not rapid enough;
economic development in the third world is a global concern; and both
require the strengthening of international economic cooperation.
—Fostering human rights in our own society and abroad is neces-
sary to a just international order and a measure of the vitality of our
most basic values as a nation.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The United States approaches these challenges with extraordinary
human and physical resources. Our unparalleled strength has its roots
deep in the character and nature of our country:
—The inherent strength and resiliency of our society;
—Our deep-seated respect for the rights and potential of the indi-
vidual regardless of circumstances of birth;
—Our economic power and resources;
—A superior technological and industrial base;
—A military capability second to none;
—A tradition of inventive diplomacy and a willingness to assume
the responsibilities of leadership.
Our strengths as a nation are amplified by our long-standing alli-
ances with other nations. We confront our challenges together.
Together, we also face a new pattern of international relations in
the late 1970’s. For close to three decades, the Cold War dominated our
view of the world; today, we must deal with a pluralistic international
setting of several major dimensions:
—First are our ties to the democratic, industrial nations of Western
Europe, Canada, and Japan. These ties serve the central political, eco-
nomic, and military interests of the United States. They have proven
their durability and their continuing value. The cohesion and strength
of these relationships remain an essential precondition to progress in
our other relations.
—There is the evolving East-West relationship, marked by contin-
uing competitive elements, and yet promising in its opportunities for
cooperation.
—Relations between the industrial societies and the developing
nations now touch every major issue before us. Increasingly, nations
both North and South recognize the need to seek common ground.
—Modern technology, while it has brought great benefits, has also
created a new set of challenges which are global in scope and in the nec-
essary dimensions of their resolution, developing and allocating scarce
resources, protecting the world environment, confronting the dangers
of nuclear proliferation, encouraging the free flow of information, ap-
plying medical and agricultural knowledge to the enhancement of
human life.
—The widening pattern of international associations, the eco-
nomic, political, technical and cultural bodies—public and private—
plays an increasingly important role in facilitating the cooperative ef-
forts necessary to deal effectively with international problems.
These elements interact to create a new pattern of international life
and new demands for diplomatic skill and creativity. Shifting coali-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
tions among nations are coming together around particular interests,
often cutting across ideological, regional and political lines. From the
core relationship with our historical allies and friends, we are able, on
an increasing number of issues, to join together with nations we have
not worked closely with in the past. This is especially true with the de-
veloping world. Moreover, when the nations of the communist world
seek constructive solutions to common problems, we and others are
ready to join with them. We seek the most inclusive coalitions that can
be effective in meeting the particular challenges before us.
We are also operating on the assumption that no animosity is so
deep that there is not some common ground. For instance, we find our-
selves associated with the Soviet Union on certain issues, such as the
Law of the Seas, even as we stand in opposition on other issues. At the
same time, we recognize that our alliances can never be so total that dis-
agreements on some issues are precluded.
We recognize that diverse and equally valid American goals may
themselves come into conflict, particularly over the short term. Thus,
our interest in secure energy supplies can conflict with our interest in
preventing nuclear proliferation, for nuclear energy without adequate
safeguards can be used to develop nuclear weapons. Our commitment
to human rights may sometimes clash with our desire to maintain close
ties to countries whose cooperation we need on security or economic
issues.
The pursuit of our basic principles must therefore be flexible and
pragmatic, for balances inevitably must be struck. Both our principles
and their pragmatic pursuit are traditional American strengths. As we
reassert the international vitality of our national ideals, we must re-
main practical in recognizing the limits to our power and the con-
flicting demands which our ideals may make upon our policies.
America has been most successful in the world when it has maintained
this sense of practical idealism.
The changing nature of international cooperation and competition,
our diverse interests in the world, the absence of armed conflicts in-
volving American force, all contribute to move American foreign
policy beyond the generalized doctrines of times past. Our policies do
not lend themselves to simple doctrinal explanations. We must there-
fore take special care to work closely with the Congress, to open our
policies to broad public discussion and to encourage alternative points
of view within the Administration itself. All voices must be heard:
America’s foreign policy cannot be sustained without the under-
standing and support of the American people.
2. Agenda for 1978
The decisions which the Administration, Congress and American
people face in 1978 will be made, in large measure, within the context of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the goals we set for ourselves during 1977. In important respects, our
choices in 1978 will shape the character of America’s role in world af-
fairs for years to come:
—We will persist in continuing long term efforts to promote
human rights, to check nuclear weapons proliferation and to restrain
the growth in conventional arms traffic.
—Ratification of the Panama Canal Treaties will secure our future
interests in the Canal and set the pattern for a healthy new relationship
between big powers and smaller countries, a relationship of clear mu-
tual benefit and respect.
—We will continue during the coming months to pursue a stra-
tegic arms limitation agreement with the Soviet Union that will
strengthen our security as well as that of our allies, and reduce the risks
and tensions that accompany an uncontrolled nuclear weapons race.
We will at the same time press for a comprehensive ban on nuclear
testing.
—Diplomacy for peace in the Middle East, southern Africa, and
the Horn of Africa will continue, in the hope that these particularly
dangerous regional disputes can be resolved.
—An effective American energy program must be enacted.
—We will pursue a more open trading system that serves the econ-
omies of all nations.
—Through a more effective foreign aid program, we will seek to
encourage the growth and well-being of developing societies. Their
economic progress will promote our own.
We have always responded well as a nation to immediate chal-
lenges. Today, more than ever, we face another critical test: whether we
can rally for the long haul, whether we can make the short-term sacri-
fices sometimes necessary to secure our future interests.
We have emerged from our national ordeal in Vietnam. In 1978, a
strong America has the opportunity to show that we have the confi-
dence to play a positive role of world leadership. This positive Amer-
ican role is essential if the world is to come to grips with the problems
that could otherwise engulf it.
The choices we face touch every American. While the immediate
interests of our citizens are diverse, over the longer run each of us
shares an interest in a foreign policy that serves three goals: to be true to
our values, to seek peace, and to enhance the well-being of our people
and the peoples of all nations. The body of this report addresses each of
these fundamental objectives.
II. VALUES
American values provide the base of our policy. Our concern for
the welfare of others coincides with our own national interest:

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
—to do what we can to alleviate injustice and tension before they
erupt into violence;
—to help reduce the threat of war and the high cost of military
establishments;
—to contribute to the global economic growth and equity on which
our own national prosperity depends.
Human Rights:
The human rights policy of this Administration most clearly repre-
sents the application of our values to the practical decisions of foreign
policy.
Our concern is for those human rights which have been recognized
internationally—in the UN Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and other UN covenants and conventions; in the
American Convention on Human Rights; and in the final act of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. These documents
codify the right to be free from torture or arbitrary arrest; the right to
political freedom; and basic economic rights and opportunities. Our
focus on these human rights is not an attempt to impose the American
political system on others. These rights can be enjoyed under various
political systems and in differing manner. They are rights to which all
are entitled.
It is easy to be for all these rights in our rhetoric. Indeed no civi-
lized nation has ever declared itself against them. It is more complex to
take the human rights dimension into account in the major foreign
policy decisions we take. We are trying to do that. That is how we view
our obligations to American law and tradition.
Human rights concerns have been integrated into all levels of our
dealings with foreign governments—from Presidential exchanges to
the discussions of working level officials. It is clear to all governments
that we consider how they treat their own people as an important factor
in all our dealings with them.
We have affirmed our commitment to formal international stand-
ards—by finally signing the UN covenants on economic, social, and
cultural rights and on civil and political rights4 and by signing the
American Convention on Human Rights. We are working to improve
the human rights machinery of the UN and the Organization of Amer-
ican States, and to secure better implementation of the human rights
provisions of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
These multilateral efforts are important since they emphasize that
America is not preaching to the rest of the world, but adding its voice to
all the others who are working to improve the plight of individuals.
Words must be supported with actions. Proposals for American
assistance—loans or grants through our aid program; our position on
loans in the international development banks; military assistance or
even sales—are carefully reviewed from a human rights point of view.
This is a time-consuming process, since we analyze the human rights
situation in the country concerned, who will benefit from the assist-
ance, and how we can effectively assist the cause of human rights and
the lot of the neediest.
We have modified aid allocations on human rights grounds and
we are working to ensure that our bilateral programs meet the basic
human needs of the poor for food, shelter, health care, and education.
We oppose loans in the international development banks to countries
with serious human rights problems, unless the loans are aimed at sat-
isfying basic human needs. We have accepted the fact that our relations
with certain countries may be strained as a result of our attention
to human rights. As human rights conditions improve, these strains
should be eased.
It may be of interest to record some of the actual dilemmas we face,
for example, in linking human rights and foreign assistance. We often
ask ourselves: should we oppose a loan which could promote the
economic condition of poor people, in hopes of influencing their gov-
ernments to permit a greater exercise of political rights? Would with-
holding security aid in a particular situation stimulate a siege men-
tality, leading to an even harsher crackdown on dissident elements, or
would its practical effect be to promote human rights? How can we best
show recognition of the progress a society is making, and thus reinforce
that process, even if the general human rights situation remains
unacceptable?
These and other hard questions require case-by-case analysis.
Some observers will find our choices inconsistent. This is because
tactics should be adaptable, although our goals are not. We will take
those actions we believe will be most effective in each country, and
which are consistent with statutory provisions designed to promote re-
spect for internationally recognized human rights.
We must also keep our human rights concerns in balance with
other national interests. We often must determine how best to respond
to the needs of individuals living under authoritarian regimes, while
still retaining the necessary cooperation of their governments on secu-
rity or economic matters that are vital to us. Even in striking this bal-
ance however, our broad goal remains the same: economic and security

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
policies, as well as policy on “human rights”, are guided by a concern
with the impact of all we do on the welfare of individuals.
We are embarked on a long term endeavor. Progress must be
measured over the long run. This Administration will probably not see
the full results—successful or not—of our efforts in this field. Nor can
we claim credit for many decisions made by sovereign foreign gov-
ernments. But we have contributed to an international climate in which
tangible progress was made in 1977:
—Thousands of prisoners have been freed.
—Some political systems have become a little more open. States of
siege have ended and elections have been scheduled in a number of
countries.
—International human rights commissions have been permitted to
visit countries formerly closed to them.
The world was not transformed by such events. But many indi-
viduals were better off at the end of 1977 than at its beginning.
This is a sound beginning, but our experience has shown us that
there are sometimes even better ways to proceed:
—In this first year we have most often reacted to human rights vio-
lations by reducing or ending economic or military assistance pro-
grams. We wish to increasingly emphasize positive actions to help gov-
ernments which are trying to improve the lot of their own people. We
are working to find ways to use our assistance affirmatively, to pro-
mote human rights, rather than in ways which are primarily punitive.
—We must work even more closely with international organiza-
tions and foreign leaders to find the most constructive ways to advance
human rights in cultures and political traditions different from our
own.
In our dealings with other nations and people we must recognize
human rights problems of our own. The President’s plans for welfare
reform, urban renewal, more jobs for disadvantaged youth, are all
part of a commitment constantly to improve our own human rights
performance.
In sum, there has been a perceptible change in the international
view of what the United States stands for in the world. Our most dur-
able source of strength is the symbol of individual liberty and opportu-
nity that we represent to others.
[Omitted here are sections III. Peace and IV. Individual Economic
Well-Being.]
V. CONCLUSION
One year ago, we decided to give new priority to several complex
longer-term issues that are becoming increasingly important to our na-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tional interests: issues such as human rights, energy, trade, nuclear
non-proliferation, and conventional arms sales.
We realized, but perhaps did not adequately explain to the Amer-
ican people, that progress on these issues would be slow, and that by
raising some of them we would complicate certain of our bilateral
relations.
We decided that these global problems had to be addressed at
once, because it is clear that we cannot approach the key issues in our
foreign policy seriatim. For example, we cannot so concentrate our en-
ergy on the political diplomacy of international peace, essential as it is,
that we discover, too late, that poverty and injustice within nations
makes peace among nations impossible.
The relationship between energy and nuclear proliferation illus-
trates this point. We can use the connection between the two issues to
find progress on both: while seeking through cooperative international
efforts to fire a safer nuclear fuel cycle, we can use progress on develop-
ment of non-nuclear energy sources to reinforce our arguments against
the development of unsafe nuclear facilities. Conversely, we emphasize
also that the dangers of nuclear proliferation make the development of
non-nuclear and safe nuclear power all the more important.
Our reluctance to set one or two rigid conceptual doctrines—to
pretend that the complexities of a mature American foreign policy can
be summarized in one or two catch phrases—is a matter of conscious
choice. We will apply ourselves with more vigor to the necessity of ex-
plaining this reordering of our strategies and inter-related priorities in
the coming year.
Some lessons that we can draw, in the light of the last year’s expe-
rience, include:
—We recognize that since we are more deeply engaged than ever
in long-term efforts, results may come slowly: in many areas, we do not
expect dramatic developments in the first year or two. We do expect to
be judged on whether measured progress is being achieved, however—
and on how much will have been achieved by the end of President
Carter’s first term in office.
—The fact is that, without a single over-arching concept, we will
have to build a national consensus behind American foreign policy on
new premises and new approaches: if there is a lag in public perception
of our design, it is partly because many people still think in terms of bi-
polar diplomacy, when relations with the Soviet Union dwarfed all
other concerns. Now, however, we must operate on a broad range of
issues in a pluralistic world, in which relations with the Soviet Union
are central but not all encompassing.
—In discussing and debating our policies, we will ask also that the
press and public be willing to wrestle with complexity and eschew the
comfort of simple slogans and a belief in quick solutions.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
—Clear priorities need not be precluded by multiple goals. Certain
issues—because of their urgency, their importance, or both—must and
do receive our most serious attention. As indicated above, we place at
the top of our agenda for 1978 the following issues:
• Approval of the Panama Canal treaties;
• Achievement of a sound SALT treaty, and other arms control
measures;
• Peace-making in the Middle East and southern Africa;
• International economic recovery and development, including
progress at the multilateral trade negotiations and a strong American
aid program;
• Energy and nuclear non-proliferation; and
• Promoting human rights.
—Abroad, we will continue to work especially closely with our al-
liance friends in addressing these challenges.
—At home, in almost every case, progress in 1978 will be heavily
dependent on positive Congressional action, and close cooperation be-
tween the legislative and executive branches. We welcome the role and
responsibility of the Congress. As we share power in an open and con-
stitutional way with the Congress, we also share responsibility with the
members of both Houses to address pressing issues in an expeditious
and constructive fashion.
—Finally, a practical approach requires an understanding that our
actions need continuing examination and correction: when circum-
stances change (as they did in the Middle East in late 1977), or when we
discover that we are making mistakes (as we may have done in early
months, in pressing certain nations to address too many of our con-
cerns at once), it is wiser to change tactics than to insist on the perfec-
tion of our approach.
In almost every case of American involvement in foreign crises, we
view our role as that of a facilitator, a provider of good offices. On occa-
sion, we may advance ideas or drafts, but our overriding desire is to get
the parties together to discuss the key issues in a meaningful way. This
has been true in the Middle East, in southern Africa, in the Eastern
Mediterranean, in the Horn of Africa and elsewhere.
By commiting our economic, diplomatic and moral resources, the
chances for the successful resolution of disputes are improved. But the
solutions themselves will depend almost always on the good will and
ingenuity of the parties themselves. For solutions that they have them-
selves designed and adopted are the solutions that are most likely to
endure.
On economic and other global issues, we can help to form coali-
tions of nations working together to resolve the problems that no single
nation can meet alone.

71.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, March 3, 1978
SUBJECT
Speech on Defense Policy
At Tab A is an outline of a speech on this Administration’s defense
policy for your consideration.
The speech should note briefly that you conceive national security
to be more than military affairs and that your efforts in the non-military
areas of national security have been many. That must not, however,
lead anyone to the mistaken view that you neglect the military dimen-
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
sion of this country’s security. If we and our allies seek a world of
“peace without victory” while others, pretending to accept that spirit of
detente, actually seek “victory without war,” the world will not be safe,
and the military factor will become crucial. Recent Soviet behavior is
not reassuring on this point.
You, as Commander-in-Chief, will make clear to the American
public and our allies that military power is a fundamental component
of national security. Furthermore, a strong and rich nation cannot es-
cape the political responsibility of military power. Well-reasoned ex-
amples of this Administration’s decisions on future military programs
will show that you carefully have considered the trends in national se-
curity affairs and are providing the flexibility needed to cope with the
wide range of contingencies which the U.S. could face during this
decade. Your personal involvement in maintaining military readiness
will be highlighted.
The speech would set forth the following principles:
—We do not seek military superiority but we will not allow others
to attain it.
—It is not our policy to intervene militarily in the domestic affairs
of other countries or to exacerbate regional and local conflicts, and we
cannot view with equanimity interventions by other powers in such
conflicts.
—We shall seek arms agreements when they are possible and pru-
dent, but we shall sustain and improve our military capabilities where
necessary.
—We shall be forthcoming in encouraging further economic and
technological cooperation with those who act to restrain destabilizing
military competition.
It would be easy for a number of states, not only Saudi Arabia and
Iran, but also Yugoslavia and our NATO allies to reach a mistaken con-
clusion about where we are going because we have emphasized coop-
eration for the past year. This speech should redress the balance and set
the backdrop for other statements you may find important to make on
national security as events unfold in Africa, the Middle East, and a
post-Tito Yugoslavia.
In sum, the image to be conveyed is not belligerence or alarm, but
rather competence and confidence in the pursuit of the national strat-
egy which you set last summer.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Jim Fallows has been consulted on this outline. I have also invited
Harold Brown to make inputs into the preparation of this speech.
Are we heading in the right direction with this outline?5
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Finally, some believe that because we do possess nuclear weapons
of great destructive power, that we need do nothing more to guarantee
our Nation’s security. Unfortunately, it’s not that simple.
Our potential adversaries have now built up massive forces armed
with conventional weapons—tanks, aircraft, infantry, mechanized
units. These forces could be used for political blackmail, and they could
threaten our vital interests unless we and our allies and friends have
our own military strength and conventional forces as a counterbalance.
Of course, our national security rests on more than just military
power. It depends partly on the productive capacity of our factories
and our farms, on an adequate supply of natural resources with which
God has blessed us, on an economic system which values human
freedom above centralized control, on the creative ideas of our best
minds, on the hard work, cohesion, moral strength, and determination
of the American people, and on the friendship of our neighbors to the
north and south.
Our security depends on strong bonds with our allies and on
whether other nations seek to live in peace and refrain from trying to
dominate those who live around them.
But adequate and capable military forces are still an essential ele-
ment of our national security. We, like our ancestors, have the obliga-
tion to maintain strength equal to the challenges of the world in which
we live, and we Americans will continue to do so.
Let us review briefly how national security issues have changed
over the past decade or two.
The world has grown both more complex and more interdepend-
ent. There is now a division among the Communist powers. The old co-
lonial empires have fallen, and many new nations have risen in their
place. Old ideological labels have lost some of their meaning.
There have also been changes in the military balance among na-
tions. Over the past 20 years, the military forces of the Soviets have
grown substantially, both in absolute numbers and relative to our own.
There also has been an ominous inclination on the part of the Soviet
Union to use its military power—to intervene in local conflicts, with ad-
visers, with equipment, and with full logistical support and encourage-
ment for mercenaries from other Communist countries, as we can ob-
serve today in Africa.
This increase in Soviet military power has been going on for a long
time. Discounting inflation, since 1960 Soviet military spending has
doubled, rising steadily in real terms by 3 or 4 percent a year, while our
own military budget is actually lower now than it was in 1960.
The Soviets, who traditionally were not a significant naval power,
now rank number two in world naval forces.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
In its balanced strategic nuclear capability, the United States re-
tains important advantages. But over the past decade, the steady Soviet
buildup has achieved functional equivalence in strategic forces with
the United States.
These changes demand that we maintain adequate responses—
diplomatic, military, and economic—and we will.
As President and as Commander in Chief, I am responsible, along
with the Congress, for modernizing, expanding, and improving our
Armed Forces whenever our security requires it. We’ve recently com-
pleted a major reassessment of our national defense strategy. And out
of this process have come some overall principles designed to preserve
our national security during the years ahead.
We will match, together with our allies and friends, any threat-
ening power through a combination of military forces, political efforts,
and economic programs. We will not allow any other nation to gain
military superiority over us.
We shall seek the cooperation of the Soviet Union and other na-
tions in reducing areas of tension. We do not desire to intervene mili-
tarily in the internal domestic affairs of other countries, nor to aggra-
vate regional conflicts. And we shall oppose intervention by others.
While assuring our own military capabilities, we shall seek secu-
rity through dependable, verifiable arms control agreements wherever
possible.
We shall use our great economic, technological, and diplomatic ad-
vantages to defend our interests and to promote American values. We
are prepared, for instance, to cooperate with the Soviet Union toward
common social, scientific, and economic goals. But if they fail to dem-
onstrate restraint in missile programs and other force levels or in the
projection of Soviet or proxy forces into other lands and continents,
then popular support in the United States for such cooperation with the
Soviets will certainly erode.
These principles mean that, even as we search for agreement in
arms control, we will continue to modernize our strategic systems and
to revitalize our conventional forces. And I have no doubt that the
Congress shares my commitment in this respect.
We shall implement this policy that I’ve outlined so briefly in three
different ways: by maintaining strategic nuclear balance; by working
closely with our NATO allies to strengthen and modernize our de-
fenses in Europe; and by maintaining and developing forces to counter
any threats to our allies and friends in our vital interests in Asia, the
Middle East, and other regions of the world.
Let me take up each of these three in turn.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Our first and most fundamental concern is to prevent nuclear war.
The horrors of nuclear conflict and our desire to reduce the world’s ar-
senals of fearsome nuclear weapons do not free us from the need to an-
alyze the situation objectively and to make sensible choices about our
purposes and means.
Our strategic forces must be—and must be known to be—a match
for the capabilities of the Soviets. They will never be able to use their
nuclear forces to threaten, to coerce, or to blackmail us or our friends.
Our continuing major efforts in the SALT talks taking place every
day in Geneva are one means toward a goal of strategic nuclear
stability.
We and the Soviets have already reached agreement on some basic
points, although still others remain to be resolved. We are making good
progress. We are not looking for a one-sided advantage. But before I
sign any SALT agreement on behalf of the United States, I will make
sure that it preserves the strategic balance, that we can independently
verify Soviet compliance, and that we will be at least as strong, relative
to the Soviet Union, as we would be without any agreement.
But in addition to the limits and reductions of a SALT II agree-
ment, we must make other steps to protect the strategic balance. During
the next decade, improvements in Soviet missiles can make our land-
based missile forces in silos increasingly vulnerable to a Soviet first
strike. Such an attack would amount to national suicide for the Soviet
Union. But however remote, it is a threat against which we must con-
stantly be on guard.
We have a superb submarine fleet, which is relatively invulnerable
to attack when it’s at sea, and we have under construction new Trident
submarines and missiles which give our submarine ballistic missile
force even greater range and security.
I have ordered rapid development and deployment of cruise mis-
siles to reinforce the strategic value of our bombers. We are working on
the M–X intercontinental ballistic missile and a Trident II submarine-
launched ballistic missile to give us more options to respond to Soviet
strategic deployments. If it becomes necessary to guarantee the clear in-
vulnerability of our strategic deterrent, I shall not hesitate to take ac-
tions for full-scale deployment and development of these systems.
Our strategic defense forces, our nuclear forces, are a triad—land-
based missiles, sea-based missiles, and air-breathing missiles, such as
bombers and cruise missiles. Through the plans I’ve described, all three
legs of this triad will be modernized and improved. Each will retain the
ability, on its own, to impose devastating retaliation upon an aggressor.
For 30 years and more we’ve been committed to the defense of Eu-
rope, bound by the knowledge that Western Europe’s security is vital

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
to our own. We continue to cooperate with our NATO Allies in a
strategy for flexible response, combining conventional forces and nu-
clear forces so that no aggressor can threaten the territory of Europe or
its freedom, which in the past we have fought together to defend.
For several years we and our allies have been trying to negotiate
mutual and balanced reduction in military forces in Europe with the
Soviets and with the Warsaw Pact nations who are their allies. But in
the meantime, the Soviets have continued to increase and to modernize
their forces beyond a level necessary for defense. In the face of this ex-
cessive Soviet buildup, we and our NATO Allies have had to take im-
portant steps to cope with short-term vulnerabilities and to respond to
long-term threats. We are significantly strengthening U.S. forces sta-
tioned in Western Europe and improving our ability to speed addi-
tional ground and air forces to the defense of Europe in a time of crisis.
Our European allies, who supply the major portion of NATO’s
conventional combat strength, are also improving their readiness and
their reinforcement capabilities and their antitank defenses. The heads
of the NATO governments will be here in our country attending a
summit meeting in May, where we will address our long-term defense
program which will expand and integrate more closely allied defense
plans.
For many years, the United States has been a major world power.
Our longstanding concerns encompass our own security interests and
those of our allies and friends far beyond our own shores and Europe.
We have important historical responsibilities to enhance peace in
East Asia, in the Middle East, in the Persian Gulf, and throughout our
own hemisphere. Our preference in all these areas is to turn first to in-
ternational agreements that reduce the overall level of arms and mini-
mize the threat of conflict. But we have the will, and we will also main-
tain the capacity, to honor our commitments and to protect our
interests in those critical areas.
In the Pacific, our effective security is enhanced by mutual defense
treaties with our allies and by our friendship and cooperation with
other Pacific nations.
Japan and South Korea, closely linked with the United States, are
located geographically where vital interests of great powers converge.
It is imperative that Northeast Asia remain stable. We will maintain
and even enhance our military strength in this area, improving our air
President addressed the North Atlantic Council on May 30; see Document 83. Documen-
tation on the summit meeting is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. XXVII, Western Europe.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
strength and reducing our ground forces, as the South Korean army
continues to modernize and to increase its own capabilities.
In the Middle East and the region of the Indian Ocean, we seek per-
manent peace and stability. The economic health and well-being of the
United States, Western Europe, Japan, depend upon continued access
to the oil from the Persian Gulf area.
In all these situations, the primary responsibility for preserving
peace and military stability rests with the countries of the region. But
we shall continue to work with our friends and allies to strengthen their
ability to prevent threats to their interests and to ours.
In addition, however, we will maintain forces of our own which
can be called upon, if necessary, to support mutual defense efforts. The
Secretary of Defense, at my direction, is improving and will maintain
quickly deployable forces—air, land, and sea—to defend our interests
throughout the world.
Arms control agreements are a major goal as instruments of our
national security, but this will be possible only if we maintain appro-
priate military force levels. Reaching balanced, verifiable agreements
with our adversaries can limit the cost of security and reduce the risk of
war. But even then, we must—and we will—proceed efficiently with
whatever arms programs our own security requires.
When I leave this auditorium, I shall be going to visit with the crew
aboard one of our most modern nuclear-powered aircraft carriers in the
Atlantic Ocean. The men and women of our Armed Forces remain
committed, as able professionals and as patriotic Americans, to our
common defense. They must stand constantly ready to fight, in the
hope that through strength, combat will be prevented. We as Amer-
icans will always support them in their courageous vigil.
This has been a serious and a sober talk, but there is no cause for
pessimism. We face a challenge, and we will do whatever is necessary
to meet it. We will preserve and protect our country and continue to
promote and to maintain peace around the world. This means that we
shall have to continue to support strong and efficient military forces.
For most of human history, people have wished vainly that
freedom and the flowering of the human spirit, which freedom nour-
ishes, did not finally have to depend upon the force of arms. We, like

73.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, April 7, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #53
1. Opinions
To achieve your foreign policy objectives—a more peaceful world
based on a reduction of arms, a deeper understanding with the Soviet
Union, and restraint and the resolution of conflicts in the third world—
it will take more than simply negotiating each of these matters in their
isolation and in terms of the technical questions they pose. To have full
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
public and political support here and abroad for overcoming the kinds
of obstacles we have encountered, we must orchestrate our efforts so
they will be mutually reinforcing and not mutually contradictory.
Foremost among those steps we will be taking shortly is the Vance
mission to Moscow2 and the possibility of significant progress in SALT.
That visit, to be successful, needs to be part of a broader effort on a
number of fronts. It is important that the mission itself not be merely a
negotiating session devoted to the specifics of SALT but that it address
other issues in the US/Soviet relationship which are the source of deep
concern, both in your government and with the public at large.
It is clearly in the Soviet interest, and part of the Soviet strategy, to
focus attention on SALT, and to proclaim the agreement to be evidence
of a general improvement in US-Soviet relations. This then leaves the
Soviets free to pursue their political objectives elsewhere and by other
means.
In addition to negotiating, with an agreement being clearly also in
the U.S. interest, it is therefore imperative that the U.S. focus also on the
larger dimensions of the U.S.-Soviet relationship. Indeed, the U.S. side
should open the discussions with a broad review of the relationship,
emphasizing that we seek a detente that is increasingly comprehensive
and genuinely reciprocal. Unless we do that, we enable the Soviets to set
the tone and to define the priorities of the U.S.-Soviet relationship,
clearly to their own advantage. Moreover, I am quite convinced that
unless detente becomes comprehensive and reciprocal, we will face an
increasing rebellion at home, and SALT will not be ratified.
I think it is not unfair to summarize the Soviet strategy as in-
volving the following elements:
1. Keep movement going forward on detente in the area of arms
control relationships. This both restrains any U.S. build-up, and gen-
erates a more passive U.S. attitude on other issues;3
2. Create the impression of a special U.S.-Soviet relationship,
which frightens both the Europeans and the Chinese;
3. To induce the Europeans increasingly into a self-Finlandized at-
titude, in part out of fear of the Soviet Union, and in part out of wishful
thinking that a genuine detente truly exists;
4. To prevent a rapid resolution of the Middle Eastern problem and
to increase U.S. difficulties, in the hope of radicalizing the Arabs and of
gaining greater leverage;
vol. VI, Soviet Union, Documents 99–103.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
5. To exploit any opportunities in Africa, or elsewhere, to advance
Soviet interests, either directly or indirectly;
6. To intimidate the U.S. and its allies by massive propaganda cam-
paigns, such as the one directed at the neutron bomb, and through gen-
eral vilification of U.S. motives, policies, and society.
Our response, accordingly, must be one in which we stress the im-
portance of the U.S.-Soviet relationship, as well as our determination to
compete in all areas of the relationship if cooperation does not in fact
develop.
We should, in view of the above, tell the Soviets very frankly that
their behavior in Africa is intolerable. If Soviet/Cuban forces are in-
truded into the Southern African conflict, this will jeopardize detente as
a whole and we will react strongly. This should be stated directly, un-
ambiguously, and forcefully.
In this connection, specific reference should be made to the
Brezhnev-Nixon communique, in which joint rules of restraint were ex-
plicitly defined. The Soviets should be told that we view them as
having violated these jointly agreed rules.
In addition, the Soviets should be told that our relationship is now
at a watershed. We are willing, anxious, and ready to try to improve it,
to widen the scope of cooperation, and to work together on a wide
range of issues. We will not stand for a selective detente, in which the
Soviet side arbitrarily defines the rules of the game. Decisions that will
be made this summer on SALT as well as on other issues will affect our
relationship for many years to come.
Subject to your revisions of the above, I would recommend that a
letter of instructions from you to Cy be drafted and given to him prior
to his departure. I do not believe that either U.S. interests, or your own
leadership, will be well served if the sessions in Moscow become
merely a bargaining exercise on the specifics of SALT. The state of U.S.
public opinion, as well as the thrust of recent Soviet actions, simply do

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
not give us that luxury. Moreover, the Soviets tend to respect a broadly
gauged approach. A realistic and non-belligerent toughness draws
from them a respectful response. Eagerness or a narrowly focused ne-
gotiating attitude tends to be exploited.
There are also a number of specific actions and events that need to
be orchestrated to support your overall objectives:
—Africa: We need to intensify our political effort to call attention to
Soviet/Cuban intervention. We should encourage the Yugoslavs and
Algerians who are questioning Cuba’s non-aligned credentials—some-
thing that apparently troubles the Cubans significantly. We should
also see, in our proposed private, direct contacts with the Cubans, if we
cannot discourage further adventures in Eritrea and Southern Africa,
holding out the prospects of significant steps in normalization.
—NATO: The Summit Meeting9 will provide an important oppor-
tunity to stress your concern for security issues and to repair whatever
strains may exist as a result of the neutron bomb episode. We should
make this a significant event in your Presidency, including major ac-
complishments in terms of both political content and adoption of allied
defense programs. Given the stresses of the last few weeks, we believe
we will be in a strong position to press the Allies to be forthcoming on
the long-term defense program. We should also stress the importance of a
Soviet response to our MBFR initiative which will be tabled next week.
—Defense Debate: There is strong Hill pressure for an increase in
defense spending above your budget. I believe it is important that we
not simply resist these increases across the board but, rather, indicate
we are prepared to accept some increase and work to shape those in-
creases that will take place. I have in mind, for example, acceleration of
the MX/Trident II missile and a modest Continental Air Defense
package, both aimed at diminishing opposition to SALT.
—China: We are putting together a strong technology package and
program for the China trip. We should also emphasize some other se-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
curity dimensions to our relationship. I will be providing further sug-
gestions to you.
—UN: The Special Session on Disarmament will be an opportunity
to place the monkey on the Soviets’ back to be forthcoming in response
to your neutron bomb decision, on MBFR and in other forums. We
should press them hard but avoid picking up for the sake of propa-
ganda some longstanding ideas in the disarmament community which
will provoke an extremely bad reaction among crucial defense-oriented
Congressmen as well as our NATO allies. I believe we can have an an
aggressive posture in the SSOD without creating fears that we have be-
come soft.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
President wrote “Let’s push SS 20 argument.”
74.
Article by the Assistant Secretary of State for International
Organization Affairs (Maynes)
Washington, undated
The Maturing of American Diplomacy
How does one describe the trends of American diplomacy today?
Were it 30 years ago, in the full flush of American power and opportu-
nity, we might adopt Dean Acheson’s metaphor and proclaim our-
selves “present at the creation.” But American strength, while greater
absolutely, is now matched relatively by the strength of others, and
American opportunity too often seems transformed into foreign
challenge.
Moreover, American confidence seems to have given way to
American self-examination. We no longer seem to enjoy the grandeur
of simplicity in our foreign policy. Our goals seem more distant and un-
attainable; our resources inadequate; our people fed up; our gov-
in the original. Maynes’s article is based on an address he delivered before the Confer-
ence on International Studies at Columbia University in New York on April 7.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
ernment divided; our friends uncertain. There seems a diffusion of
power everywhere. We find no accepted poles of authority, no widely
shared principles of action.
If Dean Acheson was present at the creation, where are we? We are
at a stage which marks the “greening of American diplomacy.” We are
witnessing its democratization and final maturity.
For a century and more, this country enjoyed the luxury of ig-
noring the rest of the world. Geography provided the basis of our for-
eign policy, and isolation from foreign crises was the result.
At the end of World War II we moved to a new stage. We began,
fitfully, to apply our growing national power to the world stage. Over-
whelming and almost unchallengeable national power provided the
basis of our foreign policy, and intervention and involvement in sev-
eral foreign crises were the result.
Now we are entering a third stage in our diplomatic development.
We are attempting, again fitfully, to adjust to the new power of others
while trying to maintain or enhance our own. The result is a challenge
to this country of a unique sort, for we are being asked for the first time
to practice diplomacy as other nations have always been forced to prac-
tice it. Like other nations we are finding that our foreign policy goals
are at least as likely to be attained because of the subtlety of our ap-
proach as through the morality of our cause or the strength of our mili-
tary and economy. We can no longer order so we have to practice the
art of persuading others.
What does all this mean in practice? In the period following the
Second World War, American power rose to unprecedented heights.
With the rest of the world in ruins, the United States accounted for 60%
of the world’s industrial production, 50% of its military spending, and
a commanding share of its monetary reserves. Some call this period the
“golden age of American diplomacy.” But the phrase is not at all appro-
priate. It was not a golden age of American diplomacy but an exhila-
rating age of American governance. The task of American foreign
policy then lay primarily in deciding among ourselves what to do,
much less in deciding how to persuade others to do it with us. Other
friends, given their weakness, had little choice. In that period, America
achieved an influence over the entire globe—its politics, its economics,
its culture—that had never been seen before and probably will never be
seen again.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Yet despite the passing of that age, we also in a sense can feel
“present at the creation,” for changing world realities are creating a
whole new tradition and environment for American diplomacy.
There are several paradoxical aspects of this development that de-
serve examination, and I would like to turn to them now.
Nationalism and Interdependence
The diffusion of power internationally and the accelerated devel-
opment of a global economy have radically changed the international
environment. The code word for this is interdependence, a reality that
requires a different approach to diplomacy, that presupposes, on the
part of the American foreign policy establishment and the public, a
more nuanced understanding of international political realities. Yet
habits are hard to break, and a clash between reality and perception
continues to hamper our efforts.
The most ready example of this is our national struggle to come to
grips with the opportunities and risks of detente. But another more
telling example is our persistent misunderstanding of the politics and
importance of the nonaligned nations. Linked to this is our deep resent-
ment of this effort to pursue aggressively their interests as though such
a cause of action was permitted only for the developed countries. It is
ironic that our most enthusiastic flagwavers and manipulators of na-
tionalistic symbols are invariably incapable of understanding similar
feelings among others.
The debate over the Panama Canal treaties is a case in point. The
canal may have had strategic importance to us in the past, and it may
still be of vital interest to us as a free and open waterway. But we could
hardly maintain that its military importance is the same in an age of
ballistic missiles and nuclear submarines as it was 30 years ago. More-
over, we have no exclusive claims to vital interests there, as these in-
terests are shared by the Panamanians, the other South American coun-
tries, as well as the rest of the world. Yet the entire Panama Canal
debate tells us something about ourselves and the forces that move na-
tions in 1978. The careful calculation of national interest and of net ad-
vantage—the essence of traditional diplomacy—was nearly swamped
in the emotional and unpredictable national reaction to the canal
treaties. We were fortunate that we had people in the Senate who dis-
played real political courage.
A segment of our public’s reaction to President Carter’s recent
overseas tours to developing countries is another good example of our
lingering tension between national bias and international reality.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Ritualistically the press denounced the trips as without purpose or
focus. Three decades of habitual summitry had given us, what one
might call an acute case of “Eurovision.” This view accepts as a matter
of course our President’s dealing with heads of state in Paris, Moscow,
or London, or for that matter any capital in Europe. Yet it becomes be-
wildered, bemused, or cynical when he is welcomed in Rio, Lagos, or
New Delhi. Minds close and eyes glaze when it is explained that India
is the 10th industrial power in the world as well as the globe’s largest
democracy, that we conduct more trade with Nigeria than South Af-
rica, or that Brazil is on the way to a global as well as regional role.
This “Eurovision” perceives the non-Western world only as a
ragtag collection of nonviable ministates, a concern of the Peace Corps,
missionaries, and readers of the National Geographic. Yet the facts are
these.
• U.S. exports to the less developed countries, exclusive of the
members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, con-
stituted about one-fourth of the total U.S. exports in the past 2 years,
approximately equaling what we export to East and West Europe, to
the Soviet Union, and to China.
• Close to one-half of our imports—about $60 billion—originate in
the Third World, including more than 9 out of 13 critical minerals.
• Since the early 1970’s, when our dependence on foreign oil began
to challenge our complacent perceptions, we have in fact increased our
oil imports by eight times and are close to importing one-half of our
total oil consumption.
• Countries like India, Brazil, Nigeria, Iran, and Saudi Arabia play
a role on the world stage that dwarfs that of some of the countries we
traditionally consider “critical.”
These realities underline an essential fact—the health and progress
of American society are vitally linked to the economic and political sta-
bility of the Southern Hemisphere. Yet whether we have the maturity
to understand that point remains very much in doubt at present.
International Institutions
International institutions are another example of how America’s
perceptions are not always synchronized with changing realities.
America was principally responsible for the creation of the current
family of international institutions. Their creation seemed a few years
ago one of the most imaginative ideas ever put into practice. Yet in-
creasingly, we see it suggested that these institutions are a nice place to
visit, but one wouldn’t want to conduct his diplomacy there.
Since the mid-1960’s, however, international institutions have
changed enormously without many understanding the transformation.
Look at the budgets. In the beginning, expenditures of the U.N. system

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
were only about $200 million a year, and they were basically for oper-
ating expenses. Now the budget of the U.N. system, excluding the de-
velopment banks, exceeds $2. billion per year, and the organization is
active not only in four major peacekeeping operations but also is de-
voting more than 90% of its budget to economic and social problems.
At our urging the United Nations has entered such fields as tech-
nical assistance, environment, population, and drug control. With this
new scope and with new resources—with several key countries, in ad-
dition, using the U.N. system as a channel for their development assist-
ance—the United Nations has assumed unprecedented significance.
Meanwhile, the World Bank has become a much more important
vehicle for development assistance than the U.S. aid program (which
tends to be focused on a few swing countries in sensitive regions of the
world). Indeed, a major triumph of U.S. diplomacy has been success in
using international institutions to persuade other countries to assume a
major share of the burden of global development efforts. Only a few
years ago our share was around 40%; now it is closer to 20%.
Yet today international institutions are under unprecedented at-
tack—an attack much more dangerous than some of the rhetorical
assaults we have witnessed in the past. There are efforts to place to-
tally unworkable restrictions on our contributions to international
institutions.
If these efforts succeed, no international agency will, for example,
be able to assist any government to increase production of certain
products whose potential export might at some future date be competi-
tive with American producers. We are asked, as World Bank President
Robert McNamara has pointed out, to deny Papua New Guinea the
right to increase palm oil production on the theory that this might be
competitive with our soybean production when, in fact, our troubles—
if we at some point have any—will stem from soybean production in
Brazil; and this is the result of investments from a Japan still shocked by
our decision in 1973 to ban soya exports to Japan in order to hold down
prices here.
At the same time, popular rhetoric continues to denounce the
domination of the United Nations by ministates; yet anyone with
knowledge of international organizations knows that the true influence
is exerted by countries of growing power and influence—countries
such as Algeria, Brazil, Egypt, India, Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Saudi Arabia, Tanzania, and Yugoslavia. By the end of this century, it is
expected that the top 12 countries in the world in terms of population
will not include a single Western power except the United States. The

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Third World now represents 74% of the world’s people; it has 58% of
the world’s armed forces.
The reasons behind this Administration’s decision to devote a new
degree of attention to the United Nations then are not trivial or the re-
sult of Andy Young’s [U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations] per-
sonal views. The U.N. system is the essential element for the conduct of
foreign relations by most of the Third World countries. It is the collec-
tive source of much of their diplomatic influence, the basic outlet for
their foreign relations initiatives. As we come to comprehend better the
importance of these countries to us, we realize the necessity of dealing
with them through international organizations. In short, the perception
of the U.N. system as a nice but essentially meaningless institution
should end. It does not match the reality of 1978.
This greater interest in international institutions is laying the
groundwork for addressing many of the more important issues on the
international agenda—issues which can only be effectively handled
in the multilateral context. The catalogue is almost endless: energy,
population, food, health, pollution, money supply, economic growth,
human rights, narcotics control, arms sales, nuclear proliferation, outer
space, the deep seabed. Yet we face this paradox. In the past we praised
international institutions and tended not to use them. Now we use
them and tend not to praise them. How long can this continue without
undermining the instruments we need?
Human Rights: Religion or Foreign Policy?
A renewed emphasis on human rights is a major new trend in
American foreign policy, strongly supported by the American people.
It is more than posturing toward foreigners as it expresses the essential
values of our society. It is more than just another factor grafted on
our diplomatic efforts to be evaluated by simple input-output analyses.
Yet it is here where we encounter an enormous controversy with cries
of success and failure sometimes uttered by the same person. How
does one measure success in this endeavor? We might suggest two
possibilities.
First, if one views the human rights issue as a religious campaign,
then one is almost never satisfied because, regardless of the progress
made, one will always see more to do. The danger of such an approach
is that the opponents of human rights will begin to argue that unless
the same degree of success can be attained everywhere, the whole effort
should be abandoned.
Second, if the human rights effort is viewed from a more traditional
foreign policy point of view, then the foremost “success” of our human
rights policy lies in the undeniable fact that human rights have become
a global issue and are decreasingly an exclusive domain of American

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
concern. This is a major—and we should hope not short run—change in
international practice.
The recently concluded meeting of the U.N. Human Rights Com-
mission provides an example of what I mean. It was one of the most
successful in a decade. More important, it provided evidence that Af-
rican and Asian countries are assuming a leadership role in an area
where many in this country believe that only we care. For the first time
in U.N. history, the Commission took action under its 1503 procedures
against a member state—in this case Uganda, Uruguay, Equatorial
Guinea, and a number of other countries. The credit for this develop-
ment lies more in a growing international consciousness than in any ef-
forts by the United States.
Yet at this point it is unclear whether this country has the patience
to build the kind of international consensus on human rights that will
make the subject a central issue of international diplomacy. Recalling
an influence we no longer enjoy, we may overlook a collective success
we stand some chance of achieving.
Foreign Policy Design and Domestic Demands
Perhaps the most striking aspect of this new age of diplomacy is its
field of practice. We have entered an age of democratic diplomacy
which is revolutionizing the craft. It used to be said that foreign policy
had only a small constituency. But who can say that today? The constit-
uency is growing every day; the problem is that it is not of one mind
and too often it is angry.
For decades our leaders have argued that to accomplish a political
task, one must organize. I think it is safe to say Americans have learned
how. The civil rights, consumer, and antiwar movements have pro-
vided on-the-job training to all of us. As a result, on a growing number
of issues, foreign policy appears to be losing its earlier character as a
largely autonomous sphere of action and thought. Foreign policy is be-
coming more inextricably linked to domestic politics and policy.
In the postwar period, we should recall, the two realms were not
so closely linked.
• It was only recently that the dependence of the United States on
certain raw materials reached the point that shifts in the terms of trade
or embargoes could have a radical effect on our domestic economy.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
• It was only in the 1960’s that the rise of the multinational corpo-
rations changed the policy focus of large U.S. firms so that today up
to 30% of total U.S. corporate profits can be attributed to overseas
operations.
• It was also only in a recent period that our allies and some of the
more successful developing countries began to compete directly with
American industry in our internal market whereas before there was
little that American business or labor had to fear.
We can also look for another reason why foreign affairs and do-
mestic affairs are becoming linked. In the past the domestic burden of
foreign policy usually increased in the event of a foreign policy failure
as when diplomacy ended and war began. Thus, the domestic burden
of our foreign policy increased sharply during the Korean and Vietnam
wars; as the burden increased, so did political division at home.
Today, these burdens seem to increase not only in the case of a for-
eign policy failure but in the event of a foreign policy “success.” An
arms control agreement may result in sharply increased defense ex-
penditures as we are urged to redouble our efforts in areas not covered
by the new compact or as we build costly verification equipment. A
successful international energy policy may require drastic domestic re-
forms to succeed. An economic agreement may further shift the terms
of trade against American business. In all three cases what might legiti-
mately represent a diplomatic triumph, far from easing domestic
burdens, could actually increase them.
As a result, today when some foreign policy issue begins to shape,
it is not just a few foreigners or key Senators who express the same
view. Today’s State Department official can rest assured that he will
hear from others. The very first may be his mother, who wants him to
cut out whatever he is doing. Then he will take a phone call from a Sen-
ator who never before had taken an interest in the subject, then a letter
from an irate American Legion member. His press officer will ask guid-
ance to answer questions from the Associated Press. His former col-
leagues—either from Brookings or from the American Enterprise Insti-
tute, depending on their politics—will pay a friendly visit to express
their views. Then a congressional hearing on the topic will feature dis-
tinguished citizens, including former officials of the State Department,
leaders of nongovernmental organizations, and academic experts. Edi-
torials will spring up like mushrooms in the New York Times, the
Washington Post, and, of course, the Atlanta Constitution.
Computerized letterwriting is a new development, the side
product of the political campaigns of 1972 and 1976. It can produce
hundreds of thousands of identical letters from all over the country, as
we have seen in the case of the Panama Canal. The State Department, in
turn, is providing computerized replies. Because the pressures are so

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
great and on so many issues, the practitioners of foreign policy today
require communications and political skills which yesterday were less
critical. This may be an overlooked reason for the growing role of the
White House in foreign affairs. It is not a power grab away from the
State Department but an effort to provide “technical assistance.”
A Vision for a Complex World
We live in an age of “all-at-once-ness”—in time and place. Good or
bad news that used to take days or even months to travel now bombard
our nervous systems incessantly and simultaneously. There is no re-
covery time in our body politic; no time for recuperation and regenera-
tion; no time to absorb and reflect on what has occurred and how we
reacted before new, unanticipated events propel us to divert attention
from one crisis to another. The pace, the crazy rhythm of events, magni-
fied by their immediate impact, deprive us all of even the luxury of
pause and reflection. When, we might ask, have the contemporary
George Kennans got time for thoughtful meditation to fuse a profound
understanding of history with a professional ability at prediction?
There is one feature of the international system from which we can
derive both hope and concern. It is what one might almost call the ho-
meostasis of world diplomacy. Homeostasis, in case you have for-
gotten, is the almost miraculous self-adjusting property of a system to
maintain its stability by a coordinated response of its parts to any
stimuli that tend to disturb it.
In simple words, our international system may have become so
complex, so interrelated, and so unfathomable that its very complexity
seems to keep it out of harm’s way and leaves in total confusion and ig-
norance not only those who attempt to reform it but, fortunately, those
too who would try to do it in. On the other hand, the system is hardly
without defects, and its plastic character make it difficult to undertake
reform. Precisely because the enterprise is so difficult, only a collec-
tive effort can succeed—which means a more vigorous and engaged
diplomacy.
In this effort, words remain the sharpest tool of attack and, when in
trouble, the last line of defense. But American diplomats have no
monopoly on the definition of words; and the impact of words is so
much greater and more unpredictable in our age of participatory diplo-
macy. We are all vulnerable to the dictionary guerrillas who do not nec-
essarily battle for the clarity of thought.
Rather, they twist and bend the meaning of terms to fit and serve
their self-serving interpretation, their particular cause. Hence, the
struggle in debate here, in international conferences abroad, and in ne-
gotiations about such terms as “human rights,” “basic human needs,”
“the new international economic order,” and a host of other currently

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
topical expressions such as “Palestinian homeland,” “internal settle-
ment” and so on and so on.
Nevertheless, words remain important. They convey ideas, and
ideas confer power. That is the essence of diplomacy.
Some of the more practical in our society might argue that power
devolves more from military strength, economic capacity, and techno-
logical superiority and that those factors are what enable us to get what
we want as we deal with the rest of the world. That may have been the
ultimate argument in the age of Bismarck, but I submit that it is neither
practical nor in our long-term interest to rely exclusively or excessively
on that kind of power today. In today’s world insufficient power comes
out of the barrel of a rifle, or the smokestacks of Pittsburgh.
No, to the contrary, our influence rests more upon our vision, our
ideals, and—yes—our words. The real question is how much our vision
reflects the concerns and interests of the community of nations—a com-
munity of which we are a part but no longer the proprietor.
What we require in 1978 is a vision that is clear enough to be un-
derstood by others, flexible enough to take into account the constant
changes in world society, strong enough to guide our diplomacy, and
worthy enough to be supported by our people.
Such a vision will have to be developed with the cooperation of
many parties. But the building blocks are obvious:
• The vision must address the issues of world security from a
larger viewpoint than narrow nationalism can provide.
• The vision must address the issues of American welfare from a
framework of improving the welfare of the international community as
a whole.
• The vision must serve to strengthen international institutions
and procedures that help more rationally to share power and
responsibility.
• The vision must embrace human rights in their broadest mean-
ing which involves a commitment to the dignity of human beings in the
material and political sense.
Always, we will need to back up our vision and our words with re-
sources and action. Even then, we will not always get what we want.
But there is no alternative. The dynamics of our society and of world af-
fairs do not permit us either to go on our way or to have our own way.
We live in a participatory age, and frankly, I think, we shouldn’t want it
any other way.

75.
Memorandum From Vice President Mondale to
President Carter
Washington, April 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Observations on Your Presidency
The Camp David discussions were very helpful in focusing our at-
tention on ways in which we can all better serve your goals. Below I
outline some observations which I hope will be of some value in deter-
mining how we should proceed from here:
Speeches
My most basic recommendation is that you should dramatically
increase the degree to which you emphasize the public education role
of your presidency. In retrospect, I believe that this function has been
seriously under-emphasized and that the Administration’s efforts have
suffered as a result.
Where you have given major speeches—such as those at Notre
Dame, Charleston, Wake Forest and ASNE—they have served as useful
basic charters which have provided the comprehensive factual and
philosophical framework of a particular policy to experts and editori-
alists, to our allies and adversaries, and especially to the public. Each
of these speeches has been enormously valuable.
I propose that you undertake a much heavier speaking schedule,
not only in Washington but around the country, on issues of greatest
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
importance to your Administration. Such a schedule will provide op-
portunities for comprehensive articulation of the basic philosophy and
direction of your Administration. You could focus on a series of issues,
spelling out to the American people where you’re going, how you in-
tend to get there, and what kinds of problems you see in the way.
I suggest you put Stu Eizenstat in charge of a small task force,
which would work closely with Jody, to map out a long-term public
speaking strategy. It would recommend forums for and prepare
speeches on such matters as government reorganization and respon-
siveness, the economy, education and the environment. The series
might appropriately begin with a speech on the difficulties of grap-
pling with many of today’s difficult problems, emphasizing that you
became President in order to tackle tough issues such as government
reorganization, health care, tax reform, illegal immigration, social secu-
rity financing, Panama Canal, SALT, and others which have been fes-
tering for years but which cannot be ignored.
I have sensed a much greater disposition on your part to articulate
comprehensively your positions on foreign policy than those in the do-
mestic area. I sense you are reluctant to define your own approach and
philosophy regarding domestic issues. I may be wrong, but I sense that
when you feel you are being characterized as being too liberal, you
react in a way designed to counteract that definition; similarly, when
you are being characterized as too conservative, you react in the oppo-
site way.
In short, I have the impression that you intensely dislike being de-
fined or “labeled”. That may have some value, but I fear it also con-
tributes to the feeling that people don’t know you, they can’t feel you,
they don’t know where you are going. I believe that by giving more
major speeches, you will not only perform your public education role
but it will require those of us serving you to help define and describe
the Administration’s goals more effectively than we do now. Also,
these speeches hopefully will become the documents on which the next
election is fought.
I believe a lot of work has to be put into your speeches. If Stu
mapped out a long-range schedule, we would have more lead-time to
prepare them and could make better use of thoughtful outsiders. Most
of your speeches tend to be descriptive and detailed demonstrations of
what you know and the amount of work that went into a particular de-
cision; but at the same time they tend to be, for many listeners, fairly
heavy and incomprehensible, lacking the eloquence and persuasive-
ness that a Presidential address should possess. I would hope a good
deal of thought could be put into how we can make these speeches
more persuasive and eloquent.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Public Perceptions of Your Presidential Leadership
Your critics make many charges directed at your leadership, in-
cluding the following:
• You are allegedly weak, uncertain and indecisive. They point to
the absence of vetoes and attempt to make your views appear to be
uncertain, equivocal and subject to bending under pressure. There
have been no public displays of anger. Your efforts to de-imperialize
the Presidency have resulted in diminishing the awe of the office.
• That you are preoccupied with foreign affairs;
• That you live a cloistered and private life and that you don’t
really enjoy the company of others in informal settings;
• That you are a manager and not a leader;
• That you become overwhelmed by minutiae;
• That your staff tends to be limited, at least in terms of Wash-
ington experience, and that you are not getting sufficient advice from
persons of stature and experience other than the original friends you
brought from Georgia.
I find very few people ever arguing that you’re not bright, honest,
decent or hard-working; rather, they argue that you are ineffective.
The great potential and exciting opportunity of this public percep-
tion is that, in most instances, it is inaccurate and can be quickly
remedied by simply letting the public see more clearly what those of us
who work with you see daily. This argues that you should undertake
the much stronger public education role outlined above. It argues for
some vetoes and/or strong rhetoric. It argues for strong discipline of
disloyal persons to reverse the present complete lack of fear that
anyone will pay a price—any prices—for unauthorized leaks or dam-
aging statements. (As Strauss puts it, “There is no penalty for screwing
up in this Administration.”) It argues for the political engagement of
your cabinet officers in an effort to serve your broadest goals. It argues
for other steps that demonstrate visibly the strength of your leadership.
Finally, I think we should look for proper ways for you to perform that
will enable people to “look up” to your office without returning to the
Nixon imperial presidency.
I believe the “indecisive” issue is due largely to leaks which pur-
port to show uncertainty when, in fact, it is an essential part of the
decision-making process to hear different views. If we can start plug-
ging most of these leaks, I think we’ll be hearing much less of this
criticism.
I fear there is a good deal of validity to the argument that you
spend too much time poring over staff memos in your office, and not
enough time in public giving speeches and appearing with people. As
someone said, when we elect a President, we don’t want a manager. We
can hire them. We want a leader.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Your perceptions, philosophies and objectives for America can be
explained only in the public role. I think you do too little of it. If there’s
one element of your Presidency that cries out for correction, in my
judgment, that is it.
Limited Range of Advice
I know you get all kinds of advice, but I’m afraid that much of it
comes in a way that is not always helpful. I think you should have in-
formal meetings—perhaps bi-weekly—with some of the wise and ex-
perienced people in this town and elsewhere, people who want nothing
from you and who have no axes to grind. Getting together periodically
with small groups of these people—preferably in the evening, away
from the press and off the record—could be invaluable.
I can think of people who would be candid with you in such
meetings, who would not talk about them afterwards, and with whom
you could try out new thoughts and ideas. Several who come to mind
are Jim Rowe (Roosevelt, Johnson), Clark Clifford (Truman), David
Ginsberg (Truman), Ted Sorensen (Kennedy), John Gardner (Johnson),
but there are others. Nearly anyone you wanted would be very flat-
tered to be asked and very willing to help.
Foreign Policy
I think there has been inadequate strategic political thinking in the
development of our foreign policy. Most of our foreign policy initia-
tives do not enjoy the same kind of congressional and political ap-
praisal when they are being developed that their domestic counterparts
do. You tend to get too personally identified with foreign policy initia-
tives whose chances of success are slight. I can think of many such in-
stances with which the Secretary of State is closely and personally iden-
tified, and others with which you are as well.
I have long sensed an attitude among the foreign policy advisers
that there is something suspect about looking at a foreign policy
problem in the context of the political environment in which it must be
fought. I couldn’t disagree more profoundly with this attitude, and I
think we must do everything possible to reverse it.
I don’t believe, for example, that the option you finally selected on
the neutron bomb issue—which I think is a good one—ever appeared
in the options paper given you. Rather, the paper simply dealt with ab-
solutes and it was only after a broader public debate that the option
that you ultimately settled on emerged as the sensible answer.
Also, I think you get too personally and too deeply involved in too
many minor foreign issues. I have talked repeatedly about the number
of foreign visitors. But it is hard to think of any issue—whether it is
Belize, Cyprus or Namibia—in which you don’t become deeply im-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
mersed once you learn of it. I realize that seeing foreign visitors and
working on foreign problems is important, but I think we need a better
balance.
My Role
I believe I should also make a basic re-evaluation of the ways in
which I have been serving you. In reviewing the last few months, I have
concluded that I have been spending too much time on routine work
which parallels and often duplicates the efforts of others and which
they could do just as well on their own; at the same time I have not been
doing those things that others cannot do. I have in mind such things as
the western trip, which produced more benefits for the Administration
than I expected. It put the problems in focus and identified where we
should be concentrating our efforts, which before the trip had been dif-
fuse and uncoordinated. I have been told that there has been a substan-
tial improvement in western attitudes towards us as a result of that trip,
and especially our follow-up efforts.
I should be doing more of this kind of domestic travel and giving
more comprehensive speeches articulating our policies. I should also
have a heavy campaigning schedule which will enable me to play a
stronger role as spokesman for our programs. I don’t know if you
concur with this conclusion or not, but if you do I think it would be
helpful in gaining greater public understanding of and support for our
goals. I don’t in any way wish to de-emphasize my role with Congress
or my advisory role with you, but I believe my public education role
has suffered somewhat.
The Mood of the Country
I would like to mention just one thing about the so-called “con-
servative” trend in the country that everyone is talking about. If you
ask people whether they are conservative or liberal, there is no question
but that more will identify themselves as conservatives than would
have been the case several years ago. But if you ask people whether
government should help provide more and better housing, education,
health care, environmental protection and the rest, a very high per-
centage of the population still strongly supports government activity of
that kind.
There is obviously great public concern about inflation and the
management of government. I don’t consider trying to deal with infla-
tion or trying to improve the management of government to be illiberal
orado, Montana, Washington, Idaho, and Nevada.

76.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, April 21, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #55
1. Opinion
A Contractual or Flexible Foreign Policy?
One thought has been gnawing at me recently that might be worth
a minute or two of your reflection. As I think about our foreign policy, I
am struck by the degree to which it can be rightly called a “contractual”
foreign policy: i.e., the major thrust of it is on negotiating agreements or
devising formulas. It is reminiscent of legal negotiations and it does not
adequately take into account the need to manipulate and influence po-
litical processes.
We have thus put a lot of effort into negotiating new proliferation
restraints, in negotiating new agreements with the Soviets, in negotiat-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ing new verbal formulas for dealing with the Middle Eastern problem,
in negotiating and then ratifying the Panama Canal Treaties, etc., etc.
Yet foreign policy, though involving the foregoing, also involves
the need to influence attitudes and to shape political events. This re-
quires a combination of additional steps, none of which we have yet
truly employed. In some cases, what is needed is a demonstration of
force, to establish credibility and determination and even to infuse
fear; in some cases it requires saying publicly one thing and quietly ne-
gotiating something else; in many cases what is needed is prolonged
and sustained exchange of political views, so that even our enemies
share or at least understand our perspectives. Often it does not require
solving problems but striking the right posture and sometimes letting
problems fester until they are ripe for action.
Examples of the foregoing would include quiet efforts to manipu-
late African leaders to obtain desired results; a willingness to back some
friendly country very strongly, so that it in turn is prepared to use its
force on our behalf (for example, I think there is a good chance that by
tangibly backing Morocco with arms we could get Hassan to use his
troops for us the way Castro is using his on behalf of the Soviets); read-
iness to use black propaganda to stimulate difficulties for our opponents,
for example by encouraging national sentiments among the non-
Russian Soviet peoples or by using deception to divide the Soviets and
Cubans on African policy.
I will be developing some ideas for you regarding the above, but
at this stage I simply wanted to register with you a basic point: namely,
that our foreign policy has to operate on many levels and use many
tools. The world is just too complicated and turbulent to be handled ef-
fectively by negotiating “contracts” while neglecting the need also to
manipulate, to influence and to compel.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Asian Neglect
I have received recently a letter from a colleague who summarized
for me some criticisms of our Asian policy, which are shared by a
number of Asian specialists.
In summary form, his key points are these:
—Pacific Asia has been accorded too low priority.
—The Korean troop withdrawal has been unsettling; the timing
was precipitate.
—Our naval posture is inadequate to deal with the growing Soviet
presence.
—U.S. weakness vis-a-vis Moscow justifiably causes China to view
us as a less attractive partner.
—We have not pursued our bilateral relations with China with
sufficient vigor.
—Our emphasis on normalizing relations with Vietnam makes
little sense, compared to the need to strengthen our ties with ASEAN
countries.
—Our human rights policy has been poorly implemented, particu-
larly its emphasis on punitive measures against the violators rather
than providing incentives to those with improving records.
—We have failed to use the China card against the Soviets.
—Our weakened relations with Japan concern the entire region.
—In the absence of confidence in U.S. policy in Asia, normalization
becomes more difficult, for our assurances to Taiwan of our continued
commitment to its tranquility become less credible.
We will be correcting some of these shortcomings shortly: the
meeting with Fukuda and the Economic Summit9 ought to improve the
economic relationship with Japan and infuse new political vitality into
the Alliance; the adjustment of combat troop withdrawals from Korea
should be welcomed by the Koreans; the Vice President’s trip to the
ASEAN countries10 will properly place higher emphasis on collabora-
tion with our friends than on our earlier (and in my judgment prema-
ture) efforts to normalize relations with Vietnam; we hope to activate
publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XIV, Korea; Japan. The next economic
summit was scheduled to take place in Bonn July 16–17. For the minutes of the meetings,
For the President’s remarks at the conclusion of the summit, see Document 92.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
step by step our relationship with China. In your comments to the press
you might consider placing more emphasis on Japan, Korea, and China
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
77.
Address by Secretary of State Vance
Cincinnati, Ohio, May 1, 1978
Foreign Assistance and U.S. Policy
Today I want to discuss with you a subject about which I care
deeply because of its importance to our nation. I speak of foreign
assistance.
Over the years the League of Women Voters has endeavored to ex-
plain and support our foreign assistance programs. You have done this
as an essential part of your nonpartisan program of public education.
Your interest in and knowledge of foreign assistance has been a key ele-
ment in making people aware of what their government is trying to
achieve with these programs.
The United States has a profound stake in its relationships with the
nations and peoples in developing countries. Our response to their
problems, needs, and aspirations tests not only the quality of our lead-
ership in the world but our commitment to economic and social justice.
Let me begin our discussion by posing three questions. First, why
do we have foreign aid programs? Second, what are these programs de-
signed to accomplish? Third, do they work?
During the past 15 months as the Carter Administration fashioned
aid budgets, reorganized aid programs, and discussed aid issues with
Congress, we have thought with great care about these three questions.
Today, in discussing our conclusions, I want to return to the basic ele-
ments of our aid programs.
Why Foreign Aid
Our foreign policy flows from what we are as a people—our his-
tory, our culture, our values, and our beliefs. One reason this nation has
a foreign aid program is that we believe we have a humanitarian and
dress before the national convention of the League of Women Voters. The text of the
question-and-answer session following his address is ibid., pp. 17–19.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
moral obligation to help alleviate poverty and promote more equitable
economic growth in the developing world.
We cannot be indifferent when half a billion people are hungry
and malnourished, when 700 million adults are illiterate, and when one
and a half billion people do not have minimal health care. As free
people who have achieved one of the highest standards of living in the
world, we cannot fail to respond to such staggering statistics and the in-
dividual lives they encompass. We can be proud that we are a people
who believe in the development of human potential.
The answer to the question of why we have foreign aid programs
also goes beyond our system of values and our concern for the less for-
tunate. Foreign aid is clearly in our national economic and political
interest.
The success or failure of developing countries to grow more food,
develop new energy supplies, sell their raw materials and products,
curb their birthrates, and defend themselves against aggression will
matter to Americans.
Our economic health and our security are more closely tied today
than ever before to the economic well-being and security of the devel-
oping world. Progress there means more jobs and more prosperity for
the United States.
• The non-oil-producing developing countries are a major market
for American goods, taking a quarter of our total exports last year.
About the same share of our total exports goes to Europe and the Com-
munist countries combined.
• Products from less developed countries—including raw mate-
rials such as tin, copper, bauxite, and lead—accounted for nearly a
quarter of our total imports last year.
• Our nation gained more than $7 billion from our direct private
investment in the developing world in 1975. And in 1976 developing
countries absorbed nearly $11 billion of our direct foreign investment.
• In the export of our agricultural abundance last year, developing
countries purchased half of our exports of cotton, 65% of our wheat,
and nearly 70% of our rice.
• Our economy benefits substantially as aid dollars are spent here
to buy commodities and services. For example, for every dollar we
have paid into such organizations as the World Bank and the regional
development banks for Latin America, Asia, and Africa, about $2 has
been spent in the U.S. economy.
The economic growth of the developing world is taking place pri-
marily as a result of massive efforts by the leaders and peoples of the
developing nations. For many, the most critical international factors in
their growth and development are our policies toward trade, invest-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ment, commodities, and technology. Our economic aid, as well as that
provided by other developed nations, also makes a crucial contribution
to their well-being. For some countries—particularly the low-income
nations—it is the principal source of foreign exchange and technical
assistance. But for many others, it serves as an essential complement to
other components of their development strategy.
In addition to America’s economic involvement in the developing
world, our political interests are strongly engaged as well. Developing
countries are often key participants in the quest for peace. Regional sta-
bility and peace in the Middle East, southern Africa, and elsewhere
cannot be achieved without the cooperation of developing nations.
Achieving progress on the global issues which directly affect peace—
arms restraint and nonproliferation—depends in large measure on
strengthening political ties between the industrialized and developing
worlds.
Our ties to developing countries are essential in many other areas
which affect our national security: in deploying our armed forces and
in maintaining access to straits, ports, and aviation facilities.
But the peace and stability we seek in the world cannot be obtained
solely through the maintenance of a strong defense in concert with
others. The social unrest which breeds conflict can best be prevented if
economic growth and an equitable distribution of resources are real-
ized. As Pope John XXIII so eloquently stated: “In a world of constant
want there is no peace. . . .”
Foreign Assistance Programs
In view of the stakes involved, our foreign aid goals must be
matched by our performance. The Carter Administration is asking the
Congress to authorize and appropriate $8. billion for our economic,
food, security assistance programs, and contributions to the interna-
tional financial institutions this fiscal year. About 16% of this sum rep-
resents government guarantees and will not result in actual spending.
We are requesting these sums because we believe that foreign aid can
and does work. We believe it can have a direct impact on economic
growth and the maintenance of peace.
Let me give you a summary of what we are trying to do.
First, in the area of bilateral economic assistance, we are trying to
determine the most effective way to channel this aid to stimulate eco-
nomic growth and alleviate poverty. In doing so we are implementing
a strategy which targets our resources directly on the needs of the poor.
Called the “basic human needs” approach, this development strategy
seeks to help people meet such basic needs as nutrition, shelter, educa-
tion, and health care. It is not an international welfare program. It is, in-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
stead, an approach to development which gives the poor a chance to
improve their standard of living by their own efforts.
• Farmers need good quality seed if they are going to escape sub-
sistence agriculture and grow enough food for their families and to sell
at the market as well. Our aid program in Tanzania, for instance, is
helping that government establish a seed multiplication project to pro-
vide improved seed for the main crops grown there. The impact on the
lives of Tanzanian farmers should be large.
• In vast sections of West Africa, people cannot live in potentially
fertile agricultural areas because of a terrible disease—river blindness.
We are helping to finance efforts to suppress this affliction. Some
success has been achieved. Small farmers are already beginning to re-
settle in areas which had been virtually abandoned.
• Education is critical to human development. In numerous poor
countries, our aid goes to training people in rural and urban areas in
basic skills which permit them to earn a better living. Education takes
place in many ways besides the schoolroom. It can be carried by low
powered local radio programs, such as one we fund in Guatemala, or
by direct broadcast satellite TV, as in an experiment we assisted in
India.
Second, the programs of the World Bank and the regional develop-
ment banks through which we channel a significant amount of our for-
eign aid range from large, capital intensive programs, such as dams
and roads, to smaller scale programs designed to directly improve the
lives of the poor. These institutions can mobilize and coordinate large
amounts of capital for development. And they can build consensus be-
tween aid donors and recipients on development goals. In performing
these roles, they well serve U.S. interests. The work of these institutions
is varied.
• In Buenaventura, Colombia—one of the poorest cities in the
hemisphere—the Inter-American Development Bank is trying to relo-
cate slum dwellers and provide the city with safe drinking water to re-
duce disease.
• In the West African country of Benin, the African Development
Fund is improving rural health services by constructing dispensaries in
remote areas and training people to run them.
• In Burma, an Asian Development Bank loan will increase fish
production for domestic consumption, thus raising the low protein in-
take of the population.
Third, we support the development programs of the United Na-
tions, which finance technical assistance to poor countries and provide
direct humanitarian assistance to children, refugees, and other groups
in need of particular relief.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
• In India, the U.N. Children’s Fund is working to restore and im-
prove potable water resources in the areas hardest hit by the November
1977 cyclone and tidal wave.
• In Central America, experts from the U.N. Development Pro-
gram are working in four countries to develop energy from under-
ground volcanic steam.
I could go on and on, citing projects in various countries aimed at
specific problems and particular groups. The point is that when we are
discussing aid levels, we must remember we are not talking about ab-
stract statistics: we are talking about whether or not we can fund prac-
tical projects that make a difference to people in need.
There is another important aspect of our foreign aid program
which I would like to mention very briefly—our security assistance
programs.
These programs have three important objectives. First, they are de-
signed to assist our friends and allies to provide for their legitimate de-
fense needs. Second, these programs support our strategic and political
objectives of reducing tensions and promoting stability in areas of po-
tential confrontation and conflict. Third, they provide economic assist-
ance to countries which are experiencing political and economic
stresses and where U.S. security interests are involved. The vast ma-
jority of our security assistance aid goes to support our peace efforts in
the Middle East and in southern Africa. In providing assistance to such
nations, we help them meet the economic strains imposed by tensions
in their regions.
Does Foreign Aid Work?
Do all these programs work?
There is a popular myth that foreign assistance often does not pro-
duce results. The record shows otherwise.
It is impossible to separate foreign assistance from other factors
that produce development. But foreign assistance has been central in
some measure to the following achievements.
• Between 1950 and 1975 the developing countries grew more rap-
idly than either they or the developed countries had grown in any time
period in the past.
• Substantial increases in life expectancy are taking place in many
developing countries.
• The number of children in primary schools in the developing
world has trebled since 1950, and the number of secondary students
has increased sixfold during the same period.
• The battle against communicable disease has produced signifi-
cant results. Smallpox is now confined to a small area of Africa, and the

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
numbers of people suffering from Malaria has been reduced by 80–90%
in the past three decades.
• The yields of rice and wheat in Asia are estimated to be substan-
tially higher today because of the introduction of high-yielding vari-
eties. More than a billion dollars worth of grain each year is ascribed to
the new seed.
Beyond these successes, the record reveals countless instances in
which projects funded by foreign assistance have improved the lives of
people in fundamental ways.
• When a village has clean water, its children are no longer made
sick from the water they drink.
• When couples have access to family planning services, there are
fewer mouths to feed.
• When a clinic is constructed, modern medicine enters lives for
the first time.
• And when a job program begins, the unemployed can find work
and have incomes.
Progress has been made. But more has to be done. Over the last 15
months the Carter Administration has made a substantial effort to fur-
ther improve the management and effectiveness of all of our programs.
Let me report to you on some of the steps we have already taken or
will soon implement to achieve this objective.
One of the key problems with foreign assistance over the years has
been a lack of adequate coordination between our bilateral programs
and our activities in the international financial institutions. Responsi-
bility for these various programs is spread throughout several Cabinet
Departments and agencies.
Shortly before his death, Senator Hubert Humphrey introduced
legislation which called for a sweeping reorganization of the gov-
ernment’s foreign aid programs designed to meet these defects in coor-
dination, The Carter Administration announced its support of the basic
purposes of this bill. Although the Congress will probably not consider
this legislation in the current session, the Administration is moving to
put into place a new interagency coordinating mechanism which we
believe will go a long way toward having the executive branch better
coordinate its diverse development efforts.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The Agency for International Development has been reorganized
under the leadership of Governor John Gilligan. More authority is
being delegated to our AID missions abroad. Tighter controls are now
imposed on financial and operational procedures. In addition, AID has
eliminated some complex and cumbersome procedures which have
slowed our ability to design and implement projects.
The United States has encouraged the multilateral banks to better
take into account the lessons of the past—both successes and failures.
The Administration has also shared congressional concerns about high
salary levels of bank employees. We want the banks to look especially
hard at more effective ways to reach poor people directly, as well as to
operate in the most cost effective ways.
In our security programs we have tightened management controls
and have instituted an interagency committee to provide coordinated
recommendations to me and the President on all aspects of our arms
transfer and security assistance programs.
Finally, because we recognize that science and technology offer
many opportunities for expanding the development process, President
Carter has proposed the creation of a new U.S. foundation on techno-
logical collaboration. This foundation will support the application of
our research to development problems. And it will improve the access
of the developing countries to American science and technology.
We will continue to seek ways to improve the management and
delivery of our foreign assistance programs. Accountability to the
Congress and to the public is an essential element of our approach.
Other Key Issues
There are several other important questions relating to our foreign
assistance programs which I would like to discuss.
First, there is a growing belief that we are both giving more aid and
at the same time losing control over where it goes. Let me put this issue
in perspective.
Clearly, we are not shouldering a disproportionate burden of
global aid flows. While in absolute terms the U.S. aid program is larger
than that of any other nation, as a percentage of GNP we rank in the
bottom 25% of all non-Communist country donors.
Concerning control, we are very active in attempting to steer mul-
tilateral assistance in directions we think best for our nation and for
global development. We have often been successful in encouraging the

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
types of projects consistent with our desired policies. We will be
working closely with Congress to develop procedures which permit
the United States to express its views about multilateral lending pol-
icies as effectively as possible. But in doing so, we must recognize the
damage that would be done if the international character of these insti-
tutions were lost.
Second, our foreign assistance programs must be consistent with
our determination to improve the conditions of political, economic, and
civil rights worldwide. Over the past year we have reviewed all of our
aid programs for their impact on human rights. In some cases we have
reduced assistance to governments with consistent records of repres-
sion. We have also increased aid to others with good or improving
human rights policies.
We face a dilemma when applying human rights considerations to
foreign assistance. We do not want to support governments which con-
sistently violate human rights. On the other hand, we do not wish to
deny our assistance to poor people who happen to live under repres-
sive regimes. We must resolve this dilemma on a case-by-case basis. In
general, we have approved aid programs when they would directly
benefit the poor since we recognize that people have economic as well
as political rights.
Third, there is the question of which countries should receive our
aid. The President has decided that our concessional assistance pro-
grams should focus primarily but not exclusively on the poorest coun-
tries. In the more advanced developing countries we do not want to
substitute our own support for the assistance those governments
should be giving. On the other hand, we cannot be indifferent to the
plight of people who are no less poor because they live in middle in-
come countries and who need our help. We are resolving this problem
by insisting that our efforts to mount programs in middle income de-
veloping nations be matched by efforts of the host country.
Fourth, it is sometimes argued that we cannot afford to spend large
amounts of money to help solve problems abroad when we have many
pressing domestic needs. But I firmly believe that it would be a serious
mistake to try to trade off international obligations for domestic prior-
ities. Both need to be addressed.
The health of our nation is increasingly dependent on the world
economy. If we neglect international progress, we undermine the wel-
fare of our own society. As a nation we have a major concern with im-
proving the lives of poor people. I do not believe this is a credible com-
mitment if made only domestically. And as a percentage of the Federal
curity assistance programs does not increase this figure substantially.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We can afford to increase foreign aid expenditures at a reasonable
rate, as we must. At the same time, we can afford to increase our do-
mestic education budget, expand programs for the elderly, and fund
other critical domestic programs as we are now doing. Helping the chil-
dren of Pakistan have adequate diets does not mean that we need ne-
glect the children of Cincinnati, Boston, or Los Angeles. Helping the
farmers of Mali grow more food does not mean we need to abandon the
farmers of Texas, Illinois, or Colorado. And helping the nations of the
Middle East remain at peace does not mean that we cannot help meet
the needs of our cities. We do not have a choice. Both foreign aid and
adequate domestic expenditures are essential to the national interest.
Senator Humphrey raised a fundamental issue about foreign aid.
He said: “The question we must decide is whether or not the conditions
of social and economic injustice—poverty, illiteracy, and disease—are a
real threat to our security. I think they are and they require the same
commitment of policy, will, and resources as does our conventional na-
tional defense.”
As someone charged with helping to protect the national security,
I agree with Senator Humphrey’s assessment of the role of foreign aid
in the scheme of our national priorities. I agree with his approach to the
tasks of alleviating poverty and working for peace.
He believed in harnessing the energy and creativity of the Amer-
ican people to solve problems which have plagued the world for cen-
turies. I share his faith in our abilities. I share his optimism that we can
do the job.
I ask that you help us inform the American people why foreign aid
is essential to the nation’s economic health, political interests, and pres-
ervation of its humanitarian tradition.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978

78.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Cabinet

79.
Editorial Note
On May 5, 1978, President Jimmy Carter delivered remarks at a
town hall meeting at the Convention Center in Spokane, Washington.
California, Washington, and Oregon. After an introduction by Repre-
sentative Thomas Foley (D-Washington) and Senator Warren Mag-
nuson (D-Washington), the President discussed several domestic
issues, including inflation and the administration’s energy program,
conceding that there were “no easy answers” to these problems facing
the United States. Foreign policy, he continued, failed to yield easy an-
swers as well:
“I know that in the past we’ve made some very serious mistakes.
The Vietnam war, Watergate, the CIA revelations have kind of torn the
fabric of our society, because the American people were not involved in
making those decisions. We were faced with mistakes for the first time
after they were revealed to us. And we create, sometimes, in the minds

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
of American people, an image that we don’t know exactly what we
want to do.
“I don’t claim to know everything about what we want to do. But
we try to bring the debate out into the open and let various voices be
heard, so that when I do make a final decision about SALT talks or non-
proliferation, or the use of solar power, or the control of the waste of en-
ergy, or farm agriculture policy, or urban policy, I will have listened to
hundreds, even thousands of voices of Americans who know better an-
swers than I do about a specific subject and who care deeply about our
country.
“So, to me it’s important that we do have some confusion, that we
do have an open debate, that we do have disputes on occasion and even
outright criticisms. I think that’s good in a strong, democratic society. I
don’t fear it. I also don’t fear addressing some very difficult questions
that have been ignored too long and have now become crises in our
Nation.”
During the subsequent question-and-answer portion of the event,
an audience member asked the President if he viewed Soviet and
Cuban intervention in Africa as a “test” of U.S. policy, then rephrased
the question to inquire as to the nature of U.S. policy “toward Soviet in-
tervention” in Africa and elsewhere. The President responded:
“I think we are holding our own in the so-called peaceful competi-
tion with the Soviet Union, in Africa, and in other parts of the world.
Again, I hate to refer repeatedly to what existed in the past, but I think
it’s accurate to say that never before in the history of our Nation have
we shown any substantial interest in the continent of Africa.
“Just a few weeks ago, I visited Nigeria, the greatest nation in Af-
rica in many ways—economically, population, vigor, influence, grow-
ing influence. There are about 100 million people who live in Nigeria.
It’s one of the present and future leaders of black Africa. I was the first
American President, by the way, in the history of our country who had
ever made an official visit to a black African nation.
“Two or three years ago when Secretary Kissinger wanted to go
and visit Nigeria, the country would not even let him enter that
country. But I was received with open arms in a tremendous out-
pouring of friendship and realization of mutual purpose.
“We are trying to do the same thing in other parts of Africa, partic-
ularly where the black nations exist. We’ve got a good advantage in
having a man like Andrew Young head our United Nations delegation.
He’s trusted by black people, not only in Africa but in the Caribbean
area, in Latin America, and around the world—also in this country, of
course. But just the fact that I appointed him to be our U.N. Ambas-
sador is a demonstration to those people in tangible terms that we care
about them for the first time in 200 years.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“Now, the Soviets are obviously trying to use their influence in Af-
rica and other parts of the world. In many instances when they have
come into a nation that has a changing government, their major input
has been weapons, and they are much more easy to buy weapons from
than we are. They will supply excessive weapons to countries like So-
malia and Ethiopia, in the Horn of Africa, resulting in this instance by
an attack on Ethiopia on Somalia with Soviet weapons. Both countries
got them from the Soviet Union.
“The Soviets have gone into Ethiopia, using Cuban troops to fight
against Somalia. I deplore this very much. In the strongest possible
terms we have let the Soviets and Cubans know that this is a danger to
American-Soviet friendship and to the nurturing and enhancement of
the principle of de´tente.
“The Soviets know very clearly how deeply I feel about this. I’ve
communicated directly with Brezhnev through private, sealed mes-
sages. And Cy Vance just came back from Moscow recently, having re-
peated to the Soviets, ‘Be careful how you use your military strength in
Africa if you want to be a friend of the United States and maintain
peace throughout the world.’
“So, I think that they are mistaken. There’s a strong sense of na-
tionalism in Africa. Once the Soviets are there to help with military
weapons when a new government is formed, then the people of that
country almost invariably want the Soviets to get out and let them run
their own affairs.
“I think there’s an innate racism that exists toward black people
within the Soviet Union, as compared to us. We know how to live with
white and black people together. We respect each other. We’ve learned
this the hard way. But there’s a great deal of appreciation in Africa for
this attitude on the part of the United States, as contrasted with the So-
viet Union. And there’s another very major factor that I mentioned yes-
terday morning in Denver at the Governor’s Prayer Breakfast, and that
is that there’s a strong sense of religious commitment throughout black
Africa and indeed the northern part of Africa as well, Egypt and the
others. They may be Arabs, they may be Moslems, they may be Chris-
tians or others, but they worship God.
“And this is a sense or a mechanism of a feeling of brotherhood
and sisterhood that binds us together very strongly. They recognize
that the Soviet Union is a Communist and an atheistic nation, and it’s a
very present concern in the minds and hearts of Africans who, on a
temporary basis, will turn to the Soviets to buy weapons because we
won’t sell the weapons to them.
“We come in later with economic aid, with trade, with friendship,
with the commitment to democracy and freedom, to human rights, and
I believe in the long run our system will prevail. We could compete

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
more directly and effectively with the Soviets on a temporary basis by
trying to sell our weapons to every country that calls for them. I don’t
think that’s the right approach.
“I’d rather depend on the basic commitment of American people
to human rights, to religious commitment and freedom, and to a sense
of equality with those people who might be brown or yellow or black,
than to depend on the Soviets trying to buy friendship through the sale
of weapons designed to kill.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, pages

80.
Memorandum From the President’s Chief Speechwriter
(Fallows) to President Carter
Washington, May 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Naval Academy Speech
I understand from Fran2 that you have agreed to speak at the
Naval Academy on June 7. So that we can begin our consultations and
research as soon as possible, it would help me to know whether you
have any subject in mind.
Jody has mentioned one theme that sounds promising to me—a
discussion of the role of the military now, after the time when they took
so much abuse, and were so wounded in spirit, during Vietnam. Not
only would that theme be appropriate for the audience, but also it
could enable you to sound firm as at Wake Forest, when discussing the
relevance of the military ideal in this generation. It would also allow
you to deal with such basic policy issues as military preparedness, vet-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
erans policy, pensions, the volunteer army, military challenges of the
next decade, and even SALT.
What is your advice?4

81.
Editorial Note
On May 28, 1978, reporters Bob Abernethy and Bill Monroe of
NBC News, Elizabeth Drew of The New Yorker and Carl T. Rowan of
Field Syndicate interviewed President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski on the NBC television and radio public af-
fairs program “Meet the Press.” Responding to a question as to the via-
bility of de´tente in light of recent Soviet actions and U.S. criticisms
thereof, Brzezinski asserted:
“As far as de´tente is concerned, I think it is terribly important for
all of us to understand what it is and what it is not. There is a tendency
to assume that de´tente is the equivalent of a comprehensive, indeed,
total accommodation between the United States and the Soviet Union.
That has never been the case.
“De´tente really is a process of trying to contain some of the com-
petitive aspects in the relationship, competitive aspects which I believe
still are predominant, and to widen the cooperative aspects. In that
process at one time or another either the cooperative or the competitive
aspects tend to be more predominant.
“I would say today the competitive aspects have somewhat sur-
faced and I would say categorically that this is due to the shortsighted
Soviet conduct in the course of the last 2 or so years.”
Referring to Brzezinski’s use of the word “shortsighted,” one of
the reporters asked Brzezinski if he had any reason to believe that So-
viet conduct “would cease” to be shortsighted. Brzezinski responded:
“I think that if the Soviet Union realizes that there are genuine re-
wards in accommodation and genuine costs in unilateral exploitation
of the world’s troubles, then the cooperative aspects will expand.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
“I am troubled by the fact that the Soviet Union has been engaged
in a sustained and massive effort to build up its conventional forces,
particularly in Europe, to strengthen the concentration of its forces on
the frontiers of China, to maintain a vitriolic worldwide propaganda
campaign against the United States, to encircle and penetrate the
Middle East, to stir up racial difficulties in Africa, and to make more
difficult a moderate solution of these difficulties, perhaps now to seek
more direct access to the Indian Ocean.
“This pattern of behavior I do not believe is compatible with what
was once called the code of de´tente, and my hope is, through patient
negotiations with us, but also through demonstrated resolve on our
part, we can induce the Soviet leaders to conclude that the benefits of
accommodation are greater than the shortsighted attempt to exploit
global difficulties.”
Following several questions related to Africa and Brzezinski’s trip
to China (see footnote 21, Document 62), the interview returned to the
topic of the Soviet Union. Referencing the list of Soviet actions Brzezin-
ski had described, one of the journalists then asked Brzezinski if he
would be in favor of linking U.S. trade and technology transfers to So-
viet behavior. Brzezinski commented:
“First of all, I don’t think it was a string of horrible things. It was a
list of actions undertaken apparently in a combative or competitive
spirit in order to gain political advantage in relationship to us. This is
the kind of conduct we wish to transform, to moderate.
“Our response to it does operate on many levels. On the one hand
we try to negotiate with the Soviets where it is mutually useful to nego-
tiate—for example, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. On the other
hand, we are trying to strengthen ourselves where it is necessary, and
we have done a great deal, for example, in regard to NATO.
“Beyond that we are trying to develop stronger relationships with
various regional powers which do feel threatened by the Soviet Union
and which, if encouraged and supported, can themselves help to pro-
vide overall global stability. Last but not least, we are enhancing our
own long-term relationship with the People’s Republic of China as a
contribution to global stability.
“I don’t believe we are wringing our hands. I think we are trying to
respond responsibly to a complicated and difficult challenge.” (Depart-
In his memoirs, Brzezinski noted that President Jimmy Carter ex-
pressed concern over his appearance on “Meet the Press.” On the
morning of May 29, the President informed Brzezinski that he “went
too far” in placing blame on the Soviet Union. Brzezinski recounted:
“He went on to say that my comments might even threaten de´tente
and he was wondering whether he shouldn’t write a letter to Brezhnev

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
to reiterate his commitment to SALT. I told the President that ‘it’s really
important that we discuss this fully, because this raises a question of
fundamental judgment. In my view, the West confronts a basic danger,
and how we respond may be decisive to the future of this country.’ I
added that I was distressed if my statements went further than he felt
they should, and I asked him to review the transcript of what I said and
not just rely on the Washington Post reporting of it.” (Power and Prin-
ciple, pages 220–221)
Summarizing his view of Brzezinski’s “Meet the Press” interview
in his diary entry for May 29, the President wrote:
“On Meet the Press, Zbig was very abusive against the Soviets—ex-
cessively so—and I chastised him about it. He was quite upset. I don’t
want to create sympathy for the Soviets among the European allies, or
to drive them away from continued negotiations with us on SALT and
the comprehensive test ban. The saving grace about it is that Zbig’s
always had a reputation of being anti-Soviet. I told him our relation-
ships with the Soviet Union were much more important than those
with China as far as the safety of our country is concerned—the preven-
tion of war—at least for the rest of this century.” (White House Diary,
page 197)

82.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter
Washington, May 29, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
I would like to put before you some reflections on the current and
future state of our relations with the Soviet Union, and some sugges-
tions on how these relations might best be managed in the coming
months. The matter is urgent, because I believe we face the prospect of
a serious deterioration of these relations in coming months.
It is extremely important, I believe, that we work through a clear
set of guidelines on this issue that can be used to instruct all levels of
the government and to provide a basis for explaining our policies to the
American people. For our public, our allies, and the Third World, it is
important to dispel any impression of uncertainty or unresolved con-
ceptual differences.
My thoughts on the subject follow:
I. BACKGROUND
US Opinion
An intense mood of exasperation and hostility toward the Soviet
Union is rapidly building up in this country. In part, the mood draws
its intensity from a reaction to the complexity and difficulty of many
problems in international affairs and from the aftermath of Vietnam.
But there are also elements more directly related to the Soviet situation:
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—Frustration over recent developments in Africa and Afghani-
stan, made more difficult by a high level of Soviet and Cuban involve-
ment, and compounded by what is seen as our inability to respond ef-
fectively to these developments in the short run.
—Concern over the widespread impression that the United States
appears to have become militarily weaker and less resolute, and that
the Soviet Union is or may become stronger than the United States.
—Understandable anger at Soviet actions in the human rights
area, including the harsh treatment of Orlov and others.
Soviet Views
On the Soviet side, there also appears to be building up a mood of
greater harshness and frustration. We must contend with a Soviet per-
spective, which, however much we would challenge its validity, con-
tains the following elements:
—The Soviets regard their moves in Africa as falling within the
bounds of acceptable competition for influence;
—They regard our interest in the dissidents as a sign of our desire
to overthrow their system;
—They feel frustrated and upset that they have been excluded
from effective action in the Middle East;
—They react sharply to disparagements from our side;
—Overall, they see our actions as unpredictable, and they have be-
come uncertain whether we now want a SALT treaty.
If this Soviet mood, which feeds upon as well as feeds the Amer-
ican mood, is translated into new Soviet hard-line actions, it could
mean still greater military expenditures (which we should and will
match); concerns among our allies upon which the Soviets will play;
greater mischief-making in Africa; an active rejectionist strategy in the
Middle East; and new Soviet pressures on Eastern Europe. The pros-
pect of a summit this fall could obviously be clouded.
The US-Soviet relationship has special importance now because
there will probably be leadership changes in the Soviet Union in the
near future, and the cast of our relationship at that time may set the
tone and direction of our relationship for a long time to come.
In addition to the foreign policy developments that could be antici-
pated from a severe deterioration in US-Soviet relations, I am con-
cerned about the effect on our domestic political situation. While there
may well be short-term favorable response, at least from some quarters,
I believe the dominant response, especially over a longer period, would
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
be strongly negative. The applause would come from sectors of Amer-
ican political life who are not likely to be numbered among your sup-
porters, whereas the prevailing sentiment among your natural constit-
uency would surely be a negative reaction to the intensified arms race,
the renewal of Cold War tensions, and the consequent weakening of
domestic programs. The heightening of militancy, the polarization of
political positions, and the destructive emotional tensions that would
be generated would make it more difficult to realize the objectives to
which you have dedicated your Administration.
II. POLICY
To put our relations on a more stable footing, while advancing our
interests and clarifying our public stance, we need to take steps to in-
sure that we have a coherent approach in three general areas: our direct
relations with the Soviets; our competition (as well as cooperation) in
third areas; and our public position.
A. Direct Relations
The essential issue here is the military balance. The fact is that the
Soviet Union has greatly increased its defense expenditures in the past
fifteen years while ours have declined in real terms since the Vietnam
War years. It is also true that the Soviets have now reached a state of
broad equivalence with us, certainly in terms of military strength and,
to a lesser extent, in terms of military reach. The question is whether
they will seek to go beyond parity to dominance in some areas.
Our response, as put in Harold Brown’s excellent posture state-
ment, is the right one: a prudent increase in our defense spending,
keyed to NATO and mobile forces while maintaining our strength in
the Pacific. Continued efforts to strengthen NATO and other alliance
relationships are also crucial.
Stabilizing the arms competition between ourselves and the So-
viets is the other essential element of maintaining the military balance.
A major priority in the Soviet-American relationship is therefore the
negotiation of a SALT treaty. Despite all that is said about the difficulty
of getting the treaty ratified, I believe that when it is signed and pre-
sented to the Congress, major sources of support will emerge as you
and the entire Administration make a major effort to carry the case to
the American people. Ultimately, with proper preparation, I believe
this issue can be made a political advantage instead of the liability it is
now wrongly thought to be.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Furthermore, the timely conclusion of a SALT treaty will have a
useful effect on our management of the relationship with the Soviet
Union. The ratification process in the United States will provide an in-
centive for responsible Soviet behavior that does not now exist.
Another aspect of our direct relations—human rights—deserves
review.
The Soviets seem to be engaged in a draconian effort to reduce the
dissident movement by trials, harsh sentences, additional arrests and
detentions, and a severance of contacts between dissidents and
Western newsmen. It seems probable that the Orlov trial will be fol-
lowed in June by the trials of Ginsburg and Shcharanskiy. It now ap-
pears that after some indecision the Soviet authorities concluded,
mid-point in the Belgrade Conference, that they would no longer seek
to conciliate Western pressures on the human rights issue, and would
try to reduce their vulnerability on these issues by rigorous police
measures.
The one favorable development in this area is that the level of
Jewish emigration has continued to increase in recent months.
I believe it would be useful for us now to study the experience of
the past 16 months in order to refine the forms and intensity of pressure
that seem to be most productive, as well as the most effective combina-
tion of governmental and private forms of pressure. We need to form a
judgment on how best to use our influence to give some measure of
protection to prominent dissidents, and to encourage longer-term
movement toward greater constraints on the Soviet political police.
From our experience thus far, it seems clear that public attention can af-
ford only a measure of protection to prominent dissidents. There is a
critical point beyond which the effect of public pressure has been to
stiffen Soviet determination not to capitulate, and to encourage harsher
measures.
Our ability to influence Soviet behavior on this and other issues
would be stronger if there were the prospect of improved trade rela-
tions, which now appear remote.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
An additional issue that deserves further study is the US-Soviet-
Chinese triangle. I believe that this is a factor of which we must be con-
tinually aware as we shape our relations with each. Clearly Chinese at-
titudes toward us are heavily influenced by our policies towards the
Soviets. Zbig’s trip was useful in indicating to the Chinese our
firmness. It is less clear to me that “playing the China card” has much
effect on Moscow’s actions.
B. Competition and Cooperation in Third Areas
Increasingly, we are faced with two differing views of the US-
Soviet relationship; although so far we have managed to combine the
two in our public statements, it is becoming more difficult to do. We
have always recognized that the relationship between the US and the
Soviet Union has been a combination of cooperation and competition,
with the competition not preventing either side from seeking agree-
ments in our mutual benefit in such areas as SALT. Now, however, we
are coming to the point where there is growing pressure on the part of
some people to have us portray the competitive aspects of the relation-
ship as taking clear precedence over the search for areas for coopera-
tion. This fundamental issue has begun to spill out into the public do-
main through recent statements and press interviews. It should be
resolved within the government in order to avoid presenting a picture
of division which will weaken us.
We have an interest in expanding areas of cooperation with the So-
viets, not only through direct exchanges but in diplomatic or program-
matic cooperation in their areas of the world.
But the harsh reality is that a growing Soviet military reach is being
translated into an increasingly assertive Soviet competitive drive in the
Third World, with a focus on Africa.
We cannot object to competition. It is inherent in our relationship.
To insist that detente be made perfect is to ensure that competition in
any area will prejudice the possibility of progress in other areas.
As you stated in your Chicago press conference7 and elsewhere,
we do not and should not link Soviet behavior in the Third World to
progress on issues in which we have so fundamental a security interest
as SALT. Yet Soviet behavior will of course affect the willingness of the
American people and the Congress to give approval to formal agree-
ments with the Soviets.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
While we cannot put an end to competition or to Soviet efforts to
help insure territorial integrity at the request of African governments,
we can and should make clear our opposition to military adventures
which exacerbate conflicts, inhibit peacemaking, and go beyond rea-
sonable defensive efforts. In particular, we should expose attempts to
gain political advantage through encouraging bloodshed.
It is evident that we cannot force a change in Soviet and Cuban pol-
icies in Africa. But there are many things we can do to influence their
decisions. If we are to preserve our interest in SALT and other central
aspects of the US-Soviet relationship, it is crucial that we do all we sen-
sibly can to deter and prevent further Soviet/Cuban adventures in Af-
rica and encourage their gradually scaling down their activities.
Such a strategy includes efforts designed to strengthen our friends,
limit the areas in which the Soviets and Cubans can find easy entree,
build longer-term relationships with the countries of the region. The
execution of this strategy is underway:
—We have steadily increased our public and private diplomatic
pressures directed against the Soviets and Cubans themselves, empha-
sizing our concern and interest in stability and peace in Africa.
—We have intensified our consultations with non-aligned states.
A number of these states share our views about Cuban and Soviet ac-
tions, and have urged restraint on Moscow and Havana. Our European
allies and some African and Arab moderates have made parallel diplo-
matic approaches; and Iraqi, Syrian, and Algerian pressures against the
Soviets and Cubans in Eritrea may in part have flowed from this effort.
—We have strengthened our ties with African countries over the
last year, particularly through our commitment to help resolve the
southern African disputes. This has fundamentally contributed to our
credibility throughout the continent and to limiting opportunities for
Soviets and Cubans.
—Our substantially increased economic assistance, and the mili-
tary assistance we have offered some of the more vulnerable countries
in east Africa, have provided us with strong cards in many countries.
—Our long-term plans for further increases in economic aid to the
area, greater effort to help Africans increase their trade with us, and
offers of appropriate technology in assisting African economic devel-
opment are tools we can exploit and which the Soviets cannot match.
—Above all, African nationalism itself—while not a tool we can
use directly—is the most powerful force available against extended So-
viet and Cuban influence. The inevitable role this force will play offers
us considerable grounds for optimism over the next few years, as-
suming southern Africa does not explode into a major racial war.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
An interagency study (PRM–36) is currently reviewing other
measures we might take to limit or constrain the Soviets and Cubans,
ranging from improvement of diplomatic relations with countries cur-
rently under Soviet/Cuban influence to strengthening of the military
capability of key African states.
C. Public Statements
It is essential that we project publicly a sense of confidence and
consistency as we pursue a coherent and long-term strategy towards
the Soviets.
It is damaging when our policies are characterized as either “hard”
or “soft,” or as swinging between those poles. In either case, such char-
acterizations irritate one group or another in the United States; send the
wrong signals to the Soviets and our allies; give disproportionate em-
phasis to one aspect or another of our policies, which properly contain
both “hard” and “soft” elements; and tend to encourage the damaging
and unrealistic swings of public mood from gloom to euphoria and
back again.
We should give more attention than we have to the psychological
side of our relations with the Soviet Union. We are less likely to get the
Soviets to move in directions we want by demanding that they capitu-
late to public pressure, than by leaving the way open for them to move
with pride intact, having made our wishes known in private. While we
should continue to criticize the Soviet Union in appropriate ways when
it is called for, public expressions of indignation by themselves tend to
emphasize our apparent impotence, and to inflame public and Con-
gressional sentiment in ways that are unproductive. (Witness the decla-
ration of nine Senators last week9 that they will oppose the ratification
of a SALT treaty because of Soviet actions in Africa and the Orlov trial.)
In a more positive sense, we can help encourage a more coopera-
tive attitude on the part of the Soviet leaders by conspicuous attention
to the sense of equality to which they attach so much importance. And
if they respond positively, we should refrain from crowing about any
gestures they may make.
In protesting Soviet lack of restraint, it is important for us to be
precise in our complaints rather than general, tailoring our demands
for Soviet action to the seriousness of the situations and the real degree
dertake a review of U.S. policy concerning objectives in limiting Soviet and Cuban influ-
ence in Africa.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of control and initiative exercised by Moscow. We should pick our
targets for a sharpshooter’s rifle, not a shotgun.
An improvement—both in substance and in public perceptions—
may lie in making two important distinctions. We must distinguish be-
tween what it is possible to gain in the way of altered Soviet behavior,
and what is not. And, in our public stance, we should concentrate as
much on what we are doing to compete as on Soviet behavior to which
we object.
Whenever we make public demands for actions the Soviets do not
then take, or build up their power or activities, we make ourselves look
weak.
It would be better, in international and domestic political terms, to
exhibit a great firmness, giving stronger emphasis than we are now
doing to our strength, our confidence, our actions—in the defense
budget, in Africa, in our economy, and in the reassertion of our ideals.
For in the long run, we hold most of the cards in the East-West
competition.
After there is agreement on the various elements of that strategy
towards the Soviets, I recommend that:
—I find the occasion privately to discuss with Gromyko, for an ex-
tended period of time, where we stand in our relations and what both
sides can do to prevent a serious deterioration.
—You or I give a major speech on US-Soviet relations in which you
would express the combination of the firmness, confidence, and tact
with which you seek realistically to regulate a basically competitive re-
lationship in ways that will be less dangerous for the world. It would
counteract public anxiety about a perceived decline in American
power. And it would present the case for both a strong defense es-
tablishment and our security interest in arms control. Such a speech
would provide an authoritative framework for all statements by our
spokesmen in the following months.
The thoughts that I have shared with you in this letter are the re-
sult of my belief that we have reached a critical point in our relations
with the Soviet Union and perhaps with China as well, and that it is
therefore essential to do a careful and searching analysis of our options
for dealing with these central questions of American foreign policy
over the next few years.
For that reason, I believe we should undertake a special review of
US-Soviet relations. I would personally lead the drafting and prepara-
tion of options for your ultimate decision, incorporating the views of

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Harold, Zbig, Stan, and other key officials. The importance and the
need for a systematic review of this vital issue is clear.
Once the NATO meetings12 are out of the way, I feel it would be
most helpful to have a small meeting to discuss these matters before be-
ginning a review.
Respectfully,
Cy
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The alliance born that day in April 1949 has helped preserve our
mutual security for nearly 30 years, almost a decade longer than the
time between the two great wars of this century. History records no
other alliance that has successfully brought together so many different
nations for so long without the firing of a single shot in anger.
Ours is a defensive alliance. No nation need fear aggression from
us, but neither should any nation ever doubt our will to deter and to de-
feat aggression against us. The North Atlantic Alliance is a union of
peoples moved by a desire to secure a safe future for our children in lib-
erty and freedom. Our Alliance is unique, because each of us 15 demo-
cratic nations shares a common heritage of human values, the rule of
law, and faith in the courage and spirit of free men and women.
The military strength and the common political purpose of the
North Atlantic Alliance has led us to cooperate in a thousand indi-
vidual efforts, rightly conferring upon us the name of “community.”
And it has given us the self-confidence and strength of will to seek im-
proved relations with our potential adversaries.
As an American I am proud that the commitment of the United
States to the security, independence, and prosperity of Europe is as
strong as ever. We are part of you, and you are part of us. The mutual
pledges of trust we exchanged here in 1949 still hold firm and true.
During the next 2 days we will reaffirm our commitment to the Al-
liance, to its strategy and doctrine, and to each other. We will review a
year-long effort to assess East-West relations as they exist now and as
they may develop in the future. We will review our cooperation in de-
fense procurement. And through a broad program of defense coopera-
tion, we will seek to reinforce our individual efforts to guarantee our
security against aggression for many years ahead.
We must be aware of the new challenges that we face individually
and collectively, which require new efforts of us all.
The Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact countries pose a military
threat to our Alliance which far exceeds their legitimate security needs.
For more than a decade the military power of the Soviet Union has
steadily expanded, and it has grown consistently more sophisticated.
In significant areas the military lead we once enjoyed has been reduced.
Today we can meet that military challenge, but we cannot be sure
of countering the future military threat unless our Alliance modernizes
its forces and adds additional military power. In this effort the United
States will play its part across the spectrum of conventional, theater nu-
clear, and strategic nuclear forces. I’m gratified that America’s allies are
joining with us in building up their military might.
In the past year the United States has increased substantially its
conventional combat strength in Europe and is enhancing its capability

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
for rapid deployment of additional forces to that continent. United
States theater nuclear forces are being modernized, and the United
States will maintain strategic nuclear equivalence with the Soviet
Union.
Our Alliance centers on Europe, but our vigilance cannot be lim-
ited just to that continent. In recent years expanding Soviet power has
increasingly penetrated beyond the North Atlantic area.
As I speak today, the activities of the Soviet Union and Cuba in Af-
rica are preventing individual nations from determining their own fu-
ture. As members of the world’s greatest alliance, we cannot be indif-
ferent to these events because of what they mean for Africa and because
of their effect on the long-term interests of the Alliance itself.
I welcome the efforts of individual NATO Allies to work for peace
in Africa and to support nations and people in need, most recently in
Zaire.
Our Alliance has never been an end in itself. It is a way to promote
stability and peace in Europe and, indeed, peace in the world at large.
Our strength has made possible the pursuit of de´tente and agree-
ments to limit arms, while increasing the security of the Alliance. De-
fense in Europe, East-West de´tente, and global diplomacy all go hand
in hand. Never before has a defensive alliance devoted so much effort
to negotiate limitations and reductions in armaments with its potential
adversaries. Our record has no equal in the search for effective arms
control agreements.
The United States continues to move forward in its negotiations
with the Soviet Union on a new agreement to limit and reduce strategic
nuclear weapons. Our objective is to preserve and advance the security
of all the members of our Alliance. We will continue to consult and to
work closely with our allies to ensure that arms control efforts serve
our common needs.
NATO Allies are also working for the mutual and balanced reduc-
tion of forces in Europe to provide greater security for all European
peoples at lower levels of armaments, lower tensions, and at lower
costs. The Allies have recently made a new proposal to the Warsaw
Pact, and we call upon those nations to respond in the positive spirit in
which our offer was made.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Our efforts to reduce weapons and forces in both these negotia-
tions are guided by the need for equivalence and balance in the military
capabilities of the East and West. That is the only enduring basis for
promoting security and peace.
The challenges we face as allies do not end here. Economic changes
within our countries and throughout the world have increased our de-
pendence upon one another and complicated our efforts to promote
economic and social welfare for our people.
Social changes generated partly by economic and political
progress will require creative thought and effort by each of our nations.
Our Alliance derives additional strength through our shared goals and
experiences.
Finally, we face the challenge of promoting the human values and
human rights that are the final purpose and meaning of our Alliance.
The task is not easy—the way to liberty has never been—but our na-
tions preeminently comprise the region of the world where freedom
finds its most hospitable environment.
As we seek to build de´tente, therefore, we must continue to seek
full implementation by Warsaw Pact countries as well as our own of
the Helsinki accords on security and cooperation in Europe that was
signed 3 years ago.
If we continue to build on the fundamental strength of the North
Atlantic Alliance, I am confident that we can meet any challenge in the
years ahead. In the future, as in the past, the Government and people of
the United States will remain steadfast to our commitment to peace and
freedom that all of us as allies share together.
Thank you very much.

84.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, May 31, 1978
SUBJECT
Reflections at Midweek: The US and the USSR
I believe this has been an important and potentially very con-
structive week. It has involved the conjunction of four important
developments:
1. NATO countries displayed more unity on vital matters than ex-
pected, and I have not the slightest doubt that they also gained a great
deal of personal confidence in your leadership. In fact, I think the
Summit has been an important personal success for you;2
2. For the first time, the Soviets and the Cubans are beginning to take
our concerns about their African policies seriously. Till now, they have
dismissed them; they are now beginning to show signs of genuine
concern;
3. Similarly for the first time, the Chinese are beginning to take us
seriously, and this could pay dividends in the longer run. In part, this is
due to my visit; more importantly, to your public statements and
posture;
4. The public is beginning to perceive this Administration as real-
istically prepared to face the realities of global power. I consider
Tuesday’s editorial in The Washington Post to be particularly signifi-
cant, as was Meg Greenfield’s column in Newsweek. I believe you will
be hearing significant echoes of Congressional support in the days to
come, and this will not be without its domestic political effects.
It is essential that these benefits not be dissipated but be exploited
towards positive ends. Let me specifically suggest the following:
1. That you take advantage of an early opportunity to stress that
detente has to be reciprocal and comprehensive. The issue is not detente it-
self, but the Soviet violation of the code of detente. This lesson has to be
driven home in a responsible and persistent way.
2. It is essential that we do not convey the impression of uncer-
tainty or anxiety. Premature whispers to the Russians about our desire
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
to promote friendship might be misconstrued by them as an indication
of a new zig-zag and as evidence of lack of resolve. It would be useful if
you were to indicate to State your determination that the Administra-
tion cohesively convey the same tone—a point which The Washington
Post editorial so well stressed and so much welcomed.
3. It should be made clear to the Russians that our purpose is not to
humiliate them, and that we are prepared to deal with them seriously, on
the basis of reciprocity. Accordingly, I think it would be useful if you
were to instruct Cy and me to have separate talks with Gromyko and
Dobrynin respectively, or each alone with Dobrynin—in order to
convey the same message. That message ought to be that we are still in-
terested in SALT, etc., but that we cannot sustain a selective detente
which they exploit to their own advantage in a manner inimical to our
vital interests; and that any positive gesture by them would be recipro-
cated by us. For example, tangible even if quiet steps to reduce the
Soviet/Cuban military presence in Africa (notably Ethiopia and An-
gola), and a commitment not to exacerbate the situation around
Rhodesia would be reciprocated by us. On the other hand, Soviet un-
willingness to give us these assurances will necessarily force us not
only to support our friends but also to seek friends where we can find
them (and here the China alternative is a very subtle but persuasive
argument).
4. In regard to China, we should be very careful to continue stress-
ing the proposition that our long-term interests are congruent not be-
cause of tactical anti-Sovietism, but because of our joint commitment to a
world of diversity (a point I stressed in my report to NATO). Subtle hints
of long-term congruence of interest are more likely to induce the Rus-
sians to compete for our favors.
Above all, what we now need is to demonstrate prudent resolve so
that the four gains mentioned at the outset of this memorandum are
translated into tangible benefits internationally and lasting domestic
advantages politically.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978

85.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, June 2, 1978
SUBJECT
Speech on U.S.-Soviet Relations
I believe the speech should outline certain fundamental proposi-
tions regarding the relationship—and not focus much on current policy
issues, be they SALT, human rights, or Africa. The public—and the
world—need to be reminded that what is involved is “a long haul”
policy—not a series of either quick fixes or dramatic shifts. Your state-
ment on the “fundamentals” would thus provide the framework for
your specific policies, and reassure all concerned that the United States
has a clear sense of direction.
Anything you say will be scanned most carefully for “soft” or
“hard” signals, and this makes it all the more important that the tone be
consistent with your own sense of measured determination. The press
will be only too eager to find evidence of a new turn.

86.
Letter From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter
Washington, June 2, 1978
Dear Mr. President:
As you requested, I am writing to provide material to supplement
my letter of May 29, 1978, for possible use in your Annapolis speech. In
doing so, I will try to minimize repetition of points made in the letter.
I.
The United States and the Soviet Union each face a strategic
choice—do we want to seek broadened areas of mutual interest as we
compete in other areas, or will we revert to the days of general antago-
nism? We prefer the former course. It means a safer world and a more
secure America. A relationship of this kind would include the fol-
lowing elements:
A. We would expand areas of cooperation in our mutual interest,
such as arms control agreements that enhance our security, or agree-
ments for cooperation in science and technology which promise a
better life for our people.
B. We would recognize and accept the continuation of competi-
tion, but within moderating limits. The American people should not ex-
pect, in this generation, to see an end to competition with the Soviets.
We, too, will compete ideologically, politically and economically. But
both sides should be fully aware of the dangers, to their bilateral rela-
tionship and to world peace, if they fuel local and regional conflicts,
rather than work together and with others on peaceful solutions.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Soviet and Cuban actions in Africa have exacerbated conflicts and
increased bloodshed. No one quarrels with the right of a country to ap-
peal to friendly powers for assistance in maintaining territorial integ-
rity. We have helped meet that call from Zaire. But such help should be
coupled with a commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes. And
it should not be a pretext for prolonged military intervention and polit-
ical dominance.
We call on the Soviet Union to adopt a policy of restraint in Africa,
forsaking the temptation to achieve short-term political gain at the ex-
pense of long-term stability. We also call on the Soviet Union to play a
constructive part in finding peaceful solutions for the future of Eritrea
and for the remaining problems of decolonization and majority rule in
Zimbabwe and Namibia.
Competition in areas like Africa will not deter our efforts to find
agreements that serve the security interests of both countries. But when
peaceful competition turns to confrontation, it cannot help but erode
the political base for cooperation in both nations. This is not a threat,
but a fact of life. Our intention is not to gain an advantage, but to try to
head off a deterioration in our relations that would follow a continued
pattern of excessive competition.
C. We would also expect the continuation of strong defenses on
both sides, and the maintenance of the military parity. Despite the So-
viet build-up over the past ten years, the United States and our Allies
are strong, and fully equal to the challenge we face.
D. Support for human rights, not as an effort to undermine gov-
ernments, but to uphold an international standard to which both na-
tions are committed.
II.
As we cooperate and compete, we must also remain strong. This
will include:
A. Demonstrated resolve not to allow any nation to gain military
superiority over us. This will involve the strengthening of vital military
programs in the U.S. and its Allies, as we are doing.
B. Achievement of dependable arms control agreements that en-
hance our security.
C. Public and Congressional support for efforts to assist old and
new friends in need of security or economic assistance.
D. Maintenance of an American leadership that recognizes the ne-
cessity of working with other nations, and that acknowledges the de-
sire of many developing nations to preserve real sovereignty and inde-
pendence, and to resist an unhealthy overdependence on either the
United States or the Soviet Union.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
E. The continued assertion of our national ideals, the most pow-
erful ideas in the world.
F. Our superior technological capacity, our unmatched industrial
base, our expanding trade relations around the world.
G. The cohesion of our society, and our ability to criticize our
shortcomings openly, and in a constructive spirit, so as to better correct
them.
III.
We are determined to pursue policies of unsurpassed readiness
and cooperation in managing our relations with the Soviet Union. No
issue is more central to the foreign interests of the United States, and
none is nearly as important in assessing the strategic and nuclear
threats to world peace. Our views must be made clear to the people of
this country and of the Soviet Union, and they will be. But effective di-
plomacy can suffer if the tone of public debates between our gov-
ernments is heated. The resulting atmosphere makes it less likely that
firm positions quietly conveyed will be fully understood by the other
side.
Providence has destined that both the United States and the Soviet
Union are great powers with global interests. Although we do not
share a similar world view, neither should seek to impose its concep-
tions on others or to exclude the other from constructive participation
in the issues that face mankind. We are confident of our future and our
ability to help build a world at peace.
Taken together with the May 29 letter, I hope that these points may
be helpful.
Respectfully,
Cy

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
87.
Address by President Carter
Annapolis, Maryland, June 7, 1978
[Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.]
Today I want to discuss one of the most important aspects of that
international context—the relationship between the world’s two
greatest powers, the United States of America and the Soviet Union.
We must realize that for a very long time our relationship with the
Soviet Union will be competitive. That competition is to be constructive
if we are successful. Instead it could be dangerous and politically disas-
trous. Then our relationship must be cooperative as well.
We must avoid excessive swings in the public mood in our
country—from euphoria when things are going well, to despair when
they are not; from an exaggerated sense of compatibility with the Soviet
Union, to open expressions of hostility.
De´tente between our two countries is central to world peace. It’s
important for the world, for the American public, and for you as future
leaders of the Navy to understand the complex and sensitive nature.
The word “de´tente” can be simplistically defined as “the easing of
tension between nations.” The word is in practice however, further de-
fined by experience, as those nations evolve new means by which they
can live with each other in peace.
To be stable, to be supported by the American people, and to be a
basis for widening the scope of cooperation, then de´tente must be
broadly defined and truly reciprocal. Both nations must exercise re-
straint in troubled areas and in troubled times. Both must honor metic-
ulously those agreements which have already been reached to widen
cooperation, naturally and mutually limit nuclear arms production,
permit the free movement of people and the expression of ideas, and to
protect human rights.
the Naval Academy commencement exercises at 10: a.m. in the Navy-Marine Corps
Memorial Stadium. His address was broadcast live on radio and television. On the eve-
ning of June 4, the President met with Vance, Brown, Brzezinski, Jordan, Mondale,
Young, and Turner to discuss the address. He recalled that they read through the indi-
vidual paragraphs he had written: “There were no material changes, and we decided to
put the paragraphs in the most effective order. I think it will be a good speech, tough but
well-balanced.” (White House Diary, p. 199) In his diary entry for June 7, the President
noted: “Reaction to the Soviet speech [at the Naval Academy] was good. It will provide a
benchmark for our decisions in the future, and we’ve sent a copy of the speech to the
State Department and all our embassies with the points to be emphasized. Most reporters
played it tough, which is good. If it’s tough at home and the Soviets consider it mild,
that’s perfect.” (Ibid.)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Neither of us should entertain the notion that military supremacy
can be attained, or that transient military advantage can be politically
exploited.
Our principal goal is to help shape a world which is more respon-
sive to the desire of people everywhere for economic well-being, social
justice, political self-determination, and basic human rights.
We seek a world of peace. But such a world must accommodate
diversity—social, political, and ideological. Only then can there be a
genuine cooperation among nations and among cultures.
We desire to dominate no one. We will continue to widen our co-
operation with the positive new forces in the world.
We want to increase our collaboration with the Soviet Union, but
also with the emerging nations, with the nations of Eastern Europe, and
with the People’s Republic of China. We are particularly dedicated to
genuine self-determination and majority rule in those areas of the
world where these goals have not yet been attained.
Our long-term objective must be to convince the Soviet Union of
the advantages of cooperation and of the costs of disruptive behavior.
We remember that the United States and the Soviet Union were
allies in the Second World War. One of the great historical accomplish-
ments of the U.S. Navy was to guide and protect the tremendous ship-
ments of armaments and supplies from our country to Murmansk and
to other Soviet ports in support of a joint effort to meet the Nazi threat.
In the agony of that massive conflict, 20 million Soviet lives were
lost. Millions more who live in the Soviet Union still recall the horror
and the hunger of that time.
I’m convinced that the people of the Soviet Union want peace. I
cannot believe that they could possibly want war.
Through the years, our Nation has sought accommodation with
the Soviet Union, as demonstrated by the Austrian Peace Treaty, the
Quadripartite Agreement concerning Berlin, the termination of nu-
clear testing in the atmosphere, joint scientific explorations in space,4
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
trade agreements, the antiballistic missile treaty, the interim agree-
ment on strategic offensive armaments, and the limited test ban
agreement.
Efforts still continue with negotiations toward a SALT II agree-
ment, a comprehensive test ban against nuclear explosives, reductions
in conventional arms transfers to other countries, the prohibition
against attacks on satellites in space, an agreement to stabilize the level
of force deployment in the Indian Ocean, and increased trade and sci-
entific and cultural exchange. We must be willing to explore such av-
enues of cooperation despite the basic issues which divide us. The risks
of nuclear war alone propel us in this direction.
The numbers and destructive potential of nuclear weapons has
been increasing at an alarming rate. That is why a SALT agreement
which enhances the security of both nations is of fundamental impor-
tance. We and the Soviet Union are negotiating in good faith almost
every day, because we both know that a failure to succeed would pre-
cipitate a resumption of a massive nuclear arms race.
I’m glad to report to you today that the prospects for a SALT II
agreement are good.
Beyond this major effort, improved trade and technological and
cultural exchange are among the immediate benefits of cooperation be-
tween our two countries. However, these efforts to cooperate do not
erase the significant differences between us.
What are these differences?
To the Soviet Union, de´tente seems to mean a continuing aggres-
sive struggle for political advantage and increased influence in a va-
riety of ways. The Soviet Union apparently sees military power and
military assistance as the best means of expanding their influence
abroad. Obviously, areas of instability in the world provide a tempting
target for this effort, and all too often they seem ready to exploit any
such opportunity.
As became apparent in Korea, in Angola, and also, as you know, in
Ethiopia more recently, the Soviets prefer to use proxy forces to achieve
their purposes.
To other nations throughout the world, the Soviet military buildup
appears to be excessive, far beyond any legitimate requirement to de-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
fend themselves or to defend their allies. For more than 15 years, they
have maintained this program of military growth, investing almost 15
percent of their total gross national product in armaments, and this sus-
tained growth continues.
The abuse of basic human rights in their own country, in violation
of the agreement which was reached at Helsinki, has earned them the
condemnation of people everywhere who love freedom. By their ac-
tions, they’ve demonstrated that the Soviet system cannot tolerate
freely expressed ideas or notions of loyal opposition and the free move-
ment of peoples.
The Soviet Union attempts to export a totalitarian and repressive
form of government, resulting in a closed society. Some of these charac-
teristics and goals create problems for the Soviet Union.
Outside a tightly controlled bloc, the Soviet Union has difficult po-
litical relations with other nations. Their cultural bonds with others are
few and frayed. Their form of government is becoming increasingly
unattractive to other nations, so that even Marxist-Leninist groups no
longer look on the Soviet Union as a model to be imitated.
Many countries are becoming very concerned that the nonaligned
movement is being subverted by Cuba, which is obviously closely
aligned with the Soviet Union and dependent upon the Soviets for eco-
nomic sustenance and for military and political guidance and direction.
Although the Soviet Union has the second largest economic sys-
tem in the world, its growth is slowing greatly, and its standard of
living does not compare favorably with that of other nations at the
same equivalent stage of economic development.
Agricultural production still remains a serious problem for the So-
viet Union, so that in times of average or certainly adverse conditions
for crop production, they must turn to us or turn to other nations for
food supplies.
We in our country are in a much more favorable position. Our in-
dustrial base and our productivity are unmatched. Our scientific and
technological capability is superior to all others. Our alliances with
other free nations are strong and growing stronger, and our military ca-
pability is now and will be second to none.
In contrast to the Soviet Union, we are surrounded by friendly
neighbors and wide seas. Our societal structure is stable and cohesive,
and our foreign policy enjoys bipartisan public support, which gives it
continuity.
We are also strong because of what we stand for as a nation: the re-
alistic chance for every person to build a better life; protection by both
law and custom from arbitrary exercise of government power; the right
of every individual to speak out, to participate fully in government,

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
and to share political power. Our philosophy is based on personal
freedom, the most powerful of all ideas, and our democratic way of life
warrants the admiration and emulation by other people throughout the
world.
Our work for human rights makes us part of an international tide,
growing in force. We are strengthened by being part of it.
Our growing economic strength is also a major political factor, po-
tential influence for the benefit of others. Our gross national product
exceeds that of all nine nations combined in the European Economic
Community and is twice as great as that of the Soviet Union. Addition-
ally, we are now learning how to use our resources more wisely,
creating a new harmony between our people and our environment.
Our analysis of American military strength also furnishes a basis
for confidence. We know that neither the United States nor the Soviet
Union can launch a nuclear assault on the other without suffering a
devastating counterattack which could destroy the aggressor nation.
Although the Soviet Union has more missile launchers, greater throw-
weight, and more continental air defense capabilities, the United States
has more warheads, generally greater accuracy, more heavy bombers, a
more balanced nuclear force, better missile submarines, and superior
antisubmarine warfare capability.
A successful SALT II agreement will give both nations equal but
lower ceilings on missile launchers and also on missiles with multiple
warheads. We envision in SALT III an even greater mutual reduction in
nuclear weapons.
With essential nuclear equivalence, relative conventional force
strength has now become more important. The fact is that the military
capability of the United States and its allies is adequate to meet any
foreseeable threat.
It is possible that each side tends to exaggerate the military capa-
bility of the other. Accurate analyses are important as a basis for
making decisions for the future. False or excessive estimates of Soviet
strength or American weakness contributes to the effectiveness of the
Soviet propaganda effort.
For example, recently alarming news reports of the military
budget proposals for the U.S. Navy ignored the fact that we have the
highest defense budget in history and that the largest portion of this
will go to the Navy.
You men are joining a long tradition of superior leadership, sea-
manship, tactics, and ship design. And I’m confident that the U.S. Navy
has no peer, no equal, on the high seas today, and that you, I, and
others will always keep the Navy strong.
Let there be no doubt about our present and future strength. This
brief assessment which I’ve just made shows that we need not be overly

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
concerned about our ability to compete and to compete successfully.
Certainly there is no cause for alarm. The healthy self-criticism and the
free debate which are essential in a democracy should never be con-
fused with weakness or despair or lack of purpose.
What are the principal elements of American foreign policy to the
Soviet Union? Let me outline them very briefly.
We will continue to maintain equivalent nuclear strength, because
we believe that in the absence of worldwide nuclear disarmament, such
equivalency is the least threatening and the most stable situation for the
world.
We will maintain a prudent and sustained level of military
spending, keyed to a stronger NATO, more mobile forces, and undi-
minished presence in the Pacific. We and our allies must and will be
able to meet any foreseeable challenge to our security from either stra-
tegic nuclear forces or from conventional forces. America has the capa-
bility to honor this commitment without excessive sacrifice on the part
of our citizens, and that commitment to military strength will be
honored.
Looking beyond our alliances, we will support worldwide and re-
gional organizations which are dedicated to enhancing international
peace, like the United Nations, the Organization of American States,
and the Organization for African Unity.
In Africa we and our African friends want to see a continent that is
free of the dominance of outside powers, free of the bitterness of racial
injustice, free of conflict, and free of the burdens of poverty and hunger
and disease. We are convinced that the best way to work toward these
objectives is through affirmative policies that recognize African real-
ities and that recognize aspirations.
The persistent and increasing military involvement of the Soviet
Union and Cuba in Africa could deny this hopeful vision. We are
deeply concerned about the threat to regional peace and to the au-
tonomy of countries within which these foreign troops seem perma-
nently to be stationed. That is why I’ve spoken up on this subject today.
And this is why I and the American people will support African efforts
to contain such intrusion, as we have done recently in Zaire.
I urge again that all other powers join us in emphasizing works of
peace rather than the weapons of war. In their assistance to Africa, let
the Soviet Union now join us in seeking a peaceful and a speedy transi-
tion to majority rule in Rhodesia and in Namibia. Let us see efforts to
resolve peacefully the disputes in Eritrea and in Angola. Let us all

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
work, not to divide and to seek domination in Africa, but to help those
nations to fulfill their great potential.
We will seek peace, better communication and understanding, cul-
tural and scientific exchange, and increased trade with the Soviet
Union and with other nations.
We will attempt to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons
among those nations not now having this capability.
We will continue to negotiate constructively and persistently for a
fair strategic arms limitation agreement. We know that no ideological
victories can be won by either side by the use of nuclear weapons.
We have no desire to link this negotiation for a SALT agreement
with other competitive relationships nor to impose other special condi-
tions on the process. In a democratic society, however, where public
opinion is an integral factor in the shaping and implementation of for-
eign policy, we do recognize that tensions, sharp disputes, or threats to
peace will complicate the quest for a successful agreement. This is not a
matter of our preference but a simple recognition of fact.
The Soviet Union can choose either confrontation or cooperation.
The United States is adequately prepared to meet either choice.
We would prefer cooperation through a de´tente that increasingly
involves similar restraint for both sides; similar readiness to resolve
disputes by negotiations, and not by violence; similar willingness to
compete peacefully, and not militarily. Anything less than that is likely
to undermine de´tente. And this is why I hope that no one will underes-
timate the concerns which I have expressed today.
A competition without restraint and without shared rules will es-
calate into graver tensions, and our relationship as a whole with the So-
viet Union will suffer. I do not wish this to happen, and I do not believe
that Mr. Brezhnev desires it. And this is why it is time for us to speak
frankly and to face the problems squarely.
By a combination of adequate American strength, of quiet self-
restraint in the use of it, of a refusal to believe in the inevitability of war,
and of a patient and persistent development of all the peaceful alterna-
tives, we hope eventually to lead international society into a more
stable, more peaceful, and a more hopeful future.
You and I leave here today to do our common duty—protecting
our Nation’s vital interests by peaceful means if possible, by resolute
action if necessary. We go forth sobered by these responsibilities, but
confident of our strength. We go forth knowing that our Nation’s
goals—peace, security, liberty for ourselves and for others—will deter-
mine our future and that we together can prevail.
To attain these goals, our Nation will require exactly those qual-
ities of courage, self-sacrifice, idealism, and self-discipline which you

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
as midshipmen have learned here at Annapolis so well. That is why
your Nation expects so much of you, and that is why you have so much
to give.
I leave you now with my congratulations and with a prayer to God
that both you and I will prove worthy of the task that is before us and
the Nation which we have sworn to serve.
Thank you very much.
88.
Address by the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs (Holbrooke)
Honolulu, Hawaii, June 16, 1978
Changing Perspectives of U.S. Policy in East Asia
I am honored to be with you today to talk about U.S. policy toward
Asia and I’m particularly delighted to have once again the opportunity
to visit Hawaii, a State which symbolizes the U.S. role as a Pacific na-
tion with vital security and economic interests stretching far into Asia.
Today, I would like to go beyond that truism and discuss with you how
the United States, and particularly these 13 Western States, relate to the
emerging Pacific community.
Most Americans, especially on the eastern seaboard, first look east
toward the great nations of Europe. They see Asia as far away and
rather exotic. But, in fact, the Far East is not very far any more. It took
me about 12 hours to fly here from Washington, but I would need only
7 more to go on to Tokyo. The tip of the Aleutian Islands of the State of
Alaska extends as far west into the Pacific as New Zealand and is as
close to Japan as Kansas City is to San Francisco. Asian Russia is visible
across the Bering Strait from Alaska. The Sun first shines on American
territory each day in Guam, which is much closer to Singapore than to
San Francisco.
The Pacific is at once a transportation route, a source of national re-
sources, including food and energy, and the locus of much of the
world’s population. More ominously, because of its strategic and com-
mercial importance, the Pacific is an area of potential conflict. Our last
original. Holbrooke delivered his address at the Western Governors’ Conference.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
three wars began in Asia, and the only foreign attacks on American soil
since 1812 occurred in the Pacific.
Another important dimension of America’s Asian character is of
particular significance to the Western States—the cultural and ethnic
bonds provided by the people who have immigrated here from the Or-
ient. Asian-Americans have contributed to all aspects of American life
since the middle of the last century. In the States which you represent,
over 2 million people, or about 5½% of the population, claim an Asian
heritage. Our host State of Hawaii provides one of the best examples of
the influence and role of Asian-Americans in our society.
While the fundamental nature of our nation’s involvement in Asia
and the Pacific is timeless, we have already entered a new era in the re-
gion, and it is time to recognize it. It is an era filled with hope and the
promise of stability, prosperity, and the emergence of a genuine Pacific
community. But this hope can be realized and the promise fulfilled
only if the United States plays a major economic role and fulfills its re-
sponsibility to help maintain the strategic balance.
Adjusting to Circumstances
Our policy objectives are thus clear. To achieve them requires
some adjustment to the changed circumstances we now find in Asia.
What are some of these changes? What are the new perspectives?
The fall of Saigon marked the end of a 30-year period of history
that began with the collapse of the European and Japanese colonial em-
pires in Asia between 1944 and 1954. Playing a remarkable new role in
world affairs, the United States filled part of the resulting vacuum by
supporting heavily many of the new nations of the region, while Com-
munist states were established in China, North Korea, and North Viet-
nam. In this period, American policy produced some striking successes
and many enduring relationships. Our presence allowed many newly
independent countries to buy time, time which was often well used.
The reconstruction of Japan, the economic miracles in Taiwan and
Korea, and the evolution of the members of the Association of South
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) into strong and viable nations are re-
markable successes in which we played a major role. But the period
also saw our intervention in Indochina, and this triggered the most di-
visive foreign policy debate the country has ever known, a debate
which has left hidden scars and persistent myths among both former
“hawks” and former “doves.”
But as we debated our proper role in Asia, Asia itself was changing
rapidly—and dramatically—and not quite the way many expected it to
change. A few years ago, many predicted that, if Vietnam fell, we
would be entering a period of declining stability as a voracious Com-
munist monolith rolled over economically weak and politically shaky

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
non-Communist countries. These smaller wars would beget larger ones
until we would be in direct confrontation with one of the superpowers.
Reality looks far different. The Communist countries are eco-
nomically weak and—after sharing common ground against us—
are now bitterly divided. The sharpening of the Sino-Soviet split, the
Vietnamese-Cambodian border skirmishing, and the recent deteriora-
tion of Vietnamese-Chinese relations clearly reveal serious and chronic
problems among these countries. The roots of these three rivalries lie
deep in the historical and geopolitical realities of Asia. We do not ex-
pect them to abate in the foreseeable future. This presents a sharp con-
trast with the other nations of the region.
The forces of regional economic integration are growing. Japan is
increasing its trade with the rest of Asia. ASEAN is successfully en-
gaged in increased economic cooperation through a web of consulta-
tions encompassing practically every phase of economic activity. Our
two-way trade with ASEAN in 1977 was over $10 billion. When that is
added to our approximately $15 billion in trade with Hong Kong,
Korea, and Taiwan, the total is almost as large as our trade with Japan.
These countries—whose combined population totals 300 million (more
than South America) have achieved between 6% and 11% annual
growth in GNP over the last 6 years. It is now the only group of coun-
tries in the world within which real GNP’s are doubling every 7–12
years.
As these countries prosper and mature, they will be increasingly
looking to U.S. markets for more sophisticated products. To cite an ex-
ample of particular interest to the Western States, Singapore’s decision
to purchase thirteen 747’s and six 727’s from Boeing is the first step in a
transaction which will ultimately be worth $900 million.
From the standpoint of security, the strategic balance that exists
today among the four most powerful countries in the region—China,
Japan, the Soviet Union, and the United States—is clearly in our na-
tion’s interests. Although important differences remain with Peking, it
is fair to say that the United States, China, and Japan share an interest in
maintaining that stability—a significant and hopeful change from the
pattern of the past half century in which U.S. Far Eastern policy con-
stantly required us to choose, in effect, between China and Japan. This
situation, true only since Henry Kissinger’s 1971 trip to Peking, has
created dramatic new opportunities throughout Asia: It is one of our
main tasks not to lose these opportunities—which are diplomatic,
strategic, political, and economic—through inattention, inaction, or
misunderstanding.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
The face of Asia has changed, and the U.S. role must change as
well. Since the outset of the Carter Administration, we have tried to
shape U.S. policies to accommodate these new perspectives. U.S. pol-
icies and actions seek to maintain the current equilibrium and not allow
any single power to achieve a preponderance of influence or military
superiority in the region. A new role has been defined—one that does
not return us to the inappropriate level of earlier involvement in the in-
ternal affairs of the region and yet does not constitute a confusing and
destabilizing “abandonment” of Asia.
As we began this process and some adjustments took place, some
on both sides of the Pacific mistook them to mean a lessening of Amer-
ican concern about Asia or a reduced U.S. priority for the region as a
whole. Others concluded from the collapse of Saigon, the closing of
U.S. bases in Thailand, and our decision to reduce our military pres-
ence in Korea, that the United States was abandoning its strategic and
security role in the region.
These new myths about U.S. attitudes toward Asia do not square
with the reality of our foreign policy and the four basic elements of the
Administration’s Asian and Pacific policy.
U.S. Military Presence
The first essential element is that we are committed to keeping a
strong, flexible military presence in the region to help maintain the
present balance of power. To emphasize this point, the President sent
Vice President Mondale and National Security adviser Brzezinski on
special missions to Asia. The Vice President visited the Philippines,
Thailand, Indonesia, Australia, and New Zealand [April–May], while
Dr. Brzezinski went to Korea and Japan after the People’s Republic of
China [May–June].
At every stop, they indicated publicly and privately our firm re-
solve to continue to play a major role in the region; and with every ally
they reaffirmed the American treaty commitments to that country.
Consider also the following.
• Except for our planned ground troop withdrawals from Korea,
we will maintain our current level of military and naval forces in the
Pacific. In addition, we will actually increase the number of tactical air-
craft in Korea by 20% this year and strengthen other forces by the intro-
duction of several advanced weapons systems within the next few
years. This will include Trident nuclear missiles for our submarine
fleet, cruise missiles for our B–52’s, the airborne warning and control
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
system, and the latest advanced fighter aircraft, such as F–14’s for our
carriers and F–15’s for Air Force squadrons.
• Our combat troop withdrawal from Korea is being conducted in
a way that will insure that stability is maintained on the peninsula. As
U.S. troops leave, we plan to turn over $800 million in military equip-
ment to bolster South Korean forces in addition to continuing assist-
ance to Korea’s military modernization program. The scheduled depar-
ture of our forces has been “backloaded” with only one battalion
leaving this year, two more in 1979, and the withdrawal continuing into
1981–82. This careful phasing will give us ample opportunity to assess
North Korea’s behavior and will give Seoul time to train and equip its
units. Our commitment to the Republic of Korea remains firm. South
Korean forces now defend virtually the entire demilitarized zone with
the U.S. military comprising only 5% of all forces in the country. We be-
lieve that the U.S. division can be withdrawn without jeopardizing the
stability which has existed for the past 25 years.
• With the agreement of the Philippine Government, and with full
regard for Philippine sovereignty, we are committed to maintaining the
two important U.S. bases in the Philippines. This will enhance our
ability to project U.S. military strength into Southeast Asia, the Indian
Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and East Africa and to protect Pacific and In-
dian Ocean shipping lanes over which 90% of Middle Eastern oil is
transported.
Relations With Japan
The second element of our strategy is our relationship with
Japan—still the cornerstone of our Asian policy. Our fundamental re-
lationship has never been better despite serious economic stresses. The
depth of commitment that both countries have brought to relieving
these stresses and the efforts of Prime Minister Fukuda and President
Carter have helped us resolve some difficult problems, such as the
Tokai Mura nuclear facility, color TV and specialty steel imports, and
fishing rights disputes. Perhaps the most significant effort has been our
joint undertaking to address Japan’s current account surplus which
reached $14 billion in 1977. Sparked by efforts of Japanese Minister for
External Economic Affairs Nobuhiko Ushiba, Japan’s Ambassador to
the United States Fumihiko Togo, our Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations Robert S. Strauss, and our Ambassador to Japan Michael
Mansfield, we have agreed to a number of steps such as:
• Japanese agreement to increase beef and citrus import quotas;
• Establishment of a U.S.-Japan forest products study group to ex-
plore ways to expand trade in this area; and

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
• Establishment of a U.S.-Japan Trade Facilitation Committee to
expand U.S. exports to Japan by resolving market access problems en-
countered by U.S. firms.
In addition, Japan has decided to stimulate its domestic demand to
absorb production and reduce pressure to export.
We are continuing regular discussions with Japan in support of
these steps. The Japanese current account surpluses and our bilateral
deficits with Japan continue to be large, but we believe that the trend
will move in the right direction if both nations remain firmly com-
mitted to the goals we have set for ourselves in remedying this serious
problem. The Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) are equally im-
portant but less visible. Minister Ushiba and Ambassador Strauss
agreed to get down to serious business on the MTN. They are now
moving at top speed along with the European Community, Australia,
and others to meet their mid-July deadline for agreement on the main
elements.
Relations With the P.R.C.
The third element in our Asian and Pacific strategy is our commit-
ment to normalizing relations with China. While we do not have a firm
timetable, one of President Carter’s first actions as President was to
reaffirm the Shanghai communique of 1972. He has expressed his de-
termination to complete the process of building a new relationship
with Peking.
In structuring our relationship with the Chinese, we will not enter
into any agreements with others that are directed against the People’s
Republic of China. We recognize and respect China’s strong commit-
ments to independence, unity, and self-reliance.
Dr. Brzezinski’s trip to China was the most recent affirmation of
the importance to both countries of the Washington-Peking relation-
ship. As Dr. Brzezinski said in Peking, a strong and secure China is in
America’s interest. I accompanied him on his visit and can attest to the
fact that it enhanced U.S.-Chinese relations from a long-range strategic
point of view.
Nevertheless, there is an incompleteness in the relationship which,
over time, could render it vulnerable to extraneous factors, raising once
again the prospects of needless confrontation or misunderstanding be-
tween two major powers. This would deprive us of the opportunity to
achieve greater cooperation with China on global and regional issues.
quet the evening of May 20. (Power and Principle, p. 217)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Normalization would not solve all of our problems or disagree-
ments, but it would help consolidate our nonconfrontational relation-
ship, and it would help insure that the current balance in the entire re-
gion remain intact. We are, therefore, convinced that normalization is
an essential objective for our new Asian policy.
In pursuing this objective, we are constantly mindful of the well-
being of the people of Taiwan. Thus, we are continuing to seek that
framework which allows us to move ahead with our strategically and
historically important relations with the People’s Republic of China
while at the same time taking full account of our concerns regarding
Taiwan. Our interest is that whatever solution there may be to the
“Taiwan question” that it will be a peaceful one. We are confident that
in the future we still would be able to continue the many mutually ben-
eficial relationships which link us to the people of Taiwan.
Trade and Investment
The fourth key element of our post-Vietnam/Asia policy is a
strong emphasis on promoting U.S. trade and investment in Asia. Eco-
nomic relations are now the single most important emerging element of
our relationship with Asia, and they must not turn into a one-way flow.
Prompted by our large trade deficit with the region, some have ar-
gued recently that U.S. trade with Asia is increasingly disadvantageous
to the United States. It is our conviction, however, that increasing U.S.
exports is the best way to reduce our trade difficulties with Asia. The
reason is clear and simple: International Trade and U.S. exports create
jobs for Americans.
The Department of Commerce estimates that every billion dollars
of U.S. exports translates directly into 30,000 American jobs. One out of
every three agricultural sector jobs is now export-directed. In the man-
ufacturing sector, one out of every seven jobs is export-related. Thus,
vided direct employment for 315,000 Americans. Our total exports to
icans. But even these figures do not tell the whole story. The Depart-
ment of Labor estimates that for every job directly involved in the pro-
duction of items for export, another job is created in an allied or
supporting industry.
Slow export growth over the last 4 years is second only to energy
imports as a cause of the large and destabilizing U.S. trade deficit. Rec-
ognizing this, President Carter asked Secretary of Commerce Kreps to
head a Cabinet-level task force to review our export policy. The task
force recommendations, which will be presented to the President soon,
focus on modifications of governmental procedures which create disin-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
centives to exports and propose new governmental programs to facili-
tate marketing efforts by U.S. firms abroad.
It is here that States play a dramatic and leading role, particularly
through export industries and business. More than $20 billion in ex-
ports were shipped from the Western States in 1976. California led the
entire country by a large margin in the export of manufactured goods
with over $8 billion in shipments and over $11 billion in total exports—
65% of which went to Asian and Pacific countries. Washington, with
over $3 billion in manufacturing exports, also ranked among the top
to Asia—trade which provides jobs to 11% of Oregon’s work force.
Exports are an increasingly important part of the States’ econ-
omies. Most of the Western States tripled or quadrupled the dollar
value of their exports between 1972 and 1976, with Idaho registering a
sixfold increase. Inflation accounted for some of those gains, but there
were solid indicators of real gains. For example, the total number of
persons employed in manufacturing exports in the Western States al-
most doubled between 1972 and 1976.
The importance of export promotion to the Western States is clear.
In Alaska 22% of manufacturing employment is related to exports; in
In California the percentage is lower—7.8% but the absolute numbers
are large: 125,000 people are employed in manufacturing exports alone.
Export promotion efforts can be helped by informing business
constituents that the investment climate in Asia is much improved as
well. Following the end of the Vietnam war, the American business
community grew less certain about the prospects for maintaining a fa-
vorable economic climate in Asia. But now that 3 years have passed, we
can see that those fears were exaggerated and unjustified. As a result of
the political stability in the market economy countries, there is a tre-
mendous regional market developing that will be increasingly hungry
for American quality products and attractive to American capital. To-
gether, utilizing already existing facilities such as the Export-Import
Bank and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, Federal and
State Governments can be important catalysts in helping America in-
crease its share of the lucrative trade and investment markets.
The other side to the coin is that the future of the Pacific commu-
nity is closely tied to the maintenance of open markets in the Western

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
States. This is true for Japan and for the newly industrializing nations
of the region. The latter group, in particular, presents us with new chal-
lenges as they are becoming increasingly competitive with us in world
markets. We must insure that this competition is conducted according
to accepted international trade rules and that we have domestic policies
in place to cushion any adjustment costs to our own industries and
workers. It is essential to the growth and development of both Asia and
the American West to keep our markets open.
This is not an easy task for public officials or for the Western busi-
nesses and workers that must compete. However, there is hardly any-
thing more important to the future of the advanced developing na-
tions of Asia nor any greater test of our ability to keep open the world
economy.
There are many other subjects which I would like to discuss—our
recent ANZUS consultations, the emergence of ASEAN for which Vice
President Mondale expressed our strong support on his recent trip, and
the question of relations with Vietnam, to whom we have made a rea-
sonable offer to establish diplomatic relations and to lift the trade em-
bargo. Unfortunately, time will not permit.
Human Rights
There are two humanitarian problems of deep concern—the plight
of the Indochina refugees and food shortages. Refugees are still fleeing
from Vietnam and the incomprehensible horrors of Cambodia; in fact,
at an increasing rate lately. Many set out in rickety boats with few sup-
plies, and estimates are that only half make it to another port. There
they often languish in barely adequate conditions in makeshift camps.
The Vice President and I were deeply moved by what we saw, and the
Vice President reported his findings to President Carter and Secretary
Vance. Our view is that the United States, with its great humanitarian
tradition, cannot turn its back on this continued outflow of people.
On June 14 the Administration announced its intention to receive
25,000 Indochinese refugees per year. We will do our part, but we call
on other nations to join us in an international effort to deal with this
tragic situation and to assist in alleviating the burden on the Southeast
Asian and Pacific countries who temporarily accommodate Indochi-
nese refugees. Some nations, like France, Australia, Canada have re-
sponded well; others have been less helpful.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
No other part of our nation has done more than the Western States
to assist those already here. Despite the growing dimensions of the
problem, I hope that the spirit of American compassion will not allow
us to turn our backs on those still in desperate need of help.
The Indochina refugee dilemma is the most visible aspect of our
human rights efforts. But the drama and urgency of that situation
should not obscure the fundamental actions of the United States in pro-
moting the dignity and rights of people in all nations. We will continue
to speak out in appropriate fashion when we feel that human dignity is
being diminished or those rights abridged, and we believe that real
progress has been made in some countries with which we have long
had, and intend to maintain, very close ties of friendship.
The other humanitarian concern I would like to mention—one
long predating the refugee problem—is the state of agriculture, which
remains the weakest link in the Asian development scene. Surveys by
the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank indicate that im-
provements in rural living standards in much of non-Communist Asia
lag further behind the modernized industrial sector. There are also se-
rious food shortages and nutritional deficiencies in some areas. For ex-
ample, one-third of last year’s entire world trade in rice—well over 2
million tons—went to Indonesia. This is a genuine cause for concern.
In the short term, the United States and other donors can do much
to alleviate the food shortages and malnutrition plaguing some Asian
countries. In the long run, the answer lies in the development and mod-
ernization in the rural economies of Asia. The United States can make a
large contribution to this process with carefully directed development
programs supported by PL–48010 and assistance by the Agency for In-
ternational Development, support for agricultural development proj-
ects sponsored by international lending institutions, and the transfer of
appropriate technology and capital to the rural sector. We are working
closely with the ASEAN countries to achieve just this sort of develop-
ment. Japan is also aiding in this effort.
In sum, Asia today presents both challenges and opportunities for
Americans. We are an integral part of the process of change in the re-
gion because of our history, our geography, and because of shared
values and interests. We will always be a power in the region, but we
realize that power must be newly defined and redefined as circum-
stances evolve. In Asia and the Pacific, it now largely means coopera-
tion not only with old friends but, if they wish, with old adversaries.
Our interest and involvement in the region will remain, but the shape
and size of that involvement will continue to adapt.

89.
Editorial Note
On June 19, 1978, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance testified on
U.S.-Soviet policy before the House Committee on International Rela-
tions. Fourteen members of the committee had sent a letter to President
Jimmy Carter requesting that the administration clarify its policy
toward the Soviet Union in light of recent statements made by Vance,
the President, and President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs
Zbigniew Brzezinski. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Urges Effort by
U.S. and Russians to Reduce Tensions: Asserts Carter Backs View,” The
thanking the committee for affording him the opportunity to address
the issues contained within the letter. He continued:
“There is perhaps no more important question on which we must
consult than the entire range of U.S.-Soviet relations. I use the word
‘range’ advisedly. For it is very important, as we deal with these critical
issues, that we recognize a fundamental reality of this relationship:
That it is not a relationship with a single dimension but with many; that
even as we have sharp differences, as we inevitably will, there are
many other areas in which we continue to cooperate and to seek useful
agreement; and that to view U.S.-Soviet relations from the perspective
of a single dimension is to run the risk of failing to identify our interests
carefully and to act accordingly.”
The Secretary noted that the President’s June 7 address at the U.S.
Naval Academy commencement exercises (see Document 87) outlined
and described the elements of U.S policy toward the Soviet Union.
Vance highlighted three points: the maintenance of military, economic,
and political strength; the pursuit of treaties and agreements crucial to
peace and security; and mutual conduct in global affairs. Regarding

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
this last component, the Secretary suggested that he intended to ad-
dress it “in its African context, where interest is presently focused.”
Commenting that he would devote greater attention to the specifics of
the policy in an address the next day, Vance explained that the admin-
istration’s strategy “is based upon an affirmative and constructive ap-
proach to African issues: helping African nations meet their pressing
human and economic needs; strengthening their ability to defend
themselves; building closer ties throughout Africa; and assisting Af-
rican nations to resolve their conflicts peacefully.” (Department of State
On June 20, Vance addressed the annual meeting of the U.S.
Jaycees, who had convened in Atlantic City, New Jersey. After high-
lighting the importance of the African continent in human, economic,
and political terms, the Secretary referenced his July 1, 1977, address
(see Document 50), noting: “I said that we can be neither right nor effec-
tive if we treat Africa simply as an arena for East-West competition.
Our Africa policy has not changed. Its objectives remain forward
looking and positive.” After summarizing the objectives as ones that
prioritized commitment to social and economic justice, resolution of
disputes, respect for nationalism, support for defense needs, and re-
spect for human rights, Vance explained how the administration had
applied them to issues of the greatest concern in Rhodesia, Namibia,
the Horn of Africa, and Zaire. He then discussed the objectives in
greater detail:
“—We will rely on our strengths—our trade, aid, economic, and
cultural ties—which have developed over the years. To these we have
added our common commitment to social justice and human develop-
ment. These are the most enduring elements in the relationship be-
tween Africa and America. They bind us to nations throughout the
continent.
“It is essential to the success of our policies that Africans know that
we share their goal of economic development. This means increasing
trade and investment in ways that benefit both Africa and the United
States. And it means continuing to increase our aid to African nations.
We will do so because there is genuine need, because it is important to
our own economic well-being, and because it will strengthen the inde-
pendence of African nations.
“—Our strategy is to work with others in Africa and beyond for
the peaceful resolution of disputes. We can help African nations avoid
human suffering and prevent the diversion of resources from human
development. Moreover, a potential conflict resolved is a conflict of
which others cannot take advantage. We will help to strengthen the ef-
fectiveness of the United Nations and regional organizations such as
the Organization of African Unity which can play a vital role in

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
working for peace. Ultimately, it is Africans themselves who will bring
peace to their continent.
“—We will continue to respect the growing spirit of African na-
tional independence because it is important to economic and political
progress and because Africans will firmly resist yielding their hard-
won independence to outside powers. The history of the last 20 years
demonstrates that fact.
“—It has been our policy since the beginning of the Administra-
tion to consider security requests from African nations with legitimate
defense needs. Our friends in Africa must know that we can and will
help them to strengthen their ability to defend themselves. Any in-
crease in American military assistance will be done prudently and will
be consistent with this Administration’s policy of seeking arms re-
straint and concentrating our assistance on economic development.
“—In private and public, we have emphasized our concern about
the nature of Soviet activities in Africa and we have been in contact
with European, Arab, and African countries and members of the non-
aligned movement who share our concern. We have pointed out to the
Soviets the problems which their activities pose for Africa and for our
overall relations. Our actions will continue to be consistent with our
commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes and with due regard
for the concerns of those African countries affected.
“—In Africa as elsewhere, we will work along with others of all
races to foster respect for individual human rights. We believe that civil
and political liberties and the right of each individual to basic neces-
sities, such as decent health care, education, and food, should be re-
spected throughout the continent.
“The strategy we are pursuing is a realistic approach that empha-
sizes our strengths and encourages an evolution of events that is in
both Africa’s interests and our own. It is a strategy that has earned the
support of African leaders throughout the continent.
“We do not ignore that there is a residue of suspicion among some
Africans who have fought against colonialism that our policy is simply
a tactic and not a reflection of a genuine commitment to African needs.
Only time and our continued demonstration that we mean what we say
will meet this problem.
“We are convinced that an affirmative approach to African aspira-
tions and problems is also the most effective response to Soviet and
Cuban activities there. Any other strategy would weaken Africa by di-
viding it. And it would weaken us by letting others set our policies for
us.
“Our nation and the nations of Africa have much in common. We
struggled hard for our independence, and we intend to remain free. We

90.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, June 19, 1978
SUBJECT
Congressional Foreign Policy Discussion
I. Your Conduct of the Meeting
1. Since this is clearly a meeting with the President, you should set
the tone for it through an opening statement, and then ask for only brief
(5–10 minutes) supplementary comments by Cy, Harold, and myself. I
would urge you to impose strict time constraints on your supporting cast.
Otherwise the Congressmen will feel “talked at” instead of being “talked
with.”
2. Cy will be prepared to comment on the state of our key negotia-
tions (SALT, Middle East, Southern Africa); Harold on our defense pos-
ture (NATO, and, if needed, SALT); I on the China trip or more gener-
ally on broad global changes.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
II. Your Overview
1. Basic Message: Your basic commitment is to the shaping of a
more just and equitable international system for a world that has now
become more politically awakened (and you might mention the emo-
tional outpouring of the Panamanians as an example) and that thus
cannot be confined to a system dominated exclusively by the devel-
oped countries. The world now includes more than 150 nation-states,
and their aspirations as well as participation require a wider frame-
work. Unlike the years 1945–1950, when America played a creative role
in shaping the post-World War II international system, this calls not for
a predominantly American response but for more subtle inspiration
and cooperative leadership on a broader front.
In effect, we are seeking to shape a cooperative global community,
while attempting to dampen the more traditional East-West conflicts
and to resolve the novel global and North-South issues.
2. Your Ten Key Goals—and Our Performance
Early in 1977 you set yourself ten key goals as a way of achieving a
more equitable international system.
Your Key Goals
Response
1. To engage Western Europe,
The first Summit was quite
Japan, and other advanced de-
useful; the second is about to be
mocracies in closer political co-
held; more frequent and more
operation, thereby also providing
direct personal top-level contacts
wider macroeconomic coordina-
and consultations than ever be-
tion among them.
fore (including phone calls).
2. To weave a worldwide web of
Your two trips were designed to
bilateral, political, and economic
advance that goal; the Vice Pres-
cooperation with the new
ident has recently been to In-
emerging regional powers,
donesia; U.S. has better relations
thereby extending our earlier re-
with all of those mentioned than
liance on Atlanticism to include
at any previous point.
such newly influential countries
as Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria,
Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, In-
donesia in a wider pattern of in-
ternational cooperation.
thereby reducing the hostility
new policy towards Latin
toward the United States that in
America, a policy no longer
recent years has developed
based on a single slogan but one
within the Third World.
which recognizes both the im-
portance of bilateral relations
with individual Latin American
countries and the global char-
acter of many of their concerns.
However, so far we have not
done enough to formulate an
economic policy dealing with
North-South problems.
4. To push U.S.-Soviet strategic
We have made progress on a
arms limitation talks into stra-
wide range of bilateral issues
tegic arms reduction talks, to
and are pressing to get SALT. At
widen the scope of American-
the same time, we have finally
Soviet collaboration by engaging
made the Soviets aware that we
the Soviet Union in a wider pat-
are concerned over their lack of
tern of negotiating relationships,
restraint in the use of military
thereby making detente both
proxies in Africa. We do not ex-
more comprehensive and
pect the cold war to revive and
reciprocal.
we are prepared both to compete
and to cooperate simultaneously.
At the same time, we have de-
veloped more extensive relations
with East European states—both
those externally independent and
those internally more liberal.
5. To normalize U.S.-Chinese re-
We remain committed to such
lations in order to preserve the
normalization; in the meantime
U.S.-Chinese relationship as a
we are broadening the scope of
major stabilizing factor in the
our bilateral relations and have
global power balance.
recently held mutually useful
global consultations.
6. To seek a comprehensive
The last year has been one of re-
Middle Eastern settlement,
markable progress. We are dis-
without which the further radi-
appointed with the most recent
calization of the Arab world and
Israeli answer, but will continue

91.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, July 7, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #66
1. Opinion: Choices
In four key policy areas—China, the Middle East, Africa, and the
Soviet Union—we are at the point where some basic choices need to be
made. If we do not make them explicitly and consciously, we are likely
to find it more difficult to attain our key objectives.
Let me state them very concisely:
A. China
We have embarked on a course that could have very great interna-
tional consequences. U.S.-Chinese normalization could open the doors
to a political-economic relationship with one-fourth of mankind. It
could alter the international balance. Success here would be a very
major and historic accomplishment for you.
However, in seeking it, we should avoid actions that convey to the
Chinese insensitivity to their concerns. The issue of Vietnam is very
germane here. The Chinese see Vietnam as veering towards the So-
viets, and they are genuinely alarmed and outraged. A Soviet presence
in Vietnam would provide the Soviets with a strategic springboard,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
as threatening to China’s security as are the Soviet forces now in
Mongolia.
The Vietnamese, probably encouraged by the Soviets, are now
making noises about U.S.-Vietnamese normalization. The State Depart-
ment said yesterday, “Our policy is clear. We are prepared to nor-
malize relations.”
This willingness comes at the wrong time and in the wrong con-
text. It will reinforce Chinese concerns, and thus needlessly complicate
the more important task—normalizing with Peking. You need to
choose: Vietnam or China, and China is incomparably more important
to us.
If you agree, you might wish to have me send a note to the State
Department, asking that efforts to normalize relations with Vietnam be
postponed until the other issue is resolved.
B. The Middle East
We are nearing a very crucial point: once the U.S. “suggestions”
are submitted, we will have no choice but to push with all our resources
to obtain a settlement. Without such a settlement it is likely that the sit-
uation in the Middle East will deteriorate greatly.
The alternative, which the Vice President recommends, is to adopt
a less assertive strategy, playing for time and limiting damage to our re-
lations with Israel and with the Jewish community. This course would
produce less controversy, and it will be less politically risky. It will also,
however, perpetuate the Middle Eastern problem, and thus pose some
dangers to Sadat himself.
If you choose to go ahead, you will face an unavoidable confronta-
tion. Are we ready for it? Do you have the resources to prevail? What
specifically can we do to make certain that rejection of our “sugges-
tions” is too costly for the parties concerned? Cy and I are developing
some thoughts for you, but only you can decide whether we are pre-
pared for a major confrontation—without which no settlement seems
possible—later this summer and probably throughout much of the fall.
However, if you do decide to cut the Gordian Knot, a sustained
time-commitment by Cy will be needed. The Middle East issue cannot
be handled on a part-time basis. Either he will have to give it a major
portion of his time over the next several months, or you should appoint

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
a top-flight negotiator (but one loyal to you and one whose success will
be your success). This challenge will not be overcome on a part-time
basis, and endless exercises in drawing up draft declarations are no
substitute for direct political negotiations, with someone holding noses
to the grindstone.
C. The Soviet Union
Here we confront three basic choices: (a) the scope of what we ne-
gotiate and seek to ratify; (b) the human rights issue; (c) rules of detente
and the Soviet involvement in Africa.
We should not tie the three issues together, but we should be con-
sistent and firm on each.
On negotiations, the key issue which you ought to review is
whether the chances for SALT would be increased or decreased if SALT
is coupled with CTB. On the basis of the last two weeks’ discussions, I
believe that you will have a unified administration behind you on
SALT, and a disunited or disingenuous one on CTB. Moreover, I fear
that opposition to SALT would be reinforced, and not diluted, by oppo-
sition to CTB. Thus the more effective sequence might be SALT signing,
then China, then SALT ratification, and then CTB.
However, this entails a political judgment on which you might
prefer to consult with the Vice President and Ham. In the meantime,
we are proceeding energetically on both SALT and CTB.
On human rights, the Soviet rejection of our Shcharanskiy overture
(and we should now let the word out to the Jewish community that we
tried), the other trials, and the insulting Pravda postcard campaign di-
rected at you (see below Facts) indicate that the Soviets have con-
cluded that they can safely ignore our earlier protestations. I think the
time is ripe for a strong statement of condemnation of the Soviets—and
let the Soviets link this to SALT if they choose. (I do not understand the

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
argument that we must not link anything to SALT, but that we must
also not do some things—on human rights, China, Africa, etc.—be-
cause the Soviets might link that to SALT.) Your credibility on human
rights is now at stake, and Cy should tell Gromyko in no uncertain
terms that your Administration intends to speak up. Moreover, it
would be good if State was instructed to do so—because if you alone do
so the newspapers will be full of stories, attributed to State Department
officials, critical of your position on human rights.
On detente and Africa, I remain of the view that the position
you stated at Annapolis9 should be the basic guideline—and not the
twist put on it by subsequent testimony before Congress and by the
McHenry trip. Unless both we and the Soviets come to exercise re-
straint in the injection of force into Third World disputes, the situation
will become more tense, with negative consequences for all. I believe
your Annapolis formulations on detente should be reiterated pub-
licly—and perhaps the Congressional meeting Monday11 night might
be a good place for such initial restatement (with Cy then echoing you).
In addition, we should give serious consideration to the possibility
of limiting either some exchanges with the Soviets or the flow of U.S.
technology to the Soviet Union. Words alone cannot successfully
convey to the Soviet Union that we are seriously concerned about some
of the above-mentioned matters. Some moderate but deliberate action
is also necessary, and exchanges and the technology flow provide the
most obvious avenues.
Ultimately, detente is not an end in itself but a means of achieving
a more cooperative world. If we let detente be defined primarily by So-
viet actions, we will pay a high price internationally and also domest-
ically (and the latter is becoming evident already).
D. Africa
We plunged heavily into African problems—which, alas, the
British created. But should we be so heavily engaged? And should we
really lean towards Nkomo, Neto, etc.—and not Muzorewa, Savimbi,
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Senghor, etc? Sadat was very eloquent on these points with the Vice
President, and perhaps Fritz has reported this to you already.
I know that our commitment is to majority rule, and not to any par-
ticular individuals or orientation. Yet the perceived effect of our policy is
to favor the left and the guerrillas. Moreover, in Angola, we are begin-
ning to inch up to Neto, who does not even command the support of his
own people.
Perhaps the British will succeed in seducing Nkomo—but if they
do not, then maybe we should choose to quietly disengage and lower
our own direct involvement. This will not be a satisfactory outcome,
but it may be better than being drawn into a massive conflict between
the forces of apartheid and Soviet/Cuban dominated guerrillas.
A final thought: our foreign policy till now has been heavily
“contractual.” Yet political problems cannot be resolved by patient ne-
gotiation of peace contracts or agreements alone. At some point, it is
necessary to bring a situation to a head—to have a brief crisis or con-
frontation even—and then to resolve it, with one’s own forces mar-
shalled in the background to provide the needed sanction or leverage.
This is essentially true of the Middle East and of U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions. A period of tension with Israel is probably an unavoidable pre-
lude to a settlement; U.S.-Soviet frictions in the past contributed to the
development of mutually understood rules of the game governing Eu-
ropean affairs and the strategic equation. The same may now be needed
regarding human rights and intervention in Third World problems. A
period of friction or crisis is not the same thing as a confrontation—and
it should not be viewed as mindless advocacy of conflict. But unless
some situations are brought to a head, they are likely to fester, with de-
structive consequences for either regional or international peace.
Making the right choice at the critical moment is ultimately the basic
test of statesmanship.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
92.
Remarks by President Carter
Bonn, July 17, 1978
Having been fortunate enough to make an official state visit to the
Federal Republic of Germany immediately prior to the summit confer-
ence, I would like to express the thanks, on behalf of all the American
delegation, to President Scheel, to Chancellor Schmidt, and to the
people of the Federal Republic, for their hospitality.
I have been very pleased at the results of this summit conference.
The results have exceeded the expectation of all of us. The discussions
and the conclusions have been carefully prepared. Each one of us has
been cautious at this summit not to promise things which we could not
subsequently deliver.
The assessments have been long, sometimes tedious, but compre-
hensive in nature. They are substantive and specific. I think each leader
has gone the limit, within the bounds of political actualities, to con-
tribute everything possible from our own individual nations to the
common well-being of the world.
Our contributions have been mutually supportive. They have been
different, one from another, because our capabilities and our needs are
different.
We have dealt with the very serious problem of protectionism and
mutually committed ourselves to successfully concluding the multilat-
eral trade negotiations to permit free markets to keep our people em-
ployed at home.
The Federal Republic of Germany, the Government of Japan, have
generously committed themselves to increased economic growth.
Other nations have joined in this commitment. The United States, rec-
ognizing our own responsibilities, and at the request of others, have
committed ourselves to a comprehensive energy policy and its imple-
mentation—to cut down the importation of oil by 2½ million barrels a
day by the year 1985, to raise the price of oil, which is too cheap in our
own country, to the world market level to discourage waste.
7: p.m. at the conclusion of the Bonn Economic Summit in the Bonn Stadt Theater fol-
lowing statements made by Schmidt, Trudeau, Giscard, Andreotti, Fukuda, and Cal-
laghan. The President departed Washington on July 13 and made a State visit to the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany July 14–15, prior to attending the economic summit, which
took place at the Palais Schaumburg July 16–17. Documentation on the State visit is
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVII, Western Europe.
For the minutes of the economic summit meetings, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
III, Foreign Economic Policy, Documents 142–145. For the text of the declaration issued at
the conclusion of the summit meeting and a joint statement on international terrorism,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We and the Canadians have recognized our need to provide some
predictability, some dependability upon a supply of nuclear fuels to
other nations, commensurate with a mutual profession against pro-
liferation of nuclear explosives and the adherence to international
safeguards.
We have all been concerned about inflation and have made our
plans to deal with this all-pervasive threat throughout the world.
This is a time when we also recognize our strength, our stability,
the benefits of peace. And our hope is that in the analysis of transient
problems, with which we are trying to deal successfully, that we need
not ever lose sight of the base of common purpose that binds us to-
gether in a successful endeavor in the free and democratic nations of
the world.
We will be carefully monitoring progress after this summit ad-
journs, to make sure that those commitments made in sincerity are not
forgotten nor abandoned in the months ahead.
I would like to say, finally, that we have not forgotten the devel-
oping nations of the world. We are fortunate, we’ve been blessed with
economic and political and military strength and with a fine, high
standard of living for our own people. We recognize the need to share
this with other, less developed countries. And all these cumulative
commitments, I think, will be very good and constructive for the entire
world economy in the months ahead.
I personally believe that the strong statement on controlling air pi-
racy, terrorism, is in itself worth the entire preparation and conduct of
the summit. We are determined that this commitment be carried out in-
dividually and collectively. And our Foreign Ministers have been in-
structed immediately to contact other nations around the world
without delay, to encourage them to join in with us in this substantive
and, I think, adequate move to prevent air hijacking in the future.
I leave this summit conference with a resolve to carry out our pur-
poses, to continue our mutual discussions and consultations, and with
a new sense of confidence.
This has been a very successful meeting among us. The prepara-
tion for it was very instructive and educational, and the superb chair-
manship of Chancellor Schmidt has helped to ensure its success.

93.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, August 4, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #69
1. Opinion
Negotiations/Consultations
In our foreign policy we have placed primary emphasis on two dif-
ferent efforts:
1. Obtaining Congressional support for major but controversial
(and hence politically costly) undertakings;
2. Negotiating the resolution of genuinely important issues (no-
tably SALT, the Middle East, and Southern Africa).
We have done well on the former; we are making some progress
on the latter.
I believe, however, that we need to engage also to a greater extent
in consultations, the explicit purpose of which is to generate mutual un-
derstanding and the implicit consequence of which might be also some
greater accommodation with the parties concerned.
For example, Andy’s2 great success in Africa is based not only on
our approach to Rhodesia and Namibia but also on the series of consul-
tative trips he has taken to the region and the rapport he has helped
you establish with African leaders. Moreover, I believe it is fair to say
that the Chinese would have never agreed to the kind of flexibility and
movement that has now developed in our relationship if I had simply
put a negotiating proposal before them on the table. Prior to my visit,
they were insisting that everything depended on normalization; now
they have in effect accepted the segmentation of the relationship into
three parts (the process of normalization; the expansion of governmental
bilateral relations; consultations on international issues). But that
emerged as a byproduct of prolonged discussions (some 15 hours) on
broad subjects, which contributed to greater mutual understanding.
I think we need to do that also with the Soviets. Nixon himself,
using Kissinger in addition to negotiating with them, would occasion-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ally engage in discussions in depth and at length, regarding our respec-
tive world viewpoints, interests, trends, etc., thereby also creating the
context for some accommodation. We have not done enough of that—
and Dobrynin has hinted to me as much. Given the present frictions, an
effort to clear the air—but on the basis of firmness regarding those
matters which we consider important (notably their military buildup
and their conduct in the third world)—is needed.
Historically, a phase of friction in U.S.-Soviet relations has contrib-
uted to the emergence of new “rules of the game,” regarding either re-
straint in the use of conventional forces, or on strategic matters, or even
regarding espionage. We now need to develop similar understandings
regarding restraint and accommodation on such matters as the use of
military proxies or direct military intrusion into third world conflicts.
But that will require candid and prolonged discussions.
In general, our approach has been one in which we have focused
on the negotiation of specific issues, in a legal-contractual fashion,
somewhat neglecting the need to develop and sustain a political
dialogue.
I would think that it would be especially useful if you would dis-
patch periodically Cy, me, Andy, and others—to talk to the principal
leaders with whom we are trying to maintain or develop closer rela-
tions: this would be flattering even to Giscard, or Schmidt, or Fukuda—
and certainly to the Shah, or Fahd, or Obasanjo, or Desai; and it would
also be useful with Hua, or Tito, Gierek, Ceausescu, etc. This could sup-
plement your direct personal contact with these leaders, and in some
cases could reinforce any ongoing negotiations.
From the domestic point of view, doing the above would also
convey the feeling that you are deliberately orchestrating some of the di-
versity of viewpoints around you on behalf of your strategic goals. Inci-
dentally, the Soviets have long used, and quite effectively, the tactic of
occasionally sending “hard” spokesmen to convey a soft message, and
“soft” spokesmen to convey a hard message, in order to enhance the
credibility of that message, and to show that the “soft” and “hard” op-
tions are deliberate instruments of policy and not merely reflections of
internal vacillation. FDR did some of the same, and it is in your interest
to promote also such a perception of yourself.
Finally, there is the fact that such consultations—conducted on a
regular basis with ten or so top leaders around the world—would re-
duce some of the foreign misunderstandings and anxieties regarding
our policy.
Cy is departing tonight for the Middle East where he will, in effect,
carry out at least in part the kind of consultations I have in mind with

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
leaders there. In addition, I would suggest the following as further
examples:
—A meeting on your behalf with Hua this fall when he visits
Eastern Europe, or you personally might meet with Teng at Princeton if
he comes to the UNGA (and that would be quite dramatic).
—A mid-fall swing through Africa by Andy to consult on how the
Rhodesian situation is evolving and the Namibian settlement being im-
plemented. This might be accompanied by a special side visit by an em-
issary to South Africa.
—A consultative visit to key European capitals (including some
East European) and the Shah in the fall both on foreign policy and key
economic issues.
—If there is no U.S.-Soviet summit this year, broad consultations
in Moscow (maybe even involving not only Cy’s but also my
participation).
2. Analysis
Key Foreign Policy Votes in 1978
There have been four key votes on foreign policy issues this year:
Panama, the Middle East Arms Sales, lifting the embargo against
Turkey, and Rhodesia.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—Fifteen Senators (11D/4R) have sided consistently with the Ad-
ministration; 5 are not returning to the Senate (marked by an asterisk),
and none are up for reelection.
Democrats:
Bumpers
P. Hatfield *
McGovern
Culver
Hodges *
Ribicoff
Glenn
Humphrey *
Sparkman *
Gravel
Inouye
Republicans:
Chafee
Pearson *
Mathias
Stafford
—Twenty-five Senators (19D/6R) have voted with the Adminis-
tration 3 out of 4 times, including: Robert Byrd, Church, Hart, Long,
Muskie, Baker, Hayakawa, Percy.
—Forty-seven Senators (26D/21R) have voted with the Adminis-
tration half the time, including: Cranston, Jackson, Kennedy, Moynihan,
Nunn, Stennis, Goldwater, Javits.
—Four Senators—Dole, Domenici, Laxalt and the Allens—have
never voted with the Administration.
Based on the above, here are a few observations:
tions. It probably contains many Democrats who think they have done
enough and many Republicans who may think they have done too
much already.
2. We should probably work the most on those who have voted
with us half the time. The split seems to be on liberal/conservative
lines, based on fairly emotional issues. Less emotional issues may pro-
duce different divisions, thus we must work with this group closely.
3. Those who never vote with the Administration are clearly doing
it for party reasons and are hopeless.
4. Baker’s support and that of the Republicans is what has made up
for Democratic defections. It should be noted, however, that the Repub-
lican group that supports us shifts and that we won without Baker on
Rhodesia.
Public Views on U.S. Military Strength
Recent polls indicate that a majority of Americans are now dissat-
isfied with how U.S. military power compares to that of the Soviet
Union. The proportion of the public feeling such dissatisfaction has
been rising since late 1976, when it stood at 41 percent. Late this spring,
it reached 55 percent.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
The number of Americans who prefer the United States to be “su-
perior” to the USSR has stayed between 46 and 48 percent over the past
18 months (47 percent prefer the U.S. to be “about equal”). The in-
creased dissatisfaction with America’s relative military power comes
from the increased number who have come to perceive the United
States as being weaker than the USSR.
In a poll taken last month, 42 percent of the public said the United
States was militarily weaker than the USSR (up from 27 percent in late
1976). Only 12 percent said the United States was militarily stronger
(down from 29 percent in late 1976).
Brezhnev on Foreign Economic Relations
Two years ago Brezhnev had this to say about the relationship be-
tween foreign policy and economic relations: “In foreign economic re-
lations, politics and economics, diplomacy and commerce, industrial
production and trade are woven together. Consequently, the approach
to them and the management of them must be integrated, tying into
one knot the efforts of all departments and, our political and economic
interests. This is precisely how the Party’s Central Committee has
posed this important question.”
4. National Security Affairs Calendar (Tab A)
5. Foreign Media Reaction (Tab B)

94.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting
SUBJECT
U.S.-Soviet Relations: Policy Implications of Interaction of Political Trends in Key
Regions with Soviet Conventional and Strategic Buildup
PARTICIPANTS
The President
CIA:
The Vice President
Admiral Stansfield Turner
State:
White House:
Secretary Cyrus Vance
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. Hamilton Jordan
Defense:
Secretary Harold Brown
NSC:
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
ACDA:
(notetaker)
Mr. Paul Warnke
JCS:
General David Jones
The meeting started with Brzezinski making the point that the pur-
pose of the meeting is to examine the implications for U.S. policy of the
interaction of political trends in key regions with the Soviet strategic
and conventional buildup. He then suggested that the President call
upon Stan Turner to initiate a discussion in regard to the three regions
mentioned in the agenda given in the recent NIE.
Turner: The Soviets are more assertive because of their power; be-
cause they feel that the U.S. is not as competitive. They are aware of the
limitations of their power but they see detente as permitting effective
competition. Moreover, their increasing war fighting capability gives
them greater confidence. They are buoyed by their experience in Africa.
Moreover, abroad the perception is one of change in the balance of
power.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
The President: Are the Soviets better off today than they were a few
years ago? Are they better off now in Africa than they were three or
four years ago?
Turner: The record in Africa is mixed, but one should note Ethiopia
and Angola.
The President: Let’s consider where the Soviets are now stronger
than they were, where their political influence is greater.
Turner: I think they are clearly in a stronger position in Africa, in
India and Pakistan, and in Southeast Asia.
The President: Even considering what happened to them in Egypt?
Turner: Yes.
Vance: I don’t agree. Look at what happened to them in Egypt, So-
malia, Guinea and the Sudan. They tried to block the Namibia settle-
ment but it went ahead. In India, Desai has replaced Gandhi and Desai
is more to the center. It is not clear at all that their position around the
world is better today than it has been.
Brown: Their position in Ethiopia is better. And certainly their role
in Rhodesia compared to five or seven years ago is greater and more
troublesome. On Namibia, the outcome remains to be seen. In North
Africa, Qhadafi is a wild card and they have some influence with
him. The Soviets are shipping substantial arms to Libya. The picture is
mixed politically in the Pacific.
Brzezinski: We have to compare the present Soviet position and ac-
tion with what it has been in the past. Under Stalin the Soviets concen-
trated on areas in immediate proximity to them (above all Europe) and
we contained them. Then Khrushchev tried to use Sputnik and general
Soviet momentum to launch a political, ideological appeal of global di-
mensions. This effort failed and in this Cy Vance is right. But today we
face an ominous development in which the Soviets are compensating
for the decline in their economic and ideological appeal with military
pressure—massive arms, insertion of troops. It is a clear sign of their
confidence in the military dimension of the balance that they moved to
insert Cuban troops in Africa. This has major political implications.
The President: I sense that three or four years ago the Soviets saw
Sub-Saharan Africa as an open field. Now, if the Soviets intrude, they
face opposition from us, Black leaders elsewhere in Africa, and from
the world. So they cannot see Africa as an open, unimpeded avenue.
Also, in Europe they face the problem of Euro-Communism. And in
Eastern Asia I think their influence has weakened.
Turner: But they are in a much stronger position in Vietnam and
this is the dominating consideration in Southeast Asia. I think there is a
standoff in Japan. But I think they are in a better position in India and
Pakistan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Vance: North Korea leans more towards China than in the past. The
Japan-China PFT was a blow to them in the world generally.
The President: If I look at things from Brezhnev’s perspective, I
would feel that what causes us problems also causes him problems. He
doesn’t want to see Angola or Cuba or Vietnam or China turn to the
West; or have Mozambique turn to us for trade; or to see trade between
us and Eastern Europe build up. If I were Brezhnev, I would hate to see
these things happen. We have to take advantage of our opportunities
and it is for this group to see that we do.
Brown: The Soviets are not a likable partner. When they get in, they
seek to dominate. But if you compare their situation with five years
ago, they are better off even if they do have the problems the President
cited. Their influence with India, Pakistan and so forth, depends on
their military power. They don’t have much in the way of economic
power. Though the Soviets do have real worries, they do have levers—
above all the military. In all of the places we have talked about, they
feel the Soviets are relatively more powerful, vis-a-vis the U.S., than
they were five years ago. There is a certain ambivalence in response: for
example, it has moved the Europeans to spend more. The Soviets are
respected and feared, not loved, but they have options. So the Soviets
may have certain apprehensions but do think they are much better off
today than they were.
The President: We should enumerate the areas where we think we
have a problem—political, trade, or military influence. We should ap-
proach each country or area as a separate question to be addressed.
Congress is more aware of the need for peaceful competition with the
Soviets than ever before. We should plan our political strategy on this
basis and consult with Congress and get them aboard. For example,
Mozambique and Angola are good cases for moving. What are others?
We need to do this on a country-by-country basis: where we should
move, what the problems are, the key Congressional elements to get on
board, how to win public approval for our efforts. Our strength should
help us. Brezhnev is vulnerable to competition. We have gotten the
Allies to go with us. We should explore how we can do this with others.
I want to discuss our military presence abroad. I want to consider
places where we can make it felt without direct military confrontation. I
have no feel from Harold Brown or the JCS of the consequences of a
military base in the Sinai. If at Camp David there is no agreement,3
there will be fear for the future and a U.S. base could be stabilizing. I
don’t know if we should do it, or how rapid the Soviet reaction would
be. This is one place for a military presence and there may be others in
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
the world. We should publicize our military presence elsewhere in the
world.
Twelve months of our propaganda against the Cubans in Africa
has led to worldwide pressure on them to get out. They are moving out
of Ethiopia and it will be hard for them to stay in Angola.
Our reputation for weakness, vis-a-vis the Soviets, is not deserved.
Many of us are guilty of this. For example, at defense budget time, we
tend to play up Soviet military capabilities and downplay our own.
When we decided to have a public demonstration of our defense capa-
bilities, the cruise missile test failed. We need a careful public relations
effort to show that we are strong militarily as well as economically and
politically. We recognize the Soviet buildup, but we are not vulnerable
or weak. We have to put all of this into proper perspective and correct
the weaknesses we have acknowledged. We have to do this in the de-
fense budget for 1980 and decide what is best for us.
Jones: The JCS have had a lot of discussion of this. They see a di-
lemma. Things now are better than they are perceived but the trends
for the future are worse than they are perceived. And the perception of
imbalance today takes the focus away from the really serious problem
of imbalance in the future. There is a deeper underlying concern about
the military trends in the JCS than I have ever seen, and it is real and
genuine. What we do today won’t impact on the military balance until
the future, but it will affect the perceptions of the future and the
present.
Brown: There is too pessimistic a view of the military balance now
and not a pessimistic enough view of the balance in 1982–83.
Brzezinski: We have to separate the global competition with the So-
viets from the competitions in peripheral areas. We will do well enough
in the peripheral areas. The Soviets will not sweep over Africa.
I am more concerned about Soviet power and perceptions in two
areas—Western Europe and the Persian Gulf—which could affect the
overall U.S./Soviet balance. In Europe we and the Europeans are doing
more than ever before to assure a conventional balance. But internal
politics and instabilities in Europe may mean that Europe’s stronger
NATO shield will be held with a trembling hand. There are also in-
ternal difficulties in Saudi Arabia and the situation is unstable in Iran
and Yemen. Both Saudi Arabia and Iran are concerned about the power
balance between us and the Soviets. They see troublesome ambiguities
in our conduct.
Vance: Some military trends are very disturbing. But we are better
off politically than we give ourselves credit for. I agree with the Presi-
dent’s presentation, but there could be serious political effects down
the road from the military trends.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Warnke: The description on pages 10 and 11 of Soviet motives in
arms control applies precisely to us as well.
Brown: Some events in Europe already can be attributed to the mil-
itary trends and Soviet power. The 3 percent defense budget increase is
one. But Norway backed off FRG participation in an exercise and,
though there are domestic reasons, I think perceptions of Soviet power
were involved. The Germans themselves may be starting to negotiate
with the Soviets on different security premises—I am thinking of Bahr
and Wehner. It is hard to see how much all this has to do with military
power, but it has something to do with it.
Turner: On the President’s remarks, the Soviets would not be both-
ered if Angola turns somewhat to the West. They would still have
20,000 Cuban troops there. The UNITA still gives them reason to re-
main. As for more trade between the West and Eastern Europe, it is not
a major factor in their economy and they are now turning back to the
Soviets in any event. On Cuba, we can open relations, but Cuba will
still be so dependent on the Soviets that the Soviets cannot be replaced.
The Soviets would see all of these steps as retrograde but they would
not tremble.
Vance: I think we should work with the Germans on Poland. The
Germans just turned down a loan. Zbig and I have been discussing this.
The Vice President: I think we have made impressive progress in
Eastern Europe. In Yugoslavia, we have good relations where before
we were barely able to talk to them. The return of the Crown to Hun-
gary had a strong psychological effect. We have good relations with
Romania.
The President: I think our relation with Nigeria is a notable achieve-
ment in our African policy.
I sense in Harold Brown’s memo5 and in the NIE a feeling of de-
spair and of abject inferiority. I don’t feel this. If I look at the globe from
Brezhnev’s standpoint, I see tremendous problems everywhere, start-
ing with uncertain allies. I don’t feel the sense of Soviet superiority that
is in these memos. We should start to be more hard-nosed about our
defense expenditures. There are things we can do that would cause the
Soviets concern. We should not tell Brezhnev that we are building a big
nuclear carrier and a fleet of escorts, and not GLCMs or medium-range

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
ballistic missiles in Europe. We should focus our defense spending on
the most important weapons that show our strength. Our substance is
sapped by non-weapons spending in the defense budget. We should
also consider the proportion of the Soviet budget that goes to meet
China, to control Eastern Europe, and to build a continental air defense
that we don’t have to depend on. We have done too much equivocating
with Congress on defense.
Brown: Efficient management is important. But we cannot simply
pick three or four important weapons. The total amount of money we
spend determines our military capabilities. Soviet expenditures are ef-
ficient. We don’t think much of Soviet air defenses, but they have a dif-
ferent doctrine and this expenditure contributes to their sense of
security.
Brzezinski: Two points: 1) we have to make measured responses to
the Soviets on the defense level; 2) politically, we are in one of those pe-
riods of friction with the Soviets which in the past have tended to pro-
duce new rules governing the relationship. The Soviets may learn from
the costs they are now incurring, e.g., developments in the non-aligned
movement and the Chinese move into Africa and now Europe. So we
need to exercise considerable caution in how we handle the Soviets in
this period of friction. We should insulate SALT and other arms control
matters as much as we can. But we should be wary of initiatives that in-
vite the Soviets to forget what has happened (the difficulties they have
created) and make sure we make them reflect on the political costs of
their actions. If we do this it may result, as it has in the past, in greater
restraint in their future behavior. We must let them know that Third
World turbulence will be with us for a long time and that their relations
with us will be affected by how the Soviets behave. I think we are on
the right course and we should keep on it.
The President: Other than increasing the defense budget, what else
should we do to improve relations with the Soviets?
Vance: The key still is SALT. I think nothing will improve the rela-
tionship unless we have a SALT agreement.
Brzezinski: SALT may no longer be so decisive in the overall polit-
ical and military relationship.
Brown: The relationship may get somewhat worse without SALT.
But will it get better with SALT? I doubt it.
The Vice President: We have pursued human rights for more than a
year. Is it a net plus or what? By pouring it on the Soviets on human
rights, do we strengthen the people we don’t want to come to power?
U.S. opinion thinks we have overdone it with the Soviets on human
rights.
Brzezinski: What actually have we done? We have been restrained
in terms of government acts and have not talked much about human

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
rights in the Soviet Union, after the gestures at the beginning of the
Administration.
The Vice President: But are we strengthening the Soviet elements we
don’t like. Suslov must be arguing that Helsinki got them in a lot of
trouble and encouraged centrifugal tendencies in Eastern Europe and
in the Soviet Union. Now the U.S. is exploiting these tendencies to
weaken the Soviet Union. The Soviet reaction may be that we have to
get tough, we need leaders who will stand up to the United States.
The President: Our human rights stance aggravated the Soviets.
Some Allies think we did too much.
Page 25 of the NIE lists five goals of Soviet policy. I assume they
are still applicable today.
Brzezinski: The goal of movement into the Third World has higher
priority for the Soviet Union today.
The Vice President: The Soviets wish they had never signed Helsinki
but they are stuck with it. It is now a major factor in relations between
the Soviets and Eastern Europe as well as the West. We have to stand
on our position on the Helsinki accords. But some of the things we have
to say do strengthen the hard liners. It is a tricky road to walk. We have
to stand behind our position.
Warnke: This is partly the price the Soviets had to pay to get the rec-
ognition of the European status quo at Helsinki.
Brzezinski: It is a mistake to punish the Soviets for their actions on
human rights and not for their actions in the Third World. Unfortu-
nately, this is the impression that was conveyed by the efforts sur-
rounding Shcharanskiy, etc. The prevailing impression is that we are
penalizing the Soviets for how they conducted their internal affairs
rather than for their international behavior where we are on much
stronger ground.
The President: I don’t disagree. But both are part of the successful
arousing of world public opinion against the Soviets, both speaking out
on human rights and my statements on Africa. I feel that as a result
the Soviets have lost esteem in the non-aligned movement and in the
Western world. I remember when we used to be on the defensive on
human rights. We were the target and the Soviets were the great pro-
tector of human rights. We were seen as aggressors because of Viet-
nam. Now the Soviets have the onus of being intruders, especially in
Africa with the Cubans. We have done part of the job and have had a
net gain on this.
I sense in this meeting a special concern with the rate of the Soviet
military buildup and our response. But we stand well everywhere else.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
We need an objective analysis of the proportion of the Soviet mili-
tary budget which is not comparable to our own needs. After all, we
don’t have to maintain a million men on the Canadian border.
Brown: Twenty-five percent of the Soviet budget goes for defense
against China. But the forces they maintain in Eastern Europe are the
forces they would use for attack on Western Europe.
The President: You have about got me convinced that we need to do
more on defense. We also have to compete in other areas for minds and
hearts in different countries—through trade, economic relations and
the like. We should delineate the things we can do above and beyond
the military, that would let us compete peacefully.
Brzezinski: We are developing with State a package of measures to
undercut the Soviets and Cubans in Africa.
The President: What can we do to assure the Saudis and Iran? We
need an NIE on the kinds of peaceful actions that can permit us to com-
pete around the world. It ought to assess the various nations and re-
gions, assess the use of our technology, and develop a propaganda ef-
fort designed to show that our strength is greater than now perceived.
We should all make an effort to do this and to sell our position.
Brzezinski: This must entail a strategic concept: 1) continued
strengthening of our relations with the European Allies; 2) stronger re-
lations with Saudi Arabia and Iran; 3) stronger relations with Japan,
China, and Korea.
The President: This should be in the spirit of peaceful competition
with the Soviets. We do have to make sure that there is no need for
apology on the military side. Maybe we are deficient on this, or have
been in the past. We should remedy the deficencies.
Brown: Military power won’t win for us. We have to rely on other
things to build our influence. For example, things are looking better
with Iraq—they are turning to us because we have things to offer.
The Vice President: We should involve the private sector more.
American businessmen see more people around the world than gov-
ernment officials do. Our world economic position is shrinking. We
ought to particularly enlarge and expand our position in Asia and help
the private sector to do this.
Vance: We are already doing a great deal. Chuck Robinson will be
leading an OPIC group to the Far East. John Moore will be going to
Japan.
The President: We ought to use the 50 state governors, for example,
ask them to organize trade missions to various countries. They would
be delighted.
We should put together a program on what we could do in the
peaceful competition, vis-a-vis various countries. We need to identify
the specific countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Brzezinski: The countries should be identified strategically in rela-
tionship to our stance vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and China.
The Vice President: We should do more to compete economically.
The recent tax law means that U.S. multinational firms are hiring non-
U.S. citizens because it is easier and cheaper. This is the kind of mistake
we should work on.
The President: When Eanes came to the NATO Summit meeting, he
was very concerned about Spain and, in answer to my question, said
we could help by getting the key conservative Spanish military leaders
to visit the U.S., and we did that. I think we should reach out our hands
to military leaders and others and do more to bring people to the U.S.
Brown: Bringing military leaders here also reassures them about
our capabilities because of what they see here.
Brzezinski: We will do a paper summarizing the conclusions of this
meeting and the things that should be done.
The President: I want to ask Paul Warnke what he thinks the impact
would be on the Soviets’ desire for cooperation with us and detente if
we were to commit GLCMs to Western Europe and establish a military
presence in the Middle East.
Warnke: The Soviets would feel that they would have to match us
with conventional GLCMs in Europe, but putting GLCMs in Europe
would not torpedo SALT. It would just accelerate Soviet development
of cruise missile capabilities. But would Western Europe feel better if
both sides had cruise missiles, rather than neither having them? I think
that there would be greater fear in Western Europe of surprise attack.
Brzezinski: Cruise missiles are not a surprise attack weapon.
Jones: Our inability to talk about command and control of cruise
missiles with the Allies—targeting, range, and the like—is slowing our
GLCM programs and this is what caused the slip from 1982. We need to
open a dialogue with the Allies on these subjects. The dialogue itself
would help to reassure the Allies.
The President: With reference to the trip I have asked Harold Brown
to make to Europe, I have to do a personal letter to Callaghan, Schmidt
and Giscard to find out what their thinking is and what they will do on:
rope. I don’t have answers from them on these items.
I have no doubt that if the Soviets had a chance to get a military
base in the Middle East they would do it. But is it good for us to do it?
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Warnke: To return to your first question, I think the main Soviet re-
action to putting GLCMs in Europe would be a very heavy ERW-style
campaign on the Germans. They would react in this manner rather than
in SALT.
They would see an American military base in the Sinai as separate
from SALT. They don’t believe in linkage. They would not like it but
they would accept it. It would not interfere with arms control.
Vance: In my session with the SFRC, they went into the question of
a military base in the Middle East at length. I said that the suggestion
had been put to the U.S. but that we had made no decision. Glenn
thought it would be very serious, that it would change the whole
relationship with Israel and the Arabs and that it would increase the
possibility of our being involved in a conflict. The question is very
controversial.
Brown: Details on any base in the Middle East will matter in reac-
tions to it. One is whether Israel and Egypt each asked for it. Another is
the kind of base—for example, the JCS are examining a trilateral—U.S.-
Israel-Egyptian—base for training purposes. In any event, the chances
of our being embroiled in a conflict in the area would go up if we have a
base there.
Vance: I think that if a base is critical to a security guarantee and the
linchpin that will get us a peace agreement, then we should do it. But it
should not just be thrown in at any point.
Jones: We are looking at a trilateral training base that would be
open to all.
The President: Both Begin and Sadat raised the base with me. Sadat
said that we should conclude a mutual security treaty with Israel. I
need an answer on the base question for the Camp David meeting. The
Israelis have always said they don’t want U.S. troops. But I might face a
request on the base nonetheless. I don’t know whether we want the
base option or not. Looking at our problem in reassuring Saudi Arabia,
Iran, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, do we want a land presence in the Middle
East or are our ships in the Eastern Mediterranean enough?
Brown: We have done a paper which we have given to Zbig and to
Cy’s people. There are marginal military advantages to an American
military base in the Sinai. But it does mean that we are more likely to be
involved in any conflict. If it is needed as a guarantee to secure a peace
agreement, then it is sensible and there are military advantages in rela-
tion to the region. And a peace agreement in the Middle East cancels
out the added risk that a base entails of getting involved in a conflict.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Brzezinski: A base helps secure a Middle East agreement. It also
gives Saudi Arabia and Iran reassurance.
The President: Does the U.S. want a base in the Middle East if we
can get a peace settlement without it? Do we want a base to reassure the
Saudis and Iran?
Brown: We have to be asked to establish a base by Egypt and Israel.
If we have choices in the matter, we should not establish a base if it is
not necessary to get a peace settlement.
Jones: We would prefer a base in Saudi Arabia from the military
standpoint and the critical importance of Saudi Arabia.
Brzezinski: A base in the Sinai does more for us throughout the
region. A base in Saudi Arabia will be more susceptible to internal
instability.
The Vice President: If we can get a peace settlement, we should be
ready to pay for it with a base. The Sinai accords and the electronic
systems set up are very important. Sadat would like an excuse not to in-
vade Israel and to help resist his hotheads. There is nothing now in the
way. An American base in the Sinai would be just a psychological, sta-
bilizing presence.
Vance: A base would certainly help us with the problem of what to
do with the air base in the Sinai and with the Israeli settlements prob-
lem as well.
The President: The base would be on Egyptian soil. If I thought
there were any opposition from Egypt or Israel to a base, then I wouldn’t
do it. But I do think a base would contribute to stability in the area.
Turner: Saudi support for a base will be critical. The Soviets will try
hard to split the Arabs on the issue and Saudi support will be needed to
help hold firm against this.
The President: This meeting has been helpful to me. I would like to
ask each of you to send Zbig further thoughts and comments on the
issues we discussed and on the items we talked about doing.

95.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Strategy for Camp David
For the talks at Camp David to succeed, you will have to control the
proceedings from the outset and thereafter pursue a deliberate political
strategy designed to bring about significant changes in both the Egyp-
tian and Israeli substantive positions. I strongly suggest that you bear
the following points in mind:
1. Sadat cannot afford a failure and he knows it; both Sadat and Begin
think that you cannot afford failure; but Begin probably believes that a
failure at Camp David will hurt you and Sadat, but not him. He may even
want to see Sadat discredited and you weakened, thus leaving him
with the tolerable status quo instead of pressures to change his life-long
beliefs concerning Judea and Samaria.
2. You will have to convince both leaders, but especially Begin, that
failure at Camp David will have directly adverse consequences for our
bilateral relations and in terms of Soviet influence in the region.
3. Sadat will define success in terms of substance, and in particular an
Israeli commitment to the principle of withdrawal on all fronts. Begin
will define success largely in terms of procedural arrangements and will be
very resistant to pressures for substantive concessions.
4. You will have to persuade Begin to make some substantive con-
cessions, while convincing Sadat to settle for less than an explicit Israeli
commitment to full withdrawal and Palestinian self-determination.
5. Your most important meetings will be with each leader individually,
not with both together. You cannot expect Sadat and Begin to reveal their
fall-back positions in front of each other, but in private you may be able
to move them toward greater flexibility.
6. During the first round of meetings, you will want to reestablish a
personal relationship with each leader, expressing your understanding
of their concerns and appealing to their statesmanship. During the sec-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ond and third days, you will want to be frank and direct in discussing
substantive points. Begin in particular will need time to reflect on what
you say. There will be a natural break in the talks on Saturday, and
Begin should understand that you will be pressing for decisions on
Sunday.
7. Both Sadat and Begin must starkly see the consequences of success and
failure if they are to make hard choices.
—Failure brought on by Sadat’s intransigence would bring to an
end the special US-Egyptian relationship. Even if Sadat is not held re-
sponsible for the collapse of negotiations, we would find it increasingly
difficult to maintain the close ties of the past few years and the Soviet
Union would find opportunities to strengthen its position in the area at
Sadat’s expense as well as our own. Sadat must be told that we cannot
afford more surprise moves by him if we are to work together effec-
tively for a peace agreement. We expect to be consulted before Sadat
takes new initiatives.
—Begin must see that US-Israeli relations are based on reciprocity.
Our commitment to Israel’s security and well-being must be met by an
Israeli understanding of our national interests. If Israel is responsible for
blocking progress toward peace in the Middle East, Begin should be told clearly
that you will have to take the following steps, which could affect the US-Israeli
relationship:
—Go to the American public with a full explanation of US national
interests in the Middle East (strategic relations with Soviets, economic in-
terests, oil, cooperation with moderate regimes).
—Explain the scale of US aid to Israel ($10 billion since 1973, or
nearly $4000 for each Israeli citizen). Despite this, Israel is unwilling to
reciprocate by showing flexibility in negotiations.
—We will be prepared to spell out publicly our views on a fair settlement.
—We will be unable to defend Israel’s position if the negotiations
shift to the UN or Geneva.
—Both Sadat and Begin can be assured that progress toward peace
will mean a strong relationship with the United States, including in the
economic and security areas, and enhanced ability to control develop-
ments in the region in ways that will serve our mutual interests.
8. The absolute minimum you want from each leader is the
following:
—From Sadat:
—Acceptance of a long-term Israeli security presence in the West Bank/
Gaza.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
—A five-year interim regime for the West Bank/Gaza; no independent
Palestinian state; deferral of negotiations on borders and sovereignty
until end of five-year period.
—Less than an Israeli commitment to full withdrawal and Palestinian
self-determination as guidelines for negotiations.
—Willingness to negotiate guidelines for West Bank/Gaza even if
Hussein does not come in.
—Repetition of “no more war” pledge; willingness to renew
UNEF in October; honoring terms of Sinai II, including commitment to
peaceful resolution of differences.
—A willingness to negotiate seriously if an agreement on prin-
ciples is reached.
—From Begin:
—Acceptance of all the principles of 242, including withdrawal
and the “inadmissability of acquisition of territory by war,” as appli-
cable on all fronts.
—Modifications in “self-rule” proposal in order to make it sufficiently
attractive to moderate Palestinians to bring them in as participants and
to increase prospects of their accepting its main features (open borders,
some Israeli security presence, some Israeli rights to live in West Bank,
self-government) beyond five years. These modifications require6 an Is-
raeli acceptance of the principle of withdrawal; a moratorium on organized set-
tlement activity, in contrast to the rights of individuals to acquire land on a re-
ciprocal basis; a visible termination of the military occupation at the outset of
the five-year period; devolution of authority for the new regime from an agree-
ment among Israel, Egypt, and Jordan; and general self-government for the
Palestinians.
—Flexibility on the remaining issues of settlements and air bases in
Sinai.
9. Begin and Sadat are likely to try to shift the discussions to new pro-
posals of their own. Begin may concentrate on details as a diversion from
the larger issues. Sadat may try to enlist your support for a bold move
on his part which will put Begin in the corner. The risk is that you could
lose control of the talks and be diverted from the central issues either by
Begin’s legalisms or Sadat’s imprecision. You should keep the focus on
the large picture, the strategic choices, and refer new proposals or sug-
gestions for textual language to the Foreign Ministers and Secretary
Vance. With Sadat, you will have to hear him out on his new strategy
without appearing to collude with him against Begin.
10. Both leaders will constantly be trying to get you to side with them on
specific points. They will not hesitate to remind you of what we have
said to them in the past. Begin will remember that we called his “self-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
rule” plan a “fair basis for negotiations,” and Sadat will have very
much in mind the promises made at Camp David. Your best defense
against these efforts to manipulate you will be to concentrate on the fu-
ture choices, on the strategic consequences of success or failure, and on the
need for each side to transcend past positions.
11. Sadat is very likely to want to explore the possibility of reaching secret
understandings with you and Begin on some elements of a settlement. This is
apparently more important to him than a declaration of principles.
There are clearly risks in relying on secret agreements, but Sadat’s will-
ingness to be forthcoming on some issues may well depend upon our
ability, as well as Begin’s to assure him that he will not be embarrassed
by leaks.
12. If Sadat shows more flexibility than Begin, we may be per-
ceived by the Israelis and their supporters as colluding with the Egyp-
tians. This could be politically awkward, and you may want to suggest
discreetly to Sadat that he not rush to accept any suggestions we put
forward publicly. It will help our credibility if we are seen to be
pressing both sides for concessions. While we do want Sadat to accept our
ideas, the timing and circumstances in which he does so should be very care-
fully coordinated.
13. (The number may by symbolic.) If the meetings end in dis-
agreement, we should not attempt to paper over the differences. The
consequences of a failure should be publicly explained by you, and
Sadat and Begin should understand from the outset that this will be the
case.
Finally, I summarize below what I consider to be the acceptable
minimum that we must aim for on the central issues:
1. Withdrawal/Security on the West Bank/Gaza
Sadat should agree to an Israeli security presence during the five-
year interim period and for an indefinite time beyond; he should agree
to defer decisions on the precise location of borders and on sovereignty
until the end of the transitional period. In return, he should be able to
claim credit for ending the military occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza, and for establishing that the principle of withdrawal will be ap-
plied in the final peace settlement dealing with these areas.
Begin should agree that the principle of withdrawal does apply on
all fronts, including the West Bank and Gaza, provided that its applica-
tion takes into account Israel’s long-term security needs in the area;
sovereignty will remain in abeyance until a final peace agreement is

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
reached at the end of the five-year period. This will allow Begin to take
credit for protecting Israel’s fundamental security interests, while not
requiring that he explicitly abandon Israel’s claim to sovereignty over
these areas.
2. Settlements
There should be a moratorium on organized settlement activities, but
both parties should agree that provisions should be made for indi-
vidual Israelis and Palestinians to do business and to live in Israel and
the West Bank/Gaza in the spirit of open borders, free movement of
peoples, and normal peaceful relations.
3. Negotiations
Both parties should commit themselves to continuing negotiations
on both the Sinai and the West Bank/Gaza issues.
4. Resolution 242
Both parties should reiterate their commitment to all of the prin-
ciples of Resolution 242 as the basis for peace treaties on all fronts. In
addition, they should agree on the Aswan language on Palestinian
rights, and should commit themselves to the concept of full peace and
normal relations. Sadat should repeat his commitment to “no more
war” and agree to the renewal of UNEF in October.
Attached at Tab A is a memorandum of Ambassador Eilts’ last
conversation with President Sadat. It is well worth reading. Sadat
seems to be preparing more surprises.
[Omitted here is a 2-page chart entitled “Camp David Summit,”
dated September 1.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
96.
Address by President Carter Before a Joint Session of
Congress
Washington, September 18, 1978
Camp David Meeting on the Middle East
Vice President Mondale, Speaker O’Neill, distinguished Members of the
United States Congress, Justices of the Supreme Court, other leaders of our
great Nation, ladies and gentlemen:
It’s been more than 2,000 years since there was peace between
Egypt and a free Jewish nation. If our present expectations are realized,
this year we shall see such peace again.
The first thing I would like to do is to give tribute to the two men
who made this impossible dream now become a real possibility, the
two great leaders with whom I have met for the last 2 weeks at Camp
David: first, President Anwar Sadat of Egypt, and the other, of course,
is Prime Minister Menahem Begin of the nation of Israel.
I know that all of you would agree that these are two men of great
personal courage, representing nations of peoples who are deeply
grateful to them for the achievement which they have realized. And I
am personally grateful to them for what they have done.
At Camp David, we sought a peace that is not only of vital impor-
tance to their own two nations but to all the people of the Middle East,
to all the people of the United States, and, indeed, to all the world as
well.
The world prayed for the success of our efforts, and I am glad to
announce to you that these prayers have been answered.
I’ve come to discuss with you tonight what these two leaders have
accomplished and what this means to all of us.
The United States has had no choice but to be deeply concerned
about the Middle East and to try to use our influence and our efforts to
advance the cause of peace. For the last 30 years, through four wars, the
people of this troubled region have paid a terrible price in suffering and
division and hatred and bloodshed. No two nations have suffered more
original. The President delivered his address at 8: p.m. in the House Chamber at the
Capitol. His address was broadcast live on radio and television. The President, Sadat, and
Begin returned to Washington from Camp David the evening of September 17 and signed
the two agreements. For their remarks at the White House signing ceremony, see ibid.,
pp. 1519–1523. For the texts of the Framework for Peace in the Middle East, the Frame-
work for the Conclusion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel, and accompanying

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
than Egypt and Israel. But the dangers and the costs of conflicts in this
region for our own Nation have been great as well. We have long-
standing friendships among the nations there and the peoples of the re-
gion, and we have profound moral commitments which are deeply
rooted in our values as a people.
The strategic location of these countries and the resources that they
possess mean that events in the Middle East directly affect people ev-
erywhere. We and our friends could not be indifferent if a hostile
power were to establish domination there. In few areas of the world is
there a greater risk that a local conflict could spread among other na-
tions adjacent to them and then, perhaps, erupt into a tragic confronta-
tion between us super powers ourselves.
Our people have come to understand that unfamiliar names like
Sinai, Aqaba, Sharm el Sheikh, Ras en Naqb, Gaza, the West Bank of
Jordan, can have a direct and immediate bearing on our own well-
being as a nation and our hope for a peaceful world. That is why we in
the United States cannot afford to be idle bystanders and why we have
been full partners in the search for peace and why it is so vital to our
Nation that these meetings at Camp David have been a success.
Through the long years of conflict, four main issues have divided
the parties involved. One is the nature of peace—whether peace will
simply mean that the guns are silenced, that the bombs no longer fall,
that the tanks cease to roll, or whether it will mean that the nations of
the Middle East can deal with each other as neighbors and as equals
and as friends, with a full range of diplomatic and cultural and eco-
nomic and human relations between them. That’s been the basic ques-
tion. The Camp David agreement has defined such relationships, I’m
glad to announce to you, between Israel and Egypt.
The second main issue is providing for the security of all parties in-
volved, including, of course, our friends, the Israelis, so that none of
them need fear attack or military threats from one another. When im-
plemented, the Camp David agreement, I’m glad to announce to you,
will provide for such mutual security.
Third is the question of agreement on secure and recognized
boundaries, the end of military occupation, and the granting of self-
government or else the return to other nations of territories which have
been occupied by Israel since the 1967 conflict. The Camp David agree-
ment, I’m glad to announce to you, provides for the realization of all
these goals.
And finally, there is the painful human question of the fate of the
Palestinians who live or who have lived in these disputed regions. The
Camp David agreement guarantees that the Palestinian people may
participate in the resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
a commitment that Israel has made in writing and which is supported
and appreciated, I’m sure, by all the world.
Over the last 18 months, there has been, of course, some progress
on these issues. Egypt and Israel came close to agreeing about the first
issue, the nature of peace. They then saw that the second and third
issues, that is, withdrawal and security, were intimately connected,
closely entwined. But fundamental divisions still remained in other
areas—about the fate of the Palestinians, the future of the West Bank
and Gaza, and the future of Israeli settlements in occupied Arab
territories.
We all remember the hopes for peace that were inspired by Presi-
dent Sadat’s initiative, that great and historic visit to Jerusalem last No-
vember2 that thrilled the world, and by the warm and genuine personal
response of Prime Minister Begin and the Israeli people, and by the mu-
tual promise between them, publicly made, that there would be no
more war. These hopes were sustained when Prime Minister Begin re-
ciprocated by visiting Ismailia on Christmas Day. That progress con-
tinued, but at a slower and slower pace through the early part of the
year. And by early summer, the negotiations had come to a standstill
once again.
It was this stalemate and the prospect for an even worse future that
prompted me to invite both President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin
to join me at Camp David. They accepted, as you know, instantly,
without delay, without preconditions, without consultation even be-
tween them.
It’s impossible to overstate the courage of these two men or the
foresight they have shown. Only through high ideals, through compro-
mises of words and not principle, and through a willingness to look
deep into the human heart and to understand the problems and hopes
and dreams of one another can progress in a difficult situation like this
ever be made. That’s what these men and their wise and diligent ad-
visers who are here with us tonight have done during the last 13 days.
When this conference began, I said that the prospects for success
were remote. Enormous barriers of ancient history and nationalism and
suspicion would have to be overcome if we were to meet our objectives.
But President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin have overcome these
barriers, exceeded our fondest expectations, and have signed two
p. 47 and Henry Tanner, “Rift on Palestinians: Plan for a Joint Declaration Dropped After
Times.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
agreements that hold out the possibility of resolving issues that history
had taught us could not be resolved.
The first of these documents is entitled, “A Framework for Peace in
the Middle East Agreed at Camp David.” It deals with a comprehen-
sive settlement, comprehensive agreement, between Israel and all her
neighbors, as well as the difficult question of the Palestinian people and
the future of the West Bank and the Gaza area.
The agreement provides a basis for the resolution of issues in-
volving the West Bank and Gaza during the next 5 years. It outlines a
process of change which is in keeping with Arab hopes, while also care-
fully respecting Israel’s vital security.
The Israeli military government over these areas will be with-
drawn and will be replaced with a self-government of the Palestinians
who live there. And Israel has committed that this government will
have full autonomy. Prime Minister Begin said to me several times, not
partial autonomy, but full autonomy.
Israeli forces will be withdrawn and redeployed into specified lo-
cations to protect Israel’s security. The Palestinians will further partici-
pate in determining their own future through talks in which their own
elected representatives, the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza, will
negotiate with Egypt and Israel and Jordan to determine the final status
of the West Bank and Gaza.
Israel has agreed, has committed themselves, that the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people will be recognized. After the signing of
this framework last night, and during the negotiations concerning the
establishment of the Palestinian self-government, no new Israeli settle-
ments will be established in this area. The future settlements issue will
be decided among the negotiating parties.
The final status of the West Bank and Gaza will be decided before
the end of the 5-year transitional period during which the Palestinian
Arabs will have their own government, as part of a negotiation which
will produce a peace treaty between Israel and Jordan specifying
borders, withdrawal, all those very crucial issues.
These negotiations will be based on all the provisions and the prin-
ciples of Security Council Resolution 242, with which you all are so fa-
miliar. The agreement on the final status of these areas will then be sub-
mitted to a vote by the representatives of the inhabitants of the West
Bank and Gaza, and they will have the right for the first time in their
history, the Palestinian people, to decide how they will govern them-
selves permanently.
We also believe, of course, all of us, that there should be a just set-
tlement of the problems of displaced persons and refugees, which takes
into account appropriate United Nations resolutions.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Finally, this document also outlines a variety of security arrange-
ments to reinforce peace between Israel and her neighbors. This is, in-
deed, a comprehensive and fair framework for peace in the Middle
East, and I’m glad to report this to you.
The second agreement is entitled, “A Framework for the Conclu-
sion of a Peace Treaty Between Egypt and Israel.” It returns to Egypt its
full exercise of sovereignty over the Sinai Peninsula and establishes
several security zones, recognizing carefully that sovereignty right for
the protection of all parties. It also provides that Egypt will extend full
diplomatic recognition to Israel at the time the Israelis complete an in-
terim withdrawal from most of the Sinai, which will take place between
3 months and 9 months after the conclusion of the peace treaty. And the
peace treaty is to be fully negotiated and signed no later than 3 months
from last night.
I think I should also report that Prime Minister Begin and Presi-
dent Sadat have already challenged each other to conclude the treaty
even earlier. And I hope they—[applause]. This final conclusion of a
peace treaty will be completed late in December, and it would be a
wonderful Christmas present for the world.
Final and complete withdrawal of all Israeli forces will take place
between 2 and 3 years following the conclusion of the peace treaty.
While both parties are in total agreement on all the goals that I
have just described to you, there is one issue on which agreement has
not yet been reached. Egypt states that agreement to remove the Israeli
settlements from Egyptian territory is a prerequisite to a peace treaty.
Israel says that the issue of the Israeli settlements should be resolved
during the peace negotiations themselves.
Now, within 2 weeks, with each member of the Knesset or the Is-
raeli Parliament acting as individuals, not constrained by party loyalty,
the Knesset will decide on the issue of the settlements. Our own Gov-
ernment’s position, my own personal position is well known on this
issue and has been consistent. It is my strong hope, my prayer, that the
question of Israeli settlements on Egyptian territory will not be the final
obstacle to peace.
None of us should underestimate the historic importance of what
has already been done. This is the first time that an Arab and an Israeli
leader have signed a comprehensive framework for peace. It contains
the seeds of a time when the Middle East, with all its vast potential,
may be a land of human richness and fulfillment, rather than a land of
bitterness and continued conflict. No region in the world has greater
natural and human resources than this one, and nowhere have they
been more heavily weighed down by intense hatred and frequent war.
These agreements hold out the real possibility that this burden might
finally be lifted.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
But we must also not forget the magnitude of the obstacles that still
remain. The summit exceeded our highest expectations, but we know
that it left many difficult issues which are still to be resolved. These
issues will require careful negotiation in the months to come. The
Egyptian and Israeli people must recognize the tangible benefits that
peace will bring and support the decisions their leaders have made, so
that a secure and a peaceful future can be achieved for them. The Amer-
ican public, you and I, must also offer our full support to those who
have made decisions that are difficult and those who have very difficult
decisions still to make.
What lies ahead for all of us is to recognize the statesmanship that
President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin have shown and to invite
others in that region to follow their example. I have already, last night,
invited the other leaders of the Arab world to help sustain progress
toward a comprehensive peace.
We must also join in an effort to bring an end to the conflict and the
terrible suffering in Lebanon. This is a subject that President Sadat dis-
cussed with me many times while I was in Camp David with him. And
the first time that the three of us met together, this was a subject of
heated discussion. On the way to Washington last night in the heli-
copter, we mutually committed ourselves to join with other nations,
with the Lebanese people themselves, all factions, with President Sar-
kis, with Syria and Saudi Arabia, perhaps the European countries like
France, to try to move toward a solution of the problem in Lebanon,
which is so vital to us and to the poor people in Lebanon, who have suf-
fered so much.
We will want to consult on this matter and on these documents
and their meaning with all of the leaders, particularly the Arab leaders.
And I’m pleased to say to you tonight that just a few minutes ago, King
Hussein of Jordan and King Khalid of Saudi Arabia, perhaps other
leaders later, but these two have already agreed to receive Secretary
Vance, who will be leaving tomorrow to explain to them the terms of
the Camp David agreement. And we hope to secure their support for
the realization of the new hopes and dreams of the people of the Mid-
dle East.
This is an important mission, and this responsibility, I can tell you,
based on my last 2 weeks with him, could not possibly rest on the
shoulders of a more able and dedicated and competent man than Secre-
tary Cyrus Vance.
Finally, let me say that for many years the Middle East has been a
textbook for pessimism, a demonstration that diplomatic ingenuity

97.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
Carter-Gromyko Plenary Meeting
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
The President
Secretary Cyrus R. Vance
Secretary Harold Brown
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Ambassador Warnke
Ambassador Toon
Mr. David Aaron
Mr. Reginald Bartholomew
Mr. William D. Krimer, Interpreter
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Foreign Minister A.A. Gromyko
First Deputy Foreign Minister G.M. Korniyenko
Ambassador A.F. Dobrynin
Mr. V.G. Makarov
Mr. V.G. Komplektov
Mr. A.A. Bessmertnykh
Mr. N.N. Detinov
Mr. V.M. Sukhodrev, Interpreter
The President first wanted to tell the Minister that he was glad to
have him come back to Washington for this meeting. He was happy to
note that relations between our two countries appeared to be rapidly
improving. He believed that a matter of first priority for our two states
was successful completion of the work on the SALT Agreement. As far
as we were concerned, this could be accomplished this morning. The
President also wanted Gromyko to know that a comprehensive detente
remained a major aim and keystone of our policy. We wanted our rela-
tions with the Soviet Union to be based on mutual respect and mutual
advantage. There had been mention of competition as well as coop-
eration between us. The President wanted to put major emphasis on
cooperation.
The President noted that there were a number of differences be-
tween us which had resulted from competition. He proposed to men-
tion them briefly.
[Omitted here is discussion of the Middle East, the ongoing MBFR
negotiations in Vienna, U.S.-PRC negotiations, trade and science topics,
the comprehensive test ban, and Africa.]
otherwise desirable objectives as SALT. If he does not get this message clearly from you,
he certainly will not get it clearly from anyone else.” In the right-hand margin next to this
paragraph, the President drew a mark pointing toward the first sentence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Overall Soviet-US Relations
Gromyko had to tell the President quite frankly that over the re-
cent period our relations had worsened. It was true, of course, that he
did discern a somewhat more positive note in recent statements by the
President’s representatives, in the President’s comments today and in
some press articles, indicating that in5 the most recent period, during
the past month perhaps, there had been somewhat of a turning point
for the better. That might be so, but he had to say that he had not dis-
cerned anything truly substantive to indicate an improvement in our
relations. The fact that our relations had become worse as compared to
the past was known to the whole world, and this could not fail to con-
cern and perplex the Soviet Union. He wanted to convey this to the
President in all frankness. He had taken note of the President’s pro-
nouncement, contained in his message to Brezhnev, where the Presi-
dent had used words to the effect that we should not try to place the
blame for the worsening of relations between us, but should look
ahead. This was quite understandable, but he would point out that the
Soviet Union was not prepared to assume any blame for the worsening
of relations and he wanted the President to know that.
Gromyko noted that in those matters where our respective views
did not fully coincide, or did not coincide at all, affairs could be con-
ducted in a number of different ways. These differences could be dis-
cussed without crossing a certain line, throwing back the relations be-
tween us. These relations had been laboriously built up between the
Soviet Union and the United States and the process had not been easy.
Quite the contrary, it had been an arduous and difficult road. On the
one hand, relations between us could be conducted with the use of fine
instruments, seeking ways to bridge gaps and to come to mutual un-
derstanding. On the other hand, one could also use an axe, raising and
dropping it repeatedly to sever the threads that existed between us.
Again, speaking quite frankly, he would point out that in his view the
latter method was the one used by the United States quite frequently in
the recent past. Of course, such a situation could not but have a nega-
tive impact on the delicate process called international detente. He

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
would hope that in all assessments of each other’s policy neither side
would fail to observe a certain sense of proportion and not go beyond a
certain limit. As seen by many people, one or two statements by the
leaders of one of our countries were quite enough to derail detente. Of
course, it would not be much of a detente if that were really true. He re-
garded it as a process that goes much deeper, one that was based on the
hearts and minds of literally hundreds of millions of people. He did
believe that if one plotted detente as a curve on a graph, on the whole
that curve was pointing upward. There were ups and downs, to be
sure, but on the whole if one felt the pulse of hundreds and hundreds of
millions of people all over the world, detente was on an upward track.
It was a process that needed to be developed and was developing, but
the greater the effort applied in that direction the better and stronger it
would be. For its part, the Soviet Union was fully prepared to do all in
its power to promote everything that furthered detente, and to pre-
serve in our mutual relations everything that had been achieved in the
past, and boldly go further.
Gromyko wanted to assure the President that in all its actions the
Soviet Union was not trying to undercut relations between the United
States and third countries so long as these relations were not directed
against the Soviet Union. He and the Soviet leadership felt that condi-
tions were now ripe for going ahead, improving and strengthening our
relations.
Gromyko noted that in his statement today the President had not
referred to one thought which he had repeatedly expressed in the past.
Perhaps that was only an oversight, but it was an axiom of foreign
policy that the nature of relations between the Soviet Union and the
United States to an enormous extent determined the general world sit-
uation, the state of detente, the state of East-West relations and the in-
ternational atmosphere as a whole. That was indisputable, and it was
an idea the President had put forward in the past and, with which the
Soviet Union agreed wholeheartedly.
The President wanted to repeat that, as he had said earlier, good
relations with the Soviet Union were a keystone of our foreign policy.
Gromyko said that was one aspect of the matter, the other being
that these relations determined the general situation throughout the
world. That was not necessarily to everyone’s liking and he was aware
of the many epithets being directed at each of us, but particularly at the
Soviet Union, referring to superpowers, to attempts at exercising he-

98.
Memorandum From Robert Pastor of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) and the President’s Deputy
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)
Washington, October 23, 1978
SUBJECT
Central America: An Emerging and Urgent Issue for U.S. Policy
As the dust blown up by the crisis in Nicaragua settles for the mo-
ment, and the mediators try to patch together an “enduring democratic
solution,” I think it is important to step back and ask ourselves: Can a
Nicaraguan-type crisis happen again?2 And, if so, what are we doing
now to prevent similar crises?
The simple answer is that it can happen again, and is likely to in El
Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala. The conditions which gave rise to
the crisis in Nicaragua exist in these countries, only in a more advanced
state.
“a good memo. ZB.” Inderfurth and Bartholomew also initialed the top-right hand corner
of the memorandum.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
The unique element in Nicaragua is, of course, Somoza, but I be-
lieve that his presence meant only that violence and polarization would
occur in Nicaragua first; not that it won’t occur elsewhere. In a few
years, if we don’t address the underlying problems in Central America,
the Nicaraguan crisis of 1978 will seem easy in comparison. I would urge
you to place Central America relatively high on your list of priorities for
I. Characteristics Common to the Region
The three Central American countries share (with Nicaragua) the
following tragic characteristics:
1. Political Alignment: Three Groups. (1) A strong, intransigent mili-
tary government with little or no popular support; (2) revolutionary
guerrilla groups which are predominantly indigenous but maintain ties
with the Cubans and with each other; and (3) a relatively weak but
hopeful middle, which includes political parties (Christian and Social
Democrats), the Church, and small business. Since the middle of the
political spectrum in Central America is considerably to the right of
that in the U.S., the political middle is generally quite conservative by
U.S. standards.
2. Severe Structural Problems. Economic inequality; rapid popula-
tion growth; inadequate bureaucratic capabilities; and slow economic
growth.
3. Continued Massive U.S. Presence. The U.S. influence and presence
in this region remains very formidable. The perception of U.S. influ-
ence often is greater than the reality but in Central America that is both
an asset and liability: it enables us to more easily achieve some of our
objectives, but it also stimulates a negative and reactive nationalism
among some and a “Fanonian” immaturity among others.
The U.S. commitment to human rights and democratization is
clearly and widely understood. The military governments that once felt
they could serve the U.S. interest in stability in whatever way they
wanted now feel inhibited from using violence or torture to suppress
political opposition or to eliminate guerrilla movements. As Torrijos
likes to say, “After Carter, military dictators have to count to 10 before
killing someone.” Both the democratic opposition and the guerrillas
seem intent on taking advantage of this new situation.
4. Political Polarization. Government-sanctioned counter-terrorism
was the rule before the Carter Administration. Now, the military gov-
ernments—like Somoza’s—have begun harassing the middle. The left
has done this as well. Polarization has increased as the middle has been
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
forced to choose sides. If the opposition prevails in Nicaragua, the
democratic middle in these other countries may conclude that it is time
to throw their fate in with the guerrillas against the government.
5. Transnational Linkages. The extremes have obtained help, train-
ing, and encouragement from abroad. The military has obtained arms
from the Israelis, Argentines, and the international black market. The
left is getting increasing help from each other. A recent intelligence re-
port suggests that the Cubans have also decided to encourage local—in
this case, Honduran cadres—to assist in training and equipping their
comrades, the TP faction of the Sandinistas.
These conditions combine to present U.S. policy with two major
problems, perhaps dilemmas:
1. How do we deal with the fact that the political middle is under
attack from the two extremes? What can we do to effectively promote
our human rights policy?
2. How do we reconcile our goal of wanting to discard a century of
U.S. paternalism with a need and an instinct to try to manage events
rather than let them manage us?
Regardless of the outcome in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras
and Guatemala will continue to be plagued by polarization. The left
will harass, and the right will repress, creating more support for the
left. The political dynamic is almost inevitable. Moreover, whatever
happens in Nicaragua will spill over to its neighbors, and indeed it al-
ready has.
II. How to Tackle the Issues? A Conceptual Framework
If I may borrow one of your analytic modes, I think the problem of
Central America can be best understood by viewing it in three concen-
tric circles:
1. The internal political upheavals in El Salvador, Honduras,
Guatemala.
2. The relationship of those countries with each other and with
Costa Rica and Panama. (Dealing not only with the problem of interna-
tional terrorism, but also with the El Salvador-Honduras border dis-
pute, Belize, and the Central American Common Market.)
3. The larger relationship of Central America to the U.S., Mexico,
Venezuela, Colombia, and the Caribbean.
A. Our goals are the following:
1. Internal Politics in Central America.
(a) Strengthen the democratic center in each country and the links
between these groups in different countries.
(b) Provide an atmosphere conducive to the eventual evolution of
democratically-elected governments.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
(c) Encourage a more equitable distribution of wealth and the nec-
essary socio-economic reforms which will permit this.
2. Central America
Our goals are to strengthen the peace by assisting in the settlement
of long-standing territorial disputes and to promote economic coopera-
tion and integration.
3. Caribbean Basin
Our goals have been spelled out in the President’s Caribbean
policy.
The first circle—internal politics in El Salvador, Honduras, and
Guatemala—is the most urgent, but we will not have a coherent and
positive policy until we have begun to address all three sets of
problems associated with each concentric circle.
B. Our means for pursuing these goals are considerable. We have
relatively large bilateral assistance programs to these small and poor
countries, and a large proportion of the loans they receive from the
Inter-American Development Bank are concessional (from FSO) over
which we have a veto. This leverage has in the past translated into real
influence. For example, our decision to withhold support for a loan to
build a hydroelectric project in El Salvador last year led the gov-
ernment to lift the state of siege. Unfortunately, we continue to deal
with aid and loans one at a time without any overall strategic approach.
Perhaps the most important source of U.S. influence is simply U.S.
symbolic support, including Presidential attention. An expression of
interest by the President in the 10-year-old El Salvador-Honduras
border dispute encouraged the Hondurans to ratify a mediation agree-
ment in September 1977 (during the Canal Treaty signing in Wash-
ington). I would guess that a small touch by the President at a
well-timed moment could have a large impact on this area. (We may
want to factor into a future review the possibility of a short visit by the
President—perhaps as a follow-on to a Mexico trip5—to the area, and to
stimulate negotiations on El Salvador-Honduras, Belize, or on eco-
nomic integration to try to reach a conclusion before that. Such a visit
would also help to restore some sense of stability to a region still
rocking with Nicaragua.)
President Romero that day: “My major purpose was to get El Salvador to agree to a medi-
ation formula for the border dispute with Honduras. He agreed to move on this, which
has kept the Pan-American Highway closed for a long time and resulted in severing of
relationships altogether between Honduras and El Salvador. Before they left Wash-
ington, this was done.” (White House Diary, p. 94)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
III. A U.S. Strategy for Central America
I think Central America is a powder keg of instability which could
blow up and take with it Carter’s Latin American policy. The scenario
is the same as what may face us in Nicaragua: a choice between sup-
porting an unpopular military dictator or intervening to prevent a
Communist take-over. Neither alternative is satisfactory, but in order
to face a different choice, we have to begin developing a strategy now
to mobilize U.S. influence in support of the goals listed above. We cur-
rently have no strategy and are doing nothing positive which con-
tributes to the realization of these goals except in an ad hoc fashion. We
are reacting to events at points of relatively little influence; we need to
get in front of the political process in Central America rather than get
pulled along by it.
I have spoken to Vaky, and he agrees on the urgency of this matter
and its great importance, but he doesn’t think that his Bureau has the
capability of handling it now. He suggested that I work on it with
Richard Feinberg of Policy Planning in State. I don’t think we can wait,
and if there are few people in State who can work on it, we can turn to
the Agency and to our Embassies for support. Indeed, I think it would
be very useful to involve our Embassies in this exercise as fully as
possible.
RECOMMENDATION:
1. That you agree that Central America is an area which requires
our urgent attention.
2. That you approve, in principle, my drafting a terms of reference
for inter-agency review with Vaky and Policy Planning (Richard Fein-
berg). The terms of reference will proceed directly from the analytic
framework suggested in this memo, but I will send the final version to
you for your approval when it is completed.
3. Would you like me to draft a short memo from you to the Presi-
dent on this subject?10
I dwelt also on growing differences which were appearing between
the views of these countries and those of the United States. This was
true with respect to the process of decolonization, trade, and racial
discrimination.
In 1970 most Americans were only vaguely aware of the potential
power and influence of the developing countries. The general opinion
was that the newly independent countries of this century would not,
for many years to come, be major factors in either economic or political
affairs.
A series of events over the last 6 years has shaken that view. In
1973 the Arab oil-producing states successfully mounted an embargo
against the United States. Once the oil-producing states understood
their power as a result of the embargo, they moved successfully to raise
the price of oil dramatically. Other developing countries, instead of ex-
pressing dismay at the impact of the price rises on their own econ-
omies, saw benefits for the developing world in general in relating
similar tactics to other commodities. In 1974 in Algiers the new interna-
tional economic order was born with its strong demands for greater
equality in economic relations between the developed and the devel-
oping countries.
North-South Dialogue
The new international economic order in the form of a declaration
of U.N. purposes and of the obligations of industrialized states to make
the original. Newsom delivered his address before the International Relations Section of
the Commonwealth Club and the World Affairs Council of Northern California.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
sweeping changes in trade, aid, and investment policy, was brought be-
fore the sixth special session of the United Nations in 1974. The United
States found itself virtually isolated as European countries expressed at
least rhetorical sympathy for the thrust of this new order. That session
brought home starkly to American policymakers for the first time the
potential impact of these demands on our political as well as our eco-
nomic relations with the developing world.
The next 2 years, then, saw the beginning of a fundamental reas-
sessment of how the have and have-not nations would relate to each
other. At the seventh special session, in September of 1975, with the
memory of the fruitless confrontations the previous year still fresh in
their minds, both sides began to rethink their respective positions and
to search for areas of constructive dialogue and possible cooperation.
One of the results was the formation, in December of that year, of
the Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC) with
8 members from the developed world and 19 from the developing
world. While CIEC did not, over the some 18 months of its existence,
succeed in finding accommodation between all of the issues where the
North and South differ, it did contribute measurably to the ongoing di-
alogue and resulted in concrete progress on some issues such as food
and agriculture and technical assistance. And while CIEC did narrow
some gaps between the North and the South, many of the developing
countries were unhappy with their exclusion from the limited member-
ship of the CIEC.
As a result, CIEC was succeeded by the Committee of the Whole
which includes all member states of the United Nations. This is now an
important forum for discussion of economic matters relating to the
North-South dialogue. The developing countries would like to give it a
decisionmaking role. We continue to believe decisions on major eco-
nomic issues should be made by existing organizations having respon-
sibilities in the specific functional areas, for example, the GATT [Gen-
eral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] for trade, the IMF [International
Monetary Fund] for monetary affairs.
There were other elements to the dialogue. The year 1976 saw the
Nairobi meeting of the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development,
known as UNCTAD 4. While providing its share of confrontation, this

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
meeting saw the United States continuing to signal its willingness to
maintain a constructive dialogue regarding the demands of the devel-
oping countries. This willingness to engage in dialogue was, however,
clearly separated from any affirmation of the legitimacy of all the other
demands of these countries. Subsequently, at Colombo, Sri Lanka, the
nonaligned nations met and found that economic issues had replaced
political issues as the prime vehicles for expressing their aspirations
and frustrations.
I have been speaking to you about the Third World. I know that
there are those who question the validity of this term. They rightly
point out that there is a tremendous difference between the least devel-
oped and the middle countries. This is true. Nevertheless, the strong
feelings which exist among these countries arising from a common her-
itage of colonialism, from their perception of themselves as econom-
ically developing nations and from a feeling that they lack a voice in
major economic decisions affecting them, give these countries a soli-
darity which is a reality. That solidarity withstood differences over the
oil crisis. It has withstood general differences of view, for example,
between those countries that are interested in debt relief and those
countries which are more concerned about their international credit
standing.
Importance of the North-South Relationship
It has been my experience that audiences attuned to the more ex-
citing political aspects of foreign affairs do not find equal stimulation in
discussions of economic issues. Yet, the average American citizen—
concerned for his job, his standard of living, and the value of the dollar
at home and abroad—has good reason to pay attention to the demands,
sometimes excessive, of the Third World nations. Only a few statistics
will illustrate why.
oping countries.
• The United States sells more manufactured goods to the devel-
oping countries than to Western Europe, Japan, and all the Communist
countries combined.
• The developing countries accounted for more than half of all U.S.
exports of industrial machinery, electrical machinery, and aircraft.
• They bought 50% of our wheat exports, 60% of our cotton ex-
ports, 70% of our rice exports, and 90% of our coal exports.
• The United States imported goods worth $67 billion from devel-
oping countries in 1977—45% of our total imports.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
These are impressive statistics, but they are hard to relate to our
everyday lives. It perhaps comes closer to home if we address the im-
portance of the North-South relationship in terms of questions like:
• Will your gas tank be full?
• How much will it cost to fill it up?
• How much more would you need to pay for a chocolate bar, for
coffee, for copper wire, if the developing countries should seek to emu-
late the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and restrict
supplies or raise prices?
• How many workers would be laid off in your community if de-
veloping countries shifted their purchases from the United States to
other suppliers?
Each issue has implications for our daily lives as well as for our re-
lationship with two-thirds of the peoples of the world. The developing
nations have addressed themselves to several key issues. Each one
presents us with problems, particularly in a time of economic diffi-
culties. Approval of new departures for any one of them could face
strong opposition in the Congress. Yet each one is a key to whether we
shall be partners or adversaries in our relations with the developing
world. Let me take briefly each one in turn.
Economic Issues
Trade. The first is trade. The developing countries want improved
access to our markets for their exports. They want special and preferen-
tial treatment for their manufactured products.
We believe improved market access is desirable and in our own in-
terest. In the event of injury to domestic industry, of course, we must
take temporary measures to protect jobs and producers, preferably
through adjustment assistance or, if necessary, through restrictions at
the borders.
There has been hard bargaining with many developing countries
in the multilateral trade negotiations which have just wound up work
in Geneva. These extended and complex negotiations have offered the
developing countries an opportunity to gain benefits. Unfortunately,
we feel they have not fully availed themselves of these opportunities.
Foreign Aid. The developing countries also seek an increase in the
transfer of resources which they need for economic development. They
wish a level of economic assistance from developed countries which
would represent seven-tenths of 1% of such countries’ gross national
product. The implications of this demand are illustrated by two simple
facts.
• The enthusiasm for foreign aid in the United States is declining.
In 1970 we ranked seventh among the developed countries in the per-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
centage of our gross national product transferred concessionally to de-
veloping countries. Today we have dropped to twelfth.
• We have changed our approach to foreign aid in part as a result
of congressional legislation. In the face of a continued need by many
countries for infrastructure assistance, particularly in Africa, we are
concentrating more and more on the needs of the poor. We look to the
multilateral institutions to provide infrastructure assistance. We are
unable to supply straight budgetary assistance to meet the special
problem of middle-income countries. This problem is particularly
acute in the Caribbean.
Some of the most active negotiations have related to commodities.
The developing countries have given a high priority to stabilizing
broad fluctuations in commodity prices which have such a profound
effect on countries depending almost entirely on one or two primary
products.
We have now indicated our acceptance in principle of the idea of a
common fund which would be used to help commodity agreements to
stabilize commodity prices. We still have differences over the form of
such a fund and whether it would also be used to provide resources not
directly related to stabilization of commodity prices. Those who follow
both our relations with the developing countries and our relations with
Congress will hear more of the common fund in the days ahead.
Debt Relief. Debt is a highly important and highly emotional issue,
as it is with individuals. We have always taken the position that debt
relief should be conditioned upon a debtor country promising to un-
dertake a comprehensive sound economic development or stabilization
program, one that would insure that excesses in resource mismanage-
ment are not repeated. Many feel strongly that the developed countries
have an obligation to relieve them of their debt burden. We are now
committed to debt forgiveness for the poorest countries and are study-
ing how much relief we should provide in 1980.
The two principal multilateral financial institutions—the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund—were founded well before
the creation of most of the nations in the United Nations today. Newly
independent countries and many other Third World countries as well
wish to move away from voting in international institutions based on
financial contributions toward a one state, one vote system giving a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
preponderant voice to the developing countries. Such a move in the
minds of many in the United States would represent a departure from
the objectivity and nonpolitical character of these institutions.
Technology Transfers. Developing countries today must often pay
very large amounts in order to obtain the rights to technology which
they feel important for their industrial development. They are seeking
to liberalize the transfer of technology believing that this would speed
up the closing of the gap between rich nations and poor nations. They
also seek support for expanding their indigenous capacity to develop
and adopt such technology.
There is, of course, a vast quantity of technology which is noncom-
mercially held, and we have ongoing programs which seek to make
that available to the developing countries. On the other hand, tech-
nology of commercial value held by firms in the investing nations has a
value which these firms, understandably, do not wish to relinquish
without a return on their investment. Various ways by which this pri-
vately owned technology can be more easily transferred are under con-
sideration. The matter remains a significant and controversial issue.
Foreign direct investments are an important source of economic
resources and technology for the developing countries. Differing views
exist, however, on whether such investments are beneficial to the de-
veloping nations. For more than a year the U.N. Commission on Trans-
national Corporations has sought to elaborate a code of conduct within
which such corporations could operate to the satisfaction of both sides.
In the view of the developed world, private foreign investment repre-
sents one of the best and least political means by which transfers of
both capital and technology can be effected. And while the corporate
investors are willing to accommodate to demands for sharing of owner-
ship and management which will provide greater benefits and oppor-
tunities for the people of the countries involved, they must ask and re-
ceive some kind of assurance that, once having invested their capital,
the rules of the game will not be changed in ways which result in the
loss of their investment.
Political Issues
I have dwelt today upon the economic issues which are under con-
stant discussion between the developed nations of the North and the
developing countries of the South. When nations gather, increasingly
these are the concerns that trouble them most. And these concerns have
a direct impact on political relations which in turn can affect the climate
in which the economic issues are resolved. One soon finds that there is
no distinction between political and economic affairs when the liveli-
hood and security of nations is involved.
The strong efforts of the United States to resolve the problems in
the Middle East have a direct bearing upon our access to the vital re-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
sources of this region and to the economic health of the nations proc-
essing these resources.
The political issues of South Africa, Namibia, and Southern
Rhodesia can cloud our dialogue with African states on other issues,
even when our position on such matters as trade, development assist-
ance, commodity policy, and debt rescheduling is clear and positive.
The danger of political instability in key areas threatening our na-
tional security is ever present. One needs only to look at events in Iran
and consider the effects of a change in the orientation of that country
on our strategic and economic interests in the area, or to look at Nic-
aragua and think about the implications of spreading unrest in
Central America, our doorstep, to understand the political-economic
interrelationship.
Finally, there are a whole series of foreign policy issues of prime
importance to us—nuclear nonproliferation, human rights, arms con-
trol—which cannot be moved forward in a meaningful fashion without
the cooperation of the Third World countries.
Ultimately, in our national interest, we wish to do what we can to
see that Third World societies evolve in ways which are compatible
with the kind of world we wish to live in and leave to our children. If
we ignore these countries, their needs, and their aspirations, we will
forfeit our ability to exert this influence which can be so important to
our own future.
So, the issues that we face in dealing with the Third World have
implications not just for our daily lives, but also for our national secu-
rity now and our future in the society of men. Thus, the fostering and
strengthening of the dialogue between the North and the South is ex-
tremely important to all of us.
Fostering a Positive Dialogue
The coming year will see a large number of international confer-
ences devoted to fundamental questions of relations between devel-
oped and developing countries. Negotiations have recently begun
under UNCTAD auspices on a new international wheat agreement;
in April the law of the sea conference will resume consideration of
who controls the vast mineral resources of the deep seabeds; in June
UNCTAD 5 convenes in Manila; in August the U.N. Conference on Sci-
ence and Technology for Development begins in Vienna; and in 1980
we expect a U.N. General Assembly special session on development.
Moreover, progress is being made in developing a positive dialogue
with the Third World.
One can point to the Association of the South East Asian Nations.
These five nations—Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Malaysia,
and Thailand—are important friends and trading partners particularly

100.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 2, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #81 (U)
1. Opinion
On Negotiating
The comments which follow are not meant to be just negative—but
I feel that I should share my concern that the way we have been con-
ducting our negotiations on some key issues may be reducing our cred-
ibility and therefore also our ability to attain our goals.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
In negotiations there often comes the time to force the issue to a
head by making the other side take stock of the consequences of failure.
One should even be willing to deliberately create such circumstances,
as Sadat has done from time to time. Of course, before one does so one
should carefully marshal one’s resources and calculate timing very
carefully.
SALT
We have been dribbling our concessions, and asserting from time
to time that we would go no further. Yet time after time we would then
make additional concessions.
The latest example pertains to the ALCMs: as a major concession
we told the Soviets that we would accept the limit of 35 as an average.
The Soviets countered with 25. We immediately offered 30 as a compro-
mise. The Soviets are now talking of a figure of between 25 and 30 as
the outcome, despite our accommodation on the definition issue.
Indeed, Cy put the new definition to Dobrynin earlier this week on
the assumption that this would solve all the remaining issues—an as-
sumption Dobrynin led us to suspect is true. The opposite has hap-
pened, and the Soviets are even reopening some old issues.
I am convinced the Soviets want a SALT agreement, and I think
there is a good probability that we could have obtained one some
months ago had we been prepared to establish credibly the position
that we are no longer able to make further adjustments and that we can
wait.
Cuba
We told the Cubans we would not go to Havana without an expec-
tation of concrete positive developments—by which we clearly meant
their troops in Africa. We then proposed to go to Havana if they would
simply let out the four American political prisoners. When they refused
to do even that, we end up sending a delegation anyway, albeit at a
somewhat lower level. This does not help our credibility.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The Middle East
I suspect that the root cause of our current difficulty is that Begin
feels he can get away with almost anything; and that Sadat and the
Saudis no longer have confidence that we can deliver either on the
wider peace nor on regional protection from the Soviets. Not having
pressed at Camp David for some direct linkage between the accords,
we have failed to respond in any concrete way to Begin’s subsequent
negative actions regarding the West Bank.
South Africa
The basic reason why our difficulties are mounting is that our
middle-of-the-road solutions are collapsing as the situation becomes
polarized. The fact of the matter is that neither the whites nor the blacks
take us very seriously. There is no bite to our proposals, because we are
visibly reluctant to press the Soviet-Cuban issue (and thus leave the
radical blacks with an increasingly attractive militant option), or to
apply sanctions to the whites (thus encouraging them to engage in dila-
tory tactics).
In brief, we should be prepared to demonstrate to all concerned
that the U.S. has clout as well as patience, and that there are evident
and predictable costs for disregarding U.S. interests. Instead, we have
given rise to the view that the best way of dealing with us is to simply
keep nibbling away, and that eventually the U.S. will simply adjust its
position. Stonewalling or even breaking off negotiations is an established
part of the negotiating tradition. The Soviets, the Israelis, the French
and others practice it well. We should, too—and every one of the
above negotiations should be reviewed from that standpoint.
2. Alert
The Arc of Crisis
If you draw an arc on the globe, stretching from Chittagong (Ban-
gladesh) through Islamabad to Aden, you will be pointing to the area of
currently our greatest vulnerability. All at once, difficulties are sur-
facing in Iran and Pakistan, and they are thinly below the surface in
India and are very manifest in Bangladesh, and there is reason to be-
lieve that the political structure of Saudi Arabia is beginning to creak.
Turkey is also becoming more wobbly.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
As I mentioned to you, George Ball will spend the next two weeks
as an NSC consultant working on the Iranian problem. He is very pes-
simistic and concerned about the situation. His pessimism is shared by
Clark Clifford, who has sent me a long memo bearing on Iran, Pakistan
and the Persian Gulf. Both feel that we will increasingly have to
search for alternative arrangements.
There is no question in my mind that we are confronting the begin-
ning of a major crisis, in some ways similar to the one in Europe in the
late 40’s. Fragile social and political structures in a region of vital im-
portance to us are threatened with fragmentation.
The resulting political vacuum might well be filled by elements
more sympathetic to the Soviet Union. This is especially likely since
there is a pervasive feeling in the area that the U.S. is no longer in a po-
sition to offer effective political and military protection.
If the above analysis is correct, the West as a whole may be faced
with a challenge of historic proportions. A shift in Iranian/Saudi orien-
tation would have a direct impact on trilateral cohesion, and it would
induce in time more “neutralist” attitudes on the part of some of our
key allies. In a sentence, it would mean a fundamental shift in the
global structure of power.
President Truman confronted a similar crisis in the late 40’s in
Western Europe. At that time, internal weaknesses also interacted with
an external challenge. It took a very major and collective effort to re-
spond effectively. That response involved a long-term solution for po-
litical initiatives as well as more direct security commitments.
I have asked an interagency group to review this problem on an
urgent basis. Though Ball will work primarily on Iran, I might have
him give some thought to this subject as well.
Before too long, we may have to consult also with our primary
allies regarding the need for a collective response, lest the kind of insta-
bility that we are seeing in Pakistan and Iran becomes also manifest in
the Persian Gulf. This subject will doubtless come up in the January
meeting, and before then we will have some recommendations for you
regarding what needs to be done by the U.S. alone, by the U.S. and its
principal allies, and by the countries directly concerned.
In the meantime, it might be appropriate for you to mention this
emerging problem in some of your discussions with Congressional
leaders and also to bear it in mind when you are making some of your

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
key decisions regarding the defense budget and other foreign policy
issues (SALT, China, the Arab/Israeli dispute).
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]
101.
Remarks by President Carter
Washington, December 6, 1978
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
What I have to say today is fundamentally very simple. It’s some-
thing I’ve said many times, including my acceptance speech when I
was nominated as President and my inaugural speech when I became
President. But it cannot be said too often or too firmly nor too strongly.
As long as I am President, the Government of the United States
will continue throughout the world to enhance human rights. No force
on Earth can separate us from that commitment.
This week we commemorate the 30th anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. We rededicate ourselves—in the words
of Eleanor Roosevelt, who was the chairperson of the Human Rights
Commission—to the Universal Declaration as, and I quote from her, “a
common standard of achievement for all peoples of all nations.”
The Universal Declaration and the human rights conventions that
derive from it do not describe the world as it is. But these documents
are very important, nonetheless. They are a beacon, a guide to a future
of personal security, political freedom, and social justice.
For millions of people around the globe that beacon is still quite
distant, a glimmer of light on a dark horizon of deprivation and repres-
sion. The reports of Amnesty International, the International Commis-
noon in the East Room at the White House at a ceremony commemorating the 30th anni-
versary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Prior to delivering
these remarks, the President hosted a reception and briefing by administration officials
for human rights activists, members of Congress, and administration officials involved in
human rights policy formation. For the text of comments made by the President, Vance,
Brzezinski, and Derian at the briefing, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Document 176.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
sion of Jurists, the International League for Human Rights, and many
other nongovernmental human rights organizations amply document
the practices and conditions that destroy the lives and the spirit of
countless human beings.
Political killings, tortures, arbitrary and prolonged detention
without trial or without a charge, these are the cruelest and the ugliest
of human rights violations. Of all human rights, the most basic is to be
free of arbitrary violence, whether that violence comes from govern-
ment, from terrorists, from criminals, or from self-appointed messiahs
operating under the cover of politics or religion.
But governments—because of their power, which is so much
greater than that of an individual—have a special responsibility. The
first duty of a government is to protect its own citizens, and when gov-
ernment itself becomes the perpetrator of arbitrary violence against its
citizens, it undermines its own legitimacy.
There are other violations of the body and the spirit which are es-
pecially destructive of human life. Hunger, disease, poverty are en-
emies of human potential which are as relentless as any repressive
government.
The American people want the actions of their government, our
government, both to reduce human suffering and to increase human
freedom. That’s why—with the help and encouragement of many of
you in this room—I have sought to rekindle the beacon of human rights
in American foreign policy. Over the last 2 years we’ve tried to express
these human concerns as our diplomats practice their craft and as our
Nation fulfills its own international obligations.
We will speak out when individual rights are violated in other
lands. The Universal Declaration means that no nation can draw the
cloak of sovereignty over torture, disappearances, officially sanctioned
bigotry, or the destruction of freedom within its own borders. The mes-
sage that is being delivered by all our representatives abroad—whether
they are from the Department of State or Commerce or Agriculture or
Defense or whatever—is that the policies regarding human rights
count very much in the character of our own relations with other indi-
vidual countries.
In distributing the scarce resources of our foreign assistance pro-
grams, we will demonstrate that our deepest affinities are with nations
which commit themselves to a democratic path to development.
Toward regimes which persist in wholesale violations of human rights,
we will not hesitate to convey our outrage, nor will we pretend that our
relations are unaffected.
In the coming year, I hope that Congress will take a step that has
been long overdue for a generation, the ratification of the Convention

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. As you
know, the genocide convention was also adopted by the United Na-
tions General Assembly 30 years ago this week, 1 day before the adop-
tion of the Universal Declaration. It was the world’s affirmation that the
lesson of the Holocaust would never be forgotten, but unhappily, geno-
cide is not peculiar to any one historical era.
Eighty-three other nations have ratified the genocide convention.
The United States, despite the support of every President since 1948,
has not. In international meetings at the United Nations and elsewhere,
when I meet with foreign leaders, we are often asked why. We do not
have an acceptable answer.
I urge the United States Senate to observe this anniversary in the
only appropriate way, by ratifying the genocide convention at the ear-
liest possible date.
This action must be the first step toward the ratification of other
human rights instruments, including those I signed a year ago. Many
of the religious and human rights groups represented here have under-
taken a campaign of public education on behalf of these covenants. I
commend and appreciate your efforts.
Refugees are the living, homeless casualties of one very important
failure on the part of the world to live by the principles of peace and
human rights. To help these refugees is a simple human duty. As
Americans, as a people made up largely of the descendants of refugees,
we feel that duty with special keenness.
Our country will do its utmost to ease the plight of stranded ref-
ugees from Indochina and from Lebanon and of released political pris-
oners from Cuba and from elsewhere. I hope that we will always stand
ready to welcome more than our fair share of those who flee their
homelands because of racial, religious, or political oppression.
The effectiveness of our human rights policy is now an established
fact. It has contributed to an atmosphere of change—sometimes dis-
turbing—but which has encouraged progress in many ways and in
many places. In some countries, political prisoners have been released
by the hundreds, even thousands. In others, the brutality of repression
has been lessened. In still others there’s a movement toward demo-
cratic institutions or the rule of law when these movements were not
previously detectable.
To those who doubt the wisdom of our dedication, I say this: Ask
the victims. Ask the exiles. Ask the governments which continue to
practice repression. Whether in Cambodia or Chile, in Uganda or South

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
Africa, in Nicaragua or Ethiopia or the Soviet Union, governments
know that we in the United States care. And not a single one of those
who is actually taking risks or suffering for human rights has ever
asked me to desist in our support of basic human rights. From the
prisons, from the camps, from the enforced exiles, we receive one mes-
sage: Speak up, persevere, let the voice of freedom be heard.
I’m very proud that our Nation stands for more than military
might or political might. It stands for ideals that have their reflection in
the aspirations of peasants in Latin America, workers in Eastern Eu-
rope, students in Africa, and farmers in Asia.
We do live in a difficult and complicated world, a world in which
peace is literally a matter of survival. Our foreign policy must take this
into account. Often, a choice that moves us toward one goal tends to
move us further away from another goal. Seldom do circumstances
permit me or you to take actions that are wholly satisfactory to
everyone.
But I want to stress again that human rights are not peripheral to
the foreign policy of the United States. Our human rights policy is not a
decoration. It is not something we’ve adopted to polish up our image
abroad or to put a fresh coat of moral paint on the discredited policies
of the past. Our pursuit of human rights is part of a broad effort to use
our great power and our tremendous influence in the service of
creating a better world, a world in which human beings can live in
peace, in freedom, and with their basic needs adequately met.
Human rights is the soul of our foreign policy. And I say this with
assurance, because human rights is the soul of our sense of nationhood.
For the most part, other nations are held together by common ra-
cial or ethnic ancestry, or by a common creed or religion, or by ancient
attachments to the land that go back for centuries of time. Some nations
are held together by the forces, implied forces of a tyrannical gov-
ernment. We are different from all of those, and I believe that we in our
country are more fortunate.
As a people we come from every country and every corner of the
Earth. We are of many religions and many creeds. We are of every race,
every color, every ethnic and cultural background. We are right to be
proud of these things and of the richness that lend to the texture of our
national life. But they are not the things which unite us as a single
people.
What unites us—what makes us Americans—is a common belief
in peace, in a free society, and a common devotion to the liberties en-
shrined in our Constitution. That belief and that devotion are the
sources of our sense of national community. Uniquely, ours is a nation
founded on an idea of human rights. From our own history we know
how powerful that idea can be.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Next week marks another human rights anniversary—Bill of
Rights Day. Our Nation was “conceived in liberty,” in Lincoln’s words,
but it has taken nearly two centuries for that liberty to approach
maturity.
For most of the first half of our history, black Americans were de-
nied even the most basic human rights. For most of the first two-thirds
of our history, women were excluded from the political process. Their
rights and those of Native Americans are still not constitutionally guar-
anteed and enforced. Even freedom of speech has been threatened peri-
odically throughout our history. Only in the last 10 to 12 years have we
achieved what Father Hesburgh has called “the legal abandonment of
more than three centuries of apartheid.” And the struggle for full
human rights for all Americans—black, brown, and white; male and fe-
male; rich and poor—is far from over.
To me, as to many of you, these are not abstract matters or ideas. In
the rural Georgia country where I grew up, the majority of my own
fellow citizens were denied many basic rights—the right to vote, the
right to speak freely without fear, the right to equal treatment under the
law. I saw at first hand the effects of a system of deprivation of rights. I
saw the courage of those who resisted that system. And finally, I saw
the cleansing energies that were released when my own region of this
country walked out of darkness and into what Hubert Humphrey, in
the year of the adoption of the Universal Declaration, called “the bright
sunshine of human rights.”
The American Bill of Rights is 187 years old, and the struggle to
make it a reality has occupied every one of those 187 years. The Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights is only 30 years old. In the perspec-
tive of history, the idea of human rights has only just been broached.
I do not draw this comparison because I want to counsel patience. I
draw it because I want to emphasize, in spite of difficulties, stead-
fastness and commitment.
A hundred and eighty-seven years ago, as far as most Americans
were concerned, the Bill of Rights was a bill of promises. There was no
guarantee that those promises would ever be fulfilled. We did not re-
alize those promises by waiting for history to take its inevitable course.
We realized them because we struggled. We realized them because
many sacrificed. We realized them because we persevered.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
For millions of people around the world today the Universal Dec-
laration of Human Rights is still only a declaration of hope. Like all of
you, I want that hope to be fulfilled. The struggle to fulfill it will last
longer than the lifetimes of any of us. Indeed, it will last as long as the
lifetime of humanity itself. But we must persevere.
And we must persevere by ensuring that this country of ours,
leader in the world, which we love so much, is always in the forefront
of those who are struggling for that great hope, the great dream of uni-
versal human rights.
Thank you very much.

102.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, December 8, 1978
SUBJECT
Two Years Down; Two to Go (U)
After each half year in 1977, I sent you an appraisal of the Admin-
istration’s foreign policy record. Two years since you took office may
be an even better time to review both the record and the tasks ahead. I
haven’t tried to examine the whole field—focusing only on a few sa-
lient areas. (U)
1. War and Peace. The main accomplishment of the last two years
was in reducing the chances of war in the two most dangerous areas of
possible US-Soviet conflict: (C)
a. In the Middle East, there is a greater chance of setting in motion a
process that could lead to peace than at any time since the creation of
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
b. In Central Europe, a NATO buildup has been launched, which
seems likely to restore the military stability that had been called into
question by Soviet military programs in the mid-1970s. (C)
These are big improvements. There are still a lot of risks ahead,
particularly in unstable countries on the periphery of the USSR, but
we’re clearly better off than in December 1976. This improvement was
made possible because we had our priorities right: During the cam-
paign you said that the main focus of US foreign policy should be on
constructive cooperation with our friends. What we have done to this
end in Europe and the Middle East has been more important in re-
ducing risk of war than anything that has been, or could have been, ac-
complished in direct dealings with the USSR. (C)

103.
Statement by the Representative to the United Nations
(Young)
New York, December 14, 1978
The world-awakening to human rights and fundamental freedoms
that emerged in 1948 in the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights has taken on a new urgency in the past few years. For
perhaps the first time in history we can truly say that there is a world-
wide human rights movement, and it is steadily gaining force.
Mahatma Gandhi in 1921 wrote that every good movement passes
through five stages: indifference, ridicule, abuse, repression, and, fi-
nally, respect. We know that human rights abuses are usually, when
first noted, regarded with indifference. Then will come the ridicule,
then the abuse, and perhaps even the repression. This is the path of
progress. It has been true in the United States, India, across the African
the original. Young made the statement in plenary.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Continent. It is no less true in the East or Middle East than it has been in
the West and South. It is part of the process of widening participation in
the public dialogue, of expanding the concerns and concepts we use
when we develop public and international policy.
There is no room for self-righteousness and self-congratulation in
the field of human rights. Each of our nations has people of vision and
people of fear, those who create and those who repress and torture. I
believe we should identify particular problems and work together
toward solving them. It is better to solve one small problem than to en-
gage in political fireworks about the grand issues of our time. We have
the potential of a new pragmatism in these halls, and I hope it grows.
Behind this new pragmatism is, I think, the growing realization
that we, indeed, have common goals and that if we stop fearing and
fighting each other we might find some practical solutions. The task is
too serious to waste our effort in nonproductive exercises. We are faced
with the necessity of promoting worldwide rapid, peaceful social
change if we are to move toward the goals of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights.
In 1967, a few months before his death, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.,
reflected on the next steps of the struggle for full human rights and
came to the conclusion that the crisis of the modern world is interna-
tional in scope and that this is a crisis that “involves the poor, the dis-
possessed, and the exploited of the whole world.”
Today, more than 1 billion people live in conditions of abject pov-
erty—starving, idle, and numbed by ignorance. Life expectancy in the
poorest countries is only slightly greater than half that in the industrial-
ized countries.
The sad fact is that most of the people in these countries who were
born in the year we adopted the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights are not around anymore to celebrate this occasion. And most of
those who are still here have very little to celebrate. Three quarters of
their number in these countries do not have access to safe water. They
cannot read the speeches we make today honoring human rights. They
earn less money in a year than most of us in this hall of the United Na-
tions earn in 1 day—and even that is only a figure of speech, since most
of them have never been paid at all for their work.
The birthright of these people has been disregarded, denied, and
violated, although it was done not by torturers, not by jailers, not by
persecution, and not by repressive government. As President Carter re-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
minded us a week ago: “Hunger, disease, poverty are enemies of hu-
man potential which are as relentless as any repressive government.”
The freedoms from arbitrariness, torture, and cruel punishment
are the rights of everyone by the simple fact that he or she is born. The
freedom of thought, speech, religion, press, and participation in public
affairs are so fundamental that they enhance the quality of our life and
character as individuals. Their exercise cannot be made dependent on
any other considerations. But we must understand too that these rights
are hollow for any individual who starves to death. Therefore, the
human rights struggle is not only a defense of our individual liberty
but also a struggle to protect life.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a call for worldwide
movements to promote human rights. This call is often heard with
alarm by many who believe that there is far more to lose than to gain by
encouraging political, economic, and social change. Perhaps, in the
short run, there is some cost for those who have special privilege or for
those who have an investment in thinking of themselves—as a nation
or class or race—as superior or more advanced than others. But the
plain lesson of history is that as the circle of participation in society
widens, almost everyone profits. They profit not just in a better stand-
ard of living for everyone but in the productivity of the economy, in
better social services for everyone, in wider political participation, and
in more freedom and more protection for human rights.
The process of change entails risks. But change is inevitable. It is
not a question of being able to withstand change or even of directing it;
it is a question of understanding change and cooperating with it. The
change of our time, the basic dynamic of our time, leads to more partici-
pation by more people in society. Poverty is the basic obstacle to the re-
alization of human rights for most people in the world today. Where
poverty is the problem, participation is the answer, participation in the
economic life of the society. Economic growth must be pursued with
equity in mind and not just for the profit of the few at the top or for the
power of the state and the government. The ultimate goal of economic
development must be equity, with broader participation in production
and consumption by all as the main objective. Speaking before the
opening session of the 8th General Assembly of the Organization of
American States [June 21, 1978], President Carter said: “The challenge
versal Declaration (for full text, see BULLETIN of Jan. 1979, p. 1)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of economic development is to help the world’s poor lift themselves out
of misery.”
He called upon that Assembly to join together the concepts of eco-
nomic development and social justice: “We must also devote our com-
mon energies to economic development and the cause of social justice.
Benefits of the world’s economy must be more fairly shared, but the re-
sponsibilities must be shared as well.”
To share responsibility is to make more participation possible. The
more participation, the wiser will be the government. Prime Minister
Manley made a stirring affirmation of his own faith in democracy when
he spoke to us in October. He was, you will recall, urging us to united
efforts in the struggle against apartheid. He said: “We believe that any
government which has the courage to mobilize its people and tell the
truth will receive the overwhelming support of its citizens.” I also be-
lieve that. We must let our people hear the truth, the whole truth. And
we must not be afraid to mobilize our citizens to participate more fully
in the political and economic processes.
Expanding participation should not be limited, however, to gov-
ernment initiative. There is an important role for nongovernmental or-
ganizations. For the last year the Government of India has been re-
minding us of the importance of autonomous—and I stress that word—
autonomous national human rights institutions.
We need not fear change if we build into it more equity and more
participation. Indeed, fear of social change is the thing we need to fear
the most. If we are afraid of it and try to preserve that which is already
eroding beneath our feet, we will fail, because the dynamic of history is
to widen the circle of those who participate in society. Whether the
struggle is for medical care for those who do not have it, bread for those
who are hungry, freedom from prison for those imprisoned for con-
science’s sake, freedom of the press to print dissenting opinions, a job
for those who are unemployed, the right to self-determination of major-
ities oppressed by minorities, the right of workers to organize, the right
to speak one’s own language in one’s own school—all of these are de-
mands for more participation and more dignity.
If we invest just half as much energy and imagination in building a
world community of the people as we have wasted in resisting the aspi-
rations of the people, we will overcome.
I believe that we are at the end of the period of cold wars, in the
middle of the era of detente, and just beginning to find ways to build
the structures of cooperation. Cooperation will demand a different sub-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
stance and different style than confrontation. It will take a while for us
to learn how to change, and I am afraid that we will all carry with us for
some years some of the characteristics of confrontational politics. But it
is more rewarding for everyone, even if it is more difficult and de-
manding, to practice the art of building community and cooperation
for the common good. I believe we can get just as excited about
building something as we can about protecting something. I believe
that cooperation for the common good of humankind can be as pow-
erful an incentive to our imaginations as fear for our survival. Indeed, I
submit that cooperation for the common good, for the protection and
promotion of human rights, is the way to survival.
Perhaps some neglected methods can be of great help to us in the
struggle to promote and protect human rights.
First, an emphasis on autonomous, national institutions. We have
not given due credit, nor due attention, to the creative role of independ-
ent, private institutions, dedicated to the protection and promotion of
human rights. My own experience was with the civil rights movement
and the churches of this country, and I know what they were able to do
in a few short years. Also, the role of a free and responsible press needs
to be recognized. The press can be a guardian of the public interest and
a critic of the abuses—where they exist—of public power, and of pri-
vate power, for that matter.
A second way to promote human rights is the use of the United
Nations and of government authority and influence as a catalyst and
agent of goodwill in stimulating a process of participation by those
who have common interests and concerns. The United Nations and in-
terested nations are doing this in the case of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
where the effort is not to impose a solution but to facilitate the building
of communication among all the parties which are concerned, so that
by talking to one another they learn to formulate their own solutions to
their own problems.
This is what the United States has been trying to do in the Middle
East; acting not as a judge between Egypt and Israel but as a mediator,
trying to be a catalyst in a process of ever-expanding conversation and
cooperation. This is what the United States, the Dominican Republic,
and Guatemala are trying to do in Nicaragua; not the imposition of an
external answer but the strengthening of the process of consultation
among all parties involved so they can find their own answers.
I believe we can be even more active in this way than we have been
at the United Nations. It is not enough to halt conflicts and to provide
buffer or peacekeeping forces. It is not enough to denounce problems
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
or supposed culprits. We must find a positive, creative role, of being
the catalyst of change, of promoting the process of wider participation
where there are conflicts so that all the parties are involved.
In the struggle to make all people free, we ourselves must become
free. Freedom is not some distant state of affairs when there will be no
more problems and history will have arrived at some utopia, some par-
adise, some order of perfect justice. Freedom is solidarity with those
who are less free than we are. Freedom is taking the risk of working for
social justice for all people.
The United Nations was brought forth as a result of the struggle
for freedom against tyranny. There are many forms of tyranny, and
none of us are exempt from the temptation to conspire with tyranny
against freedom by remaining indifferent to the struggle of others to be
free. But our very humanity rests in our capacity to identify with the
other and to join in the struggle to make all persons free.
The United Nations is now challenged to take the next steps that
can move us forward in the struggle of humankind for peace, justice,
and freedom. If we accept this challenge, I believe we will all be free
someday.
104.
Address by President Carter to the Nation
Washington, December 15, 1978
Diplomatic Relations Between the United States
and the People’s Republic of China
Good evening,
I would like to read a joint communique which is being simulta-
neously issued in Peking at this very moment by the leaders of the
People’s Republic of China:
original. The President spoke at 9 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. His ad-
dress was broadcast live on radio and television. In his diary entry for that day, the Presi-
dent commented: “The big day for the China announcement. We were favorably im-
pressed with Teng and the rapidity with which he moved and agreed to accept our
one-year treaty with Taiwan, our statement that the Taiwan issue should be settled
peacefully would not be contradicted by China, and that we would sell defensive
weapons to Taiwan after the treaty expires.” (White House Diary, p. 265) For the official

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
[At this point, the President read the text of the joint communique, which
reads as follows:]
JOINT COMMUNIQUE ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA AND THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
JANUARY 1, 1979
The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China
have agreed to recognize each other and to establish diplomatic rela-
tions as of January 1, 1979.
The United States of America recognizes the Government of the
People’s Republic of China as the sole legal Government of China.
Within this context, the people of the United States will maintain cul-
tural, commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people of
Taiwan.
The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China
reaffirm the principles agreed on by the two sides in the Shanghai
Communique2 and emphasize once again that:
—Both wish to reduce the danger of international military conflict.
—Neither should seek hegemony in the Asia-Pacific region or in
any other region of the world and each is opposed to efforts by any
other country or group of countries to establish such hegemony.
—Neither is prepared to negotiate on behalf of any third party or
to enter into agreements or understandings with the other directed at
other states.
—The Government of the United States of America acknowledges
the Chinese position that there is but one China and Taiwan is part of
China.
—Both believe that normalization of Sino-American relations is
not only in the interest of the Chinese and American peoples but also
contributes to the cause of peace in Asia and the world.
The United States of America and the People’s Republic of China
will exchange Ambassadors and establish Embassies on March 1, 1979.
Yesterday, our country and the People’s Republic of China
reached this final historic agreement. On January 1, 1979, a little more
than 2 weeks from now, our two Governments will implement full nor-
malization of diplomatic relations.
As a nation of gifted people who comprise about one-fourth of the
total population of the Earth, China plays, already, an important role in
world affairs, a role that can only grow more important in the years
ahead.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We do not undertake this important step for transient tactical or
expedient reasons. In recognizing the People’s Republic of China, that
it is the single Government of China, we are recognizing simple reality.
But far more is involved in this decision than just the recognition of a
fact.
Before the estrangement of recent decades, the American and the
Chinese people had a long history of friendship. We’ve already begun
to rebuild some of those previous ties. Now our rapidly expanding re-
lationship requires the kind of structure that only full diplomatic rela-
tions will make possible.
The change that I’m announcing tonight will be of great long-term
benefit to the peoples of both our country and China—and, I believe, to
all the peoples of the world. Normalization—and the expanded com-
mercial and cultural relations that it will bring—will contribute to the
well-being of our own Nation, to our own national interest, and it will
also enhance the stability of Asia. These more positive relations with
China can beneficially affect the world in which we live and the world
in which our children will live.
We have already begun to inform our allies and other nations and
the Members of the Congress of the details of our intended action. But I
wish also tonight to convey a special message to the people of Tai-
wan—I have already communicated with the leaders in Taiwan—with
whom the American people have had and will have extensive, close,
and friendly relations. This is important between our two peoples.
As the United States asserted in the Shanghai Communique of
1972, issued on President Nixon’s historic visit, we will continue to
have an interest in the peaceful resolution of the Taiwan issue. I have
paid special attention to ensuring that normalization of relations be-
tween our country and the People’s Republic will not jeopardize the
well-being of the people of Taiwan. The people of our country will
maintain our current commercial, cultural, trade, and other relations
with Taiwan through nongovernmental means. Many other countries
in the world are already successfully doing this.
These decisions and these actions open a new and important
chapter in our country’s history and also in world affairs.
To strengthen and to expedite the benefits of this new relationship
between China and the United States, I am pleased to announce that
Vice Premier Teng has accepted my invitation and will visit Wash-
ington at the end of January. His visit will give our Governments the
opportunity to consult with each other on global issues and to begin
working together to enhance the cause of world peace.
China, Documents 201–210.

105.
Editorial Note
On December 15, 1978, following his address to the nation re-
garding the normalization of relations with China (see Document 104),
President Jimmy Carter spoke to reporters assembled in the White
House Briefing Room. The President began his remarks by under-
scoring the historical importance of the announcement:
“It’s something that I and my two predecessors have sought
avidly. We have maintained our own United States position firmly, and
only since the last few weeks has there been an increasing demonstra-
tion to us that Premier Hua and Vice Premier Teng have been ready to
normalize relations. I think the interests of Taiwan have been ade-
quately protected. One of the briefers will explain the details to you.”
The President then noted that he had spoken with Japanese Prime
Minister Ohira and that the administration had also notified Taiwanese
leaders and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin. He continued:
“My own assessment is that this will be well received in almost
every nation of the world, perhaps all of them, because it will add to
stability. And the Soviets and others know full well, because of our
own private explanations to them, not just recently but in months gone
by, that we have no desire whatsoever to use our new relationships
with China to the disadvantage of the Soviets or anyone else. We be-
lieve this will enhance stability and not cause instability in Asia and the
rest of the world.
“I’m very pleased with it. And I obviously have to give a major
part of the credit to President Nixon and to President Ford, who laid
the groundwork for this successful negotiation. And most of the
premises that were spelled out in the Shanghai Communique´ 6 years
ago or more have been implemented now.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“You can tell that I’m pleased, and I know that the world is waiting
for your accurate explanation of the results.”
The President replied to one question about the reaction of the con-
gressional leadership to the announcement before indicating that he
would answer one additional question. Answering a question about
the Taiwanese response, the President commented:
“I doubt if there will be massive applause in Taiwan, but we are
going to do everything we can to assure the Taiwanese that we put at
top—as one of the top priorities in our own relationships with the
People’s Republic and them—that the well-being of the people of
Taiwan will not be damaged.
“To answer the other question, I don’t think this will have any ad-
verse effect at all on the SALT negotiations as an independent matter.
And I think that the Soviets, as I said earlier, have been expecting this
development. They were not surprised, and we have kept them in-
formed recently. Their reaction has not been adverse, and we will pro-
ceed aggressively as we have in recent months, in fact throughout my
own administration, to conclude a successful SALT agreement.” (Public
interview for broadcast on the CBS television network. CBS Evening
News anchor Walter Cronkite conducted the interview from the CBS
studios in New York; the President was in the Map Room at the White
House. Cronkite began the interview by noting that the United States
had not received any commitment from the government in Beijing that
it would not “use force to take Taiwan.” He asked the President if the
current, or a subsequent, government in China attempted reunification,
would the United States deploy force to help the Taiwanese resist.
Carter responded:
“In the first place, the People’s Republic of China does not have the
capability of launching a 120-mile attack across the ocean against Tai-
wan, who are heavily fortified and also heavily armed. And we have
made it clear to the People’s Republic that after this year, when the
treaty does expire, this coming year, that we will sell to Taiwan defen-
sive weapons.
“I think it is accurate to say also, Walter, that the major interest that
the People’s Republic of China has in the Western Pacific is peace and
good relationships with us. They know our firm expectations, clearly
expressed to them, that the differences between China and Taiwan will
be settled peacefully. And I think to violate that understanding with us
would be to wipe out all the benefits to them and to Asia of peace and
their new relationship with us.
“We have, obviously, a desire and a commitment to maintain
peace in the Western Pacific. And as would be the case with an alterca-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
tion between any two peoples, we would certainly be deeply con-
cerned. But I don’t want to speculate on under what circumstances we
might take military action because I think it’s an absolutely unneces-
sary speculation, because the people of China want peace, they want
good relationships with us, and because Taiwan is so strong and will
stay strong.”
Cronkite then asked the President several questions about the So-
viet response to the decision, the upcoming visits of Chinese officials,
and the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT) before addressing re-
actions some members of Congress had concerning the announcement:
“Mr. Cronkite. Mr. President, some Members of Congress, in-
cluding Democrats and some liberal Republicans, are claiming that you
failed to live up to an administration pledge to consult with Congress
before taking any such action as you have toward Taiwan and Peking.
And now, there’s a threat of a court challenge to the constitutionality of
your cancelling the treaty without congressional approval. How seri-
ously do you view this? Do you feel that either Congress or the courts
could block this arrangement with both Taiwan and Peking?
“The President. No. My constitutional responsibility in estab-
lishing relationships with foreign countries is clear and cannot be suc-
cessfully challenged in court.
“We have had constant consultations with the Congress over the
past 2 years. And our goal in establishing normal relations with China
has been made clear on numerous occasions by me personally. When
Secretary Vance went to China and came back, he gave the Congress
leaders and Members a thorough briefing. Dr. Brzezinski did the same
thing after his visit to China. I have met with all the Members of
Congress who would come to sessions here at the White House.
“One of the deliberate items on my own agenda in explaining to
them and answering their questions was about the terms under which
we would normalize relationships with China. I might add that when
numerous delegations of congressional leaders have gone to the
People’s Republic and come back, they have also given me and Secre-
tary of State Vance their views on what ought to be done. Almost in-
variably their recommendation was to proceed expeditiously with nor-
malization of relations with China.
“So, there’s been a clear understanding, really ever since 1972, of
the policy of our Government toward China, a desire to normalize rela-
tions, and also a clear expression of my views both publicly and pri-
vately to the Members of Congress about our goals and the plans for ac-
complishing this goal.
“I might say in complete candor that in the last 2 or 3 weeks, when
the negotiations were building up to a climax in an unanticipated de-
gree of rapidity of movement, we did not consult with anyone outside

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of a very tiny group within the executive branch of Government about
the prospective success. But what did happen should not be a surprise
to anyone. The congressional views were well known to me. My views
were well known to the Members of Congress.
“Mr. Cronkite. Mr. President, what was the need for such haste?
Why could you not have consulted with the congressional leaders first,
before making the final commitment?
“The President. Well, Walter, my experience in negotiating sensi-
tive and complicated agreements with foreign leaders, including the
experience at Camp David and otherwise, is that to negotiate through
the news media, through public pronouncements and with wide diver-
gencies of views expressed by different leaders in a country, is not con-
ducive to success. And I’m authorized and directed by the Constitution
and my responsibility is to conduct negotiations of this kind.
“We did not depart from the established policy of our country
that’s been extant since President Nixon went to China in 1972. And I
think had we caused a public debate in our country about all the ramifi-
cations of the negotiations at the very time we were trying to conclude
these discussions with the Chinese, it would have resulted in failure.
And our country would have lost a wonderful opportunity to a great
stride forward and all the benefits that will be derived from this
agreement.
“So, I don’t have any doubt that what I did was right and correct. I
don’t have any doubts that had we made a public issue of it, it would
have complicated the issue unnecessarily.”
Cronkite followed Carter’s answer with a question regarding the
U.S.–Taiwan Defense Treaty, before concluding the interview with a
question related to the Senate’s confirmation of the SALT II treaty:
“Mr. Cronkite. Do you think that putting the Chinese question on
the agenda of the next session of Congress might complicate the confir-
mation of a SALT treaty?
“The President. No, I think not. What we will ask the Congress to
do next session is to pass special legislation to permit us to continue our
cultural relations with Taiwan, our trade relations with Taiwan, the ap-
plication of the Eximbank, and the support of loans to China—to the
people of Taiwan, rather, and also to authorize us to sell weapons to
Taiwan after the defense treaty expires.
“So, I think that even those who oppose the normalization of rela-
tions with China will favor the continued relationships with Taiwan,
which this legislation will have to authorize. So, I don’t think this will
complicate the other issues in Congress. They’re almost as complicated
as they can get anyhow. I don’t think this will hurt at all.” (Ibid., pages

106.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 28, 1978
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #83 (U)
1. Opinion
One of the major concerns of the other leaders present at Guade-
loupe will be to obtain from you a sense of your strategic direction. In
part, this is due to some anxiety that this Administration does not have
any overall scheme, and that the United States is no longer prepared to
use its power to protect its interests or to impose its will on the flow of
history. (S)
It is, therefore, quite critical that you use the meeting in order to
share with your colleagues your thinking, especially on the level of
high strategy, in addition to much more specific discussion of such
issues as SALT, China, the Middle East, Iran, Africa, etc. (S)
I believe that as we enter 1979, you, quite literally, have a historic
chance to start shaping a new global system, with the United States as
its predominant coordinator if no longer the paramount power. The
fulfillment of that opportunity depends critically on how you play the
China/Soviet Union issues, and also on how you respond to the deteri-
orating situation along the Indian Ocean. (S)
The key issue is how you perceive and handle the U.S.-Soviet rela-
tionship, and how you fit your handling of that relationship into your
wider strategy. There are different views of handling U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions, and important consequences flow from these differences. Your
policy, as it has evolved through your speeches and actions, is quite
distinctive and—I believe—historically more relevant. It is not: (S)
1. Confrontation, or renewed Cold War (e.g., Reagan): A bitter, hos-
tile, head-on confrontation advocated almost as an end in itself. The
key weakness of this approach is that the United States would eventu-
ally find itself alone in taking on the Russians, for this is too simplistic
an image for the increasingly complex world. (S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
2. Condominium, based on a balance of power to preserve the status
quo (e.g., Nixon/Kissinger): This approach is based on the essentially
pessimistic view that the West is in decline and that the best we can do
is to prevent change in the central areas, while letting the Soviets win in
the less important peripheries. The key weakness of this approach is
that the world is too dynamic to sustain an essentially reactionary
balance-of-power policy, while the “condominium” would be bitterly
resented by everyone else, and thus would backfire strongly against
our own alliance relationships. (S)
3. Simply a Partnership as the centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy (e.g.,
McGovern): According to this view, a U.S.-Soviet partnership on a
broad front, starting with SALT, will be the basis for world peace, and
hence it ought to be the centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy. The key
weakness of this approach, much as of the one above, is that it frightens
our friends and allies, be they the West Europeans, Japanese, and lately
the Chinese, and it can be easily translated into appeasement. Indeed,
typical of this approach is its concomitant unwillingness even to criti-
cize the Soviets either for their militant intrusion into Africa or for their
excessive strategic build-up; as well as its willingness to give gratis as-
surances on the Chinese, asking nothing in return. In effect, alternatives
2 and 3 elevate the USSR into a global partner of the United States,
while giving the Soviets a hunting license to exploit global turbulence
to their advantage. (S)
Your policy, if I understand it correctly, seeks: (S)
sistance to indirect expansion, (3) ideological competition, and, most
important and above all, (4) creation of a framework within which the
Soviet Union can accommodate with us, or face the prospect of iso-
lating itself globally. This offers the best hope for the United States and
for our values, and it avoids the risks inherent in the three other ap-
proaches mentioned above because it seeks to fit the U.S.-Soviet rela-
tionship into a cooperative context of U.S.-European-Japanese, and
now also Chinese, relations. (S)
What does the fourth approach mean in practice? (S)
1. It means keeping open the option to the Soviets for genuine
global cooperation with the United States, but doing so in a patient
fashion. I think that we have made a mistake in putting so many dead-
lines on SALT and on Brezhnev’s visit here; that simply conveys over-
anxiousness, the Soviets can exploit that against us, and we hurt our-
selves domestically. We should stress to the Soviets that we are
prepared to be patient, that there is a constructive place for them in a
wider framework of international cooperation, that there are many
global issues on which we could cooperate, and that we are prepared to
seek detente and cooperation on the basis of genuine reciprocity, as in-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
dicated in your Annapolis speech. And, if that reciprocity is missing,
as it has been on Africa, Cuba, and the Persian Gulf, we are prepared to
assert our interests. (S)
2. It means cooperating with Europe and Japan in drawing China
into a more genuine involvement in global cooperation, pointing
toward a world of diversity. You should explain to Teng, and also to
the “Gang of Guadeloupe,” that diversity is the same thing as non-
hegemony; i.e., pluralism. In that sense we have genuinely compatible
strategic objectives with the Europeans, Japanese, and the Chinese. This
compatibility has to be cultivated cautiously but consistently. More-
over, if the Chinese were to sense that we are timid, or that we are using
them only to obtain a better bargain for a bilateral accommodation with
the Soviets, they could swing quickly to the other extreme. (S)
3. It means facing up to the danger that the Soviet military build-
up is likely to intersect with regional instability. In fact, it has already
started doing so, first in Africa, and now, and potentially much more
dangerously, in the Persian Gulf. (S)
The required response involves not giving the Soviets gratis guar-
antees on China. Whenever the Soviets ask for assurances regarding
China, we should be responsive by saying that we do not intend to ex-
ploit China against the Soviet Union, but couple that with a pointed re-
quest for the withdrawal of Cubans from Africa and for a halt to Soviet
activities in the Persian Gulf. (S)
In any case, we should not allow ourselves to be drawn into spon-
soring a blockade of China from defensive West European arms, since a
strong and secure China is an essential contribution to global stability,
and the Chinese are entitled to acquire defensive arms from the West.
(In the past, the Soviets were not shy about arming the Chinese against
4. It requires a U.S. military posture which is adequate to balance
the Soviet Union through essential equivalence and adequate collective
conventional forces. In brief, it means carrying out PD–18, with or
without SALT. (S)
5. It means affirming our position on human rights, which greatly
increases the moral appeal of the United States and provides an effec-
tive response to Soviet ideology. (S)
There is no doubt the global yearning for human rights is ready to
be tapped, and you have started tapping it in a genuinely important
fashion. I notice that the new Pope is beginning to join you in it. (S)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
6. With regard to the arc of instability along the Indian Ocean, we
need to respond collectively, and that is a fitting subject for a special
discussion in Guadeloupe. In the meantime, we may have to take some
steps to convince the Soviets that we will back our friends in Iran, come
what may. The disintegration of Iran, with Iran repeating the experi-
ence of Afghanistan, would be the most massive American defeat since
the beginning of the Cold War, overshadowing in its real consequences
the setback in Vietnam. (S)
7. It means, finally, making a basic decision on whether we will
seek a breakthrough to peace in the Middle East sometime in the first
half of 1979. The West Europeans can help us, if you choose to push
hard, and we should make an early decision on this matter. I fear that
without such an effort, the Middle East will become increasingly radi-
calized as it accommodates itself to the reality of U.S. inability to obtain
a wider settlement and perhaps also to provide protection to the region
from the Soviets. There is a subtle interaction between the problem of
Iran, Turkey, and the Middle East, and a United States lead on these
issues is quite necessary. You have been pointing in the right direction,
and we should now mobilize our allies for more overt support on be-
half of our efforts. These efforts, moreover, should be fitted into the
larger framework which I have sketched out above. (S)
If you agree, some comments to that effect at Guadeloupe might
provide your colleagues with the needed feeling that the United States
has historical direction. If you do not agree, some alternative statement
would still be desirable, for in either case the yearning for American
leadership must somehow be met. (S)
2. Facts
Trends in World Opinion Toward the U.S. and USSR
Newly analyzed evidence on foreign opinion toward the U.S. and
the USSR indicates that adverse trends, dating back nearly two
decades, have been reversed in the last several years. From the early
1960s until the mid 1970s, sympathy for America was eroded by Viet-
nam and Watergate, while distrust of the Soviet Union was eroded by
detente. As a result, the earlier favorable gap between Soviet and
American standing in the eyes of European and Japanese publics nar-
rowed dramatically. More recently, however, scattered but quite con-
sistent polling results suggest that U.S. standing is beginning to re-
cover, though it remains below the highs of the early 1960s, while
Soviet standing by contrast has plummeted to depths unequalled in
nearly two decades. (U)
The changes now apparently underway in Europe and Japan sug-
gest that the U.S. is recapturing the political-ideological initiative that
had slipped to the Soviets during the 1960s. In a parallel development,

107.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Priorities for 1979–80
It is quite possible that, in addition to normalization with Peking,
we will achieve in the next month or two both a SALT II agreement and
completion of the Tokyo Round of the MTN. An Egyptian-Israeli treaty
is also possible if the next few weeks produce greater flexibility.
Success on even three of these four issues, on top of the Panama
Canal Treaty, would represent historic foreign policy achievements for
the first two years of your Administration. At the same time, it becomes
especially important to look at some of the implications of such suc-
cesses for our foreign policy priorities and activities over the next two
years. I have been reviewing these priorities in some detail, and
thought it would be useful to present for your consideration a sum-
mary of this review.
SALT, MTN, and the Middle East agreements, as well as China
normalization, would mean that foreign policy issues will have a high
visibility here in the U.S. as we head into 1980, despite the attention do-
mestic priorities will receive in a time of fiscal austerity. The success of
your first term will be greatly affected by our ability to gain Congres-
sional approval of SALT and MTN agreements and measures related to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
China normalization. The difficulties of gaining such approval will be
substantial, including likely erosion of the bi-partisan foreign policy
support we have enjoyed. Efforts with the Congress on these issues
should therefore have priority over all other foreign policy concerns.
Their success would bring significant substantive benefits and consoli-
date the leadership position of the United States. Setbacks would be
very damaging to our relationships abroad and the Administration’s
ability to gain domestic support on other foreign policy issues.
We should plan our other foreign policy initiatives in this context.
The review of specific issues that follows seeks to do so.
At the same time we should keep in mind the shape of our policies
as a whole, and the impression they convey. Two years ago, we rec-
ognized that the U.S. must manage a broad foreign policy agenda, in-
cluding, in addition to the core security issues, new emphasis on con-
cerns such as nuclear non-proliferation, human rights, limiting
conventional arms sales, and development in the Third World.
It will be important that we maintain these goals, however we may
shape our priorities and tactics during the next two years. Our human
rights policies may come under increasing attack in certain domestic
circles if friendly but authoritarian governments, where human rights
have been an issue, give way to more radical or less friendly rule. Our
nuclear non-proliferation concerns may well come under increasing
pressure abroad. Without significant progress in gaining multilateral
restraint, our unilateral conventional arms sales policies will become
vulnerable. But, in each case, our goals are very important. We have
been making progress on each issue. And our constancy on each is crit-
ical to our general credibility, even as we make pragmatic decisions
about our tactics.
In presenting our policies publicly, we should emphasize that the
practical progress we have made on central issues (SALT, China, trade, the
Middle East) is fundamentally strengthening both our relationships abroad
and the international system. We should also continue to hold out our
longer term vision of a world in which we have not only helped stabi-
lize East-West relations and diffused regional tensions, but also have
made progress on issues which will determine the quality of life for
succeeding generations—e.g., development in the Third World, lim-
iting population growth, the law of the seas, preserving the environ-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
ment. These concerns have helped give a special character to this Ad-
ministration’s policies. Our human rights policies, which I believe are
well conceived and managed, provide the philosophical core of our ap-
proach to the world.
It will be especially important that we continue to work very
closely with our allies abroad. We may find ourselves increasingly
turning to them to share responsibilities in areas where we have in the
past been able to exercise power almost exclusively on our own. This
can be turned to our benefit by injecting increasing vitality and life into
our alliance relationships. As the international system becomes more
pluralistic and, during the next year or two, as the financial resources
we can use to support our diplomacy become more constrained, we
need to help our public think all the more in terms of Western interests,
influence, and power rather than exclusively in terms of U.S. interests,
influence and power. Our diplomacy in Africa and Europe over the
past two years, for example with regard to Namibia and Zaire, CSCE
and Cyprus, illustrates the advantages of such an approach.
We must also continue to project confidence in Western and Amer-
ican power and policies. We should emphasize our defense moderniza-
tion efforts and our strong ties to NATO, Japan, ANZUS and a growing
number of developing countries. While firmly responding to Soviet ac-
tivities in ways that emphasize our own advantages in the Third
World, we should be careful not to emphasize excessively Soviet
strengths and gains in our own statements. Doing so would create
fears within NATO and here at home that we cannot manage East-West
relationships effectively. If we were to let our rhetoric run ahead of the
practical responses realistically available to us, we would create expec-
tations about our ability to dominate events that we could not then
meet. This plays into the critics’ hands, and creates a damaging and er-
roneous impression of weakness. It would hurt us at home and abroad,
and could be especially damaging in SALT debates.
Running through this analysis is the point that we must, during
the next two years, give consolidation of gains on SALT, China, MTN
and the Middle East priority over other policies and new initiatives.
The following thoughts on our priorities for the next two years repre-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
sent an effort to shape our tactics on the latter to fit the primacy of the
former, while maintaining our goals and the special character of your
foreign policies.
I have divided our priorities into three categories: 1) crucial issues
on which success would have far reaching benefits; 2) important issues
on which success would be valuable but less critical to our interests;
and 3) some complicating contingencies on which we should keep an
eye and for which we should quietly plan. On each issue, I suggest
some of the opportunities and problems we will have to address.
I. Crucial Issues
A. Middle East: Success in concluding an Israeli-Egyptian Treaty,
and in beginning to build further on the Camp David framework,
would confer great substantive benefits and solidify perceptions of
your foreign policy leadership. This would ease the path of SALT and
other policies and negotiations listed below.
If we are able to gain an Egyptian-Israeli treaty, the next steps in
building on the Camp David framework will be still more difficult than
the Treaty negotiation. We face two basic problems:
—Concrete decisions will be required of leaders in the West Bank
and Gaza who have never before had to make them, and who lack a de-
cision making mechanism. These people are at the mercy, as indi-
viduals, of the winds blowing from Amman and Beirut (PLO). We
must therefore make the potential of Camp David attractive enough in
their eyes that they actively participate in the peace process, and gain
the acquiescence and engagement of the other Arab parties.
—We will also have to deal with the hard reality that the Israelis do
not see the advantages in a West Bank and Gaza accord that they may
see in a Sinai agreement. On Sinai, they can see a realistically available
alternative that is preferable to the status quo and therefore worth con-
cessions on their part. There is no realistic alternative on the West Bank
and Gaza that is preferable from the Israeli viewpoint, especially if nor-
malization of relations with Egypt has been achieved.
On each of these two counts, progress will require positions on our
part that are inherently unattractive to the Israelis. The settlements
issue will become still more contentious. There will be fall-out on the
Hill. We will have to manage all of this with real sensitivity to Israeli
longer term concerns about our constancy.
The alternative to pursuing progress on the West Bank and Gaza is
letting an Egypt-Israel bilateral treaty stand alone as a separate peace.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
To do this would probably result in our being on friendly terms only
with Israel and Egypt, with the rest of the Middle East open for a return
of Soviet influence. Saudi Arabia might not hold out against an Arab
consensus at odds with Egypt and the U.S. A friendless Sadat regime
would become more dependent than ever on us, and render precarious
the stability of the bilateral treaty. Polarization between Egypt/Israel
and the rest of the Arabs might also lead our European allies into in-
creasingly pro-Arab positions. Moreover, we could be forced to con-
sider allying ourselves with the Saudis to a degree we have not con-
templated before in order to preserve as much as possible of our
bilateral relationship. This itself could cause severe political problems
domestically.
Thus, I believe that we should continue to press forward for the
West Bank/Gaza agreement.
B. Management of East-West Relations: Now that the historic normal-
ization with China has occurred, we need to reinforce a position of
careful balance between Moscow and Peking, while improving rela-
tions with both. A “tilt” in either direction could dramatically increase
world tensions and impair our ability to control the distance that it is in
our interest to maintain between Peking and Moscow. Furthermore, re-
cent opinion polls show that our public overwhelmingly wants a bal-
anced approach.
On dealing with Moscow, I think that we are following an ap-
proach that has earned the respect of the Soviets and the American
people. The lowering of voices on both sides in recent months has reas-
sured our friends and allies that the Administration is effectively man-
aging this key international relationship.
Preparations for the Madrid CSCE Conference will require atten-
tion and allied coordination.
We must continue to press the Soviets for responsible behavior in
other regions; their actions in the Third World affect our interests, and
will become a major debating point for opponents of SALT. But, as I
noted above, we should continue to emphasize Western strengths more
than Soviet advances in our public statements.
The one change I would advocate is a more forthcoming attitude in
approving U.S. sales to the USSR of non-strategic items. This will not
President wrote: “The most important.”

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
only encourage U.S. business to pursue actively this potentially vast
market, it will also allow us vigorously to promote U.S. entry into
the opening Chinese market, while observing a policy of “even-
handedness.”
I believe we should consider an effort to repeal Jackson-Vanik,14
after SALT ratification, if the state of detente is positive, and if events in
the Middle East are not complicating.
With regard to China, gaining Congressional approval of legisla-
tion relating to normalization will be our first priority in terms of
timing. I expect that we will gain approval, but there will probably be
attempts to add reservations or amendments (for example directing
certain types of arms sales or relations with Taiwan) that we will have
to beat back.
We should plan to conclude a number of basic agreements with
Peking in 1979 which will enable us to expand our trade and exchange
relationships. Settlement of claims/assets issues, a consular agreement,
and formal bilateral agreements on some of the science and technical
areas where we have already made progress are practicable. Given Pe-
king’s present mood of looking outward, particularly toward the West,
we can also try to draw the Chinese more actively into several interna-
tional issues, for example on refugees and disarmament, where they
have showed reluctance in the past. Our decisions on technology
transfer and on arms sales by our allies, however, are particularly sensi-
tive in terms of the balance we want to maintain with the Soviets. We
should move with great care in both these areas.
C. SALT:
Beyond the extraordinary substantive stakes involved, failure to
conclude and gain approval of a SALT II Agreement would be seen as a
major setback here and abroad. The negative effect on Soviet thinking
about our relations could be profound and long lasting, especially as it
would come at a time of transition in Soviet leadership.
The SALT debate itself could be abrasive for our relations with the
Soviets. It must be made clear that we cannot go back to Moscow for
last minute adjustments of the text, as it was possible to do with Tor-
rijos. We must also be wary, in managing the debate, not to be drawn
into shifts in our policies elsewhere in the world that would damage
our over-all relationship with the USSR.
cerns may mean we should start SALT III discussions at a slow pace.
As suggested below, it could be very important to our non-
proliferation policies that we reach agreement on a comprehensive test
ban by the end of 1979; we should seek progress in the negotiations
during the coming year, but not try to reach final agreement until after
SALT II ratification.
The possibility that a SALT II agreement might create conditions
for progress on MBFR is also considered below.
D. Trade and the Dollar: The importance of international economic
issues to our own economy and to our political relationships abroad
has become increasingly evident. Working to enhance the strength of
the dollar, which depends primarily on the anti-inflation program, re-
mains crucial.
1979 is likely to see a major struggle in the Congress over approval
of an MTN package, as well as in response to the likely introduction of
new protectionist measures aimed at our major trading partners (espe-
cially Japan) and at the more advanced LDC’s.
The stakes are very high, not only in terms of the economic benefits
to us and the future of the international trading system, but also in
avoiding the acrimony abroad that would follow Congressional rejec-
tion. Our relationships with Europe would be damaged; and trade is an
even more important strand in our ties to Asian friends. This is, I be-
lieve, a major strategic issue.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Interagency planning of our Congressional strategy for MTN, led
by STR, should be completed as soon as possible. It will be important,
both on the merits and to help us sell an MTN package, that we press
ahead with export promotion measures.
E. North-South Issues: We are considering ways in which we can
move the international dialogue away from rhetorical exchanges about
resource flows, to focus more on the concrete problems that must be
solved. This means concentration on practical programs in health, agri-
culture, etc. We are developing a coherent strategy of tying some prac-
tical, modest initiatives to the major North-South conferences sched-
uled for the next two years. Such initiatives must be sized to our limited
resources.
In any case, there will be major efforts needed—with the G–77, our
Congress and the U.S. public—to gain agreement and support on com-
modities (including both the Common Fund and a number of indi-
vidual agreements) and our AID appropriations for FY 80.
II. Important Issues
A. Western Asia: A further breakdown of stability in this vital oil
producing region can gravely affect our national security and that of
our allies and could dangerously engage U.S. and Soviet interests. Do-
mestic political concern could focus on perceived setbacks in the area,
affecting a wide range of other Administration concerns, including
SALT and our economic policies. There is an interagency effort to de-
velop a coherent approach to this problem. Given the area’s extraordi-
nary diversity, this strategy will require a number of substrategies that
can encompass local rivalries and conditions. An essential problem is
that many of the instabilities flow from domestic difficulties over which
we have little influence, and a resurgence of Islamic nationalism which
presents challenges to our interests but also to the Soviets’.
B. African Policies: The greatly increased influence in Africa which
our new policies have gained for us is likely to erode if we do not gain a
Namibia settlement. In any case, a growing crisis in Rhodesia is likely.
We must seek to position ourselves in a manner that can best help
maintain confidence with African nations and manage East-West as-
pects. This means continuing efforts to consult the Front Line states;23
making it clear that we are prepared to help the Rhodesian parties
reach agreement whenever they wish us to do so and they have the will

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
to negotiate; and voicing our concerns to the Soviets while carefully
managing our public statements. Our impartiality among the Rhode-
sian parties will be increasingly important if, as seems likely, Rhodesia
again becomes a lively Congressional issue. Our relations with Pretoria
will need to reflect any progress in Namibia, but not go so far as to
imply a backing away on apartheid.
C. Mexico: Your February trip reinforces the fact that we are start-
ing to give the future of our relations with Mexico the proper atten-
tion. Putting these relations on a solid basis of cooperation would pay
handsome dividends over the next decades, both in reducing our de-
pendence on Middle Eastern oil and in helping us manage together
problems that could otherwise create constant tensions and domestic
political problems for us both. We should approach the many com-
plex issues with Mexico—including especially natural gas and migra-
tion—in the context of a positive, long-term strategy.
D. Nicaragua and Central American Stability: The Nicaraguan crisis
has links and/or parallels to the situations in neighboring countries.
Costa Rica, Panama and Venezuela are watching to see what we can ac-
complish. El Salvador and Guatemala share most of Nicaragua’s polit-
ical characteristics. A settlement in Nicaragua could help us encourage
moderate evolutions in these two neighbors. Deterioration in Nicar-
agua will have repercussions here that could affect congressional ac-
tion on such issues as Panama Canal Treaty implementation and AID
levels.
E. Nuclear Non-Proliferation and CTB: Our non-proliferation policies
have been designed and implemented well. We have had some success
on a number of discrete issues (e.g., France and Pakistan), and the
INFCE is a creative measure that could point the way to resolve some
thorny technical issues.
But I am concerned about the potentially difficult period of late
candidates for renegotiation of our bilateral nuclear agreements. Most
can be deferred or managed. But India will be very difficult.
In addition, the 1980 NPT Review Conference is scheduled for that
June.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXVI, Arms Control.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Success in these renegotiations—and the context of the Review
Conference—will be strongly affected by the results of the INFCE,
scheduled for completion in February, 1980; by progress in arms con-
trol negotiations among the nuclear powers; by the confidence poten-
tial proliferators like Korea and Taiwan have in their security and our
assurances; and by attitudes toward the U.S. as a reliable nuclear fuel
and technology supplier.
If the INFCE results are inconclusive, and we do not have a good
case to make on arms control among the nuclear powers, we could
easily see a backlash against the NPT at the Review Conference. A
number of the more than 100 nations which have ratified the Treaty
could renounce it.
Particularly important, both for the Review Conference and the In-
dian renegotiation, will be agreement on a CTB. Yet a CTB treaty would
have rough sledding on the Hill. I would recommend that we seek to
reach a CTB agreement after SALT II ratification, toward the end of
1979 or early 1980, and then consider whether, rather than moving
promptly for ratification, we should send it to the UN Committee
on Disarmament for its review. This would please the Indians
and others, and could defer contentious Senate debate until after our
elections.
F. Other Arms Control Initiatives:
A SALT II agreement might make it possible to gain the political
level decisions necessary to make progress at the MBFR talks. The pri-
mary focus will remain on the Soviet position on data; we must remain
firm here.
We might wish to look at ways of bringing the French into the
discussions, perhaps by adding a few new participants and thus
moving part way towards their proposed European Disarmament
Conference.
With regard to conventional arms sales limitations, we will want
seriously to review progress on multilateral restraint when looking this
spring at our unilateral policies. But even if progress is minimal, we
should avoid so dramatic a change in our own policies of restraint that

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
we imply either final failure in seeking restraint by others, or that we
have concluded our goal was misguided.
G. Eastern Mediterranean:
Progress on Cyprus is needed, both for the sake of Greek-Turkish
rapprochement, including Greek reintegration into NATO, and to
avoid a congressional backlash that could endanger our Turkish secu-
rity assistance package.
Turkey’s economic difficulties are profound, and could at some
point create a political crisis that would be damaging to our interests.
Our own ability to respond is limited, and we will continue to urge our
European allies to think creatively about ways to form ad hoc multi-
lateral arrangements that could complement IMF support. This is a
part of a broader problem: how best to support financially troubled im-
portant upper tier LDC’s and weaker European nations. The IMF itself
will bear an increasing load. We face an important effort next year to
gain congressional authorization and perhaps appropriation of some
$5 billion for our share of an agreed 50 percent IMF quota increase,
unless we decide to defer this request until the following year.
H. Refugees:
We plan to introduce new legislation that will simplify existing au-
thorities and expand the ceiling for “foreseeable” refugees, thus re-
ducing the pressure on the Attorney General’s parole authority. I be-
lieve we should appoint a high-level Refugee Coordinator to focus
interagency actions, so that the issue receives the priority concern that
it deserves.
The Select Commission on Immigration and Refugee Policy, man-
dated by the Congress last September, should get under way early next
year. Its terms of reference will be very broad. Its report, due October
1, 1980, offers an opportunity to pull together a more coherent way of
managing this complex and politically charged area.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I. Normalization with Angola, Iraq, Cuba and Vietnam, etc.:
Normalization of relations with such countries should remain our
goal, as part of our vision of a more stable international system. And in
each case, normalization would be a useful step in expanding U.S. in-
fluence and posing a counterweight to substantial Soviet interests
and influence. But the complexities of normalization are real in each
case and the domestic political context must always be given full
weight. I would recommend, therefore, continuing caution but forward
movement.
III. Contingencies
A. Possible Conflicts: Zaire; Ogaden/Ethiopia-Somalia; Sino-Viet
(Soviet); Egypt-Libya; Argentina-Chile (perhaps drawing in Peru and
Bolivia).
B. Possible Instability: Turkey; Post-Tito Yugoslavia; Iran; China;
Egypt; Poland; El Salvador; Saudi Arabia; Pakistan; Zambia; Romania;
Sudan; the Philippines; and countries moving to democracy, e.g., Ni-
geria, Brazil, Ecuador, Bolivia.
C. Post-Brezhnev USSR.
D. Repolarized Arab world.
E. The Korean Peninsula during and after U.S. withdrawals.
F. Possible Soviet moves affecting Yugoslavia, Romania, other
Eastern European nations, or China.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
108.
Briefing by Secretary of State Vance and the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, January 15, 1979
SECRETARY VANCE
I am delighted that so many of you have joined us today. I particu-
larly want to thank the two main business organizations represented
here, and especially their leadership, for their efforts in advancing
public understanding of a major foreign policy issue. Both Councils
have played—and will continue to play—important roles in strength-
ening our economic relations.
It is now 1 month since the President announced that the United
States and the People’s Republic of China had reached agreement on
the establishment of full and normal diplomatic relations. Today I
would like to share with you some of the background leading up to the
President’s historic decision and outline what we believe it means for
the United States and for the world.
Few other foreign policy issues have so long divided Americans as
“the China question.” In the 1930’s, Americans became deeply aware
and often passionately concerned with the tragedy and suffering of
China. In the early 1940’s, our two nations fought together against the
Axis Powers. In the late 1940’s we tried—ultimately without success—
to help the two sides in the Chinese civil war find a peaceful settlement
to their conflict.
Relations between the People’s Republic of China and the United
States reached a nadir in the 1950’s. Our armies clashed in Korea, and at
home the China issue left a deep mark on the domestic political land-
scape. One of the tragedies of that period was the destruction of the ca-
reers of some outstanding Foreign Service officers because they re-
ported events in Asia as they saw them.
The impasse in our relations with Peking persisted despite the
emergence during the 1960’s of incontestable evidence of serious ri-
valry between the Soviet Union and China. The United States, en-
meshed in military involvement in Southeast Asia, and China, preoc-
the original. The Department of State held the briefing for chief executives and other offi-
cials from member firms of the National Council for U.S.–China Trade and the USA/
ROC Economic Council.
ments 104 and 105.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
cupied with the Cultural Revolution, were unable to make progress
toward overcoming our differences.
The year 1971 marked the beginning of a new phase. Across a vast
gulf of misunderstanding and mutual distrust, the Governments of Pe-
king and the United States began a dialogue, starting with Henry Kiss-
inger’s dramatic trip to Peking in 1971 and President Nixon’s visit in
1972. The Shanghai communique of that year set a framework for our
new relationship.
But that dialogue was incomplete. The United States still formally
recognized the Republic of China—whose de facto control encom-
passed only Taiwan and a few adjacent islands—as the legal Govern-
ment of China. Despite this, we were able to begin contacts and ulti-
mately, in 1973, even establish Liaison Offices in Washington and
Peking. But the nature of the relationship with Peking remained lim-
ited in scope and depth by the political, legal, and economic implica-
tions of our lack of mutual recognition.
Nonrecognition—the delicate state in which we dealt with Peking
in the 6 years after the Shanghai communique—presented daily prac-
tical problems. Although both sides made major efforts to minimize
these limitations, they became increasingly inhibiting. Discussions
with the Chinese often foundered on the fact that in the absence of rec-
ognition, many activities either could not proceed at all or had to be
conducted at a low level. Contacts were constrained, including those
that might have produced greater understanding on global issues.
Trade was limited, and opportunities often would go elsewhere. Legal
problems hung over commercial transactions because of American
claims and frozen P.R.C. assets dating back to 1950. More importantly,
not to try to move forward would have been to risk moving back-
ward—and backward movement in U.S.-Chinese relations would have
caused serious damage to our global position.
So even before he was inaugurated, President Carter made his first
China decision. In an act of continuity with two previous Presidents, he
reaffirmed the Shanghai communique as the basis for our relationship
and specifically reaffirmed its commitment to work toward normal
relations.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
We were not at all certain at that time that we could, indeed, reach
that ultimate goal. But we felt it essential to try, and we were prepared
to take as much time as was necessary to achieve it on an acceptable
basis.
With this in mind, we began discussions within the Administra-
tion, as well as an intensive series of consultations both with Members
of Congress and with a wide cross-section of American businessmen,
scholars, and others. From our consultations and review, two central
thrusts, and several specific concerns, emerged.
These basic thrusts could not have been clearer. On the one hand, a
substantial majority of Americans wished to see the United States and
the People’s Republic of China establish diplomatic relations; but at the
same time, an equally large majority had deep concerns about Taiwan’s
future prosperity, security, and stability. We shared these concerns.
The President decided that we would only establish diplomatic rela-
tions with Peking if such an action could be accomplished in a way that
did not damage the well-being of the people on Taiwan or reduce the
chances for a peaceful settlement of the Taiwan question by the Chinese
themselves.
Beyond these basic considerations, several specific concerns emerged.
First, there was widespread and legitimate concern over Peking’s
insistence that prior to normalization the United States must unilater-
ally abrogate the Mutual Defense Treaty with Taiwan rather than ter-
minate it in accordance with its own provisions, to which the United
States and Taiwan had agreed in 1954. Furthermore, we wished to es-
tablish that after normalization, even in the absence of diplomatic rela-
tions with Taiwan, all other agreements and treaties would remain in
effect.
Second, we shared with Congress and the American public a deep
concern over the strong assertions by Chinese officials concerning their
right to “liberate” Taiwan in any way they saw fit. From an American
point of view, the peaceful settlement of the Taiwan issue by the Chi-
nese themselves was of critical importance; we could not move forward
if Peking continued to talk and think about the Taiwan issue in such in-
flammatory terms.
Third, a consensus rapidly emerged, inside and outside the gov-
ernment, that it was essential that we continue a wide range of relations
with the people on Taiwan on a nongovernmental basis after normali-
zation. In particular, these postnormalization relations would have to
include continued sale of defensive weapons to Taiwan.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
With these priorities emerging, I visited Peking in August of 1977,
and Dr. Brzezinski went there in May of 1978. We found a newly confi-
dent leadership emerging in Peking as a period of intense internal tur-
moil subsided. We found many points of common interest on global
matters, although on some important issues we continued to have dif-
ferences. Our discussions on normalization were of an exploratory na-
ture. These overall discussions reinforced our view that a strong, se-
cure, and peaceful China was in the interest of world peace.
In the early summer, President Carter instructed Ambassador
Leonard Woodcock, Chief of the Liaison Office in Peking, to begin a
series of presentations outlining our views on normalization. In five
meetings, Ambassador Woodcock laid out the American position.
On September 19, President Carter met with the new head of the
Chinese Liaison Office in Washington, Ambassador Chai Zemin. In-
volving himself directly in the discussions for the first time, the Presi-
dent told the Chinese that we were ready to normalize relations if our
concerns about the future well-being of the people on Taiwan were
met.
In completing his presentations on November 4, Ambassador
Woodcock indicated to the Chinese that we would be willing to work
toward a January 1, 1979, target date for normalization if our concerns
were met. The Chinese began their response in early December. In
mid-December, negotiations intensified with Vice Premier Deng
Xiaoping becoming personally involved. Finally, on December 14, we
reached agreement that met our fundamental concerns, and the an-
nouncement of our decision to establish diplomatic relations was made
on December 15.
We have been able to establish full diplomatic relations with the
People’s Republic of China in a way that protects the well-being of the
people on Taiwan. The importance of this is fully reflected in the ar-
rangements that we have been and will be establishing.
First, the United States will not abrogate the Mutual Defense
Treaty. Rather we have given notice that we will exercise our right to
terminate the treaty with Taiwan in accordance with its provisions,
which permits termination by either party after 1 year’s notice. All
other treaties and agreements will remain in effect.
about Brzezinski’s trip, see footnote 21, Document 62.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Second is the critical question of the peaceful settlement of the Tai-
wan question by the Chinese themselves. It is clear from the actions and
statements of the P.R.C. in the last month that normalization has, in
fact, enhanced the possibilities that whatever the ultimate resolution of
the issue may be, it will be pursued by peaceful means.
Since the normalization of relations, the P.R.C. has adopted a
markedly more moderate tone on the Taiwan issue.
• On January 9 of this year, Vice Premier Deng told Senators
Nunn, Glenn, Hart, and Cohen that: “The social system on Taiwan will
be decided by the people of Taiwan. Changes might take 100 years or
1,000 years. By which I mean a long time. We will not change the so-
ciety by force.”
• On New Year’s Day, after 25 years, the P.R.C. ceased firing prop-
aganda artillery shells at the offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu.
Third and finally, after the termination of the Mutual Defense
Treaty on December 31, 1979, we will continue our previous policy of
selling carefully selected defensive weapons to Taiwan. While the
P.R.C. said they disapproved of this, they nevertheless moved forward
with normalization with full knowledge of our intentions.
In constructing a new relationship with the people on Taiwan, we
are taking practical steps to insure continuity of trade, cultural, and
other unofficial relations. The President has taken steps to assure the
uninterrupted continuation of such relations from January 1, 1979. In
the future these relations will be conducted through a nonprofit
nongovernmental corporation called the American Institute in Taiwan.
This corporation will facilitate ongoing and, we are confident, ex-
panding ties between the American people and the people on Taiwan.
Taipei will handle its unofficial relations with this country in similar
fashion.
Let me say a word or two about the American Institute in Taiwan,
the legislation it requires, and its operations. Congress will be asked to
approve an omnibus bill that will authorize the funding of the Amer-
ican Institute in Taiwan and confirm its authority to act in a wide range
of areas. I hope we will have your active support for expeditious pas-
sage of that bill.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The institute will have its headquarters in Washington with field
offices in Taiwan. It will provide the full range of commercial and other
services that have been previously provided through official channels
to businessmen, both from the United States and from Taiwan. In your
private business dealings on Taiwan, you may freely contact the insti-
tute’s staff for advice or can deal directly with local firms and the au-
thorities there. In short, we see no change necessary in the way private
American business has been conducted on Taiwan up to now. Exim-
bank loans, OPIC [Overseas Private Investment Corporation] guar-
antees, and other important arrangements will continue.
With these new arrangements in place, we expect Taiwan to con-
tinue to prosper. Taiwan’s dynamic economic growth is one of the most
impressive stories of the last decade; it is now our eighth largest trading
partner, and per capita income is among the highest in Asia.
As anyone who has studied the issue can attest, normalization of
relations with Peking was not an easy step to take. The difficulties
always argued for themselves, and further delay was always an in-
viting option for any President. But we all recognized that sooner or
later we would have to move. As I have already said, failure to try to
move forward would have left us in danger of moving backward—at
great cost to our global position. By the time we took the decisive step,
every other member of NATO, our two treaty partners in ANZUS
[Australia and New Zealand], and Japan had long since recognized the
P.R.C., as had most other nations of the world. They were ready for our
action—and most of them, including all the members of the Association
of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), applauded it.
When we acted, we did so in a way that enhances significantly the
prospects for stability and peace in Asia and the Pacific. We acted in a
way that will move us toward our objective of a stable system of inde-
pendent nations in Asia and that will also increase the chances of main-
taining a stable equilibrium among the United States, Japan, China, and
the Soviet Union.
The United States will continue to play an active role in order to
maintain that stable equilibrium. For reasons of geography, history,
and economics, we are as much a Pacific nation as an Atlantic nation,
with deep and abiding national interests in the region. We will main-
tain balanced and flexible military forces in the region, as the recent
successful conclusion of the base agreements with the Philippines so
clearly demonstrates. And we will not hesitate to act, as required, to
protect our vital national interests.
The rapidly expanding relations between our two nations in sci-
ence, trade, and exchanges require the kind of structure that diplomatic
relations can provide. It will allow a much freer exchange between our
cultures. And with full relations, we are in a far better position to en-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
courage China’s role as a constructive member of the world commu-
nity. We will be discussing all of these matters with Vice Premier Deng
when he visits us in 2 weeks.
It is particularly useful on this occasion to note some of the eco-
nomic benefits we expect to flow from the establishment of diplomatic
relations with the P.R.C. These include our participation as a regular
supplier of agricultural commodities to China; the ability of U.S. ex-
porters to compete on an equal basis with other suppliers; and the re-
sumption of shipping, air, banking, and other normal economic rela-
tions with China.
Let me emphasize that in normalizing relations we acted in a way
that does not threaten any other nation but can increase the sense of
community of nations that we seek to encourage.
We believe that China has an important role to play in the search
for global peace and stability. The same is true for the Soviet Union.
Our national interests are best served when we seek to improve rela-
tions with both nations while protecting our vital strategic interests.
This was the case during the late winter and spring of 1972, a period
during which both the Shanghai communique and SALT I were
achieved. Equilibrium and stability, not isolation, are our strategic ob-
jectives. For this reason, we also look forward to the early conclusion of
the SALT agreement with the Soviet Union and to improvement of our
trade relations with the Soviets as well as the Chinese.
In conclusion, let me urge you to support the President’s decision
and the legislation to continue relations with the people on Taiwan. We
seek your support in explaining the strategic and historic necessity of
this action. And we encourage you to develop greater trade and contact
with both the People’s Republic of China and the people on Taiwan.
It was just short of 7 years from the Shanghai communique to nor-
malization of relations. Through a difficult period, two great nations
began to restore contact and shape a new relationship. We all recognize
that a new era is upon us. Opportunities previously denied to us have
now begun to take shape.
The nations grouped in and around the world’s largest ocean—the
Pacific—contain close to half the world’s population. These nations
must decide whether to choose the path of greater cooperation and
growth or to enter into a period of unresolved struggles for influence.
For our part, the United States will enter the closing decades of the
20th century ready to play a leading role in the search for peace and
economic well-being. The lack of diplomatic relations between the
United States and China was an obstacle to progress for many years.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Having now surmounted it, we face the tremendous challenge ahead
with a sense of excitement and hope.
[Omitted here are remarks by Blumenthal and Kreps.]
DR. BRZEZINSKI
My purpose is to place our China policy in a wider context. As I
address you, a number of troubling developments dominate the
headlines.
• The Shah of Iran is planning to depart for a rest, leaving behind
him a new administration which will seek to return tranquility to an
unsettled country in which the United States has an enormous stake.
• Vietnam has invaded its neighbor, Cambodia. Through an act
of aggression, it has imposed a subservient regime upon a Cambodian
people wearied of the inhumane, callous rule of Pol Pot.
• Among the first governments to recognize the new Vietnamese-
installed regime in Phnom Penh was Afghanistan, a strategically im-
portant country which borders on Iran and Pakistan and in which So-
viet influence has increased significantly in recent months.
• The situation in the Horn of Africa and in South Yemen, Angola,
and southern Africa remains uncertain, as Cuban troops continue to
promote Soviet interests.
• Indeed, all the developing countries in the arc from northeast
Asia to southern Africa continue to search for viable forms of gov-
ernment capable of managing the process of modernization. Their in-
stability, uncertainty, and weakness can be exploited and intensified by
outside powers.
Balanced against these unsettling developments, however, are a
number of quieter yet more significant, positive developments.
• Progress has been made in bringing peace to the Middle East.
The progress is slow and often painful. But through the persistent di-
plomacy of President Carter and Secretary Vance, we are, I believe, in-
exorably moving toward the realization of the Camp David accords.
We are promoting reconciliation to one of the most volatile disputes in
the world.
• In Latin America, U.S. policy has undergone significant change,
and our relations with most countries in the region are at or near all

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
time highs. The ratification of the Panama Canal treaties was an histor-
ical milestone.
• We have significantly improved the nature of our relations with
black African countries.
• Our relations with India have never been better; and we are re-
taining our ties of friendship with Pakistan.
• In East Asia, a delicate balance of power exists favorable to our
interests. We have normalized relations with China, in part, to consoli-
date the balance.
• Such regional organizations as ASEAN and the Organization of
African Unity are playing an increasingly positive role in bringing sta-
bility to their regions.
• In recognition of the growing conventional military capability of
the Soviet Union, we are increasing our military expenditures—as are
our NATO allies—to make sure our European defenses remain strong.
• While we have not yet managed to establish a more stable world
monetary and trading system, we have made progress in recent
months in stabilizing the dollar and in creating a more orderly and
growing world market through MTN.
• We will reach a SALT II agreement which will place a cap on the
deployment of new and more missiles and which introduces a note of
stability in the precarious strategic balance between the Soviet Union
and the United States.
Added to these favorable developments are those of the spirit.
After the debilitating decade of Vietnam and Watergate, our people are
returning to their social moorings and exhibiting their traditional will
and idealism. Worldwide, too, we have once again assumed the mantle
of moral leadership, with the importance we attach to human rights,
nuclear nonproliferation, and limitation of conventional arms sales.
Certainly as much as and probably more than any other major power,
the United States is addressing in a forthright manner the problems of
our age. We remain an innovative society and a worldwide source of
inspiration.
These positive developments are the result of the President’s com-
mitment—as he enunciated at Notre Dame more than a year ago—to a
policy of constructive global engagement, a policy of trying to influ-
ence the changes of our era in directions that are compatible with our
interests and values. Under that broad heading, we have crystallized
seven fundamental objectives for our foreign policy:
• To enhance our military security;
• To reinforce our ties with our key allies and promote a more co-
operative world system;

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
• To respond in a positive way to the economic and moral chal-
lenge of the so-called North-South relationship;
• To improve relations between East and West;
• To help resolve the more threatening regional conflicts and
tensions;
• To cope with such emerging global issues as nuclear prolifera-
tion and arms dissemination; and
• To reassert traditional American values—especially human
rights.
At the outset, I should note that American foreign policy confronts
a fundamental analytical question: Are the issues of the moment which
I mentioned earlier—Iran, Indochina, the Horn, Afghanistan—indica-
tions of longer term trends? Do we respond to these issues not only
with the sense of urgency which is obviously called for but with a sense
of historical despair as well? Or are the positive developments more in-
dicative of our era? Should we continue on course? In short, is an opti-
mistic or pessimistic view of history justified? It seems to me that this
issue underlies the emerging foreign policy debate in the United States.
Without being Pollyannaish, this Administration is basically opti-
mistic. We recognize the future is ours only with effort. Continued
American vigilance, preparedness, and decisiveness are necessary to
grasp the better future before us. But an optimistic view of history and
of America’s future lies at the heart of this Administration’s foreign
policy and of our China policy.
I do not mean to downplay or belittle the seriousness of the current
foreign policy challenges. Important, indeed vital, issues are at stake.
But in each situation, we are developing responses appropriate to the
challenges involved. The United States will suffer occasional setbacks,
but we will continue to be able to offset our losses with gains else-
where—such as those that have occurred in recent years in our rela-
tions with India, Egypt, Eastern Europe, Ghana, the Sudan, and East
Asia.
What we emphatically reject are apocalyptic visions about the fu-
ture ability of the United States to pursue and defend our interests
abroad. The pessimism that one hears from many quarters conveys a
sense of Armageddon and of the need to rush to the barricade at every
challenge without forethought.
Today, we seek neither a world order based on a Pax Americana
nor an order based on a Soviet-American condominium. Neither order
is possible or just.
Rather, we are in the process of creating a diverse and stable com-
munity of independent states. Working with our traditional allies—for
we cannot do the job alone—we are beginning to create a framework

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
for wide-ranging international cooperation involving the United States,
Western Europe, Japan, and many of the emerging regional powers
such as Mexico, Venezuela, Brazil, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, India, and In-
donesia. And with the establishment of full diplomatic relations with
the People’s Republic of China, we very significantly increase the scope
of international cooperation.
We wish, of course, to include the Soviet Union in that framework
of cooperation. Indeed, a fundamental choice the Soviet Union faces is
whether to become a responsible partner in the creation of a global
system of genuinely independent states or whether to exclude itself
from global trends and derive its security exclusively from its military
might and its domination of a few clients. We hope and encourage the
Soviet Union to be cooperative, but, whichever path the Soviet Union
chooses, we will continue our efforts to shape a framework for global
cooperation based not on domination but on respect for diversity.
We recognize that the world is changing under the influence of
forces no government can control. The world’s population is experi-
encing a political awakening on a scale without precedent in its history.
The global system is undergoing a significant redistribution of political
and economic power.
The record of the past 2 years suggests, however, that the United
States need not fear this change. To the contrary, the record shows that
we can shape this change to our benefit and attain security in a world of
diversity.
Not only does the record of the past 2 years suggest realistic opti-
mism is warranted. Our own past and the quality of our people also en-
courage confidence. For our national experience as a nation of diverse
origins and of change speaks to the emerging global condition. Not just
our wealth, not just our military might, but our history as a pluralistic
people and our commitment to the values of freedom and independ-
ence which now stir all of mankind give us a naturally key role in
shaping the trends of our time.
Given our assessment of history and the goals of the Administra-
tion, these points should be made about our China policy.
• We see normalization as having long-term, historic significance.
It comprises part of our effort to consolidate and improve our relations
with all the emerging powers in the world. And none of these powers is
more important than China, with its nearly billion people and third
largest defense budget in the world.
• We did not normalize out of tactical or expedient considerations;
rather we recognized reality. The People’s Republic of China is going to
play an increasing role in world affairs, and it was important for us to
have a continuing, broadened, and structured relationship with this
government.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
• We recognize that the P.R.C. and we have different ideologies
and economic and political systems. We recognize that to transcend the
differences and to make our new relationship successful will require
patience, wisdom, and understanding. We harbor neither the hope nor
the desire that through extensive contacts with China we can remake
that nation into the American image.
• Indeed, we accept our differences. Normalization is an impor-
tant part of our global effort to create a stable community of diverse
and independent nations. As President Carter stated in his cable to Pre-
mier Hua Guofeng on January 1: “. . . the United States desires a world
of diversity in which each nation is free to make a distinctive contribu-
tion to . . . the manifold aspirations . . . of mankind . . . we welcome the
growing involvement of the People’s Republic of China in world
affairs.”
• We consider China as a key force for global peace simply by
being China: an independent and strong nation reaching for increased
contact with the rest of the world while remaining basically self-reliant
and resistant of any efforts by others to dominate it.
• As Vice President Mondale stated on January 1: “We feel bonds
of friendship, but sentiment alone cannot bridge the gap between us.
What has brought us together is an awareness of our parallel interests
in creating a world of economic progress, stability, and peace.”
The community of interest we share with China is particularly evi-
dent in Asia, where we both desire peace, stability, and nations free of
outside domination.
East, Southeast, and South Asia is one of the most important re-
gions of the world today. The economies of the area are booming; the
people are dynamic. The United States has great economic and security
interests around the rim of Asia: in Japan, South Korea, all the Pacific
islands down to the Philippines, and in Southeast Asia as well.
To protect our interests, we retain a strong military presence in the
region, we maintain appropriate weapon sales throughout the region,
and we are prepared to act on our interests should the need arise.
Few actions will contribute more to the security and stability of our
important positions around the rim of Asia, however, than a construc-
tive involvement with China. As we improve our relations with Beijing,
China will also wish to keep us involved in the region and not, as in the
past, seek to drive us away.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
For the first time in decades, we can enjoy simultaneously good re-
lations with both China and Japan. It is difficult to overstress the impor-
tance of this fact. Normalization consolidates a favorable balance of
power in the Far East and enhances the security of our friends.
Now the Chinese are turning outward and extending their hand to
the West. We are prepared to respond less in confidence that in the fu-
ture their hand will remain extended than in the knowledge that
without a reciprocal gesture, their hand would certainly be withdrawn.
And by developing bonds of commerce and shared understanding, we
reduce the chances of future animosity.
That is why we have completed the process of normalization
begun by President Nixon, President Ford, and Secretary Kissinger.
Normalization, therefore, is an act rooted in historical optimism
and political realism. This change in our China policy does not repre-
sent retreat or abandonment of our previous positions; rather, it reflects
our determination to be globally engaged, to welcome diversity, and to
shape our future.
For a generation, we said “no” to the reality of East Asia. We re-
fused to recognize reality, we sought to isolate China, and we lived by
myths—with two wars and with incalculable cost to the region and to
us. Now, we say “yes” to reality. We are confident that as an Asian and
Pacific power with a positive relationship with Beijing, we will signifi-
cantly contribute to the peace and prosperity of the American people
and of all peoples in the region.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
109.
Address by President Carter on the State of the Union Before
a Joint Session of Congress
Washington, January 23, 1979
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the 96th Congress, and my fellow
citizens:
Tonight I want to examine in a broad sense the state of our Amer-
ican Union—how we are building a new foundation for a peaceful and
a prosperous world.
Our children who will be born this year will come of age in the 21st
century. What kind of society, what kind of world are we building for
them? Will we ourselves be at peace? Will our children enjoy a better
quality of life? Will a strong and united America still be a force for
freedom and prosperity around the world?
Tonight, there is every sign that the state of our Union is sound.
Our economy offers greater prosperity for more of our people than
ever before. Real per capita income and real business profits have risen
substantially in the last 2 years. Farm exports are setting an all-time
record each year, and farm income last year, net farm income, was up
more than 25 percent.
Our liberties are secure. Our military defenses are strong and
growing stronger. And more importantly, tonight, America—our be-
loved country—is at peace.
Our earliest national commitments, modified and reshaped by
succeeding generations, have served us well. But the problems that we
face today are different from those that confronted earlier generations
of Americans. They are more subtle, more complex, and more interre-
lated. At home, we are recognizing ever more clearly that government
alone cannot solve these problems. And abroad, few of them can be
solved by the United States alone. But Americans as a united people,
working with our allies and friends, have never been afraid to face
problems and to solve problems, either here or abroad.
The challenge to us is to build a new and firmer foundation for the
future—for a sound economy, for a more effective government, for
address at 9: p.m. in the House Chamber at the Capitol. O’Neill introduced the Presi-
dent. The President’s address was broadcast live on radio and television. In his diary
entry for January 23, the President characterized the address: “I made a briefer, clearer,
more balanced State of the Union address this evening. I thought the delivery was rela-
tively poor, but it got good reviews. At least that chore is out of the way for another year.”
(White House Diary, p. 281)
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
more political trust, and for a stable peace, so that the America our chil-
dren inherit will be even stronger and even better than it is today.
We cannot resort to simplistic or extreme solutions which substi-
tute myths for common sense.
In our economy, it is a myth that we must choose endlessly be-
tween inflation and recession. Together, we build the foundation for a
strong economy, with lower inflation, without contriving either a reces-
sion with its high unemployment or unworkable, mandatory gov-
ernment controls.
In our government, it is a myth that we must choose between com-
passion and competence. Together, we build the foundation for a gov-
ernment that works—and works for people.
In our relations with our potential adversaries, it is a myth that we
must choose between confrontation and capitulation. Together, we
build the foundation for a stable world of both diversity and peace.
[Omitted here is the portion of the address devoted to domestic
policy.]
A strong economy and an effective government will restore confi-
dence in America. But the path of the future must be charted in peace.
We must continue to build a new and a firm foundation for a stable
world community.
We are building that new foundation from a position of national
strength—the strength of our own defenses, the strength of our friend-
ships with other nations, and of our oldest American ideals.
America’s military power is a major force for security and stability
in the world. We must maintain our strategic capability and continue
the progress of the last 2 years with our NATO Allies, with whom
we have increased our readiness, modernized our equipment, and
strengthened our defense forces in Europe. I urge you to support the
strong defense budget which I have proposed to the Congress.
But our national security in this complicated age requires more
than just military might. In less than a lifetime, world population has
more than doubled, colonial empires have disappeared, and a hundred
new nations have been born. Mass communications, literacy, and mi-
gration to the world’s cities have all awakened new yearnings for eco-
nomic justice and human rights among people everywhere.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
This demand for justice and human rights is a wave of the future.
In such a world, the choice is not which super power will dominate the
world. None can and none will. The choice instead is between a world
of anarchy and destruction, or a world of cooperation and peace.
In such a world, we seek not to stifle inevitable change, but to in-
fluence its course in helpful and constructive ways that enhance our
values, our national interests, and the cause of peace.
Towering over this volatile, changing world, like a thundercloud
on a summer day, looms the awesome power of nuclear weapons.
We will continue to help shape the forces of change, to anticipate
emerging problems of nuclear proliferation and conventional arms
sales, and to use our great strength and influence to settle international
conflicts in other parts of the world before they erupt and spread.
We have no desire to be the world’s policeman. But America does
want to be the world’s peacemaker.
We are building the foundation for truly global cooperation, not
only with Western and industrialized nations but with the developing
countries as well. Our ties with Japan and our European allies are
stronger than ever, and so are our friendly relations with the people of
Latin America, Africa, and the Western Pacific and Asia.
We’ve won new respect in this hemisphere with the Panama Canal
treaties. We’ve gained new trust with the developing world through
our opposition to racism, our commitment to human rights, and our
support for majority rule in Africa.
The multilateral trade negotiations are now reaching a successful
conclusion, and congressional approval is essential to the economic
well-being of our own country and of the world. This will be one of our
top priorities in 1979.
We are entering a hopeful era in our relations with one-fourth of
the world’s people who live in China. The presence of Vice Premier
Deng Xiaoping next week will help to inaugurate that new era. And
with prompt congressional action on authorizing legislation, we will
continue our commitment to a prosperous, peaceful, and secure life for
the people of Taiwan.
I’m grateful that in the past year, as in the year before, no Amer-
ican has died in combat anywhere in the world. And in Iran, Nica-
ragua, Cyprus, Namibia, and Rhodesia, our country is working for
peaceful solutions to dangerous conflicts.
In the Middle East, under the most difficult circumstances, we
have sought to help ancient enemies lay aside deep-seated differences
that have produced four bitter wars in our lifetime.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Our firm commitment to Israel’s survival and security is rooted in
our deepest convictions and in our knowledge of the strategic impor-
tance to our own Nation of a stable Middle East. To promote peace and
reconciliation in the region, we must retain the trust and the confidence
both of Israel and also of the Arab nations that are sincerely searching
for peace.
I am determined, as President, to use the full, beneficial influence
of our country so that the precious opportunity for lasting peace be-
tween Israel and Egypt will not be lost.
The new foundation of international cooperation that we seek ex-
cludes no nation. Cooperation with the Soviet Union serves the cause of
peace, for in this nuclear age, world peace must include peace between
the super powers—and it must mean the control of nuclear arms.
Ten years ago, the United States and the Soviet Union made the
historic decision to open the strategic arms limitations talks, or SALT.
The purpose of SALT, then as now, is not to gain a unilateral advantage
for either nation, but to protect the security of both nations, to reverse
the costly and dangerous momentum of the nuclear arms race, to pre-
serve a stable balance of nuclear forces, and to demonstrate to a con-
cerned world that we are determined to help preserve the peace.
The first SALT agreement was concluded in 1972. And since then,
during 6 years of negotiation by both Republican and Democratic
leaders, nearly all issues of SALT II have been resolved. If the Soviet
Union continues to negotiate in good faith, a responsible SALT agree-
ment will be reached.
It’s important that the American people understand the nature of
the SALT process.
SALT II is not based on sentiment; it’s based on self-interest—of
the United States and of the Soviet Union. Both nations share a pow-
erful common interest in reducing the threat of a nuclear war. I will
sign no agreement which does not enhance our national security.
SALT II does not rely on trust; it will be verifiable. We have very
sophisticated, proven means, including our satellites, to determine for
ourselves whether or not the Soviet Union is meeting its treaty obliga-
tions. I will sign no agreement which cannot be verified.
The American nuclear deterrent will remain strong after SALT II.
For example, just one of our relatively invulnerable Poseidon subma-
rines—comprising less than 2 percent of our total nuclear force of sub-
marines, aircraft, and land-based missiles—carries enough warheads to
destroy every large- and medium-sized city in the Soviet Union. Our
deterrent is overwhelming, and I will sign no agreement unless our de-
terrent force will remain overwhelming.
A SALT agreement, of course, cannot substitute for wise diplo-
macy or a strong defense, nor will it end the danger of nuclear war. But

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
it will certainly reduce that danger. It will strengthen our efforts to ban
nuclear tests and to stop the spread of atomic weapons to other nations.
And it can begin the process of negotiating new agreements which will
further limit nuclear arms.
The path of arms control, backed by a strong defense—the path
our Nation and every President has walked for 30 years—can lead to a
world of law and of international negotiation and consultation in
which all peoples might live in peace. In this year, 1979, nothing is more
important than that the Congress and the people of the United States
resolve to continue with me on that path of nuclear arms control and
world peace. This is paramount.
I’ve outlined some of the changes that have transformed the world
and which are continuing as we meet here tonight. But we, in America,
need not fear change. The values on which our Nation was founded—
individual liberty, self-determination, the potential for human fulfill-
ment in freedom—all of these endure. We find these democratic prin-
ciples praised, even in books smuggled out of totalitarian nations and
on wallposters in lands which we thought were closed to our influence.
Our country has regained its special place of leadership in the world-
wide struggle for human rights. And that is a commitment that we
must keep at home, as well as abroad.
The civil rights revolution freed all Americans, black and white,
but its full promise still remains unrealized. I will continue to work
with all my strength for equal opportunity for all Americans—and for
affirmative action for those who carry the extra burden of past denial of
equal opportunity.
We remain committed to improving our labor laws to better pro-
tect the rights of American workers. And our Nation must make it clear
that the legal rights of women as citizens are guaranteed under the laws
of our land by ratifying the equal rights amendment.
As long as I’m President, at home and around the world America’s
examples and America’s influence will be marshaled to advance the
cause of human rights.
To establish those values, two centuries ago a bold generation of
Americans risked their property, their position, and life itself. We are
their heirs, and they are sending us a message across the centuries. The
words they made so vivid are now growing faintly indistinct, because
they are not heard often enough. They are words like justice, equality,
unity, truth, sacrifice, liberty, faith, and love.
These words remind us that the duty of our generation of Amer-
icans is to renew our Nation’s faith—not focused just against foreign
threats but against the threats of selfishness, cynicism, and apathy.
The new foundation I’ve discussed tonight can help us build a na-
tion and a world where every child is nurtured and can look to the fu-

110.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, January 26, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #86
This week I am giving you two items for your weekly report: a
frank and personal midterm assessment; and several maps which
speak for themselves by graphically conveying what you and I recently
discussed. I hope they are useful.
1. Opinion: Midterm Assessment
You have Cy’s analysis of what we have accomplished thus far in
your Administration as well as an outline of future priorities. As you
know, I generally agree with his analysis of our longer-term priorities.
This brief note seeks to lay out, at the mid point of your Administration,
the major issues and questions which will dominate our foreign policy
concerns as you approach the 1980 election.
I believe there are four issues. First, what will be your principal
foreign policy success in 1980? Second, how should we play out the im-
plementation of the Camp David accords? Third, what do we do to
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
maintain the crucial and delicate balance between ourselves, the Soviet
Union and China? And fourth, what can be done to our national secu-
rity process to overcome a deep-seated perception that we are in dis-
array—an image which gravely undermines the very real and substan-
tive successes of this Administration.
Achievements in 1980
Your intense work over the last two years on SALT, the Middle
East and China is bearing fruit. We are about to sign a SALT agreement,
and with effort and firmness we might have a Middle East treaty. The
Deng visit will dramatize a very real diplomatic accomplishment.
But the question as we approach 1980 is what do we do for an en-
core. The achievement of the SALT summit will evolve into a long, pos-
sibly bitter and potentially inconclusive ratification debate. Legislative
liaison experts now estimate we may not achieve Senate ratification be-
fore Thanksgiving and possibly not before Christmas. While ratifica-
tion itself will be an achievement, it is hard to believe it will provide
much political momentum for the campaign of 1980, especially if the
Soviets in the meantime again do something that generates further
public concerns about their motives and actions.
The problems of the Middle East are likely to drag on in one form
or another. This is addressed in detail below. It is also true that we are
likely to continue to have turmoil in Iran with wider international
repercussions.
We have surveyed the possible achievements which we might seek
that could come to fruition in 1980. Success in Southern Africa, if it is
possible, will not have a great public impact. CTB is likely to produce a
divisive debate in Congress. Conventional Arms Transfer Limitation
will be a positive step but will not command enormous public atten-
tion. The same may be said for an Indian Ocean agreement or the estab-
lishment of some new rules regarding the proliferation of nuclear capa-
bilities as the result of INFCE.
The only measure apart from those indicated below that might
have a broad impact is the achievement of a first step MBFR agreement
focusing primarily if not exclusively on U.S.-Soviet reductions in Cen-
tral Europe. Such an agreement could well be signed at a Summit of the
more than a dozen nations which participate in MBFR. It could be a sig-
nificant political event, indicative of improving East-West relations. We
could seek to time such an initial agreement for the spring of 1980,
shortly before the Democratic Convention.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
The Middle East
Better still would be a significant breakthrough to peace in the
Middle East. It seems clear that in any case fulfillment of Camp David
will be an essential yardstick to measure the success of your Presi-
dency. This will require additional direct and deep involvement on
your part. I am still convinced that genuine progress is achievable.
However, we must recognize that the American Jewish commu-
nity harbors deep suspicion of this Administration. This can only be
overcome by a successful conclusion to the Israeli-Egyptian negotia-
tions. Moreover, suspicion is easily rekindled—witness the resurgence
of Jewish concern after the euphoria of Camp David.
In this situation I believe our strategy should be to make a max-
imum effort in the near future to conclude a treaty, to be followed by
negotiations regarding self-government in the West Bank and Gaza.
Once the latter are underway, we would be able to lower the profile of
our involvement in Middle East matters until after the 1980 election.
This maximum effort should be made between now and late spring—to
be followed by a gradual easing off on our part.
Another way perhaps of dealing with the linkage issue—in the
event that it proves impossible to obtain a formal Israeli commitment to
elections on the West Bank—might be an understanding between the
Israelis and the Egyptians or between the Israelis and ourselves (with
us conveying it to the Egyptians) that Israel will now undertake a series
of unilateral steps designed to set in motion a political process on the
West Bank/Gaza, pointing toward eventual self-government. This
could involve release of some prisoners, fewer restrictions on political
activity, the initiation of discussions on the subject of elections and the
scope of authority for the self-government, self-restraint on settle-
ments, etc. The point would be to substitute tangible Israeli actions for
the formal commitment that the Israelis may be unwilling to make pub-
licly (I will be exploring these and other ideas with Cy Vance and Bill
Quandt, and the above is merely suggestive).
In any case, we have little time left for endless litigation of the
issue, and within the next two weeks or so some basic strategic deci-
sions concerning the rest of this year and next year ought to be made.
US-USSR-China
Normalization with China obviously carries with it the risk of So-
viet over-reaction and miscalculations in both Peking and Moscow. We
are now directly in the middle of a very delicate balancing act—one
which is complicated by the fact that both Brezhnev and Deng are old
and we could, even in the next few years, see significant governmental
changes in both countries.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
There is also a ripple effect. The Germans, for example, are already
nervous that the Soviet response to our playing “the China card” will
result in the Russians playing “the German card.” By this they are evi-
dently concerned that pressure could be brought on Berlin or that some
other aspect of Soviet-West German relations could be adversely
affected.
Thus, it is extremely important for allied solidarity as well as
global stability for this three-cornered relationship to be handled with
the utmost care. From a political standpoint it is important to maintain
momentum with both Peking and Moscow. I believe this means that
you should plan on emerging from both the Deng visit and the
Brezhnev visit5 with concrete plans to visit both China and the Soviet
Union before the 1980 election. (You should make some tentative
scheduling decisions on this even before you meet with Deng.)
Such summits in Peking and Moscow will not only enhance your
own prestige but serve as a focus for structuring our relations with both
China and the Soviet Union over the next 18 months. They will provide
both reassurance of a continuing relationship with both countries and
positive incentives for both to maintain a measure of restraint in their
mutual relations.
My second recommendation is that you take more direct com-
mand of our relationship with the Soviet Union. You should insist on
tight personal control of all actions affecting our relationship with the
Soviet Union. You have taken this approach in regard to the Middle
East and China with significant success. There is a potential for great
disarray, given the different ideological views in your Administration.
We cannot afford this disarray any longer, but it is likely to intensify in
the absence of better discipline.
The Process
This leads me to my final concern. Substantively, we are doing ex-
tremely well. You have dispelled the popular impression that you are
not skilled in foreign policy. You have made real progress on a number
of key issues, and today the U.S. has better relations with the more im-
portant countries in the world than at any point since 1945.
But as an Administration, we have not dispelled the notion that we
are amateurish and disorganized and that our policies are uncertain
members of the White House Correspondents Association, the President indicated that
he would like to host Brezhnev in Washington for 4–5 days to discuss “a broad range of
agenda items.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, p. 2180) Responding to reporters’ ques-
tions in Plains, Georgia, on December 25, the President suggested that it was unlikely that
the meeting would take place in January, but adding: “We would be ready in January if
the Soviets are.” (Ibid., p. 2287)

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
and irresolute. (The latest issue of Foreign Affairs6 makes a very strong
case to that effect, and that is becoming the conventional wisdom.) This
is the direct result not of our policies but of the way in which almost
anyone in the bureaucracy feels free to talk to the press, discuss and
distort the most intimate decision-making processes, and generally
promote themselves or their personal policy preferences. It is extremely
destructive, not only of our foreign policy but of political support for
this Administration. I am afraid I see no remedy to this problem short
of a significant shake-up, particularly in the State Department. There
are faults here in The White House, in the NSC, and certainly in De-
fense. But one cannot have a discussion with any journalist in this city
without gaining the very clear impression that the leaks and misinfor-
mation coming out of the State Department are of unprecedented
proportions.
I am prepared to direct my staff to have no conversations with the
press whatsoever unless specifically authorized by me or David. I be-
lieve we can similarly discipline the rest of the White House Staff. We
should save our crackdown on the Pentagon until after we have SALT
ratified; but this is not a major problem anyway, and we can take action
against any outrageous examples of disloyalty or indiscretion (the
Singlaub case8 had a constructive impact in DOD). In the State Depart-
ment, I believe the principal problem areas that require shaking up are:
the Iran desk, which has consistently misrepresented your policy; the
staff in the Human Rights office; some key people in the Secretariat, in-
cluding those who deal with the press; and some Assistant Secretaries,
who grind their own axes with the press (most recently on the question
pertaining to the Kennedy invitation to the Deng dinner). All of them,
in different ways, have contributed to the public sense of disarray.
I have hesitated to set down this view for fear it would be misinter-
preted. But I simply feel I would not be honest with you or myself if I
did not express my deepening concern for the destructive impact of the
World 1978.” In it, authors surveyed and analyzed the President’s foreign policy suc-
cesses and limitations during the second year of his administration.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
undisciplined and unprofessional conduct that characterizes various
parts of the bureaucracy in the State Department.
This kind of thing does not have to go on. It did not happen under
Dean Rusk; it did not happen under Henry Kissinger; it did not even
happen under William Rogers. It is destructive, and I do think that you
should consult some of your close political advisers (Ham, Jody, etc.)
on how best to reassert more effective discipline. I do not wish to offer
advice along these lines because it could be misconstrued as being self-
serving.
In sum, if our foreign policy efforts are not only to be successful
but be perceived as such so as to contribute to your political strength in
1980, it is necessary to focus on those few issues which will come to fru-
ition at that time. And it is important that we do so with a genuine
sense of cohesion and loyalty. I want you to know that I myself and my
staff will do our utmost to refrain from contributing to public disarray.
A similar commitment elsewhere in the government should be re-
quired as well.
2. Trends
Attached are the maps I referred to at the beginning of this re-
color coded as follows:
Blue
Aligned with U.S. or West
Light Blue
Non-Aligned but trending toward West (not
necessarily the U.S.)
White
Non-Aligned
Pink
Non-Aligned but trending toward USSR (not
toward communism per se)
Red
Aligned with USSR
I believe these maps, albeit in a simplified fashion, capture the sig-
nificant political changes that have occurred over the past two and a
half decades. Here are a few observations:
1. The most far-reaching changes have taken place in Asia—the Far
East, Southeast Asia and South Asia—and the most important of these
has been the PRC. The alignment of India has also shifted during this
period and it could be argued that India should now be considered
trending toward the West (light blue) rather than non-aligned (white).
The next year—and the fate of Indira Gandhi and the Janata Party—
its white coloration. That same question mark could be applied to the
region.
4. The area of least change—with the obvious exception of Eu-
rope—has been the Western hemisphere, although to our south there has
been a slight trend toward less alignment with the U.S. Given the his-
tory of the region—and the need to set U.S.-Latin relations on a more
mature basis for the future—this is probably a positive development (up
to a point).
5. With respect to worldwide trends, the United States has reason to
be optimistic; the Soviets less so. Again, the changing political align-
ment of the PRC is largely responsible for this. In addition, our region
of the world is relatively stable; the Soviet Union’s is not. The next few
years, however, will be critical ones. How the conflicts in the Middle
East, the “arc of instability,” and Southern Africa are resolved will go a
long way toward determining the alignments of the future.
As you have often mentioned, the world today is undergoing tre-
mendous change—demographic, social, economic and political. The at-
tached maps reflect the surface manifestations of these changes. Far more
interesting would be a map that depicted the undercurrents of change.
In lieu of such a map, studies such as the one you recently requested
on the international implications of Islamic fundamentalism will be
essential.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
111.
Remarks by President Carter
Atlanta, Georgia, February 20, 1979
Chairman Milton Jones, Chancellor George Simpson, Dr. Joe Pettit, Mr.
Kroll, honored guests, fellow Tech students and alumni, ladies and
gentlemen:
I have always been proud that I attended Georgia Tech, and I’ve
always been grateful for what I learned here.
I have attended as a full-time student four different colleges in my
life. Georgia Tech is by far the most difficult—[laughter]—and a number
of years ago I decided that my being elected President was the only
way that I would ever have a chance to get a degree from Georgia Tech.
[Laughter] This has made it worthwhile. [Laughter]
I remember when I first came to Tech, the entire world was at war.
Our Nation was under attack on two fronts and was desperately
gearing up for a total war effort that we had not known since we fought
each other in the 1860’s.
In 1942, 1943, it was not yet a time for victories for the United
States nor for our allies, and many people feared that Western de-
mocracies might be overwhelmed. We now face a very different world
from the world in which I came of age. The old empires are gone, and
the maps are covered with new and developing nations with names
that we had then never heard.
But one thing has not changed as much as I had hoped. It’s still a
world of danger, a world in which democracy and freedom are still
challenged, a world in which peace must be rewon day by day. Too
many people still lack the simplest necessities of life, and too many are
deprived of the most basic human rights. As the events of recent days
inal. The President spoke at a special convocation, which took place at 12: p.m. in Alex-
ander Memorial Coliseum at the Georgia Institute of Technology. In his diary entry for
February 20, the President commented: “I made a foreign affairs speech at Georgia Tech
and got the first honorary degree they’ve ever given. They had to pass a special rule by
the Board of Regents that an honorary degree could be given by a college in the univer-
sity system only to an alumnus of the college who had become president of the United
States.” (White House Diary, p. 295) The President had attended Georgia Tech before he
received a commission to the U.S. Naval Academy.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
have shown, peace remains a fragile thing, vulnerable to assaults from
all sides.
Disturbances in Iran, the Western Indian Ocean, and Southeast
Asia, are a challenge to our determination and our leadership. They
underscore the importance of strength in our national defenses,
wisdom in our diplomacy, and steadfastness in the pursuit of arms con-
trol and peace.
I want to speak to you today about America’s role and America’s
purpose in this world of change and turbulence.
Ever since the end of the Second World War, the United States has
been the leader in moving our world closer to a stable peace and gen-
uine security. We have the world’s strongest economy; we have the
world’s strongest military forces; and we share burdens of mutual de-
fense with friends abroad whose security and prosperity are as vital to
us as to themselves.
With our strong allies, we have succeeded in preventing a global
war for more than one-third of a century—the longest period of general
peace in modern times. And as President of the United States, I am de-
termined to keep our Nation at peace.
We help to sustain a world trading and monetary system that has
brought greater prosperity to more of the world’s people than ever be-
fore in history. We are working to resolve conflicts among other nations
so that each can develop its own future in independence and peace.
And we’ve helped to maintain the conditions in which more than 100
new nations have come into being, and in which human hope—and its
fulfillment—has taken a revolutionary leap forward.
In short, we in the United States provide the bedrock of global se-
curity and economic advance in a world of unprecedented change and
conflict.
In such a world America has four fundamental security responsi-
bilities: to provide for our own Nation’s strength and safety; to stand by
our allies and our friends; to support national independence and integ-
rity of other nations; and to work diligently for peace.
We do not oppose change. Many of the political currents sweeping
the world express a desire that we share—the desire for a world in
which the legitimate aspirations of nations and individuals have a
greater chance for fulfillment.
The United States cannot control events within other nations. A
few years ago, we tried this and we failed. But we recognized as inevi-
table that the uncertainty and the turmoil that come with change can
have its darker side as well. We saw this in a senseless act of violence
last week in Afghanistan, when a brave and good man—Ambassador

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Adolph Dubs—gave his life in the performance of his duty as a repre-
sentative of the United States.
As we meet here today at Georgia Tech—enjoying the blessings of
freedom and peace—we must remember that we are indebted for those
blessings to the sacrifice of men and women like Spike Dubs.
We also see the darker side of change when countries in turbulence
provide opportunities for exploitation by outsiders who seek not to ad-
vance human aims, but rather to extend their own power and their own
position at the expense of others.
As I speak to you today, the country of Iran—with which we have
had close relations for the last 30 years—is in revolution. It’s been our
hope that Iran could modernize without deep internal conflicts, and we
sought to encourage that effort by supporting its government, by urg-
ing internal change toward progress and democracy, and by helping to
provide a background of regional stability.
The revolution in Iran is a product of deep social, political, reli-
gious, and economic factors growing out of the history of Iran itself.
Those who argue that the United States should or could intervene di-
rectly to thwart these events are wrong about the realities of Iran. So,
too, are those who spout propaganda that protecting our own citizens
is tantamount to direct intervention.
We have not and we will not intervene in Iran, yet the future of
Iran continues to be of deep concern to us and to our friends and allies.
It’s an important nation in a critical part of the world, an immediate
neighbor of the Soviet Union, a major oil producer that also sits beside
the principal artery for most of the world’s trade in oil. And it is still a
significant potential force for stability and progress in the region.
Iran is a proud nation with a long history—more than 2,000
years—of struggle to establish and to guarantee its own freedom. The
independence of Iran is also in our own vital interest and in the interest
of our closest allies—and we will support the independence of Iran.
Out of today’s turmoil, it is our hope that these troubled people
will create a stable government which can meet the needs of the Iranian
people and which can enable that great nation not only to remain inde-
pendent but to regain its internal strength and balance.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
We are prepared to support that effort as appropriate and to work
with the Iranian Government and the people as a nation which shares
common interests and common aspirations with us.
But just as we respect Iran’s independence and integrity, other na-
tions must do so as well. If others interfere, directly or indirectly, they
are on notice that this will have serious consequences and will affect
our broader relationships with them.
At the same time, we are intensifying our efforts to promote sta-
bility throughout the Middle East so that the security and the inde-
pendence of the nations of that part of the world will be maintained.
At my direction, the Secretary of Defense recently carried out com-
prehensive consultations in Israel, Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia,
concerning the security of that region. We are determined to work
with these nations and with others to put the peaceful development of
the region on a sound and a lasting foundation.
Recent disturbances in the region have underlined the need to
work even more urgently towards peace between Israel and its Arab
neighbors. To this end, Israeli and Egyptian negotiators, the Foreign
Ministers of both countries, will return to Camp David tonight at the
invitation of the United States.
They will be meeting with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. And I
myself will do whatever I can to promote the success of the Camp
David negotiations. And if it should be necessary, and the parties show
adequate flexibility, I will call another summit conference to work for
peace.
I urge all leaders throughout the Middle East to recognize the vital
importance for their region for these talks to succeed.
For us in the United States, any crisis in the Middle East has the
most immediate and serious consequences. But we are also deeply con-
cerned by what is happening now in Southeast Asia. The same prin-
ciples of American policy apply: We support the independence and in-
tegrity of the regional nations; we will stand by our friends; and we will
continue as a nation to work for peace.
Just in the last few weeks we’ve seen a Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia7 and, as a result, a Chinese frontier penetration into Viet-
vol. XVIII, Middle East Regional; Arabian Peninsula.
Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
nam. Both actions threaten the stability of one of the world’s most im-
portant and promising regions—Southeast Asia.
We have opposed both military actions. Let me outline very briefly
the principles that govern our conduct.
First, we will not get involved in conflict between Asian Commu-
nist nations. Our national interests are not directly threatened, al-
though we are concerned, of course, at the wider implications of what
might happen in the future and what has been happening in the past.
We are using whatever diplomatic and political means are avail-
able to encourage restraint on all parties and to seek to prevent a wider
war. While our influence is limited, because our involvement is limited,
we remain the one great power in all the world which can have direct
and frank discussions with all the parties concerned. For this reason,
we have a useful and important role to play in the restoration of sta-
bility. We will continue our efforts, both directly with the countries in-
volved and through the United Nations, to secure an end to the fighting
in the region, to bring about a withdrawal of Vietnam forces from Cam-
bodia, and of Chinese forces from Vietnam, and to gain the restoration
of the independence and integrity of all nations involved.
At the same time, we are continuing to express our deep concern
that this conflict may widen still further—with unforeseen and grave
consequences for nations in the region and also beyond.
In any event, the United States is fully prepared to protect the vital
interests of our people wherever they may be challenged. We are in
close consultation with our friends and allies in the region, especially
the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
ASEAN nations. Their continued stability and prosperity are of great
importance to us.
The normalization of relations between the United States and the
People’s Republic of China is already an accomplished fact and will not
be reversed. This was the simple, long overdue recognition of the re-
ality of the government in Peking.
In the last few days, we’ve consulted directly with leaders around
the world—and with our own congressional leaders, as well—about
events both in the Middle East and Southeast Asia. The responsibilities
that we face are serious, and they are shared by the administration and
the Congress, by our Nation, and our allies—and our common under-
standing and our adherence to a common cause are vital.
All of us know that the internal affairs of Iran or combat even
among Communist nations are of concern to us. Many nations are trou-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
bled, even threatened by the turmoil in Southeast Asia and in the
Middle East. To stand by our friends and to help meet their security
needs in these difficult times, I will consult with the Congress to deter-
mine what additional military assistance will be required. This added
measure of support is crucial for stability throughout the Indian Ocean
area.
And let me repeat, in the Middle East, in Southeast Asia, and else-
where in the world, we will stand by our friends. We will honor our
commitments. And we will protect the vital interests of the United
States, and you can depend on it.
As we face this immediate series of crises, we also look constantly
to the broader needs of security. If we are to meet our responsibilities,
we must continue to maintain the military forces we need for our de-
fense and to contribute to the defense of our allies.
This year, I have proposed a substantial real increase in the defense
budget. The events of recent weeks underscore the responsibility of
the Congress to appropriate these funds in full. There must be no doubt
that the people of the United States are fully prepared to meet our com-
mitments and to back up those commitments with military strength.
Turmoil and crisis also underscore the vital needs to work wher-
ever possible to stabilize and to reduce competition in strategic nuclear
weapons. This effort has the same ultimate goals as does our strong de-
fense—the goals of security, stability, and peace. In pursuit of these
goals, our Nation faces no more important task this year than the suc-
cessful conclusion of a strategic arms limitation agreement.
Just as we work to support national independence and to aid our
friends and allies in times of trial, we must work to regulate nuclear
arms capable of threatening life throughout this planet. For a SALT
agreement is a fundamental element of strategic and political stability
in a turbulent world—stability which can provide the necessary polit-
ical basis for us to contain the kinds of crises that we face today, and to
prevent their growing into a terrible nuclear confrontation.
After more than 6 years of negotiations—conducted by three dif-
ferent Presidents—agreement has now been reached on most of the
major components of a sound and verifiable SALT II treaty.
The emerging agreement will establish for the first time equal
numbers of strategic arms for both sides. It will thus reverse the So-
viet’s numerical advantage which was temporarily established in the
SALT I treaty of 1972, when they had about a 40-percent built-in negoti-
ated advantage.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
To reach these new levels, the Soviets will be required to reduce
their overall number of strategic arms. Over 250 Soviet missiles or
bombers—about 10 percent of their strategic forces—will have to be de-
stroyed or dismantled. At the same time, because we are now well
below the agreed ceiling, we could substantially increase our own op-
erational strategic forces.
The SALT II agreement will also provide negotiated limits on
building new types of weapons and limits on the improvement of ex-
isting ones—the so-called qualitative arms race can be controlled.
SALT II will limit the size of land-based missiles and the number of
warheads that can be placed on them. Without these limits, the Soviets
could vastly increase the number of warheads on their large land-based
missiles—with grave implications to the strategic balance. SALT II will
therefore contribute to our ability to deal with the growing vulnera-
bility of our land-based missiles. Without it, the Soviet Union could
continue to increase the number of their warheads, tending to nullify
our effort to protect our missiles.
The agreement will also permit us and our allies to pursue all the
defense programs that we believe might eventually be needed—the
M–X missile; the Trident submarine and its missiles; air, ground, and
sea-launched cruise missiles; cruise missile carrier aircraft; and a new
penetrating bomber. These would be permitted.
Thus SALT II would allow our own prudent programs to move
ahead and also will place important limits on what the Soviets might
otherwise do. And this SALT II agreement will be a basis for further ne-
gotiations for additional substantial cuts in the level of nuclear
armaments.
Without the SALT II agreement, the Soviet Union could have
nearly one-third more strategic forces by 1985 than with SALT II. We
would, of necessity, as a nation, match such a buildup. The costs would
be enormous, the risks self-evident. And both nations would wind up
less secure.
The stakes in SALT are too high to rely on trust. Any SALT II treaty
that I sign will be adequately verifiable, using our own independent
means of guaranteeing Soviet compliance with terms of the agreement.
SALT II will specifically forbid any interference that would im-
pede our ability to verify compliance with the treaty. Any effort on the
part of the Soviet Union to interfere with our verification activities
would be a detectable violation of the agreement itself, and an early
signal of any possible cheating.
Finally, let me put this agreement in the context of our overall rela-
tions with the Soviet Union and the turbulence that exists in many parts
of the world. The question is not whether SALT can be divorced from

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
this complicated context. It cannot. As I have often said, our relation-
ship with the Soviet Union is a mixture of cooperation and competition.
And as President of the United States, I have no more difficult and deli-
cate task than to balance these two. I cannot and I will not let the pres-
sures of inevitable competition overwhelm possibilities for coopera-
tion, any more than I will let cooperation blind us to the realities of
competition, which we are fully prepared to meet.
Because this carefully negotiated and responsible arms control
agreement will make the world safer and more secure, it is in our na-
tional interest to pursue it, even as we continue competition with the
Soviet Union elsewhere in the world. Therefore, I will seek both to con-
clude this new SALT agreement and to respond to any Soviet behavior
which adversely affects our interests.
To reject SALT II would mean that the inevitable competition in
strategic nuclear arms would grow even more dangerous. Each crisis,
each confrontation, each point of friction—as serious as it may be in its
own right—would take on an added measure of significance and an
added dimension of danger. For it would occur in an atmosphere of un-
bridled strategic competition and deteriorating strategic stability. It is
precisely because we have fundamental differences with the Soviet
Union that we are determined to bring this dangerous dimension of
our military competition under control.
In today’s world, it is vital to match the pursuit of ideals with the
responsible use of force and of power. The United States is a source of
both, ideals and power. Our ideals have inspired the world for more
than two centuries; and for three generations, since World War II, our
power has helped other nations to realize their own ideals.
The determination and strength of purpose of the American
people are crucial for stability in a turbulent world. If we stand together
in maintaining a steady course, America can protect its principles and
interests and also be a force for peace.
Americans have always accepted the challenge of leadership. And
I am confident that we will do so now.
Thank you very much.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
112.
Address by Vice President Mondale
Minneapolis, Minnesota, February 22, 1979
Preserving Freedom and Peace in a Nuclear Age
Today I want to talk with you about how our nation can preserve
its freedom, its beauty, and its peace in a nuclear age.
Our own Hubert Humphrey once said that: “In this world, disaster
is but a step away. There is no margin for error.” Returning to a dark
age of unrestrained nuclear arms competition would reduce that
margin. Allowing any nation to gain military advantage over the
United States would be equally dangerous.
We must not—and we will not—let either happen. This is the de-
termination of the Carter Administration. This is the view of the vast
majority of the American people—who overwhelmingly support both
an arms control agreement and a strong national defense. And I am
confident that Congress shares this view as it prepares to consider
both the strategic arms limitation treaty and our proposed defense
programs.
There are some Americans, however, who fear that we are not
strong enough as a nation to move ahead with SALT. That view—of the
current military balance and of SALT—is wrong, and it can lead us in
the wrong direction. It not only underestimates America’s over-
whelming nonmilitary advantages, it seriously misjudges both our rel-
ative military strength and the effect of a SALT agreement.
Our military position today is secure, and we are taking steps to
assure that it remains secure. And a sound SALT agreement will make
us stronger as a nation because it will contribute to that security.
address at a conference organized by the Department of State, the Greater Minneapolis
Chamber of Commerce, and a consortium of other Minnesota organizations. Additional
information about the address is in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers,
Vice Presidential Papers, Special Assistant for Speech Writing, Speech Text Files, Re-
marks, SALT Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota, February 22, 1979.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Let me make that point again. The SALT agreement we hope to
present to the American people is not a gift to the Soviets; it is an agree-
ment which serves the security interests of our nation and of the world.
It does not weaken us; it strengthens us.
We have watched carefully the steady growth of Soviet military
power in recent years. In some areas, the Soviets are ahead of us; in
others, we are ahead of them. What matters for us is not whether the
two forces are identical, but whether they are in an overall balance—for
that is the basis of security today.
For example, the Soviets have always had a larger land army. But
we do not need to match them man-for-man because of the strength of
our more numerous allies. The Soviet Union has always had more
tanks. But we have three times as many antitank weapons in Western
Europe as there are Soviet tanks in Eastern Europe.
The critical question is not whether we match the forces the Soviets
have built to meet their own security needs but whether we meet U.S.
and allied security needs. Without question, our forces meet those
needs.
U.S. Strategic Advantages
To begin with, the United States has certain strategic advantages.
• We have friendly neighbors on our borders. The Soviet Union
has far longer and far more vulnerable borders.
• We have only one major adversary. The Soviets face two. Fully
25% of its combat forces are deployed on the Soviet-Chinese border.
• We have easy access to the sea. The Soviets are restricted by
narrow straits, by a long and icy winter, and by other natural barriers.
Our military capabilities today are enormous and growing
stronger. And our allies and friends significantly increase our overall
strength.
Nor are we standing still. Because of steady growth in Soviet de-
fense spending and capabilities over the past decade—particularly in
central Europe—we have had to reverse the pattern of shrinking Amer-
ican defense efforts. We and our allies committed ourselves last year
to increasing individual defense expenditures. The defense budget
President Carter submitted to Congress last month reflects that
commitment.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We must continue to protect our own and our allies’ interests. We
are strengthening our forces in Europe. We are improving our ability to
speed additional ground and air forces in the event of a crisis. And our
European allies, who provide most of NATO’s combat forces, are
steadily improving their forces’ readiness and effectiveness.
But it is the awesome power of our nuclear weapons that I want to
emphasize this afternoon.
Many of you here today remember the shuddering reality of our
first atomic bomb. Today, the United States has over 20,000 nuclear
weapons.
• Each warhead on one of our Poseidon missiles is two times more
destructive than the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Naga-
saki. One Poseidon submarine carries more than 140 warheads. Each
Poseidon can deliver more destructive force than all the bombs—nu-
clear and conventional—that were dropped during World War II. We
have 31 of these Poseidon submarines.
• More than half of our 1,000 Minuteman missiles are equipped
with multiple independently-targetable reentry vehicles (MIRV’s)—
which enable one rocket to carry a number of warheads and thus strike
at several different targets. Each of the Minuteman warheads carries
eight times the force of the first atomic bomb. And soon we will double
that destructive power.
We have 348 heavy bombers which can carry 2,000 megatons of
total power. Let me illustrate what that means. If every car of a train
that extended from Minneapolis to Winona5 were filled with TNT and
blown up, that would be one megaton.
I cite these facts to give you a sense of the enormous scale—and the
great diversity—of America’s nuclear strength.
The Soviets, of course, also have a large arsenal. But the factor that
keeps us at peace is not simply what each of us has; it is whether there
is any possibility that a nuclear attack on us or our allies would not
mean massive destruction for the Soviets.
Let me take the worst case. It is possible that, in the early to mid-
1980’s, the Soviets—with a surprise attack—could destroy most of our
land-based missiles while keeping a large number of their missiles in
reserve. In doing so, they also must consider the grim possibility that
we would have already launched our missiles before theirs arrived.
The possibility, even theoretical, that our missiles would be vulnerable
is something we are working very hard to avoid.
But even if our land-based missiles were vulnerable to a surprise
attack, we could still totally destroy the Soviet Union as a viable society

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
with the rest of our nuclear arsenal. No sane leader could expect to gain
an advantage from launching such a suicidal attack.
Modernization and Restructuring
To assure that our strategic forces will be a convincing deterrent in
the future, we are carrying out the most extensive modernization and
restructuring of our nuclear forces in over a decade.
First, we have put three-quarters of our strategic warheads in our
largely invulnerable submarines and mobile bombers; three-quarters of
the Soviet Union’s warheads are on more vulnerable fixed land-based
missiles.
Second, we are adding to the capabilities of our strategic bombers.
Our B–52 force is being equipped with long-range cruise missiles. That
force eclipses Soviet air defense expenditures. These missiles will en-
able our B–52’s to remain outside Soviet air defenses and still strike sig-
nificant Soviet targets with extraordinary accuracy.
Third, we are placing more powerful, sophisticated missiles in our
existing submarines. We are about to launch our new, longer-range Tri-
dent submarine; and we are developing a still more powerful and accu-
rate missile for these Trident submarines.
Fourth, we are substantially improving our land-based missile
force. Our Minuteman III’s will be considerably more accurate. We are
accelerating development of a new and much larger land-based missile
called the M–X. And we are carefully analyzing the alternatives avail-
able for making our intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM’s) less vul-
nerable. The SALT agreement now being considered will not constrain
a single one of these alternatives. Indeed, it will help make these alter-
natives feasible and safe.
We will continue to maintain a convincing deterrent with a nuclear
weapons force. But in a world of nuclear weapons, more is not neces-
sarily better. We are not more secure today because we and the Soviets
have tens of thousands of warheads rather than thousands.
For the stark reality is that neither of us can win an all-out arms
race. It is a futile search for a temporary advantage. We will match what
they do, and they will do the same, in a spiral of ever-increasing risk
and cost.
Thus the power we share with the Soviet Union carries this imper-
ative for our security: We must slow, and ultimately reverse, this dan-
gerous and burdensome competition. That is an imperative recognized
for nearly three decades. Every President since the beginning of the nu-
clear era—and both major political parties—have understood that se-
curity depends on both a sound defense and sound arms control.
Background to SALT II
Building on the efforts of Presidents Truman and Eisenhower,
President Kennedy concluded the first arms control agreement with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the Soviet Union in 1963—halting poisonous nuclear-weapons testing
in the atmosphere. Later we reached agreements that banned nuclear
weapons from the ocean floor and from outer space.
The 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty now binds more than
100 nations. It has not yet removed the specter of nuclear proliferation,
but it has advanced that objective significantly.
Since first proposed by President Johnson, we have been engaged
in broader Strategic Arms Limitation Talks. During the Nixon Admin-
istration, these negotiations severely restricted both sides from build-
ing new antiballistic missile systems. These systems would have cost
billions of dollars and added new dangers to the arms race.
Under President Nixon, SALT I placed the first limits on the
number of strategic offensive missiles. It prevented the Soviets from
continuing to increase the number of their missiles by several hundred
each year.
For the past 6 years, three Presidents of both parties have been ne-
gotiating the next step in arms control—the SALT II agreement. The ne-
gotiations have been intense. We have proceeded carefully and deliber-
ately. And we are near agreement.
What SALT II Will Accomplish
Let me explain what this agreement will accomplish.
First, it will establish equal limits on the number of missiles and
bombers capable of delivering nuclear weapons to the other side. The
first SALT agreement in 1972 froze the number of strategic missiles,
leaving the Soviets with a numerical advantage which was then offset
by U.S. technological superiority. The new agreement firmly estab-
lishes the principle of equal numbers.
Second, these limits will be lower and more encompassing than
those in the first SALT agreement. The new overall limits would force
the Soviets to eliminate over 250 strategic missiles and bombers. This is
a 10% reduction and about 750 fewer than they are likely to have in the
absence of SALT. On the other hand, because we are below the new
limits, we would actually be able, if we chose, to increase the overall
number of our strategic weapons in operation.
Third, the agreement will place lower limits on specific weapons,
including those with more than a single warhead.
Fourth, for the first time, we will curb the number of new systems
and begin to limit the race to make existing systems more deadly. Only
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
one new ICBM will be permitted to each side. The number of warheads
on a single missile would be limited. And there would be restraint on
increasing the size of land-based missiles.
What would be the major effect of this agreement on our security?
Instead of an estimated 3,000 Soviet strategic weapons by 1985, there
would be 2,250. The strategic balance will be more stable and, there-
fore, safer. We will have greater confidence and certainty in our own
defense planning. And the defense programs that we and our allies
need and have planned can proceed forward on schedule.
Verification and Competition
But how do we know the Soviets will not violate the agreement?
The answer is—we can see for ourselves.
We have powerful and varied systems for observing the Soviets.
Besides our photographic satellites, we have other highly sensitive and,
therefore, highly classified means of verification. The large size and
limited number of bases for intercontinental missiles, heavy bombers,
and nuclear submarines eases our task.
And the SALT agreement itself makes a major contribution. SALT
II would forbid any interference which would impede our ability to
verify compliance with the treaty. And for the first time the Soviets
have agreed to regularly exchange precise data with us on each coun-
try’s missiles.
This is not a new and uncertain challenge. We have monitored So-
viet compliance with SALT I. We know what we can see. And we know
that we can detect any violation large enough to affect the strategic bal-
ance—and do so in time to respond effectively.
Yet with all this, some critics suggest that we should not move
ahead with SALT, even if it strengthens U.S. and allied security. They
contend that Soviet actions elsewhere—in the Third World or on
human rights—compel us to withhold approval of SALT II. This would
be a profound mistake.
As President Carter said two days ago, we “. . . cannot let the pres-
sures of inevitable competition overwhelm possibilities for cooperation
any more than [we can permit] cooperation to blind us to the realities of
competition. . . .” And the President said this:
It is precisely because we have fundamental differences with the
Soviet Union that we are determined to bring this most dangerous di-
mension of our military competition under control.
Bulletin of Mar. 1979, p. 21. [Footnote and brackets in the original. For the address, see
Document 111.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
We will continue to compete peacefully with the Soviets. In this
competition, we hold many cards—not only our military aid but our
economic ties, our understanding of diversity, and, most of all, our sup-
port for the determined sense of independence in emerging nations
around the world.
But as we compete, we must also cooperate to limit the most dan-
gerous competition—nuclear weapons. This is in our calculated self-
interest. SALT is not a reward for Soviet good behavior. It is a benefit
for ourselves and for mankind.
With or without SALT, competition with the Soviets in many areas
will continue. We will respond to any Soviet behavior which adversely
affects our interests. Without SALT, that competition becomes more
dangerous, and the possibilities for cooperation are dimmed.
We must recognize our overwhelming strengths as a nation. We
must see the future not as a threat but as an opportunity to make our
children’s lives safer and more rewarding than our own. The emerging
SALT agreement represents such an opportunity.
Military competition today is carried out in highly technical terms.
The debates on SALT will be very complex. Let us not, as we explore
the technicalities in all the detail they deserve, lose sight of these simple
truths: A nuclear war would destroy much—if not all—of what we
love. We must do everything in our power to see that it never happens.
We prevent it today with a military defense strong enough to deter our
potential adversaries. We will maintain that deterrence.
But that alone will not make us secure. We must also, at long last,
reverse the dangerous race in nuclear weapons that each year increases
nuclear stockpiles and each year makes us less safe. That is what SALT
is about.
With the vision that set him apart from other men, Hubert Hum-
phrey defined our present challenge over a decade ago. He not only
cared deeply, he thought deeply about the nature of America’s security
in a nuclear world.
Nuclear power has placed into the hands of men the power to de-
stroy all that man has created. Only responsive statesmen—who per-
ceive that perseverence in the pursuit of peace is not cowardice but
courage, that restraint in the use of force is not weakness but wisdom—
can prevent international rivalries from leading to an incinerated
world.
Let us have Hubert’s wisdom—and summon Hubert’s courage—
as we set the course which will help define our future for years to come.

113.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, February 24, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #89
I. Opinion
Foreign Policy: Tone and Orchestration
You confront a paradox: everyone who has met with you, whether
it be mass media dinner guests or participants in the Congressional for-
eign policy briefings, afterwards invariably say how immensely im-
pressed they were by your mastery of foreign policy, by your knowl-
edge of details, and by your ability to relate that knowledge to a broad
vision. Just last night I was told that Mrs. Reston2 commented after a
dinner with you that she cannot recall any President who could match
you in that regard. After one of the Congressional briefings, Tip O’Neill
said that no one can have the slightest doubt that you are not only fully
in charge of foreign policy but that you have a clear and coherent pic-
ture as to where this country ought to be heading.
Yet at the same time, it is a fact that both abroad and increasingly at
home the United States is seen as indecisive, vacillating, and pursuing a
policy of acquiescence. We are perceived as neither responding effec-
tively to Soviet assertiveness and as unable to generate a broad strategy
that is relevant to the times.
Why this incongruity?
Part of the answer, I suppose, is to be found in what you said at the
State Department the other day: we live in a complex age, and com-
plexity does not lend itself to simple explanations. We can no longer
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
color the world in shades of black and white, and we can no longer
reduce challenges to a single phenomenon, be it Hitlerism or Stalin-
ism. However, I suspect that part of the problem is also to be located
on a less philosophical plane, with some of it related to tone and
orchestration.
For example, I think a genuine problem has been created by the
press’s fascination, exploitation and magnification of the so-called
Vance-Brzezinski rivalry. To be sure, some differences do exist and you
are not only aware of them, but, as you have often said, you do want
divergent viewpoints presented to you. At the same time, the fact is
that on most matters Cy and I are in basic agreement, and there has
been no underhanded maneuvering to have one’s point of view
prevail.
As one looks back on previous administrations, one can note sim-
ilar divergences, and in the case of FDR they were certainly much
wider philosophically and more intense. The real difference is that FDR
was seen as orchestrating and deliberately exploiting such differences
whereas the press is now creating the impression that you are buffeted
by them. You know and we know that this is not so, but it is the percep-
tion that is damaging.
Accordingly, it would be very useful if you took some deliberate
steps to demonstrate that you are exploiting the differences while pur-
suing a steady course. Schram in a recent story asserted that this is ex-
actly what you are doing and it was the first positive expression of that
view.
One way to achieve that objective would be to use Cy soon and
visibly in relationship to China, and to use me in some fashion in rela-
tionship to the Soviet Union. For example, you told Deng that the
United States and China should have regular consultations. When the
crisis in Indochina is over, it would be useful for Cy and some of his top
assistants to go to Peking at your direction to engage in high-level dis-
cussions. Similarly, it might be useful, and domestically even appealing,
to have me spend a couple of days in Moscow in consultations with the

114.
Editorial Note
On March 5, 1979, White House Press Secretary Jody Powell an-
nounced that Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat and Israeli Prime
Minister Menachem Begin had invited President Jimmy Carter to
Egypt and Israel, respectively, to discuss the “peace process, regional
security, and bilateral issues.” Powell indicated that the President
would depart Washington for Egypt on March 7 and would then pro-
In remarks prior to his departure, the President asserted: “So, it is with
hope that I depart, hope tempered by sober realism. As a friend of
Egypt and a friend of Israel, we will do our best to help them achieve
the peace that they have paid for in blood many times over.
“In doing this, in seeking to lay the basis for a stable and a peaceful
Middle East, we will also be serving our own deepest national interests
and the interests of all the people of the world.” (ibid., page 395)
The President arrived in Cairo on March 8. For Sadat’s and the
President’s comments at a welcoming ceremony held at Qubba Palace,
see ibid., page 405. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the Presi-
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) On the
morning of March 9, Carter, Sadat, and the Presidential party boarded
a train for Alexandria. En route, Carter and Sadat took part in an inter-
view conducted by U.S. news correspondents Walter Cronkite (CBS
News), John Chancellor (NBC News), and Peter Jennings (ABC News).
For the transcript of this interview, see Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book
I, pages 407–410. Later that evening, Carter and Sadat met at Mamoura
Palace in Alexandria.
On the morning of March 10, the Presidential party departed Alex-
andria for Cairo via helicopter. At 1 p.m., the President addressed the
People’s Assembly of Egypt, which had convened in the Assembly
Chamber of the People’s Assembly Building. Following his introduc-
tory remarks, the President turned to the efforts made the previous fall:
“Last September, the course of negotiations took the President of
Egypt and the Prime Minister of Israel to Camp David, in the wooded
mountains near the Capital of the United States of America.
“Out of our discussion there came two agreements: A framework
within which peace between Israel and all her neighbors might be
achieved, and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people realized—
and also an outline for a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, in the
context of a comprehensive peace for the Middle East.
“Those agreements were rooted in United Nations Security
Council Resolution 242, which established the basic equation between

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
an Arab commitment to peace and Israeli withdrawal in the context of
security. The treaty which is now being negotiated between Egypt and
Israel reflects those principles.
“Since the two agreements were signed, we have been working to
bring both of them to fruition. The United States has served as a medi-
ator—not to press either party to accept provisions that are inconsistent
with its basic interests.
“In these negotiations, a crucial question has involved the relation-
ship between an Egyptian-Israeli treaty and the broader peace envi-
sioned and committed at Camp David. I believe that this body and the
people of Egypt deserve to know my thinking on the subject.
“When two nations conclude a treaty with one another, they have
every right to expect that the terms of that treaty will be carried out
faithfully and steadfastly. At the same time, there can be little doubt
that the two agreements reached at Camp David—negotiated together
and signed together—are related, and that a comprehensive peace re-
mains a common objective.
“Just in recent days, both Prime Minister Begin in Washington and
President Sadat here in Egypt have again pledged to carry out every
commitment made at Camp David.
“Both leaders have reaffirmed that they do not want a separate
peace between their two nations. Therefore, our current efforts to com-
plete the treaty negotiations represent not the end of a process, but the
beginning of one, for a treaty between Egypt and Israel is an indispen-
sible part of a comprehensive peace.
“I pledge to you today that I also remain personally committed to
move on to negotiations concerning the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
and other issues of concern to the Palestinians and also to future negoti-
ations between Israel and all her neighbors. I feel a personal obligation
in this regard.
“Only the path of negotiation and accommodation can lead to the
fulfillment of the hopes of the Palestinian people for peaceful self-
expression. The negotiations proposed in the Camp David agreements
will provide them with an opportunity to participate in the determina-
tion of their own future. We urge representative Palestinians to take
part in these negotiations.
“We are ready to work with any who are willing to talk peace.
Those who attack these efforts are opposing the only realistic prospect
that can bring real peace to the Middle East.
“Let no one be deceived. The effect of their warlike slogans and
their rhetoric is to make them in reality advocates of the status quo, not
change; advocates of war, not peace; advocates of further suffering, not

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
of achieving the human dignity to which long-suffering people of this
region are entitled.
“There is simply no workable alternative to the course that your
nation and my nation are now following together. The conclusion of a
treaty between Israel and Egypt will enable your government to mobi-
lize its resources not for war, but for the provision of a better life for
every Egyptian.
“I know how deeply President Sadat is committed to that quest.
And I believe its achievement will ultimately be his greatest legacy to
the people he serves so well.
“My government, for its part, the full power and influence of the
United States of America, is ready to share that burden of that commit-
ment with you. These gains which we envision will not come quickly or
easily, but they will come.
“The conclusion of the peace treaty that we are discussing will
strengthen cooperation between Egypt and the United States in other
ways. I fully share and will support President Sadat’s belief that sta-
bility must be maintained in this part of the world, even while con-
structive change is actively encouraged. He and I recognize that the
security of this vital region is being challenged. I applaud his determi-
nation to meet that challenge, and my government will stand with him.
“Our policy is that each nation should have the ability to defend it-
self, so that it does not have to depend on external alliances for its own
security. The United States does not seek a special position for itself.
“If we are successful in our efforts to conclude a comprehensive
peace, it will be presented obviously, each element of it, to this body for
ratification.
“It is in the nature of negotiation that no treaty can be ideal or per-
fect from either the Egyptian or Israeli point of view. The question
we’ve faced all along, however, is not whether the treaty we negotiate
will meet all the immediate desires of each of the two parties, but
whether it will protect the vital interests of both and further the cause
for peace for all the states and all the peoples of this region. That is the
basic purpose and the most difficult question which we are resolved to
answer.
“Such a treaty, such an agreement, is within our grasp. Let us seize
this opportunity while we have it.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I,
pages 413–414)
The complete text of the address is ibid., pages 412–414.
Following a luncheon at Mena House in Giza, Carter and Sadat
met and subsequently made a statement to the press about Carter’s
visit. For the text of the statement, see ibid., page 415. After touring the
pyramids at Giza, the Presidential party departed for Tel Aviv. For the

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
remarks of Israeli President Yitzhak Navon and Carter at a welcoming
Following these remarks, Carter went by motorcade with Begin to the
entrance of the city of Jerusalem. On March 11, Carter and Begin, in ad-
Carter, made at the conclusion of this meeting, see Public Papers: Carter,
Carter and U.S. officials met with Begin and members of the Israeli
p.m., Carter addressed the members of the Israeli Knesset. In his
opening remarks, the President affirmed the U.S. commitment to Israel
before turning to a discussion of the peace process:
“At Camp David, Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat
forged two frameworks for the building of that comprehensive peace.
The genius of that accomplishment is that negotiations under these
frameworks can go forward independently of each other, without de-
stroying the obvious relationship between them.
“They are designed to be mutually reinforcing, with the intrinsic
flexibility necessary to promote the comprehensive peace that we all
desire. Both will be fulfilled only when others of your Arab neighbors
follow the visionary example of President Sadat, when they put ancient
animosities behind them and agree to negotiate, as you desire, as
you’ve already done with President Sadat, an honorable solution to the
differences between you.
“It’s important that the door be kept open to all the parties to the
conflict, including the Palestinians, with whom, above all, Israel shares
a common interest in living in peace and living with mutual respect.
“Peace in the Middle East, always important to the security of the
entire region, in recent weeks has become an even more urgent
concern.
“Israel’s security will rest not only on how the negotiations affect
the situation on your own borders but also on how it affects the forces
of stability and moderation beyond your borders.
“I’m convinced that nothing can do more to create a hospitable at-
mosphere for those more distant forces in the long run than an equi-
table peace treaty between Israel and Egypt.
“The risks of peace between you and your Egyptian neighbors are
real. But America is ready to reduce any risks and to balance them
within the bounds of our strength and our influence.
“I came to Israel representing the most powerful country on Earth.
And I can assure you that the United States intends to use that power in
the pursuit of a stable and a peaceful Middle East.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“We’ve been centrally involved in this region, and we will stay in-
volved politically, economically, and militarily. We will stand by our
friends. We are ready to place our strength at Israel’s side when you
want it to ensure Israel’s security and well-being.
“We know Israel’s concern about many issues. We know your con-
cern for an adequate oil supply. In the context of peace, we are ready to
guarantee that supply.
“I’ve recommitted our Nation publicly to this commitment, as you
know, only in recent days in my own country.
“We know Israel’s concern that the price of peace with Egypt will
exacerbate an already difficult economic situation and make it more
difficult to meet your country’s essential security requirements. In the
context of peace, we are prepared to see Israel’s economic and military
relationship with the United States take on new and strong and more
meaningful dimensions, even than already exist.
“We will work not only to attain peace but to maintain peace, rec-
ognizing that it’s a permanent challenge of our time.
“We will rededicate ourselves to the ideals that our peoples share.
These ideals are the course [cause?] not only of our strength but of our
self-respect as nations, as leaders, and as individuals.
“I’m here today to reaffirm that the United States will always rec-
ognize, appreciate, and honor the mutual advantages of the strength
and security of Israel. And I’m here to express my most heartfelt and
passionate hope that we may work together successfully to make this
The complete text of the address is ibid., pages 424–428.
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and President’s Assistant for Na-
tional Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski participated in a meeting
with Begin and his Cabinet later that afternoon. The Presidential party
departed Tel Aviv en route to Cairo the afternoon of March 13. At a de-
parture ceremony, the President commented: “President Sadat, Prime
Minister Begin, and I remain determined to exert every ounce of effort
at our command to bring the peace negotiations to a successful conclu-
sion. We will not fail.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, page 429)
After meeting with Sadat, the President told reporters assembled
at the Cairo International Airport that Sadat had accepted the pro-
posals the United States had made and that Begin had agreed to
present them to the Knesset, asserting: “I am convinced that now we
have defined all of the main ingredients of a peace treaty between
Egypt and Israel, which will be the cornerstone of a comprehensive
peace settlement for the Middle East.” (Ibid., page 430) For the Presi-
dent’s remarks upon arrival at Andrews Air Force Base shortly after

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Documentation on the President’s visit, including the memoranda
of conversation of the meetings referenced above, is in Foreign Relations,
115.
Address by Secretary of State Vance
Seattle, Washington, March 30, 1979
America’s Commitment to Third World Development
These past weeks have been a time to deal with immediate diplo-
matic issues of extraordinary importance to our nation. Tonight I want
to speak about an issue that may seem less immediate but is no less im-
portant: our approach to the economic future of the developing
nations.
Before turning to our strategy toward the North-South dialogue
between the industrial and developing nations, let me first talk for a
moment about why the development of Third World countries matters
to us.
Its human dimension is clear. At least ½-billion people regularly
go hungry in a world of plenty. A half-billion is an abstract number, an-
other statistic among many and, therefore, too easily dismissed. But
when we pause to picture in our minds how much human suffering lies
behind that single statistic, the scope of our moral challenge is evident.
The continuation of that suffering is an affront to the conscience of men
and women everywhere.
Americans have long recognized this challenge: We have gener-
ously shared our resources in times of tragedy and need abroad, from
the great hunger in Ireland in 1847, to the Marshall plan and point 4
program2 100 years later. We are determined today, despite budgetary
stringency, to live up to that historic moral responsibility.
dress before the Northwest Regional Conference on the Emerging International Order.
For the text of the question-and-answer session following Vance’s address, see ibid., pp.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Our humanitarian commitment is reinforced by the recognition
that it also serves our national self-interest to assist the process of equi-
table growth within the developing nations. We need to help shape an
international economic system which will support and stimulate that
growth.
Here on this Pacific rim, you know well a fact that is true for our
entire nation: that your prosperity and well-being depend on the in-
creasing prosperity and well-being of others throughout the world.
Some 75% of the Northwest’s wheat crop is sold on world markets.
Fully one-third of western Washington’s forest products economy is
dependent on those markets, and that dependence is increasing.
One dollar in eight in this State’s economy comes directly from in-
ternational trade. More than a quarter of a million jobs in Washington
and Oregon alone depend on exports.
Much of this trade, as you know, is with developing countries.
Four of the State’s 10 biggest export customers are developing coun-
tries. Seven of the State’s biggest sources of imports—imports without
which your economy could not function—are developing countries.
These countries of the Third World are increasingly involved in
our daily lives. We know how oil from these countries affects us. As a
nation, we also get more than 50% of the tin, rubber, and manganese we
need from less developed countries and substantial amounts of our
tungsten and cobalt. We now export more to the developing countries,
including the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, than to
the Common Market, Japan, and the Communist countries combined.
For example, almost one-half of our commercial aircraft sales abroad
are to developing nations.
So, as we survey and address questions of the evolving interna-
tional economic order, we do not do so on some abstract basis. We do
so as a matter of economic self-interest and, for some sectors of our
economy, of survival.
The participation of the developing countries is also essential to
solving pressing global problems that will shape the character of our
future. Inefficient and wasteful use of the Earth’s resources, pollution
of the oceans and atmosphere, nuclear proliferation, unchecked arms
competition, all of these involve the well-being and safety of the human
race. None can be solved without the involvement of the developing
nations.
Most countries of the Third World have too little food and rapidly
growing populations. We face the prospect of a population increase in
the final quarter of this century which will equal the entire growth of
world population from the birth of Christ to 1950. Roughly 90% of this
increase will be in developing countries. And perhaps more troubling,

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
this growth seems certain to be greatest in already hard-pressed urban
centers. Imagine, if you can, what current projections would indicate: a
Mexico City with 32 million people; a Sao Paulo with 26 million; Cal-
cutta, Bombay, Rio de Janeiro, Seoul, Beijing, and Shanghai each with
some 19 million in 20 years or so.
We all recognize that the developing countries themselves bear the
major burden for responding to these challenges. The industrial coun-
tries, however, can play a crucial role in assisting their efforts. Whether,
and how, we help the developing nations in pursuing their develop-
ment goals is one of the central issues of our time.
U.S. Approach
Our approach to development in the Third World is based on four
fundamental tenets.
First, we are committed to supporting strong and equitable growth
in the developing nations, as a matter of our national interest as well as
our national ideals. And we recognize that at times this requires facili-
tating adjustment in our own economy in ways which will support eco-
nomic growth in the Third World.
Second, we are committed to improving the international system in
ways which will be mutually beneficial to all, which respond to the par-
ticular needs of the developing nations, and which accord them an ap-
propriate voice in decisions that affect them. By the same token, we be-
lieve firmly that as nations develop and grow stronger, they incur
increasing responsibility to contribute to, as well as gain from, the in-
ternational economy.
Third, despite the economic pressures we and other industrial na-
tions now face, the United States remains committed to increasing
transfers of resources from the richer to the poorer nations.
Let me emphasize, however, a fourth point. As we cooperate with
developing nations in seeking useful changes in the international
system, and as we consider the level and nature of our resource flows,
we must be clear about our priorities. Alterations in the international
system and resource transfers among nations are not ends in them-
selves. They are a means to the compelling goal of development within
nations.
We cannot spend so much time and energy on our international
discussions of the roadmap that we lose sight of our destination. The
destination—the goal we share—is to find practical ways to have an ap-
preciable impact on the lives of people around the world, and espe-
cially on the lives of those for whom daily survival is an unanswered
question.
We envision an international economic system which is not rigidly
divided into northern and southern blocs. We seek a global community

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
which furthers the well-being of all countries, in which all recognize the
responsibilities of each to the others, in which the richer help the poorer
for the benefit of all, in which international deliberations are focused as
much on practical ways of serving human needs as on levels of re-
source flows among nations, and in which every nation dedicates itself
to economic justice as well as economic growth.
We can help build such a system in a number of ways: in our closer
cooperation with the other industrial nations, constantly taking ac-
count of the effect on each other of our domestic decisions; in encour-
aging constructive involvement of Communist nations in the promo-
tion of a healthy global economic system; in our positive participation
in the current North-South dialogue, and in our search for practical
programs that can best promote Third World development.
North-South Negotiations
Let me concentrate today on the negotiations that are taking place
between industrial and developing nations and the practical focus on
development itself that we hope can be achieved.
The distinction between industrial and developing nations, be-
tween North and South, is clearly eroding. The industrial and agricul-
tural performance of some of the developing nations now surpasses
that of some of the industrial countries. But negotiations between
North and South remain valuable. While we believe a broader global
community is emerging in which rigid economic blocs no longer pre-
dominate, we understand the importance the developing countries at-
tach to the Group of 77. The developing nations can use their cohesion
to bring greater clarity and purpose to our negotiations.
We face an unusually large number of important international
conferences in the coming 18 months. These meetings provide an ex-
traordinary opportunity for progress on issues of importance to devel-
oping nations—and to us all.
As we prepare for them, we must first recognize the progress that
already has been made. Last week in Geneva, for example, agreement
was reached on most of the basic elements of a common fund to help
finance international buffer stocks and other commodity development
measures. This marks an important milestone in a process launched at
the fourth U.N. Conference on Trade and Development in 1976. Over
the past 2½ years of intensive negotiations, all participants moved from
their original positions in search of common ground. The negotiations

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
now move into a more technical phase leading to the drafting of articles
of agreement, a process which could be concluded as early as the end of
this year.
In the past few years, industrial nations and international institu-
tions have undertaken a number of other important measures of con-
crete benefit to the developing countries.
• Multilateral and bilateral aid flows have increased steadily in re-
cent years. Agreements have recently been or will soon be concluded to
enable the multilateral development banks to increase significantly, in
real terms, their lending levels over the next 3 to 4 years.
• Resources available through the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) for financing balance-of-payments difficulties have been sub-
stantially increased—through liberalization of the IMF Compensatory
Financing Facility; through the fourth IMF quota increase; and through
the establishment of new IMF facilities including the trust fund and the
$10-billion Witteveen facility.
• Consuming countries have agreed to the concept of shared re-
sponsibility with producing countries for financing buffer stocks to sta-
bilize prices in commodity markets. Agreements for coffee and tin were
renegotiated; a new agreement for sugar has been reached; and nego-
tiations on rubber and a new cocoa agreement are underway. Such
agreements can have important anti-inflationary benefits for our own
economy.
• All Western industrial countries have implemented preferential
tariff systems for developing countries. The multilateral trade negotia-
tions will provide new opportunities for all nations to increase their
economic welfare. Just as consumers and producers will benefit in our
own country, so they can gain in the developing world.
• And donor countries have agreed to the concept of easing or
eliminating the official debt burden of the poorest countries.
The United States has played a leading role in many of these and
other international initiatives and we have taken national measures to
support them.
• We have increased our foreign economic assistance from $3. bil-
• In the commodities field, the United States is a member of the tin
agreement, and we intend to make a contribution to the tin buffer stock.
We are seeking Senate approval to join the sugar agreement, and we
hope to conclude new cocoa and rubber agreements in which we can

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
participate. Last month we put forth ideas on a price stabilization
agreement for copper.
• We endorsed the concept of a common fund, and we worked
toward that end with flexible new proposals on the major issues
involved.
• On trade, the United States has generally resisted protectionist
pressures. We have a preferential tariff system for the developing coun-
tries which has assisted growth in their manufactured exports.
• We now have legislation enabling us to waive interest payments
on past development loans to the poorest countries and to allow prin-
cipal to be paid into local currency accounts to be used for development
purposes.
• Almost all our development assistance to the poorest countries is
now in grant form.
• We have facilitated access to the technology that is in the public
domain, and we have helped developing countries draw upon our ad-
vanced technologies—using satellites, for example, to develop their
natural resources and improve their internal communications.
• The President is proposing the creation of an international devel-
opment cooperation administration which would consolidate or im-
prove coordination among our bilateral and multilateral development
assistance programs.
In short, there has been real progress. But far more remains to
be done in concluding agreements to stabilize commodity markets,
bringing the developing nations more fully into the world trading
system and implementing the new codes and tariff reductions of the
multilateral trade negotiations, facilitating the adjustment of domestic
Church had blocked ratification of the agreement, which the United States had signed in

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
economies to changing patterns of world trade, arriving at a common
understanding of the responsibilities of both governments and corpo-
rations to create a better environment for international investment and
the flow of technology, assuring adequate assistance to nations facing
acute financial difficulties, strengthening the scientific and techno-
logical capabilities of developing countries, increasing aid flows to
countries which need it most and can use it effectively, and finding
ways to assure an appropriate role for developing countries in interna-
tional economic institutions.
This is a heavy agenda. And these are difficult times in which to
address it, since most of the industrial nations face difficult domestic
economic challenges.
In a period of fiscal austerity, there is a danger, which we must
frankly address, that negotiations between North and South could re-
turn to the rancor of earlier years. This will happen if each nation be-
comes so concerned with its own problems that it forgets the essential
reality of an interdependent age: that each nation can surmount its own
difficulties only if it understands and helps resolve the difficulties of
others as well.
The industrial nations must maintain their commitment to the
well-being of the developing nations. The developing nations must rec-
ognize that making demands which the industrial nations cannot meet
will only produce international acrimony, not progress. And the oil-
producing nations must recognize their special responsibilities for the
health of the global economy and their fundamental stake in its con-
tinued vitality.
A Practical Focus
This brings me to a central point. Our progress in North-South ne-
gotiations—our progress toward a more equitable and healthy new in-
ternational economic order—will turn on our common ability to avoid
endless debates on sterile texts and to focus instead on concrete devel-
opment problems which we can tackle together and which directly af-
fect people’s lives.
Only by focusing on practical ways to meet human needs can we
remain clear about our goals and clear in explaining them to our
peoples. I know that the American people will never be convinced that
there is an inherent value only in resource flows among nations. They
want to know, and have a right to know, how their taxes are being used
to better the lives of people abroad.
It is this practical—and human—focus which compels us to con-
centrate our aid on programs that directly improve the lives of poorer
people abroad. We believe it is important that we concentrate our re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
sources on programs which most directly contribute not only to growth
but also to equity in those countries which receive our aid.
This approach is not only this Administration’s policy. It has been
expressed by the Congress in the 1973 Foreign Assistance Act8 and the
International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1978. And it
applies not only to our bilateral aid programs but also to those pro-
grams we support in the multilateral development institutions.
Growth without equity can lead to a situation in which a growing
economic pie is cut into ever more unequal pieces. Equity without
growth can lead to a situation where a shrinking economic pie is cut
into equal but ever smaller pieces. Neither situation can lead to
long-term political or economic health. Both growth and equity are
necessary.
A practical focus also requires that we be clear about our priorities.
Thus while we will continue to work with the developing countries in
addressing the future of the international political and economic
system, we intend increasingly to concentrate on specific development
goals: energy, food, health, and increasing the capacity of the devel-
oping countries to obtain and apply the knowledge and technology
they need.
There is good reason for seeking international emphasis on each of
these areas:
• An ample supply of energy at reasonable prices is essential to
economic advancement. It is also a key to our own prosperity.
• Adequate food and good health are basic to human survival and
productivity.
• And the ability of people and institutions in the developing
countries to obtain, develop, adapt, and apply technology is critical to
most development problems.
Let me illustrate these priorities today by describing our current
efforts and future plans in two areas—energy and food. In the coming
months and in other forums such as the U.N. Conference on Science
and Technology for Development and the World Health Assembly, we
will be addressing the others as well.
regarding development assistance authorizations. It also contained the provisions of the
“New Directions” mandate. See footnote 3, Document 22.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Energy
No issue we face today more clearly demonstrates the interests we
share with the people of the developing world than energy. The com-
muter buying gasoline in Seattle and the peasant farmer buying kero-
sene near Khartoum both face the harsh reality of rising world petro-
leum prices. Governments in the richest countries and those in the
poorest must deal with the impact of higher energy costs and rising en-
ergy demand on their national economies.
Let me be frank. The worldwide energy situation, already serious,
is likely to get worse before it gets better. For the foreseeable future, in
the absence of substantial new efforts, worldwide growth in energy
demand will continue to outpace worldwide growth in energy
production.
We must do what is necessary in our own country to restrain con-
sumption and increase domestic production. But we cannot solve the
energy problem by what we do here alone. It is a global challenge.
Thus, we have a direct interest in helping developing countries de-
vise their own effective energy policies—helping them identify their
energy resources, determine their current and future energy demand,
identify the technology they need, and obtain the necessary financing.
Let me tell you what we are already doing in each of these areas.
We are now helping several developing countries survey their na-
tional energy resources, define their future energy needs, and construct
alternative energy strategies.
With our strong support, the World Bank is significantly ex-
panding its program to help developing countries finance further ex-
ploration and development of fossil fuels. The Bank envisages loans
amounting to as much as $3 billion over the next 5 years.
We are devoting substantial financial resources to research on re-
newable energy sources. In addition to private financing, the Depart-
ment of Energy has budgeted over $600 million this year to study, de-
velop, and demonstrate renewable energy technology. We have asked
the Congress for more than $700 million for these efforts next year.
These programs can lead to technological developments that directly
benefit the developing nations.
The Agency for International Development (AID) has requested
$42 million in FY 1980 for the actual application of renewable energy
technologies in developing countries.
We have accelerated our training and technical assistance pro-
grams for energy professionals and institutions in the developing coun-
tries. We have proposed a new institute for scientific and technological
cooperation, which would become an important element of our foreign

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
assistance program. Energy will be a major focus of the work of the in-
stitute as it both helps strengthen scientific and technological capacities
in developing countries and also identifies domestic American research
relevant to development abroad.
And we are providing substantial direct and indirect financial
assistance to help developing countries acquire the energy technology
they need. The Export-Import Bank authorized approximately $2 bil-
lion in energy-related loans and guarantees to developing countries in
fiscal year 1978. This has produced more than $3 billion in U.S. exports
of energy equipment. The World Bank, to which we are the largest con-
tributor, has already provided about $10 billion for financing of con-
ventional power projects. And the other development banks also are
active in this area.
But we must and will do more.
• We will respond positively to additional requests from devel-
oping nations for help in evaluating their energy resources, needs, and
strategies.
• We will encourage the regional development banks to expand
their energy programs and to consider new approaches to encourage
further private capital flows into mineral and energy development in
their regions.
• President Carter and other heads of state at the Bonn economic
summit last July12 pledged to increase assistance for harnessing the vast
energy potential of the Sun, the wind, the oceans, and other renewable
resources. We are now in the process of formulating a coordinated ef-
fort which will be discussed at the Tokyo summit in June.
• With strong U.S. backing, the United Nations will hold a World
Conference on New and Renewable Energy in 1981. We intend to play
an active role in that effort.
• We will increase our support for research, development, and
training efforts of national and regional energy institutions in devel-
oping countries. We will encourage other nations to join us in this
effort.
• We will also work with other nations to determine whether it
would be useful to supplement the work of such institutions. Together
we will seek to identify gaps in current efforts, and ways to fill them,
including the possible establishment of new institutions. For example,
which the President signed into law on August 14, 1979, authorized the President to es-
tablish an Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
international research centers—which enjoy support from developed
and developing countries, private organizations, and multilateral insti-
tutions—have played a major role in addressing developing country
agricultural problems. If, as a result of discussions with our colleagues
in developed and developing countries, there is agreement that this ap-
proach would be appropriate in the field of energy, the United States
would support such international energy centers.
• We must assure that as new renewable energy technology be-
comes relatively less expensive, adequate financing is available for the
developing countries to acquire it. We will ask the World Bank to un-
dertake a thorough review of this question.
These steps and others we will be discussing with developed and
developing countries in the months ahead can help assure that high en-
ergy costs do not undermine economic growth and a steadily im-
proving way of life for those who live in the developing world.
Our future economic well-being and theirs carries an inescapable
imperative: We must work together to expand the availability of en-
ergy for developed and developing countries alike. There is no promise
for any of us in an intensifying competition for limited energy supplies.
Food
Let me turn to a second development priority which we intend to
focus on in the months ahead—the stark fact that one out of every five
of our fellow human beings is sick or weak or hungry because he or she
simply does not have enough to eat.
In one respect, this is a question of the equity with which economic
benefits are distributed. Millions are too poor to buy food, even when it
is available. As I have stressed, our overall development efforts must
address this fundamental issue.
But it is also clear that in many developing countries, food produc-
tion is not keeping pace with population growth. The long-range pros-
pects point to even greater food deficits in developing countries in the
years ahead. Not only will we approach the limits of new land to culti-
vate, but soil erosion, desert encroachment, and simple overuse are
robbing the world’s historic breadbaskets of their productive capacity
because of inadequate land and resource management practices.
The United States is already doing a great deal to increase the
availability of food in the developing world. Roughly half of our bilat-
eral economic development assistance—approximately $600 million
this year—is devoted to agriculture and rural development. We pro-
vide roughly two-thirds of the world’s concessionary food assistance.
Our contribution this year will amount to $1. billion. And we have
contributed $200 million to the International Fund for Agricultural
Development.

257.
food is lost to rodents, insects, and spoilage in the developing world
than all the food aid to the developing world combined. We are already
a major contributor to the Food and Agriculture Organization’s post-
harvest loss fund, and both AID and the new institute will be devoting
increasing resources to finding better ways to assure that what people
toil to produce is available to sustain them.
Finally, we intend to channel our food and development assistance
increasingly to countries which are seeking to adopt domestic policies
which encourage their own food production and equitable distribution
and promote better use of water and land resources. We intend to par-
ticipate actively in the upcoming World Conference on Agrarian Re-
form and Rural Development which will be addressing these essential
questions.
Conclusion
Programs such as those I have mentioned today are no cure-all.
But they come to grips with the most pressing problems of the de-
veloping countries, and they will make a difference where it counts
most—in the daily lives of people. They will insure that more people in
the developing countries will have enough food to eat, that fewer chil-
dren will die in infancy, that there is sufficient energy to power more
irrigation pumps and to bring more heat and light to distant villages.
The resources we can bring to bear may seem small in comparison
to the magnitude of the problems which must be solved. But let us re-
member that development is a long-term process. Our hopes for the
coming decades are lifted by the fact that people are better off in most
developing countries today than they were two decades ago.
Life expectancy in the developing world in the past two decades
has jumped from 42 to over 50, an increase which took the industrial
nations a century to accomplish. Adult literacy in the developing world
has jumped from one-third in 1950 to over one-half. In the past quarter
of a century, per capita income in the developing countries grew on the
average of almost 3% a year. This is about 50% better than historical
growth rates in Western nations during their industrialization.

116.
Editorial Note
President Jimmy Carter took part in an interview with editors and
news directors, consisting of his introductory remarks and a question-
and-answer session, at the White House on April 7, 1979. The session
began at 1: p.m. in the Cabinet Room. In response to a question con-
cerning the global perception of the administration’s human rights
policy, the President commented:
“Well, there have been a number of occasions around the world
where our human rights policy, which I espouse very strongly and
think we ought to maintain, has been a diplomatic problem—in dealing
with the People’s Republic of China, the Soviet Union, South Korea, Ar-
gentina, Chile, Brazil, the Philippines—just been described—and other
countries. I could name a lot of them.
“Q. Afghanistan.
“The President. Afghanistan and others. I acknowledge that. I
think, in balance, it’s one of the best things that we have ever done since
I’ve been President. I think for us to raise the banner of being deeply
committed to human rights has been and has had an enlightening effect
on the rest of the world.
“Some of the administrations or the regimes in other nations have
been embarrassed. But I can assure you—and I don’t think I’m saying
this in a gloating way—that in previous administrations, quite often—
even in very popular administrations—when visits were made to coun-
tries, say, in Latin America just to use an example, there have been,
sometimes, massive anti-American demonstrations against very pop-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
ular leaders, like Eisenhower or Truman or Nixon or Rockefeller and
others.
“When we have visited those countries, the response has been
overwhelmingly favorable and friendly among the people, even when I
drove through the streets of Rio de Janeiro in the midst of an argument
where human rights and nuclear power were raised.
“I think the people have responded well, even though the leaders
in some countries have been somewhat embarrassed.
“I think it’s also reminded the American people about our own
Nation’s principles. And sometimes the arguments with the totalitarian
regime that has several thousands of people imprisoned without trial
and without any charge, those arguments have made vivid in the
minds of Americans that we are indeed better, or different—I think
better—in our basic philosophy than those philosophies espoused in
some other countries.
“There has been a substantial shift toward democratization in
many of those nations, partially encouraged by our own standards on
human rights. And there have been literally tens of thousands of polit-
ical prisoners released from within those countries in the last year and a
half or so because of our human rights position.
“The last point that I would like to make in this answer is that it’s
raised the issue of human rights to a high degree of intensity. There are
very few leaders in the world, in the 150 countries that now exist, who
don’t every day or every week have to remind ourselves—including
me—to what degree are we violating basic human rights? To what de-
gree are we earning the condemnation of the rest of the world? To what
degree are we arousing the animosity or distrust or displeasure or dis-
appointment among our own people because we violate those rights?
“I’m very proud of what we have done. And I think in balance, this
posture on human rights has helped us considerably.
“If you would go back 3 years or so and look at the attitude, for in-
stance, in the General Assembly of the United Nations every fall when
it convened, where our Nation was the butt of every joke and the target
of every attack mounted by almost 100 nations on Earth, and compare
it with the difference now, the last 2 years, part of that improvement is
because we have espoused basic human rights.
“I think this is particularly true in Africa where black people now
feel they’ve got a friend in the United States; they can depend on us.
“So, to answer your question, I think we’ve got the right policy,
and I intend not only to maintain it but to elevate our commitment to

117.
Remarks by President Carter
New York, April 25, 1979
President Al Neuharth, distinguished members of the American Newspaper
Publishers Association, other guests and friends:
I want, first of all, to commend and to endorse the theme of this
convention: the defense of the first amendment of our Constitution and
the freedom of the press.
Liberty of expression is our most important civil right, and free-
dom of the press is its most important bulwark. We can never afford to
grow complacent about the first amendment; on the contrary, you and I
and others must actively protect it always.
The American press has grown enormously since the Nation’s
early days—not only in its size and breadth but in its concepts of its
own duties and its own responsibilities. The highest of these duties is to
inform the public on the important issues of the day. And no issue is
more important than the one I want to discuss with you today in a
solemn and somber and sincere way—the control of nuclear arms.
Each generation of Americans faces a choice that defines our na-
tional character, a choice that is also important for what it says about
our own Nation’s outlook toward the world.
In the coming months, we will almost certainly be faced with such
a choice—whether to accept or to reject a new strategic arms limitation
treaty. The decision we make will profoundly affect our lives and the
lives of people all over the world for years to come. We face this choice
from a position of strength, as the strongest nation on Earth econom-
ically, militarily, and politically.
Our alliances are firm and reliable. Our military forces are strong
and ready. Our economic power is unmatched. Along with other in-
dustrial democracies who are our friends, we lead the way in techno-
logical innovation. Our combined economies are more than three times
as productive as those of the Soviet Union and all its allies. Our political
institutions are based on human freedom. Our open system encourages
individual initiative and creativity, and that, in turn, strengthens our
entire society. Our values and our democratic way of life have a mag-
netic appeal for people all over the world which a materialistic and a to-
talitarian philosophy can never hope to challenge or to rival.
12: p.m. in the Grand Ballroom at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel at the annual convention
of the American Newspaper Publishers Association.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
For all these reasons, we have a capacity for leadership in the
world that surpasses that of any other nation. That leadership imposes
many responsibilities on us, on me as President, and on you, other
leaders who shape opinion and the character of our country.
But our noblest duty is to use our strength to serve our highest in-
terest—the building of a secure, stable, and a peaceful world. We per-
form that duty in the spirit proclaimed by John F. Kennedy in 1963, the
year he died. “Confident and unafraid,” he said, “we labor on—not
toward a strategy of annihilation, but toward a strategy of peace.”
In our relations with the Soviet Union, the possibility of mutual
annihilation makes a strategy of peace the only rational choice for both
sides.
Because our values are so different, it is clear that the United States
of America and the Soviet Union will be in competition as far ahead as
we can imagine or see. Yet we have a common interest in survival, and
we share a common recognition that our survival depends, in a real
sense, on each other. The very competition between us makes it imper-
ative that we bring under control its most dangerous aspect—the nu-
clear arms race. That is why the strategic arms limitation talks are so
very important. This effort by two great nations to limit vital security
forces is unique in human history; none have ever done this before.
As the Congress and the American people consider the SALT
treaty, which is now nearly complete, the debate will center around
four basic questions: Why do we need SALT? How is the treaty related
to our overall defense strategy? Can Soviet compliance be verified?
How does the treaty relate to Soviet activities which challenge us and
challenge our interests?
Let me address each question in turn.
First, why do we need a strategic arms limitation treaty? We need
it because it will contribute to a more peaceful world—and to our own
national security.
Today, we and the Soviet Union, with sharply different world out-
looks and interests, both have the ominous destructive power literally
to destroy each other as a functioning society, killing tens of millions of
people in the process. And common sense tells us—as it tells the Soviet
Union—that we must work to make our competition less dangerous,
less burdensome, and less likely to bring the ultimate horror of nuclear
war.
Indeed, the entire world has a vital interest in whether or not we
control the strategic arms race. We have consulted closely with our
American University. For the text of the address, see Public Papers: Kennedy, 1963, pp.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
allies, who count on us not only to maintain strong military forces to
offset Soviet military power, but also, and equally important, to man-
age successfully a stable East-West relationship. SALT is at the heart of
both these crucial efforts. That is why the leaders of France and Great
Britain, Germany, England, Canada, and other nations have voiced
their full support for the emerging treaty.
Some nations which have so far held back from building their own
nuclear weapons—and at least a dozen other nations on Earth now
have that capability—will be strongly influenced in their decision by
whether the two nuclear superpowers will restrain our weapons. Rejec-
tion of the new strategic arms limitation treaty would seriously under-
mine the effort to control proliferation of these deadly weapons. And
nothing, nothing, would more surely damage our other critical efforts
in arms control—from a ban on all nuclear testing to the prevention of
dangerous satellite warfare in space; from equalizing NATO and
Warsaw Pact forces to restraining the spread of sophisticated conven-
tional weapons on Earth.
Every President since the dawn of the nuclear age has pursued the
effort to bring nuclear arms under control. And this must be a contin-
uing process.
President Kennedy, building on the efforts of Presidents Truman
and Eisenhower, signed the first agreement with the Soviet Union
in 1963 to stop the poisonous testing of nuclear explosives in the
atmosphere.
In 1968, 5 years later, under President Johnson, the United States
and the Soviet Union joined other nations throughout the world in
signing the Non-Proliferation Treaty, an important step in preventing
the spread of nuclear explosives to other nations.
In 1972, under President Nixon, the SALT I agreement placed the
first agreed limits on the number of offensive weapons, and the antibal-
listic missile treaty, the ABM treaty, made an enduring contribution to
our own security.
President Ford continued in negotiations at Helsinki and at Vladi-
vostok. Each negotiation builds on the accomplishments of the last.
Each agreement provides a foundation for further progress toward a
more stable nuclear relationship.
Document 2. For information about the July–August 1975 Helsinki meetings, see Foreign

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Three Presidents have now spent more than 6 years negotiating
the next step in this process—SALT II. We have all negotiated carefully
and deliberately. Every step of the way, we’ve worked with our mili-
tary leaders and other experts, and we’ve sought the advice and coun-
sel of the Members of Congress.
An overwhelming majority of the American people recognize the
need for SALT II. Our people want and our people expect continued,
step-by-step progress toward bringing nuclear weapons under control.
Americans will support a reasoned increase in our defense effort,
but we do not want a wholly unnecessary return to the Cold War and
an all-out arms race, with its vastly greater risks and costs. Through
strength, we want world peace.
Let me turn to the second question—how is SALT II related to our
overall defense strategy?
The strategic forces of the United States and the Soviet Union
today are essentially equivalent. They have larger and more numerous
land-based missiles. We have a larger number of warheads and, as you
know, significant technological and geographical advantages.
Each side has the will and the means to prevent the other from
achieving superiority. Neither side is in a position to exploit its nuclear
weapons for political purposes, nor to use strategic weapons without
facing almost certain suicide.
What causes us concern is not the current balance but the mo-
mentum of the Soviet strategic buildup. Over the past decade, the So-
viets have steadily increased their real defense spending, year by year,
while our own defense spending over that decade has had a net
decrease.
In areas not limited by SALT, SALT I, they have launched ambi-
tious programs to strengthen their strategic forces. At some future
point, the Soviet Union could achieve a strategic advantage, unless we
alter these trends. That is exactly what I want to do—with the support
of the American people and the bipartisan support of Congress.
We must move on two fronts at the same time. First, within mutu-
ally accepted limits, we must modernize our own strategic forces.
Along with the strengthening of NATO, that is a central purpose of the
increased defense budget that I’ve submitted to Congress—improve-
ments which are necessary even in a time of fiscal restraint. And
second, we must place more stringent limits on the arms race than are
presently imposed by SALT I. That is the purpose of the SALT II treaty.
The defense budget I’ve submitted will ensure that our nuclear
force continues to be essentially equivalent to that of the Soviet Union.
This year, we’ve begun to equip our submarines with new, more
powerful, and longer range Trident I missiles. Next year, the first of our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
new, even more secure Trident submarines will be going to sea, and we
are working on a more powerful and accurate Trident II missile for
these submarines.
Our cruise missile program will greatly enhance the effectiveness
of our long-range bomber force. These missiles will be able to penetrate
any air defense system which the Soviet Union could build in the fore-
seeable future.
We are substantially improving the accuracy and the power of our
land-based Minuteman missiles. But in the coming decade missiles of
this type, based in fixed silos, will become increasingly vulnerable to
surprise attack. The Soviets have three-quarters of their warheads in
such fixed-based missiles, compared to only one-quarter of ours. Nev-
ertheless, this is a very serious problem, and we must deal with it effec-
tively and sensibly.
The Defense Department now has under consideration a number
of options for responding to this problem, including making some of
our own ICBM’s mobile. I might add—and this is very important—that
the options which we are evaluating would be far more costly—and we
would have far less confidence of their effectiveness—in the absence of
SALT II limits. For without these limits on the number of Soviet war-
heads, the Soviet Union could counter any effort we made simply by
greatly increasing the number of warheads on their missiles.
Let me emphasize that the SALT II agreement preserves adequate
flexibility for the United States in this important area.
Our strategic forces must be able to survive any attack and to coun-
terattack military and civilian targets in the aggressor nation. And the
aggressor nation must know that we have the ability and the will to ex-
ercise this option if they should attack us. We have had this capa-
bility—which is the essence of deterrence—in the past; we have it
today; and SALT II, plus the defense programs that I’ve described, will
ensure that we have it for the future.
The SALT II agreement will slow the growth of Soviet arms and
limit the strategic competition, and by helping to define future threats
that we might face, SALT II will make our defense planning much more
effective.
Under the agreement, the two sides will be limited to equal
numbers of strategic launchers for the first time, ending the substantial
Soviet numerical advantage which was permitted in the currently ef-
fective SALT I treaty.
To reach these new and lower levels, the Soviets will have to re-
duce their overall number of strategic delivery systems by 10 percent—
more than 250 Soviet missile launchers or bombers will have to be dis-
mantled. Naturally, the Soviets will choose to phase out their older
systems, but these systems are still formidable.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
The missiles, for instance, to be torn down are comparable in age
and payload to our Minuteman II missiles and to our Polaris missiles,
presently deployed. Under the agreement, they will not be permitted
to replace these dismantled systems with modern ones. Our own
operational forces have been kept somewhat below the permitted
ceiling. Thus, under the agreement, we could increase our force level, if
necessary.
SALT II will also impose the first limited but important restraints
on the race to build new systems and to improve existing ones—the
so-called qualitative arms race.
In short, SALT II places serious limits on what the Soviets might do
in the absence of such an agreement. For example, without SALT II, the
Soviet Union could build up to some 3,000 strategic systems by 1985.
With SALT II, we will both be limited to 2,250 such weapons.
This new arms control agreement will, obviously, serve our na-
tional interests. It will reduce the dangerous levels of strategic arms
and restrain the development of future weapons. It will help to main-
tain our relative strength compared to the Soviets. It will avert a costly,
risky, and pointless buildup of missile launchers and bombers—at the
end of which both sides would be even less secure.
Let me turn now to the third of the four questions—how can we
know whether the Soviets are living up to their obligations under this
SALT agreement?
No objective—no objective—has commanded more energy and at-
tention in our negotiations. We have insisted that the SALT II agree-
ment be made verifiable. We are confident that no significant violation
of the treaty could take place without the United States detecting it.
Our confidence in the verifiability of their agreement derives from
the size and the nature of activities we must monitor and the many ef-
fective and sophisticated intelligence collection systems which we in
America possess.
For example, nuclear submarines take several years to construct
and assemble. Missile silos and their supporting equipment are large
and quite visible. Intercontinental bombers are built at a few plants,
and they need major airfields. Our photoreconnaissance satellites
survey the entire Soviet Union on a regular basis, and they give us high
confidence that we will be able to count accurately the numbers of all
these systems.
But our independent verification capabilities are not limited only
to observing these large-scale activities. We can determine not only
how many systems there are, but what they can do. Our photographic
satellites and other systems enable us to follow technological develop-
ments in Soviet strategic forces with great accuracy. There is no ques-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tion that any cheating which might affect our national security would
be discovered in time for us to respond fully.
For many years, we have monitored Soviet strategic forces and So-
viet compliance with the SALT agreements with a high degree of confi-
dence. The overall capability remains. It was certainly not lost with our
observation stations in Iran, which was only one of many intelligence
sources that we use to follow Soviet strategic activities. We are con-
cerned with that loss, but we must keep it in perspective.
This monitoring capability relates principally to the portion of the
new agreement dealing with the modernization limits on ICBM’s and
to only a portion of such modernization restraints.
The sensitive intelligence techniques obviously cannot be dis-
closed in public, but the bottom line is that if there is an effort to cheat
on the SALT agreement, including the limits on modernizing ICBM’s,
we will detect it, and we will do so in time fully to protect our security.
And we must also keep in mind that quite apart from SALT limits,
our security is affected by the extent of our information about Soviet
strategic forces. With this SALT II treaty, that vital information will be
much more accessible to us.
The agreement specifically forbids, for the first time, interference
with the systems used for monitoring compliance and prohibits any de-
liberate concealment that would impede verification. Any such con-
cealment activity would itself be detectable, and a violation of this part
of the agreement would be so serious as to give us grounds to cancel
the treaty itself.
As I have said many times, the stakes are too high to rely on trust,
or even on the Soviets’ rational inclination to act in their own best in-
terest. The treaty must—and the treaty will be—verifiable from the first
day it is signed.
And finally, how does SALT II fit into the context of our overall re-
lations with the Soviet Union?
Because SALT II will make the world safer and our own Nation
more secure, it is in our national interest to control nuclear weapons
even as we compete with the Soviets elsewhere in the world.
A SALT II agreement in no way limits our ability to promote our
interests or to answer Soviet threats to those interests. We will continue
to support the independence of Third World nations who struggle to
stay free. We will continue to promote the peaceful resolution of local
and regional disputes and to oppose efforts by any others to inflame
these disputes with outside force. And we will continue to work for
human rights.
It’s a delusion to believe that rejection of a SALT treaty would
somehow induce the Soviet Union to exercise new restraints in trou-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
bled areas. The actual effect of rejecting such a treaty might be precisely
the opposite. The most intransient and hostile elements of a Soviet po-
litical power structure would certainly be encouraged and strength-
ened by our rejection of a SALT agreement. The Soviets might very well
feel that they then have little to lose by creating new international
tensions.
A rejection of SALT II would have significance far beyond the fate
of a single treaty. It would mean a radical turning away from America’s
longtime policy of seeking world peace. We would no longer be identi-
fied as the peace-loving nation. It would turn us away from the control
of nuclear weapons and from the easing of tensions between Amer-
icans and the Soviet people under the system of international law based
on mutual interests.
The rejection of SALT II would result in a more perilous world. As
I said at Georgia Tech on February 20, “Each crisis, each confrontation,
each point of friction—as serious as it may be in its own right—would
take on an added measure of significance and an added dimension of
danger. For it would occur in an atmosphere of unbridled strategic
competition and deteriorating strategic stability. It is precisely because
we have fundamental differences with the Soviet Union that we are de-
termined to bring this most dangerous element of our military competi-
tion under control.”
For these reasons, we will not try to impose binding linkage be-
tween Soviet behavior and SALT, and we will not accept any Soviet at-
tempts to link SALT with aspects of our own foreign policy of which
they may disapprove.
Again, SALT II is not a favor we are doing for the Soviet Union; it’s
an agreement carefully negotiated in the national security interests of
the United States of America.
I put these issues to you today, because they need discussion and
debate and because the voices of the American people must be heard.
In the months ahead, we will do all in our power to explain the
treaty clearly and fully to the American people. I know that Members of
Congress from both parties will join in this effort to ensure an informed
public debate. And you, more than any other group I can imagine in the
United States, share this responsibility with me and with the Congress.
During this debate, it’s important that we exercise care. We will be
sharing with the Congress some of our most sensitive defense and in-
telligence secrets. And the leaders in Congress must ensure that these
secrets will be guarded so that the debate itself will not undermine our
own security.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
As the national discussion takes place, let us be clear about what
the issues are—and are not.
Americans are committed to maintaining a strong defense. That is
not the issue.
We will continue to compete, and compete effectively, with the So-
viet Union. That is not the issue.
The issue is whether we will move ahead with strategic arms con-
trol or resume a relentless nuclear weapons competition. That’s the
choice we face—between an imperfect world with a SALT agreement,
or an imperfect and more dangerous world without a SALT agreement.
With SALT II, we will have significant reductions in Soviet stra-
tegic forces; far greater certainty in our defense planning and in the
knowledge of the threats that we might face; flexibility to meet our own
defense needs; the foundation for further controls on nuclear and con-
ventional arms; and our own self-respect and the earned respect of the
world for a United States demonstrably committed to the works of
peace.
Without SALT, the Soviets will be unconstrained and capable, and
probably committed to an enormous further buildup.
Without SALT, there would have to be a much sharper rise in our
own defense spending, at the expense of other necessary programs for
our people.
Without SALT, we would end up with thousands more strategic
nuclear warheads on both sides, with far greater costs—and far less se-
curity—for our citizens.
Without SALT, we would see improved relations with the Soviet
Union replaced by heightened tensions.
Without SALT, the long, slow process of arms control, so central to
building a safer world, would be dealt a crippling and, perhaps, a fatal
blow.
Without SALT, the world would be forced to conclude that Amer-
ica had chosen confrontation rather than cooperation and peace.
This is an inescapable choice we face. For the fact is that the alter-
native to this treaty is not some perfect agreement, drafted unilaterally
by the United States in which we gain everything and the Soviets gain
nothing; the alternative now, and in the foreseeable future, is no agree-
ment at all.
I am convinced that the United States has a moral and a political
will to control the relentless technology which could constantly devise
new and more destructive weapons to kill human beings. We need not
drift into a dark nightmare of unrestrained arms competition. We
Americans have the wisdom to know that our security depends on
more than just maintaining our unsurpassed defense forces. Our secu-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
rity and that of our allies also depends on the strength of ideas and
ideals and on arms control measures that can stabilize and finally re-
verse a dangerous and a wasteful arms race which neither side can win.
This is a path of wisdom. This is a path of peace.
118.
Address by Secretary of State Vance
Chicago, May 1, 1979
Meeting the Challenges of a Changing World
From the first days of our nation; Americans have held a staunch
optimism about the future. We have been a self-confident people, cer-
tain about our ability to shape our destiny. And we are a people who
have not only adapted well to change, we have thrived on it.
We are now living in a period of history marked by deep and rapid
change. Tonight, I want to talk about change and how America can use
its extraordinary strength to meet the challenges of a changing world.
America’s optimism has been jarred in recent years—by a bitter
war, by domestic divisions that tested our democratic institutions and
left many of our people skeptical about government, by the sudden
awareness that our economic life at home can be shaped by actions
abroad, and by the realization that there are events which affect us but
which we can only partly influence.
There is much that we can and have learned from these experi-
ences. But fear of the future is not one of them.
Let me share with you frankly my concern that the distorted prop-
osition being advanced by some that America is in a period of decline
in the world is not only wrong as a matter of fact but dangerous as a
basis for policy.
For we would imperil our future if we lost confidence in ourselves
and in our strength and retreated from energetic leadership in the
world. And we would imperil our future, as well, if we reacted in frus-
tration and used our power to resist change in the world or employed
our military power when it would do more harm than good.
dress before a meeting of the American Association of Community and Junior Colleges.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The realization that we are not omnipotent should not make us
fear we have lost our power or the will to use it. If we appreciate the ex-
traordinary strengths we have, if we understand the nature of the
changes taking place in the world, and if we act effectively to use our
different kinds of power to shape different kinds of change, we have
every reason to be confident about our future.
America’s Strengths
We must begin with a clear understanding of our own strengths as
a nation.
America’s military strength today is formidable. I know of no re-
sponsible military official who would exchange our strategic position
for that of any other nation.
• We have friendly neighbors on our borders.
• We have strong and reliable security relationships. Together,
these allies more than double our overall military strength.
• We have easy access to the sea, which enables us to have diversi-
fied strategic forces and the ready capacity to project our power.
Our economy, and those of our allies, are more than three times as
productive as those of the Soviets and their allies.
The industrial democracies continue to lead the way in techno-
logical innovation and in harnessing that technology to serve mankind.
And the way of life of our people and what we stand for as a nation
continue to have magnetic appeal around the world.
Because we and our allies are the engines of creative change in al-
most every field, because of the vitality of our political institutions and
the strength of our military forces, we have a capacity for leadership—
and an ability to thrive in a world of change—that is unsurpassed.
The issue is not whether we are strong. We are. The challenge is to
use these unquestioned strengths appropriately and effectively to ad-
vance our interests in a world undergoing different kinds of change.
What are these changes, and how can we use our strength effectively?
Stable Strategic Equivalence
The first element of change is the evolution from an earlier period
of American strategic supremacy to an era of stable strategic equivalence.
We should harbor no illusion that we could return to the earlier
era. Neither side will permit the other to hold an exploitable strategic
advantage. Each side has the financial and technical resources to keep
pace with the other. With the stakes so high, we know that both of us
will do whatever is necessary to keep from falling behind. That is why
essential equivalence has become the only realistic strategy in today’s
nuclear world.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
This rough balance can also serve the cause of stability—even if
some find it unsettling compared with our earlier supremacy. It is this
essential equivalence in strategic arms which allows us to move ahead
on arms limitation. For if one side were far ahead, it would feel no spe-
cial urgency about arms control, and the side that was behind would
refuse to negotiate from a position of weakness. Only when both sides
perceive a balance, as is now the case, can we hope for real arms control
progress.
Our response to this broad change in the security environment has
several elements.
We will assure that essential equivalence in nuclear arms is main-
tained. We will not be overtaken by the momentum of Soviet military
programs.
We have undertaken a far-reaching modernization of our strategic
forces. We are improving each leg of our strategic triad—with cruise
missiles for our B–52 bombers, with a new Trident I missile for existing
submarines and the development of a new Trident submarine and Tri-
dent II missile, and with development funding for the M–X missile.
And we are examining, in a timely fashion, the options for offsetting
the probable future threat to the land-based portion of our missile
force.
At the same time, we are equally determined to enhance our secu-
rity by applying mutual limits to nuclear arms. We are at the threshold
of a SALT II treaty. It is a critical step in the process of bringing strategic
weapons under sensible control. As its terms become known and de-
bated, I am confident that the Senate will agree that it will enhance our
national security and that of our allies. Its rejection would lead to an
intensification of the nuclear arms race. The risk of nuclear war would
increase. The costs to our taxpayers would rise sharply. It would
heighten tensions with the Soviets, trouble our allies, and deal a crip-
pling blow to future arms control prospects.
The American people, and our allies, understand the importance
of decreasing tensions with the Soviet Union and seeking common
ground where our interests may converge.
While we address strategic issues, we must also be especially sen-
sitive to the importance of maintaining a balance of conventional
forces. At the NATO summit last summer, we and our allies committed
ourselves to real increases of 3% in defense expenditures and to mod-
ernize and upgrade NATO forces. Last year’s repeal of the arms em-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
bargo against Turkey was an important step to help bolster NATO’s
southern flank.
In Europe and elsewhere, we are committed to maintain strong
conventional forces. And no one should doubt that we will use those
forces if our vital interests or those of our allies are threatened.
In these ways, we will maintain, and strengthen, our security in an
age of essential equivalence by meeting the new problems it presents
and by seizing the new arms control opportunities it affords.
Growing Risks of Regional Conflicts
A second change is the reality that the risks posed by regional con-
flicts have grown. Many of these conflicts are long standing. They have
roots deep in history, in geography, in religious and ethnic differences.
But as more nations acquire more sophisticated arms, regional
conflicts become more dangerous. They pose a constant threat of wider
confrontation. As a result, the United States must be more active in
working to help settle these disputes peacefully.
The fact is that no nation is more intensively engaged in the contin-
uing effort to dampen the flames of conflict around the world than the
United States.
No other nation could have played the role that the United States
has played in helping Israel and Egypt achieve an historic peace treaty.
And we will continue to remain actively involved in the effort to
achieve a comprehensive peace—a peace in which Israel, the neigh-
boring Arab states, and the Palestinian people can live with security
and with dignity.
In southern Africa, in the eastern Mediterranean, in Southeast
Asia, and elsewhere in the world, we are using the influence we have
for peace. Progress does not come easily or quickly. There will be set-
backs, for the path to peace is often more difficult than the road to war.
But with persistence and steadiness, we can help provide the parties to
conflict with an alternative to violence—if they choose to take it.
In some cases, these efforts will involve working with other inter-
ested nations as a catalyst for bringing the parties together. In other sit-
uations, we will support international and regional institutions that
provide a framework for easing tensions. When we believe it will con-
embargo against Turkey by signing into law the International Security Assistance Act (S.
Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1636.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
tribute to regional stability, we will assist nations threatened by ex-
ternal force to strengthen their ability to defend themselves.
In all cases, we will oppose attempts by others to transform local
disputes into international tests of will. Every nation has a responsi-
bility to recognize that there is greater safety in healing, rather than
fueling, local conflicts.
Changes Within Nations
A third kind of change we must address is change within nations.
As a result of mass communications, better education, urbaniza-
tion, and growing expectations for a better life, there is a new tide in
many Third World nations, as more and more people demand a ful-
ler share in their government and their economy. These demands
can place extraordinary pressures on economic, social, and political
institutions.
This ferment can at times cause the kind of turmoil that adversely
affects our interests, at least in the short run. But rather than reacting in
opposition to such change, or assuming that it necessarily works
against us, let us look at two central questions: Is this kind of change
generally in the interest of our nation? And what are the best instru-
ments through which we can help others meet popular aspirations in
an orderly and peaceful fashion?
The answer to the first question, in my judgment, is that the
growing demand of individuals around the world for the fulfillment of
their political, social, and economic rights is generally in our interest.
These aspirations are producing new or strengthened democratic insti-
tutions in many nations throughout the world. And America can
flourish best in a world where freedom flourishes.
Should we not gain confidence from this expansion of democracy,
which is taking place not because we force it but because of its inherent
appeal?
And what is that inherent appeal? Surely it lies in the enhanced op-
portunity that democracy provides for the realization of fundamental
human rights—the rights to political and religious expression, to polit-
ical participation, and to economic justice.
These values are remarkably attuned to the demands of change.
The change which confronts many nations—particularly the less devel-
oped nations—challenges cultures, ways of living and communicating,
notions of individual and national autonomy. The great strength of
democratic processes is their flexibility and resilience. They allow ac-
commodation and compromise. By giving all groups a voice in the de-
cisions which affect their lives, democratic societies are far better able
to shape a peaceful and stable balance between tradition and progress.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Internal change in other countries will sometimes be turbulent and
difficult. At times, it may run in repressive directions. But we must not
let our concerns about the crosscurrents blind us to the tide running in
favor of freedom.
In seeking to help others meet the legitimate demands of their
peoples, what are the best instruments at hand?
Let me state first that the use of military force is not, and should
not be, a desirable American policy response to the internal politics of
other nations. We believe we have the right to shape our destiny; we
must respect that right in others. We must clearly understand the dis-
tinction between our readiness to act forcefully when the vital interests
of our nation, our allies, and our friends are threatened and our recog-
nition that our military forces cannot provide a satisfactory answer to
the purely internal problems of other nations.
In helping other nations cope with such internal change, our chal-
lenge is to help them develop their own institutions, strengthen their
own economies, and foster the ties between government and people.
To do so, we must continue to provide them with increasing levels
of development assistance. We must maintain human rights policies
which work in practical ways to advance freedom. And we must accept
the fact that other societies will manage change and build new institu-
tions in patterns that may be different from our own.
Third World nations will fiercely defend their independence. They
will reject efforts by outsiders to impose their institutions. We should
welcome this spirit. For our national interest is not in their becoming
like us; it is that they be free of domination by others.
This strategy of affirmative involvement and support for the inde-
pendence and the diversity of developing nations serves us well. It cap-
italizes on the West’s inherent strengths. And it improves our ties to de-
veloping countries in a context which does not force them to make an
explicit choice between East and West.
The test of our will in dealing with domestic change abroad will
come not in how we use our military might but in whether we are
willing to put our resources behind our words—and to make them
work effectively.
An Increasingly Pluralistic World
A fourth kind of change that we are seeing is in the international
system itself. Building on our experience as a pluralistic nation, we
must learn to deal effectively with an increasingly pluralistic world.
Since the early 1960’s, we have seen the emergence of dozens of
new nations, each with its distinctive identity, each fiercely intent on
fulfilling its national aspirations.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
We have seen the development of new powers in the world, na-
tions which play an increasingly important role in international eco-
nomic and political life.
And we have come to recognize that many of the challenges we
face are genuinely global in scope. Halting the spread of nuclear
weapons, managing the world’s resources sensibly and fairly, pre-
serving an environment that can sustain us—these problems do not de-
rive from any single nation nor can any single nation, working alone,
resolve them.
A world where many must participate in designing the future
rather than a few, where progress often requires cooperative effort, de-
mands more—not less—American leadership. It requires us to exercise
that leadership creatively, to inspire others to work with us toward
goals we share but cannot achieve separately. It calls for a new kind of
diplomacy.
We must practice, wherever possible, an inclusive form of diplo-
macy, working together with others to achieve common goals. Such
multilateral efforts are time consuming and complex. But they can
often be more productive than working alone.
The core around which these broader efforts must be built is a
strong and solid relationship with our traditional allies. We have
worked hard in this Administration to strengthen that partnership, and
we have done so.
Working together with our allies we are able, on an increasing
number of issues, to engage others in collective efforts to resolve some
of the more intractable problems we face. Let me cite just one ex-
ample—our effort to find a more proliferation-resistant nuclear fuel
cycle.
At our initiative, 44 nations have come together to search for
ways—both technical and institutional—to enable nations to pursue
peaceful nuclear energy without adding to the danger of nuclear
weapons proliferation. There is no “American” answer to the threat of
nuclear weapons proliferation; there is only an international answer,
and we are working with others to find it.
We are strengthening our ties with those developing nations
which exert increasing economic and political influence. We have
worked to bring these and other developing nations more fully and
fairly into the decisionmaking of international institutions which affect
their life and ours. For enduring solutions to problems we face in
common can be found only if all who have a stake also have a role and
recognize their responsibilities as well as their rights in the world
community.
To work effectively in a changing international system we must be
prepared to work with nations whose ideologies are different from our

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
own. By establishing full diplomatic relations with the People’s Re-
public of China, for example, we are now in a better position to deal di-
rectly and forthrightly with a government that represents one-fourth of
the world’s people.
We have embarked on a deliberate effort to enhance the role of the
United Nations and regional institutions such as the Organization of
American States, the Association of South East Asian Nations, and the
Organization of African Unity. These institutions often can provide the
most effective setting for resolving international disputes and for
broadening the realm of international cooperation.
To secure the cooperation of other nations, we must deal with
them on a basis of mutual respect and independence. Our achievement
of a new Panama Canal treaty, which secures our use of the canal for
coming generations, has demonstrated that fair dealing with other na-
tions, whatever their size, can serve our interests as well as theirs. Our
relations throughout this hemisphere have benefited as a result.
A Changing World Economy
Let me turn finally to the change we are seeing in the international
economy—the growing stake every nation has in economic decisions
made beyond its borders.
America’s strength rests on the vitality of America’s economy. Our
economy continues to provide expanding opportunity for our people
and continues to fuel growth around the world. We must also recog-
nize the other side of this coin—the health of other economies around
the world increasingly affects the health of our economy.
Our exports provide Americans with jobs—in fact, one out of
every eight jobs in the manufacturing sector—and income for our firms
and farmers. Every third acre of our farmland produces for export. Im-
ports from abroad provide us with essential raw materials, they afford
our consumers greater choice, and they dampen our inflation.
This growing economic interdependence requires that our gov-
ernment work with others to help create international conditions in
which all nations can thrive. We cannot seek to build our own eco-
nomic future at the expense of others, nor will we allow others to com-
pete unfairly. For a new era of economic nationalism could have tragic
consequences, just as it did during the protectionist warfare of the
1930’s.
We are deeply involved in working with other nations to meet the
challenges of a changing world economic order.
We have been successful in strengthening economic cooperation
among the industrial nations. We have instituted regular economic
summits to coordinate our economic policies so that they reinforce
rather than undermine one another. And there has been far closer col-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
laboration among our monetary authorities in restoring order to for-
eign exchange markets.
We have initialed an important new multilateral trade agreement
that will establish fair trading rules for the next decade. It will have a
direct and positive impact on our economy.
We have agreed with the other industrialized members of the In-
ternational Energy Agency to cut back our collective demand for oil by
2 million barrels a day. To fulfill this commitment—and to reduce our
own costly and dangerous dependence on oil imports—the President
has initiated a sensible program for achieving greater domestic conser-
vation and production. For we must begin to deal urgently with a
markedly changed global energy environment.
We recognize that a well-managed foreign assistance program
contributes to the economic performance of the developing countries.
Their growth has become an increasingly important factor in the health
of our own economy. Aiding that development is not only an invest-
ment in the future of others, it is an investment in our own future as
well.
The Path We Will Follow
In the foreign policy choices we are now making, we are deter-
mining the path we will follow in a new era. In unsettled times, each of
us has a responsibility to be clear about how we would deal with the
world as we find it.
Most Americans now recognize that we alone cannot dictate
events. This recognition is not a sign of America’s decline; it is a sign of
growing American maturity in a complex world.
We are stronger today because we recognize the realities of our
times. This recognition, together with an equally clear understanding
that we remain the most powerful of nations, should make every
American as staunchly optimistic about our nation’s future as we have
always been.
There can be no going back to a time when we thought there could
be American solutions to every problem. We must go forward into a
new era of mature American leadership—based on strength, not bel-
ligerence; on steadiness, not impulse; on confidence, not fear.
We have every reason to be confident. For 200 years, we have pros-
pered by welcoming change and working with it, not by resisting it. We

119.
Editorial Note
On May 9, 1979, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and Secretary of
Defense Harold Brown announced at the White House that the Stra-
tegic Arms Limitation Treaty (SALT II) negotiations had concluded.
The U.S. and Soviet Governments instructed their delegates at Geneva
to incorporate agreements reached by Vance and Soviet Ambassador
Anatoly Dobrynin during their negotiations into the draft treaty and re-
solve any outstanding issues. Vance commented on the significance of
the treaty and then discussed the way forward:
“This treaty will not only mark the end of one negotiation, it will
open the way for another. When it is ratified by the Senate, it will be-
come the cornerstone for still further limits in reductions in SALT III.
“The national debate which we now commence is not only about
this treaty. We are still considering as well the inescapable realities of a
nuclear world—the necessity to our security of a strong defense and the
grave danger to our security of an unlimited race in nuclear arms, for
our security today lies in maintaining a stable strategic balance be-
tween two nations with awesome power.
“The SALT II treaty will make a substantial contribution to that
stability. We have demonstrated through the SALT process that even as
we compete in some areas, the United States and Soviet Union can and
must cooperate to lessen the dangers of war. In this way, the treaty can
serve to open the path to a more constructive and peaceful relationship
between us.
“This treaty is a message of hope for us and for all the people of the
world.”
Brown explained that the SALT II treaty would aid the United
States in maintaining a strategic nuclear balance. He highlighted the
main elements of the agreement and concluded:
“In sum, SALT will help us maintain flexible and credible deter-
rence, stability, and essential equivalence. Without the treaty, we could
also do these things, but it would be more costly and less certain. None
of the challenges we face would be less without the treaty, and some
would be considerably greater. All the increases we plan in our defense

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
efforts with SALT would still be needed without it. But many more
would be needed as well.
“I see the treaty as a valuable method of helping, along with our
own moderately increased programs, to meet our nation’s strategic
needs, and, if the Soviet Union will emphasize cooperation rather than
competition, SALT will also allow a healthier state of U.S.-Soviet rela-
On May 11, President Jimmy Carter took part in an interview and
question-and-answer session with editors and news directors. The in-
terview began at 1: p.m. in the Cabinet Room at the White House.
The President discussed the beginning of the ratification process in his
opening remarks:
“Perhaps more important than anything that I will address while
I’m President and perhaps the most important vote that the incumbent
Members of the Senate will ever cast is concerning the ratification of
SALT II.
“It’s a fair treaty, enforceable treaty, verifiable treaty, and rejection
of this treaty would have a devastating, adverse effect on our Nation’s
relationship with the Soviet Union, on our ability to deal effectively
with our allies, with uncommitted nations, and with the control of nu-
clear weaponry or explosives in the future throughout the world.
That’s one issue.”
The President noted that the Middle East peace treaties, signed by
Egyptian and Israeli officials, constituted the second crucial interna-
tional issue facing the United States. He continued:
“We hope that the other nations in that region will soon realize the
importance of these treaties. We’ll do all we can to implement them
fully and to demonstrate to all those who are interested that we believe
in and are committed to a comprehensive peace settlement.”
During the question-and-answer portion of the interview, a re-
porter asked the President for his assessment of the SALT treaty and
whether or not he could guide the treaty through the Senate in the same
form in which he intended to sign it. The President responded:
“Well, you know, we’ve negotiated this SALT treaty now for going
on 7 years, under three Presidents, and it’s been negotiated in the most
extreme specificity, much greater specific, detailed negotiation than
ever existed with the limited test ban or SALT I or the ABM treaty.
“There’s been a hard negotiation, a tough negotiation on both
sides, and the Soviets, I think, as have we, have been not only tough but
fair. We have gotten the best deal we can. It’s not perfect. I could have
written a unilateral treaty if I didn’t have to consult with the Soviets,
that it would have been more attractive to us and less attractive to
them. But for the Senate to expect the Soviets substantially to change

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
their posture just because we unilaterally want them to do so is fruitless
and, I think, would cause a rejection of SALT treaty completely.
“I think the treaty is to our great advantage and also to the Soviets’
great advantage. And I need not go into all the details of SALT II, but I
think that it’s, at the very least, very fair, well-balanced, stable, verifi-
able, adequate, and a move in the right direction. It leads to SALT III,
which will be even better.
“Rejection of the treaty, however, will have the most devastating
consequences to our country and, I think, to world peace. It will sever,
to a substantial degree, the workable relationship between ourselves
and the Soviets. It will shake the confidence of our own NATO Allies in
our ability to get along reasonably well with the Soviets and leave them
in an increasingly vulnerable position. It would make it almost impos-
sible for us to pursue successfully the control of nuclear weapon devel-
opment in countries like India, Pakistan, Iraq, Argentina, Brazil, Tai-
wan, South Korea, and other nations who have the technical ability to
produce nuclear weapons, but have refrained from doing so because
they saw an overall, worldwide restraint.
“If we show that we are not willing to restrain our own nuclear ar-
senal, when it’s to our advantage and the Soviets’ both to do it—we
would already have several thousand nuclear weapons—there’s no
way that I could go to someone like Prime Minister Desai in India, with
whom I have had long discussions on this, and say, ‘We have set a good
example for you, now you restrain yourself and don’t ever develop an-
other explosion in India.’ It would be almost impossible for me to do it.
So, it would wipe out any real good opportunity for us to constrain nu-
clear weaponry.
“And as you know, there are three ways that we can compete with
the Soviet Union. One is militarily through a prospective or actual war,
which we both want to avoid. The other is what we are doing. We are
meeting them competitively in the political realm and also in the philo-
sophical and moral and ethnic [ethical?] realm. And that’s where the
competition goes on.
“If the Soviets should sign SALT II and, in effect, ratify it—which
is, I think, inevitable—and if we should sign it and then reject it, we
would lose our competitive ability to reach effectively the hearts and
minds of other people around the world who will be making a choice
between us, on the one hand, and the Soviets, on the other, in the future
for military, political, trade alliances; because the Soviets can put them-
selves through a massive propaganda effort, which would be inevi-
table, too, in their role of a powerful but fair and peace-loving nation.
“We would be put in the role of a powerful nation that was, in ef-
fect, in their opinion, a warmonger who refused even to participate in
an equitable restraint on the most destructive weapons on Earth. And

120.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, May 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Summit Strategy
The memorandum that follows provides a framework for your ap-
proach to the summit by reviewing what we have learned from pre-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
vious summits; by outlining the central objectives of the two sides; by
identifying the key messages and accomplishments; and by describing
the scenario and strategy for these negotiations.
Moreover, we attach at Tab A a more detailed statement of our tan-
gible and intangible maximum objectives for the entire summit; Tab B
contains the Soviet text of the proposed joint communique; and Tab C
contains a memorandum previously prepared by Bill Hyland on the ex-
perience of past summits.
History and Setting
Some months ago, you read Hyland’s memorandum, and I would
urge you to reread it (Tab C). In brief, it points out that some summits
created unreal expectations and, hence, generated disillusionment
(e.g., the first Nixon-Brezhnev Summit of 1972). Some were outright
failures, notably Paris in 1960 (Khrushchev walked out over the U–2 in-
cident), and Vienna in 19615 (Kennedy was browbeaten and assessed
to be a weak leader). Despite its relatively low key, Glassboro6 was a
rather unusual success in that it helped bring the USSR to recognize the
need for a comprehensive strategic arms control process, despite the
then-blazing Vietnam conflict.
You will be meeting Leonid Brezhnev in a setting of unusual un-
certainty and difficulty. Never has the mixed character of the relation-
ship of cooperation and competion been more in evidence. Despite the
successful completion of SALT II, U.S.-Soviet relations are clearly
strained by a number of conflicting interests. The United States is in-
creasingly skeptical of Soviet intentions because of the momentum of
its military programs and its intervention in the Third World. In the
past, we could discount Soviet intentions because Soviet capabilities
were limited; today, even benign Soviet intentions are becoming in-
creasingly suspect because of the implications of Soviet capabilities.
with the whole collective leadership, and—hopefully—through it
perhaps also with the next generation of Soviet leaders as well. In some
ways this may diminish the importance of whatever personal rapport
you can develop with Brezhnev, but it enhances the importance of the
signals and messages that you will want to transmit.
The U.S. side is also an uncertain quantity to the Soviet side. The
firm centerpiece of the relationship now is SALT but the fate of SALT II
in the Senate is unsure. The sensitivity of the United States to assertive
Soviet behavior in the developing world, combined with our reluctance
to get involved, makes it difficult for the Soviets to predict our reactions
and can create the possibility of dangerous miscalculations.
Soviet Objectives
The Soviets have ample reason to invest in the relationship. They
do not want our economic and technological might mobilized against
them. They do not want us to move closer to China. They want to re-
duce the chances that security issues in conflict between us boil up to
confrontation, yet they are unlikely to yield their positions in Africa,
the Middle East or anywhere else.
While you would like to accomplish as much as possible—in-
cluding strengthening SALT II reductions, agreeing on a number of
other arms control measures and reconciling differences in the Third
World—the Soviets have made it clear to us that they would be satis-
fied with signing SALT and having a positive atmosphere. We have
their draft communique (Tab B). It is down to earth and businesslike. It
has the usual Soviet boiler plate but is surprisingly moderate and
breaks little new ground. They want to minimize consideration of con-
tentious security and regional issues. They are prepared to reach fur-
ther agreement on ASAT and MBFR but we don’t know whether they
are willing to make the needed concessions. They say little about eco-
nomic relations, obviously seeking to avoid being a supplicant.
In effect, the Soviet objective is to create the impression of a U.S.-
Soviet partnership in the management of world affairs; to downplay
the importance of the U.S.-Chinese relationship; to improve the at-
mospherics and some tangibles of the U.S.-Soviet bilateral relationship;
but not to limit in any way Soviet freedom of action in regards either to
Europe or some of the Third World areas of turbulence.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
In addition, the schedule proposed by the Soviet side minimizes
public exposure and thus diminishes their usual penchant for public
cameraderie. Above all, we are getting one message—no surprises.
Their approach is one of extreme caution. What they appear to fear
most is the picture of a young U.S. President making dramatic initia-
tives (a la March 1977) without careful preparation in advance to ensure
their acceptability to the Soviet leadership.
Tone and Style
Given the character of Soviet objectives, atmosphere will be a par-
ticularly important aspect of this summit. Every indication is that
both sides seek a positive atmosphere. We should understand, how-
ever, that the Soviets have more to gain and less to lose than you do
from pumping up the atmospherics. A glowing summit gives the So-
viet leadership a boost at home and abroad, because they face no public
comparison between pretense and actual results.
In managing the atmosphere and the substance of the summit, a
number of points deserve being kept in mind:
1. There is little to be gained by philosophical discourse or ideolog-
ical debate with the Soviet leaders; they are not psychologically confi-
dent enough to engage at the philosophical level as the Chinese do; in
particular, trying to debate rules of conduct becomes frustrating be-
cause of the gap in perceptions;11
2. Concrete issues, however, are more easily resolved but only if
they have been well prepared and the Soviets do not have to contend
with surprises that have not been aired by the collective leadership;12
3. Soviet leaders are quite sensitive to their personal treatment;13
they are particularly concerned over any slights reflecting the inferi-
ority of the USSR. This will be a particularly important issue at this
summit with Brezhnev’s ill health. It is not in our interest to exploit his
infirmities.
4. Meeting the “people” is of little interest to the Soviets. Their pre-
occupation is with those who have the power of decision. As a conces-
sion to us, they have reluctantly agreed on a joint call by the two Presi-
dents on Austrian President Kirchschlager.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
5. There is no basis for “personal trust”; the Soviet system breeds
power struggles; it is unlikely they would trust foreigners if they do not
trust their own colleagues; expecting Western leaders to act against
their class or national interest would subject a Soviet leader to ridicule,
if not worse, in the Politburo;
6. Talks, that is conversation, mean little compared to the reassu-
rance found in written documents and precise obligations; that is one
reason why communiques and joint principles and treaties have more
importance in the USSR than in other diplomatic exchanges; but the
“spirit” of a document is virtually non-existent;15
7. The main value to you may be simply to get some feel for the
mind set of the Soviets and their mode of reasoning. The top Soviet
leaders do in fact have extraordinary power and will make decisions.
But they have no great incentive to make concessions and thereby ex-
pose themselves politically. Negotiations therefore take place within
a pre-defined framework, and on any issue it is important for the So-
viets to point to the precise concession they extracted in the bargaining.
Scenario
We originally wanted at least four days of talks. The Soviets have
reduced the time available for discussion by making the first and fourth
days largely ceremonial and by insisting that your private meeting
with Brezhnev be on the last day. At this point we have agreed to a
minimum of seven hours of talks with the possibility of two more on
the final day before signing the SALT Treaty.
This will put a premium on the conversations at the two dinners.
Accordingly we have in mind making them as small as possible—you,
Cy, Harold, me and Dave Jones on our side and Brezhnev, Gromyko,
Alexandrov, Ustinov and Ogarkov on theirs. Soviet attendance how-
ever is not yet set.
Equally important is the sequence of substantive issues. The first
working day (Saturday, June 16) will be devoted to SALT and other
arms control issues. This will be an upbeat day and we will be the hosts
for the talks and the dinner. The next day will be hosted by the Soviets
and will involve more contentious arms control, security and regional
issues.
This will be the most important meeting from the standpoint of
conveying firmness and determination to defend our interests. It will
inevitably be more downbeat, with the atmosphere more filled with

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
conflict and tension. The last day will see a private meeting and the
SALT and other document signing and this should provide a positive
conclusion to the summit.
In effect we have something of a drama—at first things are good,
then they turn tense, then finally there is a positive resolution. The
toasts and your remarks at the signing ceremony will be the key indi-
cators of what is transpiring and they must be carefully crafted with
that in mind. At the outset of the talks we must be careful to moderate
expectations. The theme of SALT plus serious consultations, as we
agreed previously, is the best note to strike before the summit begins.
U.S. Strategy and Objectives
This wary and uncertain setting makes it important that we con-
centrate on those objectives that have the greatest potential for longer
term impact on the U.S.-Soviet relationship. I would define the central
strategic objectives of the Vienna Summit in the following terms:
1. To consummate SALT II and to initiate SALT III;
2. To give additional impetus to further U.S.-Soviet arms control
measures (such as ASAT, MBFR, CTB, CAT, etc.);
3. To make not only Brezhnev but also the Soviet leaders who
stayed at home more aware that the U.S. sees the Soviet Union as insen-
sitive to our vital interests or concerns in such regions as the Middle
East, Southern Africa, Cuba, and Vietnam.
In effect, your objective is to demonstrate that the United States
can successfully manage the contradictory positive and negative tend-
encies in our relationship. To do that, you must articulate a conception
of a reciprocal and realistic detente, based not only on the common in-
terest in avoiding nuclear war, but also on genuine respect for each
side’s security concerns. This requires that you be candid with the So-
viet leaders about our deep dissatisfaction with Soviet performance on
a whole range of security-related issues. They must be made to under-
stand that to move in a constructive direction now, U.S.-Soviet relations
must involve positive Soviet behavior on key security issues of para-
mount U.S. concern.
At the same time, Soviet leaders must be convinced that our com-
plaints do not derive from a desire for bad U.S.-Soviet relations, or from

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
the desire to gain a one-sided advantage—but that we genuinely wish
those relations to improve.
To this end, it is essential that all key members of your delegation
be explicitly instructed to deliberately and repeatedly emphasize cer-
tain key and simple themes to their Soviet counterparts. Only a delega-
tion that speaks with a united voice, that keeps repeating the same key
themes is likely to convey the message that needs to be heard back in
the Kremlin.
Accordingly, I would recommend that you instruct everyone
going to Vienna to make the following points to every Soviet that they
encounter:
1. The United States wishes to join the Soviet Union in containing
the nuclear arms race through further cuts in SALT II and more ambi-
tious cuts in SALT III, as well as through other arms control measures;21
2. The United States wishes to see the Soviet Union as a partner in
dealing with many emerging global problems, the solution of which
need not be the object of ideological disputes (food, development, en-
3. The United States cannot be indifferent to Soviet insensitivity to
our concerns in such areas as the Middle East, Southern Africa, Viet-
nam, or Cuba—and such insensitivity will produce strong American
reactions, particularly on matters which are of concern to the Soviet
Union (e.g., China);23
4. Soviet military buildup, both strategic and conventional, has
gone beyond the point of legitimate defense needs, and is generating a
genuine threat to the United States and its principal Allies—and unless
the Soviet side shows restraint, the West, with the United States in the
lead, will undertake major, comprehensive, and matching efforts.
If we succeed in communicating these messages effectively, we
will have achieved our basic objectives. SALT II ratification will get a
boost. Our Allies will maintain confidence in our leadership. You will
have set a clear framework for a constructive U.S.-Soviet relationship
regardless of who succeeds Brezhnev.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Next Steps
The final impression of the meeting will be shaped by the commu-
nique issued jointly by the two parties. It must be prepared well in ad-
vance. We need your guidance, therefore, on how to proceed on the full
range of issues that are candidates for discussion.
In response to your admonition that we not be timid in our goals
for the Summit, Tab A contains a statement of our maximum objectives
organized around the agenda as it now stands. However, realism dic-
tates the conclusion that not all these objectives will be attained at the
Summit itself. The Soviets have also stressed to us that they desire “no
surprises.” It follows therefore that these objectives need to be priori-
tized and prepared in advance with the Soviets.
Accordingly, I would welcome your guidance as to which of the
items at Tab A you want us to pursue with particular vigor. Once I
know your priorities, and with your permission, I will ask Dobrynin to
join me and Christopher for a preliminary review of those items which
ought to be discussed with the Soviets in advance of the Vienna
Summit. In this manner, we will enhance the prospects of attaining not
only our broad strategic objectives, but also the more concrete goals
listed in Tab A.
Tab C
Paper Prepared by William Hyland of the National Security
Council Staff
Washington, undated
Soviet-American Summitry
Summit meetings between the American President and the Soviet
leaders inevitably stimulate great expectations that a new and favor-
able turning point will be reached. Rarely have positive expectations
been justified; in those cases of a relatively “successful” summit, the re-
sults have been produced more by the surrounding or preceding cir-
cumstances than by the actual negotiations between the leaders.
One of the problems is the persistent American belief that such
meetings are of special significance because they: (1) create “goodwill”
among the participants; create a better “atmosphere” for resolving
issues and permit the American case to be made to the leaders that have
the power of decision. These attitudes explain in part why in retrospect

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
summit meetings have seemed of such little value and on occasion even
dangerously misleading.
The tone and approach to summits was set by President Roosevelt,
who had great confidence in his own ability to deal with foreign
leaders, and he saw Stalin largely in terms of an adversary who could
be won over by powers of persuasion. Because the actual substance of
the wartime meetings was secret, they were represented as dramatic
success stories. The inevitable post-war disillusionment made all
summits appear dangerous traps, in which the Soviets received major
concessions.
The death of Stalin in 1953, however, revived summitry; Churchill
sensed that the Kremlin might be in some disarray and wanted to con-
front the new leaders; Dulles was skeptical, but even Eisenhower was
intrigued. He wrote:
“ . . . a major preoccupation of my mind throughout most of 1953
was the development of approaches to the Soviet leaders that might be
at least a start toward the birth of mutual trust.”
The quest for “mutual trust” was in fact the theme of the Geneva
summit of July 1955, and the subsequent “spirit” the meeting engen-
dered. The meeting was not the intimate conclave Churchill had
wanted but a formal, ritualistic series of meetings, with little substance
and no achievements. Within days Khrushchev had repudiated any
semblance of cooperation on Germany (one purpose of the meeting)
and the USSR was moving into the Middle East with arms sales to
Nassir—a subject not even raised.
If the summit of 1955 was a leisurely, cosmetic affair, the subse-
quent meetings, held under Soviet pressures on Berlin, were, in effect,
safety valves to drain the threatened crisis of a separate German peace
treaty. The well known summit in Paris of May 1960, was aborted by
the U–2 incident, though most observers believe that Khrushchev had
concluded beforehand that there was little hope of getting his demands
on Berlin.
The Kennedy summit of 1961 in Vienna was an example of the
fecklessness, not to say the danger, of turning summit meetings into
ideological debates.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Much like the Kitchen debate between Khrushchev and Nixon in
1959, at the 1961 Vienna summit the two leaders consumed great time
in arguing over the merits of their respective economic and political
systems. Naturally, neither was persuaded by the other’s arguments,
but it may be that Khrushchev concluded that Kennedy would not be a
formidable opponent in a confrontation. In any case, the opportunity to
deal concretely with Berlin was frittered away leading eventually to the
Cuban missile crisis.
The Glassboro summit of 196729 was somewhat unique; it featured
the Soviet premier, Kosygin, but not the party chief (thus perhaps
downgrading its importance); it was arranged as an extension of a UN
visit by Kosygin and much of the time was consumed by a debate about
SALT and ABM; the US arguing for the start of talks and the Soviets,
ironically, arguing that ABMs should not be included because they
were defensive and hence “moral” (they shifted totally by the spring of
1970, when they argued for a separate ABM treaty).
It might be noted that one of the hazards of summitry is that the
planning stage is subject to the unforeseen event—the U–2 in May 1960
and the Czech invasion that aborted the Johnson summit in 1968, and
the bombing and mining of Haiphong in May 1972.
The Nixon summits were unusual in their frequency. Nixon and
Brezhnev met 3 times in a little over 24 months. Nixon was against an
early summit; he wanted to use it to gain some leverage on other issues;
this was somewhat effective in the Berlin and SALT negotiations, but
much less so in involving the Soviets in Vietnam peace efforts.
Nixon personally had little use for the give and take of summits as
far as substance was involved but he saw their political and symbolic
benefits. The actual meetings were almost entirely prepared before-
hand; only a few minor SALT matters were still open for negotiation in
the threshold of the underground test ban.
order to open the American National Exhibition in Sokolniki Park in Moscow. During a
tour of the exhibit on July 24, Nixon and Khrushchev came to a model American home
and stopped in the kitchen. While there, they engaged in an argument about the relative
merits of capitalism and Communism. The argument became known as the “kitchen
debate.”
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
There may in fact have been something to the personal rapport es-
tablished between Brezhnev and Nixon, particularly since after the first
meeting there were no major divisive issues on the agenda. The as-
sumptions of “detente” were under fire, however, when Nixon re-
signed a little over a month after his July meeting with Brezhnev. It was
the concern that the relationship might rapidly deteriorate after Water-
gate that led Ford to a quick meeting in Vladivostok. Another purpose
of that meeting was to salvage the SALT discussion which had more or
less stalemated in the Nixon summit. Ford picked up an easy personal
relationship, helped in part by the “success” of reaching an agreement
at Vladivostok.
The last “summit” was the Ford-Brezhnev meeting [in] Helsinki, it
lasted only a few hours. By then Brezhnev was beginning to show
signs of wear; he was particularly fatigued by the round of meetings at
Helsinki and not pleased by what seemed a western success in the
speeches, publicity and documents.
A few general observations on Summits may be in order:
1. There is little to be gained by philosophical discourse or ideolog-
ical debate with the Soviet leaders; they are not psychologically confi-
dent enough to engage at the philosophical level as the Chinese do; in
particular, trying to debate rules of conduct becomes frustrating be-
cause of the gap in perceptions;35
2. Concrete issues, however, are more easily resolved but only if
they have been well prepared and the Soviets do not have to contend
with surprises that have not been aired by the collective leadership;
3. Soviet leaders are quite sensitive to their personal treatment;
they are particularly concerned over any slights reflecting the inferi-
ority of the USSR.
4. Meeting the “people” is of little interest to the Soviets. Their pre-
occupation is with those who have the power of decision (this, inciden-
tally, is why Congressional delegations do so poorly in the USSR);
5. There is no basis for “personal trust”; the Soviet system breeds
power struggles; it is unlikely they would trust foreigners if they do not
trust their own colleagues; expecting western leaders to act against
their class or national interest would subject a Soviet leader to ridicule,
if not worse, in the politburo;

121.
Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Kreisberg) to the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake)
Washington, July 13, 1979
SUBJECT
The Next 18 Months
I ASSUME:
—terrific bind on resources, —state budget (cut for FY 80 by 5%
yesterday), AID, FMS, ESF, etc., plus SALT military and energy.
—very tough political environment for Carter—possible squeaks
or losses in early primaries, overwhelming emphasis by White House
on election related policies both domestic and foreign (Kirby2 tells me
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
this is clearly evident already in Bob Strauss’s approach to Middle East
negotiations).
—SALT treaty passes the Senate—for if it doesn’t, Vance will be
spending all his time mending the Soviet fences and our allied wells.
THIS MEANS:
—even less likely Carter or Vance should want to take on major
new initiatives. We’ve assumed that all along. It is simply underlined
triply now.
—programs that may cost money or imply new outlays are not
going anywhere unless they are strictly in support of what we’re al-
ready doing and of the highest priority (e.g., Vance’s approval of an-
other $60 million in PL–480 for Egypt without even waiting to see what
other claimants may be or even what our resource base for the PL–480
pie is likely to be).
—Vance is going to have to spend a lot more time SELLING our
foreign policy domestically; the President doesn’t have too much to sell
on domestic economic policy.
—foreign policy credibility of the US administration—always un-
certain during an election year in terms of our ability to commit and
deliver on new policies—is going to be lower than we’ve seen it since
Watergate. This means hesitation by allies and others to be strongly
supportive of US initiatives which may not have bipartisan support in-
side this country and their own.
I SUGGEST, THEREFORE:
—that Vance focus particularly on defending and articulating what
we’ve done;5
—that he concentrate on strengthening existing policy areas where
they are sagging and where we may suffer losses;
—Central America
—non-proliferation
—relations with Allies
—relations with energy producing states, Middle East and
elsewhere

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—and above all, ensuring we do not suffer visible setbacks in
—that he intensify his involvement in pressing Congress and the
White House for the indispensable minimum resources we need. With
a recession and countervailing claims all over the domestic economy
and from Defense, that will be something he’s going to have to spend
much more time on than he has previously.
—that he not devote excessive amounts of his time to North-South
issues. Not because they may not be important but because in the do-
mestic environment of 1980 that is not where people are going to be
looking, EXCEPT where active US involvement is necessary in order to
prevent a grave and visible deterioration.
—that to the extent he becomes involved in new issues—long-term
debt relief for LDCs, energy development in non-OPEC LDCs, etc.—
these be clearly tagged as issues for the next term but for which ground
needs to be laid, etc.
Paul H. Kreisberg

122.
Memorandum From Samuel Huntington to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, August 2, 1979
SUBJECT
Four year Goals Revisited
On the basis of a very hurried survey of the goals material you
gave me today, I conclude:
1. The Administration’s impressive accomplishments in foreign
policy look much less impressive when compared with the goals the
Administration set for itself in 1977. This is due not to a paucity of
achievement but rather to the scope and magnitude of the goals. A dra-
matic example of this is Arab-Israeli relations, where the Administra-
tion obviously scored a major triumph at Camp David, but which does
not produce a very good rating when compared to the goal of a com-
prehensive peace settlement including Palestinians and with Saudi in-
volvement and backing. As a consequence of this phenomenon, how-
ever, it clearly would not be desirable to use the April 1977 goals
statement4 in any public presentation of the Administration’s foreign
policy record.
2. The 1977 goals do make for some interesting reading now as a
reflection of the dominant approaches to foreign policy at the start of
the Administration. Despite the fact that this statement was primarily
the work of you and me, it is still striking to me now to see the impor-
tant role in it of the foreign policy approach which you labeled “Liberal
do a think piece for purely internal consumption on why it was the Ad-
ministration was so successful in achieving its goals in some areas (e.g.,
China) and unsuccessful in others (e.g., Africa). I suspect such an
analysis would relate success and failure to the extent to which the
goals were based on realistic assumptions concerning the hard power
politics of the situation. While I won’t give it a high priority, if you’re
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
agreeable, I may at some point try to undertake such an interpretive
re-evaluation.
Attached at Tab A is a topical outline of the goals statement with
my judgments as to how well the Administration has done so far in
achieving the goals it set out for itself. In many areas, my knowledge of
the detailed specifics of these actions is rather limited, and here I have
simply put a question mark. In other cases, I’ve made guesses that may
or may not be very well informed. Performance is graded on a scale of
zero to ten, with the latter meaning achievement of all goals set forth in
the paper. In arriving at these ratings, I have also made some qualita-
tive judgments about the relative importance of specific goals within
each topic.
Obviously, I could go around and get a much more accurate read-
out of how well we’ve done by talking with the NSC specialists in each
area, but I have doubts as to whether that would really produce a great
deal more that was useful.
Tab A
Outline Prepared by Samuel P. Huntington
Washington, undated
FOREIGN POLICY GOALS, AUGUST 1979
1. Relations with Advanced Industrial Democracies
A. Political coordination
B. Cooperation with Europe
C. Cooperation with Japan
D. Economic cooperation
E. Recovery
F. Finance
G. Investment
0?
H. Trade
2. Relations with Emerging Regional “Influentials”
A. General steps
B. Venezuela
C. Brazil
2?
D. Nigeria
6?

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
E. Saudi Arabia
F. Iran
G. India
H. Indonesia
7?
3. North-South Relations
A. Political Relations
B. Economic relations
6?
C. Relations with specific countries
(1) Panama Canal
(2) Cuba
4. Relations with Soviet Union and Its Allies
A. Arms Control
B. Political and economic issues (Eastern
Europe)
C. Social issues
5. Relations with China
6. The Middle East
A. Arab-Israeli conflict
B. Trade and development
C. Persian Gulf
7. Africa
A. South Africa
(1) Zimbabwe
(2) Namibia
(3) South Africa
B. Communist state presence
8. Arms Control
A. Conventional arms transfer
B. Nuclear proliferation
C. CTB
9. Human Rights
A. Multilateral action
B. Bilateral relations
C. Unilateral action
10. Defense
A. Defense posture
B. Defense management
5?
C. NATO
D. East Asia

123.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Tarnoff) and the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, August 9, 1979
SUBJECT
Next Eighteen Months
In thinking about this exercise, we began by looking back at your
December memorandum to the President. The most impressive fact
that emerges from such a review is the extraordinary progress made
since then on the “big issues”: SALT, China legislation, MTN, and the
Middle East. You wrote to the President that success on three of the
four would be historic. Specific goals on all four were met.
As we thought about how you will allocate your time in the next
eighteen months, we tried to identify ongoing issues which will con-
tinue to require your attention, to subjects that you might want to leave
primarily to others in the Department, and new areas of concentration.
We start with the premise that, after your UNGA period in New
York, and especially after SALT is ratified (an increasingly likely pros-
pect for the fall), you will have the opportunity to decide how to use a
dividend of unallocated time. Unless you give some clear signals on
how you expect to use this time, the bureaucracy naturally will try to
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
fill the vacuum with issues that are not necessarily worth your own
attention.
Since you have announced your intention not to serve in the
second Carter Administration, you need more than ever to show a com-
mand of the important continuing issues as well as an energetic ap-
proach to new areas, so as not to be perceived, in the final months, as a
lame duck.
We do not suggest that the coming months will provide fertile
ground for dramatic new successes. There isn’t much money avail-
able—indeed, we will be fighting to avoid real cuts in our foreign
policy resources. And the domestic political climate as we head into the
election is obviously difficult.
We do believe, however, that you can be extremely effective in a
number of areas in which you can leave a lasting imprint, by defining
new substantive longer-term goals, influencing public opinion, or
strengthening the institutions of your office and this building.
I. Priority Old Issues.
In this category are issues that have, from the beginning, repre-
sented cornerstones of the Administration’s foreign policies. Your ac-
tive involvement is needed in each case either to build on a partial
success or to keep the pressure up on finding solutions. In certain cases,
your presence is necessary so that other agencies or other advisors do
not counsel the President in ways that could lead to dramatic policy re-
versals or sharp increases in international tensions.
A. Middle East: No issue continues to present more difficulties and
dangers. Clearly your involvement is crucial even with Strauss’s ap-
pointment. We are concerned that the U.S. is moving in the direction of
dealing with the Palestinians without adequate study of the effect of
such moves on: Israeli flexibility on the West Bank/Gaza; Israeli doubts
about the U.S. at a time that a change in government may be near in Je-
rusalem; and the 1980 Presidential candidates who may polarize this
emotional issue within the U.S.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Quite frankly, we doubt that we can both move closer to the Pales-
tinians and exercise significant pressure on Israel to make progress in
the autonomy negotiations or on Lebanon. If we have to choose—and
we believe it necessary to do so, we favor the second objective over the
first.
If we fail, a year or so hence, to have gained progress on the10 West
Bank/Gaza, then we might want to move on the U.S.-Palestinian front
for the sake of our Saudi and other ties. We do not think that now is the
time.
B. US/USSR/China Relations: Given the differing conceptual views
of the triangle, your own heavy involvement on such issues as MFN for
the USSR and the PRC will remain important. If SALT II fails, of
course, your primary task will be to salvage what we can with the So-
viets, not to mention the Allies. With the likelihood of a succession be-
fore 1981, it is especially important for you to be closely involved in the
handling of the post-Brezhnev period.
C. Arms Control, Post-SALT: In terms of actual new agreements, we
should be thinking about a push for CTB, since we will soon be en-
tering the late 1979–1980 period of new non-proliferation activity you
noted for the President. If a full agreement is not possible, a fallback to
agreement on principles might be useful.
An ASAT agreement might be reachable and, less likely, a RW
agreement. Progress on CW is unlikely.
More important than these specific agreements will be base laying:
for SALT III; with the Allies for TNF negotiations (immensely compli-
cated; actual negotiations unlikely to move quickly; but very important
in Allied context); and for MBFR progress, perhaps in 1981. Reg should
also proceed on laying a new base for CAT.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
D. Relations with Allies: Despite the absence of specific disagree-
ments, our relations with major Allies (especially the Summit partners)
are not strong. It is unfortunate but true that our key friends are slowly
losing confidence in the Administration’s ability to lead both domes-
tically and internationally. You and Harold Brown are the only senior
officials of the Administration whose standing remains high. The Gov-
ernments in the U.K., Canada, France, Japan and probably the FRG are
likely to be in place well beyond the 1980 U.S. elections; this fact gives
them a certain over-confidence, not to say arrogance, in dealing with an
Administration perceived to be in political trouble. Your time and at-
tention on key issues between the U.S. and our Allies—TNF deploy-
ments, energy—is probably indispensable.
E. Southern Africa: Your personal stature with the British, South Af-
ricans and key African players—as well as in the Congress and the
American black community—is such that you will probably want to re-
main fully involved in both Namibia and Rhodesia. Additionally, our
African policy could run into heavy weather in coming months. For
you to distance yourself from the difficulties could be perceived by
the Africans and much of the Third World as an abandonment of the
one policy that most distinguished this Administration from its
predecessors.
F. Central America and Western Asia: These areas are very different
from each other except in one crucial17 respect: they will be the scene of
crucial Administration decisions on how to manage change and a posi-
tive evolution, in terms of U.S. interests, of regimes that are repressive,
weak, unrepresentative and pro-American. As you know, the Admin-
istration is deeply divided on this issue, and our policies have zig-
zagged in every case. These developments are also a subject of do-
mestic political interest.
II. Old Issues to be Delegated.
It is always difficult to step away from an important issue, espe-
cially when it has not been successfully resolved. If we recommend less
of your involvement in these areas, it is because we believe that they

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
could be competently handled by others—at least on a day to day
basis—and that your time could be better spent elsewhere.
A. Indochina and Refugees: Dick Clark will handle refugees well al-
though he will require some guidance and attention from you and
Chris. Dick Holbrooke should continue to pursue ideas on how to get
at the Kampuchea problem and further our excellent ties to ASEAN na-
tions. But prospects on Kampuchea are unpromising in the medium-
term.
B. Non-Proliferation: We are approaching crucial decisions in this
area with respect to South Africa and India/Pakistan. In addition, the
NPT review/renegotiation conference will soon be on us. Given the
cross-cutting political-scientific-strategic nature of the issues involved,
we suggest that Chris be given oversight of the issue, including man-
agement of the various individual components—both geographic and
functional.
C. Northern Africa (Western Sahara): This area needs more effort by
the Department. Dave Newsom and NEA should give greater priority
to thinking through how we can do more for Hassan while encour-
aging him towards flexibility on the Saharan dispute. Without the
latter, the former is a prescription for growing longer-term difficulties
in our relations with interested Arab and African nations (c.f., OAU
resolution). David should also oversee a review of our relations with
Algeria.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
D. Mexico: Matt and Pete should continue to stay closely involved
as Krueger takes over. However, you or Chris may have to step in if,
as is possible, domestic political considerations continue to be a key ele-
ment in determining our policies toward Mexico.
E. Korea: We need to think through alternatives for improving the
hostile political climate on the Peninsula if the tripartite talk idea
flounders. Holbrooke to manage.
F. Japan: Ohira is a strong and well-disposed leader, and we should
find ways to keep up our consultations with the Japanese on a wide va-
riety of issues. We must also convince the suspicious Japanese that our
policies and attention are not Sinocentric. Holbrooke to manage.
G. Africa North of the Zambezi: You might ask Dick Moose and S/P
to oversee analyses of our policy towards the Horn and Zaire. We are
treading water in both areas, but we can foresee a dangerous drift, es-
pecially in Zaire, unless we and others increase the pressure for re-
form. We also need to keep an eye on relations with Nigeria, where
we should plan to concentrate progress and resources in order to de-
velop closer relations with the new civilian government.
H. Human Rights: Chris continues to manage this issue well al-
though we still advocate a system which would give his committee
oversight responsibility for both military and economic assistance pro-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
grams. This Administration should not let this term end without rati-
fication of the genocide and other human rights conventions.
Chris might also want to initiate a review of the two years of expe-
rience that we have had in applying our human rights objectives to in-
dividual cases in order to derive a body of operating principles.
I. Eastern Mediterranean: Turkey ticks away as an issue which could
explode. Considerable Congressional and public lobbying will be
needed to keep our assistance levels high enough to pursue this impor-
tant relationship. Chris and Matt to handle.
J. India/Pakistan: Apart from our nuclear proliferation concerns, the
strategic and political stakes in the subcontinent are becoming more
critical. Chris and Constable to handle.
K. Poland: Here the serious economic/financial situation, coupled
with a call for Western assistance, give us a unique opportunity for in-
fluence with a key Eastern European government. We may have oppor-
tunities, through the international financial institutions, to help shape
this socialist economy, including the level of Polish military spending.
However, attempts to politicize our assistance, or put an anti-Soviet
twist on it, will have to be resisted. Matt could manage.
L. Foreign Assistance: You might want to have Chris, Tony, Doug
and Brian put together a strategy for our next foreign assistance sub-
missions in what promises to be an extremely difficult political and re-
source climate.
III. Issues Deserving More Attention
A. Public Statements and Appearances: We are concerned that one re-
sult of the SALT debate and the political campaigns may be to narrow
the focus of public discussions of foreign policy towards a preoccupa-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
tion with Soviet actions and balances of power. This is apparently one
of the objects of Henry Kissinger’s testimony. If this happens, the con-
tributions of your recent speeches, especially the ones on North/South
issues and political change, could be forgotton. During the next 18
months, we would urge you to be much more actively involved in
speeches and TV appearances and press conferences to articulate the
themes you have been developing recently. Although you will not be
making political speeches as such, you will be speaking authoritatively
about the Administration’s view of the world and the success or
failures of U.S. policies. Because of the campaign atmosphere in this
country, you will have an opportunity not only to define the Adminis-
tration’s policies but to lay the groundwork for what the President’s
second term could achieve in foreign affairs.
As one S/P staff member put it in a recent memo:
“Some sort of basic national post-Vietnam consensus on foreign
policy must inevitably emerge, and I think the Secretary ought to make
a major effort to shape it. Secretary Vance has stored up a great deal of
respect and credibility, both among sophisticates—the press, the bu-
reaucracy, the Congress, and related academia—and, to the extent they
have followed foreign policy, among the public. Those assets should be
invested. There is probably no one who could have a greater public im-
pact in addressing these issues in a sustained way at the conceptual
level.”
B. Energy: We are convinced that both the Department and you
personally should play a more aggressive role on economic issues.
This is one area in which we would seriously fault the Department’s
performance. Energy is probably the most serious issue the nation
faces. It is an international issue, yet the Administration’s handling of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the matter is primarily carried out in a domestic context. There is a
vacuum here that the State Department ought to fill.
We suggest that you meet soon with Dick Cooper, EB and others to
discuss how we can become more involved and what we should be
pressing for in this area. Attached is a list of proposals which might be
explored for possible new initiatives.
C. North/South Issues: You have expressed an interest in spending
more time on these issues. Your support, and speeches, have been very
valuable for what progress we have made in the last two years; but you
will have to spend more time in the bureaucratic arena, and in getting
fully acquainted with the substance of these complex matters, to have
the desired impact.
We have been more effective at setting broad directions than in ob-
taining practical movement. The recent fiasco on the liberalization of
the Compensatory Finance Facility makes the point.
Budgets and politics make dramatic new North/South initiatives
unthinkable. But as listed in previous memos, there are a number of
specific issues on which progress may be possible (e.g., a bond guar-
antee scheme to increase LDC access to private credit and debt ques-
tions). We are working on a contingency fund proposal as part of
the FY’81 ESF budget. And we may want to suggest to you that Tom
Ehrlich set up a working group, perhaps including SFRC and HFAC
staffers, to work on a streamlined foreign aid bill, looking toward our
FY’82 submission. Church and Zablocki should be consulted first.
This would lay the groundwork for Congressional action in 1981.
D. Institutional Issues: We would encourage you to make a con-
scious effort to upgrade the role and performance of the Department in
the next eighteen months. Thanks to your stature and standing with
the President, the Department usually is involved in key policy deci-
sions. However, participation by your top officials is often not institu-
tionalized—it is only a result of your involvement on an ad hoc and
case-by-case basis. When you leave, your successor may find that the
Department’s presence in the key decision-making processes is again
to key meetings. If they are with you when decisions are debated,
their roles at working levels in the inter-agency process are enhanced.
(2) Inside the Department, you may want to consider weekly meetings
on new subjects of interest to you, such as energy and North/South re-
lations. If you had agendas and brief papers prepared for these
meetings, you would thereby force the Department’s attention to these
areas in a decisive way.
E. The Foreign Service: The new Foreign Service Act is likely to pass,
and this measure will result in a more productive and more
professional corps. There are, however, additional ways for you to
strengthen the performance of the career service in the months to come.
Appointing the most promising FSO’s, with years of service before
them, to key policy positions in the Department is one way to promote
excellence and continuity. Authorizing “stretch assignments” for out-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
standing middle-grade officers is another way. At the same time, the
senior officers who are being encouraged to leave the Service should
be treated with greater consideration, and your willingness to hold a
reception for them next month is a step in that direction. Finally,
schedule permitting, we recommend finding some opportunities in
coming months for you to appear occasionally before groups of FSO’s
(e.g., the Open Forum). Such appearances would not only give the ca-
reer professionals a better sense of the man whom they work for, it
would also be an expression of interest on your part in a dialogue with
a broader spectrum of career officers.
F. Multilateral Diplomacy: A recent Chicago CFR poll shows a sig-
nificant decline among elite groups for the UN. More broadly, a grow-
ing mood of nationalism undermines popular support for multilateral
diplomacy and multilateral assistance. On the other hand, we are doing
more of our diplomatic and economic business through multilateral
groups and organizations. More thought needs to be devoted to revital-
izing multilateral organizations. Sometimes, multilateral diplomacy
works best outside the framework of established international organi-
zations. For you to review the international structures available to us,
and recommend how the U.S. can use them best, could be a valuable
service to this and succeeding Administrations.

124.
Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State
(Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance
Washington, August 9, 1979
SUBJECT
The Next 18 Months
We are in a new period.
There will be no more foreign policy extravaganzas requiring long
planning and negotiation, sustained Presidential involvement, and ex-
tensive Congressional debate (such as the Panama Canal Treaties,
China normalization, and SALT). Thus, before discussing the ten goals,
I want to describe some of the constraints of the new context in which
we will be operating in the remainder of the Term.
(a) The time is short, more like a year than 18 months. In the imme-
diate future, the focus will be on SALT. If SALT is approved by Thanks-
giving, that leaves less than a year until the 1980 Presidential elections.
(b) Priority for domestic issues will preclude the President’s per-
sonal involvement in foreign policy initiatives requiring a major com-
mitment of his time. Existing commitments (e.g., Middle East negotia-
tions), the day-to-day flow of foreign “crises”, and unavoidable state
visits will continue to occupy an important place on the President’s cal-
endar, but he will not be able to make substantial time for new initia-
tives. And probably he shouldn’t. It is also realistic to note that the Pres-
ident does not have a large store of political capital that he can draw on
to manage foreign policy initiatives.
(c) After SALT, the Congress will be unable to give foreign policy
issues the major chunks of time which it has given such issues in the
first three years. Of course, Congress will spend a substantial amount
of time in 1980 dealing with unavoidable foreign policy items (such as
trade agreements and appropriations), but in the main the Congress
will want to spend its time focusing on energy and the economy. And
probably it should.
(d) Our goals will be constricted by election year politics. This does
not mean that we should step back from projects which are in the na-
tional interest, but we must recognize that our ability to initiate and ac-
complish must reckon with political factors. The President’s political
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
advisers will naturally want to avoid foreign policy actions which
would be unpopular with segments of the electorate. In addition, with
the long stream of primaries, we can expect even ephemeral issues to be
stridently debated in public.
We may be able to overcome the foregoing constraints in specific
instances, but they will provide the overall context. In that context, the
following are ten points for emphasis in the last 18 months.
1. Latin America. An unusual opening for progress in Latin Amer-
ican relations is provided by the Panama Canal Treaties, our role in the
removal of Somoza, and our human rights policy. Systematic attention
by you and others on the 7th Floor to Latin America can pay big divi-
dends, and can be done without cutting across the constraints outlined
above.
(a) Andean Countries. The opening is especially important with re-
spect to the Andean countries. Their democratic leanings make us nat-
ural allies on many problems. We should consult more with them, learn
from them, and seek to make common cause with them in approaching
the hemisphere’s problems.
(b) Brazil. The new Figueredo regime affords an opportunity to put
our relations on a sound and friendly footing. We started off on the
wrong foot with Brazil but they have recently shown signs that they are
ready for a closer relationship. We should begin to consult with them
not primarily on bilateral matters, but on regional and global issues,
treating them as the equals that they may some day be. Sometime
during this period, I would like to consider making a trip to Brazil,
which, if it went well, might be seen in contrast to the trip I made at the
very beginning of the Administration, carrying the rather heavy non-
proliferation message.
(c) Mexico. We have had a roller-coaster relationship with Mexico,
with more downs than ups. The US-Mexican Coordinator gives us a
mechanism to try to smooth out the relationship. It is however a rather
awkward mechanism which will work only if it has support at the
highest levels. You have devoted considerable time to Mexican rela-
tions, but some of that investment was lost when Roel was replaced.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
We should work especially hard to prevent the border from continuing
as a source of friction. The domestic political overtones of anything we
do vis-a-vis Mexico will have to be assessed with special care.
(d) Caribbean. Substantial effort should be devoted to following up
on Phil Habib’s analysis and discussions regarding the Caribbean. To
do so, we will have to challenge the prevailing wisdom that aid to the
Caribbean must be taken “out” of the aid funds for Latin America as a
whole. I am not reluctant to argue that it is in our national interest for
us to put a disproportionate amount of our aid resources into develop-
ment of countries in the western hemisphere.
2. The Genocide Treaty. Human rights will be one of the hallmarks
of this Administration. However, some are beginning to suggest
(wrongly, I think) that the human rights initiative has run out of steam
and that the Administration is trimming its sails. A decisive counter to
this insinuation would be a strong Administration effort to ratify the
Genocide Convention, which was first submitted to the Senate thirty
years ago. While requiring some Presidential and Senatorial time, this
goal could be within reach after the SALT debate. I recommend that we
make it one of the highest foreign policy objectives for 1980. If we suc-
ceed, we could then turn to the other human rights conventions.
3. Indochina. Our interests have been served well by our policies in
the PRC/Vietnamese conflict and Cambodian debacle. Recent develop-
ments, however, may require a more aggressive role during the next 18
months. We may have to take the lead in mounting initiatives re-
garding the famine in Cambodia, the Vietnamese security threat to
ASEAN nations and the possibility of renewed PRC/Vietnamese mili-
tary conflict.
4. South Asia. The instability and uncertainties in India, Pakistan,
and Afghanistan provide great opportunities for creative diplomacy. In
India, we should move briskly with the new administration to avoid
slipping back to the pre-Desai attitudes. Pakistan presents a striking
challenge to our capacity to blend our non-proliferation policy with our
other foreign policy objectives. In Afghanistan, we need to avoid
over-eagerness which might rescue the Soviets from a major failure.
5. North-South Dialogue. Our generalized intention to give more at-
tention to the North-South dialogue will require some specific initia-
tives. I understand that Tony Lake is developing and scrubbing a list of
possible approaches. We should meet on this subject sometime during

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the first three weeks of September, before you leave for the UN. Among
the issues we should consider is how to develop a better forum for the
North-South dialogue. The UN Committee of the Whole is plainly not
an optimum mechanism.
6. Foreign Service Reform. The enactment of the Foreign Service leg-
islation should be one of our highest priorities. It will not require
much time on the floor of the Senate or the House, and does not im-
pinge on the other restraints set forth at the beginning of this
memorandum.
7. Trade Agreements with the PRC and Soviet Union. The approval of
these trade agreements should be one of our principal legislative goals
for 1980. To gain this approval, especially in the Soviet case, will re-
quire a mobilization of business support as well as sensitive dealings
with the interests groups. Once approved, we should give a strong im-
petus to the implementation of the agreements.
8. A Non-Isolationist Energy Policy. Our evolving energy policy has
some “Fortress America” overtones. One of our responsibilities in the
next 18 months is to ensure that we do not isolate ourselves on this
issue. One way to do this—and a way that could have great substantive
benefits as well—would be to explore fully the possibilities of joint de-
velopment of the tar sands in Canada and Venezuela. There is wide
agreement that these tar sands deposits are an enormous source of po-
tential energy which could be developed if sufficient capital is made
available from governmental sources. We should make sure that our
new energy legislation is flexible enough to permit such joint
development.
9. Normalizing Diplomatic Relations. The United States had less-
than-normal relations with 13 countries when we came into office. We
now have reduced that to 10 countries: Albania, Angola, Cuba (In-
terests Section), Equatorial Guinea, Kampuchea, Iraq (Interests Sec-
tion), North Korea, South Yemen, Vietnam, Zimbabwe/Rhodesia. We
should improve this record during the last 18 months, asking ourselves
in each instance whether a continuation of the current anomaly serves
any national interest. Normalization in some instances may prove to be
politically impossible, either from a domestic or international stand-
point. However, there are other instances where we can make progress
without impinging on any of the constraints set forth at the beginning
of this memorandum. Vietnam will be one of the most difficult, but also
one of the most important. Progress in our relations with all three Af-
rican countries on the list would seem a reachable goal. An end to the
isolation of Rhodesia would be especially welcome.

125.
Editorial Note
On September 7, 1979, President Jimmy Carter spoke to reporters
assembled in the Old Executive Office Building. The President ad-
dressed the administration’s attempts to modernize the United States’
“strategic triad,” consisting of air, land, and sea defenses. He noted that
the fixed, land-based intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) system
was increasingly vulnerable to attack. Earlier, on June 8, White House
Deputy Press Secretary Rex Granum announced that the President had
agreed to pursue development and deployment of “full-scale,” mobile
ICBMs, known as MX. (Public Papers: Carter, 1979, Book I, page 1016)
During the September 7 briefing, Carter referenced this decision, indi-
cating that he had done so to ensure a “strategic deterrent,” and
elaborated:
“The MX will enable us to continue with a modernized, unsur-
passed, survivable strategic deterrent ICBM, submarine-launched, and
heavy bomber triad, armed with cruise missiles. Clearly, the way we
base the MX to enhance its own security from attack is vital to the
ability it has to defend our country.”
“At the time that I made the decision to build the MX, I established
five essential criteria which the basing system would have to meet.
First, it must contribute to the ability of the strategic forces to survive
an attack. Second, it must be verifiable so as to set a standard which can
serve as a precedent for the verifiability of mobile ICBM systems on
both sides. Third, it must minimize the adverse impact on our own en-
vironment. Fourth, its deployment must be at a reasonable cost to the

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
American taxpayer. And fifth, it must be consistent with existing SALT
agreements and with our SALT III goal of negotiating for significant
mutual reductions in strategic forces.”
The President provided additional details as to the configuration
of the MX system and then outlined how the configuration met the es-
sential criteria. He concluded his remarks, noting:
“Unhappily, we do not yet live in the kind of world that permits us
to devote all our resources to the works of peace. And as President, I
have no higher duty than to ensure that the security of the United
States will be protected beyond doubt. As long as the threat of war per-
sists, we will do what we must to deter that threat to our Nation’s secu-
rity. If SALT II is ratified and SALT III is successful, then the time may
come when no President will have to make this kind of decision again
and the MX system will be the last weapon system of such enormous
destructive power that we will ever have to build. I fervently pray for
that time, but until it comes, we will build what we must, even as we
continue to work for mutual restraint in strategic armaments.” (Public
At 2: that afternoon, the President took part in an interview and
question-and-answer session with reporters. The interview took place
in the Cabinet Room in the White House. The President began the ses-
sion by stating:
“This is an interesting day for you to be in Washington. We have,
as usual, an accumulation of both domestic and foreign issues to be ad-
dressed by me and by my associates, with whom you’ve met already.
“It is a coincidence that we have already had a major announce-
ment on the deployment of the MX missile in a mobile form this
morning, and in just a few minutes, about 4 o’clock, I will make a state-
ment to the Nation concerning Soviet troops in Cuba.”
The President highlighted a variety of domestic issues and then
answered questions from the assembled reporters. In response to a
question about Soviet and American postures regarding defense, the
President asserted:
“When I assess in my own mind the trends in Soviet influence the
last 10 or 15 years, say—just to get out of my own administration and
to make it a bipartisan thing—versus the Soviet Union, I’m very
encouraged.
“The Soviets did win an advantage in Afghanistan. That Soviet-
endorsed government is in substantial danger, and that’s significant.
But when you compare that with our new relationship with India, com-
pared to what it was 5 years ago, or our new relationship with Egypt,
the strongest and most powerful Arab country, compared to what it
was during the time of the Aswan Dam construction when Egypt was

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
absolutely committed to the Soviet Union and was dependent on the
Soviet Union for military and economic aid, and now are completely
friends with us and have prohibited Soviet technicians and others from
coming into the country—that’s a major change in the Mideast itself.
“The People’s Republic of China, a fourth of the people on Earth—
it wasn’t long ago that they were endorsed and supported by and were
the closest of allies with the Soviet Union. Now, we have a new and
burgeoning friendship with the people of the People’s Republic of
China, and we have not lost our financial and economic and friendly re-
lationships with the people on Taiwan.
“I could continue to go on, but those are major countries. There
have also, obviously, been some setbacks. I don’t deny that.
“I think that the present commitment that I have given to defense
has reversed a longstanding trend. For 15 years, our country was
making no real increase in defense expenditures. In fact, when I came
into office, our real commitment to defense was less than it was in 1963.
This year, the current fiscal year, we have accommodated all the im-
pact of inflation, and we have at least a 3-percent growth in defense
expenditures.
I think we have restrengthened NATO, which was very weak, not
only militarily but politically. There’s a new spirit and a new dy-
namism and a new cooperation in NATO that did not exist before.
“On strategic weapons systems, if you take our sea-based missiles
and you assess the dramatic progress being made with the Trident sub-
marines and the new Trident missiles, that’s a quantum step forward.
“The air-breathing leg of our triad, with the new generations of cruise
missiles coming along—that’s a major technological and strategic
breakthrough. And with the MX missile that I announced this morning
on land-based, silo-type missiles—this is the first time that we have
ever seen a single missile acquire such a tremendous importance, and it
not only gives our country a better defense or attack capability, it also
contributes to stability because you’ve got a lot more defense with a lot
fewer missiles.
“So, I think that if you look at other factors—our espousing human
rights, the economic strength of our country, our overall trade relation-
ships—in almost every measure, I do not see our country as being af-
fected detrimentally, as contrasted with the Soviet Union.
“We recognize that they are a military nation; they put a lot more
emphasis on military weaponry than do we. And we are much more in-
clined to support the status quo, to put down regional conflagrations
and conflicts than are the Soviet Union. They espouse a revolutionary
political thesis and, to them, the change of governments, quite often, is
in their advantage. We, generally, are inclined to support the gov-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ernment that is in power, unless it is so obnoxious to our own stand-
ards and principles that we cannot accept it.
“So, the Soviets are inclined to stir up trouble; we’re inclined to try
to dampen trouble and to provide peace. That’s one thing that gives
them an advantage when there is trouble. But I think we have stood up
well against them, and I think we can continue to do it in the future on a
peaceful, competitive basis. There’s no doubt in my mind that the
ideals and the principles and the basic strengths of America can prevail
At 4: p.m. that afternoon, in the Briefing Room at the White
House, the President spoke to reporters concerning the presence of a
Soviet combat brigade in Cuba. Earlier, at a September 5 press confer-
ence, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance had asserted that this develop-
ment “is a matter of serious concern.” (Department of State Bulletin, Oc-
tober 1979, page 14) Carter referenced Vance’s remarks and added:
“We are confident about our ability to defend our country or any
of our friends from external aggression. The issue posed is of a different
nature. It involves the stationing of Soviet combat troops here in the
Western Hemisphere, in a country which acts as a Soviet proxy in mili-
tary adventures in other areas of the world, like Africa.
“We do have the right to insist that the Soviet Union respect our in-
terests and our concerns if the Soviet Union expects us to respect their
sensibilities and their concerns. Otherwise, relations between our two
countries will inevitably be adversely affected. We are seriously pur-
suing this issue with the Soviet Union, and we are consulting closely
with the Congress.
“Let me emphasize that this is a sensitive issue that faces our Na-
tion, all of us, and our Nation as a whole must respond not only with
firmness and strength but also with calm and a sense of proportion.
“This is a time for firm diplomacy, not panic and not exaggeration.
As Secretary Vance discusses this issue with Soviet representatives in
the coming days, the Congress and the American people can help to en-
sure a successful outcome of these discussions and negotiations by pre-
serving an atmosphere in which our diplomacy can work.” (Public

126.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, September 13, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #109
1. Opinion—Acquiescence vs. Assertiveness
I think all of us in this Administration should think through two
questions, which are both perplexing and troublesome:
1. Why is the public not giving this Administration, and particu-
larly the President, due credit for genuinely substantive foreign policy
accomplishments—accomplishments which no other Administration
in recent years has matched in a comparable period of time?
2. Why is public opinion in the world at large, notably in allied
countries, viewing this Administration as perhaps the most timid since
World War II?
The easy answer to these questions is that the U.S. public is simply
misinformed, because of the excessively critical and even prejudiced
views of the Washington press corps; and that this jaundiced perspec-
tive, echoed by a mindless foreign press, then shaped the stereotypes
with which we are now saddled.
There is doubtless some truth in that answer, and perhaps even a
great deal of truth. However, it is certainly not the entire truth. I think
that to find a more complete explanation one has to take a closer look at
the increasingly pervasive feeling in the country and abroad that in the
U.S.-Soviet relationship the Soviet side increasingly is the assertive
party and the U.S. side is the more acquiescent. This is seen as true in
terms of arms competition, though you are the first President in a
decade and a half to reverse the trends; this is seen as especially true in
terms of international behavior, particularly in relationship to the
various trouble spots. For better or for worse, we were passive in Iran;
the Soviets are far from passive in Afghanistan. We pursued a diplo-
matically amiable policy in Africa; the Soviets relied on Cuban arms,
not without some effect. In Latin America, and particularly in Central
America, revolutionary fervor is on the rise, and we have not been able
to give those who want to rely on us a sense of security.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
To be sure we have gained notable diplomatic successes—China
normalization, India, and elsewhere—but these do not obviate the im-
pression of assertiveness on the one side and acquiescence on the
other—despite Soviet internal weaknesses, bureaucratic stagnation,
and the dramatic drop in Soviet ideological appeal.
Moreover, those decisions which you took and which were not
only the right decisions but the tough decisions—on such matters as
China, the MX, the defense budget, or even arms to Yemen3—have
been interpreted as primarily motivated by the desire either to compen-
sate for past weaknesses (e.g., Yemen vs. passivity on Ethiopia) or to
obtain some other desired result (e.g., to obtain SALT ratification).
These perceptions, you and I know, are not correct—but they are
part of the political reality which provides part of the answer to the two
questions with which I opened. In addition, the neutron bomb debacle
certainly did lasting damage in Europe4 and today much of the world is
watching to see how we will behave on the Soviet/Cuban issue.
None of the above is designed to suggest that we should somehow
adopt a reckless policy of confrontationism, nor is it meant to hint that
our policy has been one of appeasement. But it is meant to suggest that
both in tone and occasionally in substance, we have been excessively
acquiescent, and that the country craves, and our national security
needs, both a more assertive tone and a more assertive substance to our
foreign policy. I believe that both for international reasons as well as for
domestic political reasons you ought to deliberately toughen both the tone
and the substance of our foreign policy. The country associates assert-
iveness with leadership, and the world at large expects American lead-
ership insofar as the Soviet challenge is concerned. That challenge is
real, and a recognition of it does not mean that we have to abandon
such positive objectives as arms control and notably SALT II. We
should be mature enough to be able to seek, all at the same time, SALT
II; and more defense efforts; and pursue a more assertive foreign
policy.
What would a more assertive foreign policy mean? As I said ear-
lier, it does not mean confrontation or war. It does mean, however, the
following:
1. We are now beginning to do what needs to be done in defense,
but we should keep stressing that this is being done on its own merits
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
and is not simply a means of buying SALT. In doing more for defense,
as you have done, we ought to stress publicly what you have often said
privately: that this is your prime responsibility and that you are the first
President in 15 years to reverse the downward trends.
2. Less hesitation in explicitly condemning Soviet/Cuban exploita-
tion of Third World turbulence. This means occasionally a very tough-
minded remark by you and your instructions to the Secretary of State,
to me, and to others at least to echo or perhaps to go a touch beyond
you. I have had no difficulty in selling SALT (ask Anne Wexler) in the
context of a tough pitch. Thus toughening our rhetoric will not hurt
SALT but probably help it, while projecting a firmer image. The French
have a saying: “c’est le ton qui fait la chanson” (it’s the tone that makes
the song). And our tone has been somewhat opaque; at least, that is the
way the country hears it, and what the country thinks it hears we have
to recognize as part of our reality.
3. We should adopt a forceful policy of ostracizing Cuba, of maxi-
mizing Cuban economic difficulties by urging others to refrain from
providing economic assistance, by sharing massively all our intelli-
gence on Cuban activities and on the Soviet build-up of Cuban
power-projection capability.
4. While our relationship with China has to stand on its own feet
and we cannot use China merely as a “card” against the Soviet Union,
the fact is that the U.S.-Chinese relationship does not operate in a
vacuum. If the Soviets are insensitive to our concerns, we should go be-
yond your warnings and do some things in the Chinese-American rela-
tionship that they explicitly do not like. This means, at this stage, the
transfer of genuinely sensitive technology to China and some consider-
ation of a serious military dialogue with the Chinese. We need not de-
cide now how far we go in this, but we do need to convey to the Soviets
that their cynical use of the Cubans against us will be reciprocated in a
manner that in some fashion is painful to them.
5. Radio Liberty/Voice of America should be instructed to step up
their broadcasts to Soviet national minorities, notably the Moslems and
Ukrainians. I see no reason why the Soviets should be free to agitate
against us in Puerto Rico as well as throughout the world but we
should somehow remain intimidated by the fact that Moscow is sensi-
tive to the problem of its national minorities.
6. We should resume our talks with the Soviets on the issues that
you raised with Brezhnev in Vienna: the need for reciprocal restraint.
In so doing, we should not hesitate to convey to them that we are pre-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
pared to take steps they do not like, and after two and a half years of
making that point we should actually take some such steps (as sug-
gested above). Moreover, I really wonder whether State can convey
credibly to the Soviets the proposition that we are prepared to retaliate.
7. There are also other things we could do—e.g., Afghanistan,
etc.—but the above indicates a range of possible reactions.
I know that the above is going to trouble you, and perhaps even ir-
ritate you. However, the need to review our approach is now particu-
larly timely because of the Cuban problem. I do not see the issue of the
Soviet brigade in Cuba as posing a challenge of the 1962 type, and
therefore I do not advocate extreme solutions for it. But failure to cope
with it firmly can have the effect of vitiating your foreign accomplish-
ments and conclusively stamping this Administration as weak, and
that is why I feel that in general the time has come to adopt a more as-
sertive posture.
Adopting such a posture will require some specific decisions,
thereby prodding those parts of the government which have contrib-
uted so much to the image of an acquiescent Administration. You may
wish to use one of the Friday morning breakfasts to discuss this larger
issue. We all want to follow as closely as possible the direction and the
tone that you set, and now may be the moment for a review and for
some appropriate signals.
Finally, there is no doubt in my mind that the country will rally be-
hind the President as he responds firmly to a foreign challenge.
Truman gained enormously from being perceived as tough and as-
sertive—and undercutting a President engaged in a vigorous assertion
of national security is usually seen as unpatriotic and divisive.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to foreign policy opinions.]

127.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, September 21, 1979
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #110
1. Opinion
The Parallel: 1961 but not 1962
Most people think you are in a situation now which parallels that
of Kennedy in 1962: the Cuban missile crisis. Accordingly, subcon-
sciously (and in the case of politicians, expedientially) most people will
compare the outcome, and you personally, to Kennedy’s “success” in
October–November 1962.
Yet the situation is really not analogous; we face a political chal-
lenge, and we cannot fully undo the reality we don’t like, whereas in
1962 we faced a direct military challenge, and we could—through di-
rect military pressure—undo it. Yet if the outcome in the end appears to
be inadequate, most people will declare you as having been “defeated”
and perhaps even blame you for both generating the problem (note
what Javits said at the meeting) and then for being timid in responding
to it.
In fact, you are facing a situation much more like that faced by
Kennedy in 1961, when the Soviets suddenly put up the Berlin wall.
That situation was “unacceptable,” but we had no choice except to live
with it. Kennedy was not prepared to knock it down. Neither are we
prepared to create a military confrontation in order to get the Soviets to
remove their troops from Cuba.
But Kennedy did something else also, and hence the foregoing ar-
gument is not an unexpected plea from me for acquiescence. Kennedy re-
sponded to this “unacceptable” situation, with which he had to live, by
taking a number of steps designed to indicate to the public that he
would assert U.S. interests, and if necessary, be prepared to use force.
He sent additional troops to Berlin, and he put more emphasis on our
overall defense efforts—in addition to adopting a very tough public
posture on the Soviets. At the same time, he did not pretend—through
some cosmetic formula—to have solved the problem.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I personally do not favor sending more troops to Guantanamo, be-
cause Guantanamo to most Latin Americans looks like an imperialist
outpost from days gone by—and it tends to reinforce the legitimacy of
the Soviet troop presence in Cuba. I do favor the other steps, which I
have incorporated in your speech outline: more defense, more intelli-
gence, some limited steps regarding China (because that actually does
concern the Soviets and we have to do at least one thing that genuinely
bothers them), and a more generally tough line on Soviet adventurism
and disregard for our interests.
We should do all of these things, even if the Soviets give us some-
thing on Cuba. The fact is that they will not give us enough to enable us to
proclaim a victory, and, much more important, even if we did, I have
not the slightest doubt that the public will not accept some cosmetic ar-
rangement of relocation within Cuba as a Carter “victory.”
For the foregoing reasons, I would recommend:
1. That we start talking up the Berlin wall analogy;3
2. That we take the specific steps that I recommend in the speech
outline, including at least one that genuinely hurts the Soviets;
3. That for the next several months at least we maintain a tough
posture on the Soviets in our public pronouncements.
What about SALT then? My view is that you will not get SALT rati-
fied if the public thinks that we were timid on this issue. What I advo-
cate above permits us also to argue that SALT is necessary for our na-
tional security, that it stands on its own feet, that it permits us to pursue
a genuinely mature foreign policy toward the Soviet Union, which
includes:
1. More defense
2. SALT ratification
3. Assertive competition.
In the next few days you will be under considerable pressure to
adopt a cosmetic solution and consider the case closed, or to exclude
any response directed at the Soviet Union from our menu of re-
sponses—or both. In my judgment, such an outcome would be domes-

128.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter
Washington, September 24, 1979
SUBJECT
A Proposal (U)
In the next fifteen months Americans will be primarily concerned
with two inter-related problems: the US economy, and the US world
role. This memorandum suggests that the time is ripe for major and
mutually reenforcing initiatives which will set the tone for the Admin-
istration’s handling of both these issues during the coming year. (C)
[Omitted here is information about the U.S. economy.]
II. US World Role
Since the late 1940s most Americans have believed that a strong US
world role was essential to a peaceful world. And they have seen
holding our own in competition with the USSR as an essential element
of that role. I doubt most people are unduly excited about a few thou-
sand Soviet soldiers in Cuba. But they are excited about what they see
as a continuing Soviet attempt to exploit change in Third World areas;
Cuba is only the latest example. (C)
There is some analogy here to inflation: No one expects Soviet
pressure in third areas to fade away quickly. But people do want some
evidence that we are mounting a comprehensive effort to meet the So-
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
viet challenge. As on the economic front, they want to see some light at
the end of the tunnel. (C)
What is needed to meet this need is less specific immediate actions
(which might look like gimmicks) than a basic change in emphasis,
which will be reflected in a variety of actions over time. The Cuban
problem could be the occasion for a speech spelling out that shift. You
might recall that your Annapolis speech had said that the US was ready
to respond to either competition or cooperation, depending on Soviet
actions; after pointing out that the Soviets’ actions since then have
made clear that their main emphasis is on competition, you could indi-
cate that we are ready to respond in kind: While we are still anxious to
join in cooperation (SALT), where this serves both sides’ interests, our
main effort must be to make clear to the USSR that the competition they
are forcing on us will be unrewarding. This means:
—Responding directly to Soviet pressures in Third World areas,
e.g., by military aid to intended victims and, if requested by countries
of the region concerned, by interdicting the movement of outside forces
across national frontiers to intervene in local hostilities. (C)
—Trying to mitigate turbulence that lends itself to exploitation by
the USSR and its proxies—e.g., by intensified efforts to reach a settle-
ment in the Middle East and by providing effective aid (which doesn’t
necessarily mean more money) for economic development in troubled
areas of the developing world. (C)
—Pushing ahead with the 3% real increase in defense expend-
It also means (though you may not want to say this in your speech)
counter-pressures on the USSR—e.g., not being deterred by Soviet con-
cerns from feasible improvement in our relations with China. (C)
What is important, I repeat, is less specific measures, which will no
doubt be modified or discarded as events evolve, but a general shift in
emphasis: not a return to the cold war, but an adjustment of the balance
between competition and cooperation in response to recent Soviet be-
havior. You would be signalling that we have read the Soviets’ signal
and are sending an equally clear one in return. We hope that it will be
read; to the extent that the Soviets respond by shifting away from com-
petition toward cooperation, we will be only too glad to do the
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
All this will not get Soviet troops out of Cuba; I doubt anything
will. But it will show the American people that we have drawn the
proper conclusions from these troops’ presence and other Soviet ac-
tions, and are taking steps to reflect these conclusions in the conduct of
US-Soviet relations. (C)
Such a speech would be welcomed abroad. Last week in Paris, Art
Hartman told me that the French are worried less about Cuba than by
what they see as a generally assertive Soviet policy in Third World
areas. They would welcome a firmer US response—a clear indication
that we realize what the Soviets are up to and will act accordingly. (C)
III. Conclusion
These two initiatives should be seen as mutually reinforcing ele-
ments of a coherent program to strengthen the7 US and its position
in the world: Pushing for higher productivity will strengthen the US
at home; responding effectively to Soviet competition will strengthen
it abroad. Neither initiative will yield early results. But both will
strengthen the Administration’s standing, at home and abroad—indi-
cating that we have longer-term programs to help meet the problems
that worry Americans most. (C)
If you make the Soviet speech first, because of Cuba, you could in-
dicate that a second speech would soon follow, foreshadowing the do-
mestic economic programs that are also needed to maintain our na-
tional and international strength. (C)
The second speech could not only announce your new campaign
to boost investment and productivity, but also rehearse the other ele-
ments of our anti-inflationary strategy, emphasizing that prolonged
fiscal and monetary restraint is the key to success. This may not be a
popular message, but the leaders who have done best politically in the
industrial countries (Schmidt, Giscard, LDP leaders in Japan) are those
who have proposed hard measures to beat inflation, while those who
have done poorly (Trudeau, Callaghan) have given the impression of
trying to please everyone. A President who tells it like it is, and thus is
seen to put the country’s interest over personal and political advantage,
will make anyone who argues for painless approaches to inflation look
second-rate. (C)
Once made, these two speeches should set the theme for the Ad-
ministration’s posture during the remainder of your first term. You
should come back to this theme at every occasion—stressing the need
to strengthen our country, and underlining the steps to improve pro-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
ductivity and restrain Soviet competition that are needed to fulfill this
task. You will be seen to be looking beyond specific problems to a
broad vision of the country’s future and the policies that are needed to
achieve it. This is what the much-abused term “leadership” means. (C)
If this approach makes sense, I’m sure Bill Miller could offer more
detailed suggestions as the specific content of the economic speech I
have in mind.
After writing this memo, I read an article in the Sunday Star,9
quoting a recent piece by the British observer, Henry Fairlie. One sen-
tence caught my eye: “If Carter understood that the question of Amer-
ican power is what is really nagging at the American people, he would
occupy the main ground of this election, which is still vacant, and in
which the President’s authority can be overwhelming.” I believe you
do understand it. Which is why I am offering these suggestions on how
to translate that understanding into action. (C)
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
129.
Address by President Carter to the Nation
Washington, October 1, 1979
Peace and National Security
Good evening.
I want to talk with you about the subject that is my highest con-
cern, as it has been for every President. That subject is peace and the se-
curity of the United States.
We are at peace tonight, as we have been at peace throughout the
time of my service in this office. The peace we enjoy is the peace of the
strong. Our national defenses are unsurpassed in the world. Those de-
fenses are stronger tonight than they were 2 years ago, and they will be
stronger 2 years from now than they are tonight, because of carefully
planned improvements that are going forward with your support and
with the support of the Congress.
Our program for modernizing and strengthening the military
forces of the NATO Alliance is on track, with the full cooperation and
participation of our European Allies. Our strategic nuclear forces are
powerful enough to destroy any potential adversary many times over,
and the invulnerability of those forces will soon be further assured by a
new system of powerful mobile missiles. These systems are designed
for stability and defense.
Beyond these military defenses, we are on the threshold of a great
advance in the control of nuclear weapons—the adoption of the second
strategic arms limitation treaty, SALT II.
This evening, I also want to report to you about the highly publi-
cized Soviet brigade in Cuba and about its bearing on the important re-
lationship between our Nation and the Soviet Union.
This is not a simple or easy subject. The United States and the So-
viet Union are the two most powerful nations on Earth, and the rela-
his address at 9 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. The address was broadcast
live on radio and television. The Department transmitted the text of the speech to all dip-
Central Foreign Policy File, D790451–0362) Brzezinski recalled that the President had di-
rected him to begin preparing the speech in mid-September, “and I did so with special
emphasis on the wider character of Soviet activities in the Third World, stressing that
these were not compatible with a stable detente.” (Power and Principle, p. 350) In his diary
entry for the weekend of September 29–30, the President recounted: “Because the issues
were so profoundly complicated—ourselves, Cuba, the Soviets, SALT, Congress, pol-
itics—this has been the most laborious speech preparation of my life.” After the address,
he offered the following assessment: “The speech went over well, and the general result
was exactly what we wanted: to defuse the Soviet troop issue and let the nation realize
the importance of SALT. It was a quiet but good birthday.” (White House Diary, p. 358)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
tionship between us is complex because it involves strong elements of
both competition and cooperation.
Our fundamental philosophies conflict; quite often, our national
interests conflict as well. As two great nations, we do have common in-
terests and we share an overwhelming mutual concern in preventing a
nuclear war. We must recognize therefore that nuclear arms control
agreements are vital to both our countries and that we must also exer-
cise self-restraint in our relations and be sensitive to each other’s
concerns.
Recently, we obtained evidence that a Soviet combat brigade has
been in Cuba for several years. The presence of Soviet combat troops in
Cuba is of serious concern to us.
I want to reassure you at the outset that we do not face any imme-
diate, concrete threat that could escalate into war or a major confronta-
tion—but we do face a challenge. It is a challenge to our wisdom—a
challenge to our ability to act in a firm, decisive way without de-
stroying the basis for cooperation that helps to maintain world peace
and control nuclear weapons. It’s a challenge to our determination to
give a measured and effective response to Soviet competition and to
Cuban military activities around the world.
Now, let me explain the specific problem of the Soviet brigade and
describe the more general problem of Soviet-Cuban military activism
in the Third World.
Here is the background on Soviet forces in Cuba: As most of you
know, 17 years ago in the era of the cold war, the Soviet Union sud-
denly attempted to introduce offensive nuclear missiles and bombers
into Cuba. This direct threat to the United States ended with the Soviet
agreement to withdraw those nuclear weapons and a commitment not
to introduce offensive weapons into Cuba thereafter.
At the time of that 1962 missile crisis, there were more than 20,000
Soviet military personnel in Cuba. Most of them were withdrawn, and
we monitored their departure. It was believed that those who stayed
behind were not combat forces, but were there to advise and train
Cubans and to perform intelligence functions.
Just recently, American intelligence obtained persuasive evidence
that some of these Soviet forces had been organized into a combat unit.
When attention was then focused on a careful review of past intelli-
gence data, it was possible for our experts to conclude that this unit had
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
existed for several years, probably since the mid-1970’s, and possibly
even longer.
This unit appears to be a brigade of two or three thousand men. It
is armed with about 40 tanks and other modern military equipment.
It’s been organized as a combat unit. Its training exercises have been
those of a combat unit.
This is not a large force, nor an assault force. It presents no direct
threat to us. It has no airborne or seaborne capability. In contrast to the
1962 crisis, no nuclear threat to the United States is involved.
Nevertheless, this Soviet brigade in Cuba is a serious matter. It
contributes to tension in the Caribbean and the Central American re-
gion. The delivery of modern arms to Cuba and the presence of Soviet
naval forces in Cuban waters have strengthened the Soviet-Cuban mili-
tary relationship. They’ve added to the fears of some countries that
they may come under Soviet or Cuban pressure.
During the last few years, the Soviets have been increasing the de-
livery of military supplies to Cuba. The result is that Cuba now has one
of the largest, best equipped armed forces in this region. These military
forces are used to intrude into other countries in Africa and the Middle
East.
There’s a special relationship between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The Cubans get their weapons free; other Soviet satellite countries have
to pay for their military supplies.
The Communist regime in Cuba is an economic failure that cannot
sustain itself. The Soviet Union must send to Cuba about $8 million in
economic aid every day.
Fidel Castro does not pay money for Soviet arms; the Cuban
people pay a much higher price. In every international dispute, on
every international issue, the Cuban regime automatically follows the
Soviet line.
The Soviet brigade is a manifestation of Moscow’s dominance of
Cuba. It raises the level of that dominance, and it raises the level of re-
sponsibility that the Soviet Union must take for escalating Cuban mili-
tary actions abroad.
Now, I want to report further on what we are doing to resolve
these problems and to counter these activities.
Over the past 3 weeks, we’ve discussed this issue at great length
with top Soviet officials. We’ve made it clear that the presence of a So-
viet combat unit in Cuba is a matter of serious concern to us.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The Soviet Union does not admit that the unit in question is a
combat unit. However, the Soviets have made certain statements to us
with respect to our concern: that the unit in question is a training
center, that it does nothing more than training and can do nothing
more; that they will not change its function or status as a training
center. We understand this to mean that they do not intend to enlarge
the unit or to give it additional capabilities.
They have said that the Soviet personnel in Cuba are not and will
not be a threat to the United States or to any other nation; that they reaf-
firm the 1962 understanding and the mutually agreed upon confirma-
tion in 19705 and will abide by it in the future. We, for our part, recon-
firm this understanding.
These assurances have been given to me from the highest level of
the Soviet Government.
Although we have persuasive evidence that the unit has been a
combat brigade, the Soviet statements about the future noncombat
status of the unit are significant. However, we shall not rest on these So-
viet statements alone.
First, we will monitor the status of the Soviet forces by increased
surveillance of Cuba.
Second, we will assure that no Soviet unit in Cuba can be used as a
combat force to threaten the security of the United States or any other
nation in this hemisphere. Those nations can be confident that the
United States will act in response to a request for assistance to meet any
such threat from Soviet or Cuban forces.
This policy is consistent with our responsibilities as a member of
the Organization of American States and a party to the Rio Treaty. It’s
a reaffirmation in new circumstances of John F. Kennedy’s declaration
in 1963 “that we would not permit any troops from Cuba to move off
the island of Cuba in an offensive action against any neighboring
countries.”

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Third, I’m establishing a permanent, full-time Caribbean joint task
force headquarters at Key West, Florida. I will assign to this head-
quarters, forces from all the military services responsible for expanded
planning and for conducting exercises. This headquarters unit will em-
ploy designated forces for action if required. This will substantially im-
prove our capability to monitor and to respond rapidly to any at-
tempted military encroachment in this region.
Fourth, we will expand military maneuvers in the region. We will
conduct these exercises regularly from now on. In accordance with ex-
isting treaty rights, the United States will, of course, keep our forces in
Guantanamo.
Fifth, we will increase our economic assistance to alleviate the
unmet economic and human needs in the Caribbean region and further
to ensure the ability of troubled peoples to resist social turmoil and pos-
sible Communist domination.
The United States has a worldwide interest in peace and stability.
Accordingly, I have directed the Secretary of Defense to further en-
hance the capacity of our rapid deployment forces to protect our own
interests and to act in response to requests for help from our allies and
friends. We must be able to move our ground, sea, and air units to dis-
tant areas, rapidly and with adequate supplies.
We have reinforced our naval presence in the Indian Ocean.
We are enhancing our intelligence capability in order to monitor
Soviet and Cuban military activities—both in Cuba and throughout the
world. We will increase our efforts to guard against damage to our cru-
cial intelligence sources and our methods of collection, without im-
pairing civil and constitutional rights.
These steps reflect my determination to preserve peace, to
strengthen our alliances, and to defend the interests of the United
States. In developing them, I’ve consulted not only with my own ad-
visers but with congressional leaders and with a bipartisan group of
distinguished American citizens as well. The decisions are my own,
Castro. In many ways we have attempted to isolate Cuba and to indicate our determina-
tion to continue that policy until Cuba is free.” (Public Papers: Kennedy, 1963, p. 329)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and I take full responsibility for them as President and as Commander
in Chief.
I have concluded that the brigade issue is certainly no reason for a
return to the cold war. A confrontation might be emotionally satisfying
for a few days or weeks for some people, but it would be destructive to
the national interest and to the security of the United States.
We must continue the basic policy that the United States has fol-
lowed for 20 years, under six administrations of both parties, a policy
that recognizes that we are in competition with the Soviet Union in
some fields and that we seek cooperation in others—notably main-
taining the peace and controlling nuclear arms.
My fellow Americans, the greatest danger to American security to-
night is certainly not the two or three thousand Soviet troops in Cuba.
The greatest danger to all the nations of the world—including the
United States and the Soviet Union—is the breakdown of a common ef-
fort to preserve the peace and the ultimate threat of a nuclear war.
I renew my call to the Senate of the United States to ratify the SALT
II treaty.
SALT II is a solid treaty. Ensuring compliance with its terms will
not be a matter of trust. We have highly sophisticated, national tech-
nical means, carefully focused on the Soviet Union, to ensure that the
treaty is verifiable.
This treaty is the most important step ever taken to control stra-
tegic nuclear arms. It permits us to strengthen our defense and to pre-
serve the strategic balance at lower risk and lower cost. During the past
few years, we have made real increases in our defense expenditures to
fulfill the goals of our 5-year defense plan. With SALT II, we can con-
centrate these increases in areas where our interests are most threat-
ened and where direct military challenge is most likely.
The rejection of SALT would seriously compromise our Nation’s
peace and security.
Of course we have disagreements with the Soviets. Of course we
have conflicts with them. If we did not have these disagreements and
conflicts, we would not need a treaty to reduce the possibility of nu-
clear war between us.
If SALT II is rejected, these disagreements and conflicts could take
on a new and ominous dimension. Against the background of an un-
controlled nuclear arms race, every confrontation or dispute would
carry the seeds of a nuclear confrontation.
In addition, SALT II is crucial to American leadership and to the
further strengthening of the Western Alliance. Obviously, a secure Eu-
rope is vital to our own security. The leaders of our European Allies
support SALT II—unanimously. We’ve talked to a number of those

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
leaders in the last few days. I must tell you tonight that if the Senate
fails to approve the SALT treaty, these leaders and their countries
would be confused and deeply alarmed. If our allies should lose confi-
dence in our ability to negotiate successfully for the control of nuclear
weapons, then our effort to build a stronger and more united NATO
could fail.
I know that for Members of Congress this is a troubling and a diffi-
cult issue, in a troubling and difficult time. But the Senate has a tradi-
tion of being the greatest deliberative body in the world, and the whole
world is watching the Senate today. I’m confident that all Senators will
perform their high responsibilities as the national interest requires.
Politics and nuclear arsenals do not mix. We must not play politics
with the security of the United States. We must not play politics with
the survival of the human race. We must not play politics with SALT II.
It is much too important for that—too vital to our country, to our allies,
and to the cause of peace.
The purpose of the SALT II treaty and the purpose of my actions in
dealing with Soviet and Cuban military relationship are exactly the
same—to keep our Nation secure and to maintain a world at peace.
As a powerful nation, as a super power, we have special responsi-
bilities to maintain stability even when there are serious disagreements
among nations.
We’ve had fundamental differences with the Soviet Union since
1917. I have no illusions about these differences. The best way to deal
with them successfully is to maintain American unity, American will,
and American strength. That is what I am determined to do.
The struggle for peace—the long, hard struggle to make weapons
of mass destruction under control of human reason and human law—is
a central drama of our age.
At another time of challenge in our Nation’s history, President
Abraham Lincoln told the American people: “We shall nobly save, or
meanly lose, the last best hope of earth.”
We acted wisely then and preserved the Nation. Let us act wisely
now and preserve the world.
the Union.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
130.
Remarks by President Carter
Washington, November 15, 1979
President Meany, Secretary-Treasurer Lane Kirkland, men and women of the
greatest labor movement in the world:
[Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.]
But today we have other important matters to consider. For a brief
time this afternoon I want to speak with you and all Americans about
some fundamental principles upon which our Nation was founded and
which we must never forget. To some, these ideals may seem at times to
be old fashioned or outmoded. But we’ve been clearly reminded in re-
cent days that these principles mean just as much to us now as they
have ever meant during any time of critical decision in the history of
our Nation.
These fundamentals have old names to which we must continually
give new meaning—names like “strength,” “courage,” “patriotism,”
“independence,” “the love of freedom,” “human rights,” “justice,”
“concern for the common good.”
This is the 12th day that more than a hundred innocent human
beings, some 60 of whom are members of the United States diplomatic
mission, have been held hostage in our Embassy in Iran. For a rare time
in human history, a host government has condoned and even encour-
aged this kind of illegal action against a sovereign territory and official
diplomatic relations of another nation. This is an act of terrorism—to-
tally outside the bounds of international law and diplomatic tradition.
In this time of trial, our deep concern is for the lives of these brave
hostages, our Nation’s loyal citizens and faithful representatives. Every
American feels anger and outrage at what is happening to them, just as
every American feels concern for their safety and pride in their great
courage. This crisis calls for firmness, and it calls for restraint. And I’m
proud that this situation has brought forth calm leadership by officials
and private citizens throughout this country.
Firmness does require patience, and it requires perseverance.
Firmness also means measured action, deliberate actions that clarify
the real issues, reduce the likelihood of violence, protect our interests,
and ensure justice.
bor–Congress of Industrial Organizations, meeting in the Sheraton Washington Hotel
ballroom.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
The United States has done nothing and will do nothing that could
be used to justify violent or imprudent action by anyone. While we are
pursuing all avenues of diplomatic resolution, we’re also acting unilat-
erally as appropriate—with restraint, yes, but without hesitation.
First, in order to discourage violence and possible bloodshed here,
which when televised and transmitted back to Iran might threaten the
safety of the hostages, I’ve discouraged the issuing of permits for dem-
onstrations on Federal properties here in Washington. Consistent with
our laws and pursuant to my own powers and responsibilities, I have
also encouraged local and State officials to take similar legal action.
Second, I’ve directed our immigration authorities to review the
visas of some 50,000 Iranian students, who are guests here in our
country. Our Nation is fully committed to the enhancement of human
rights, the protection of legal rights, and the enhancement of civil jus-
tice. All provisions of the United States Constitution will be honored.
All foreign nationals who are here lawfully may continue here with
their work or their studies. But those who are here illegally will be
processed promptly and lawfully for deportation back to their own
country.
Third, I want to remove any question that our principles might be
compromised by our supposed need for Iranian oil. Early this week,
therefore, I ordered an immediate halt to any purchases or shipments
of Iranian oil to the United States of America.
I’m determined to make clear that we will never allow any foreign
country to dictate any American policy.
Fourth, in order to protect our economic interests and to ensure
that claims on Iran by the United States or by United States citizens are
settled in an orderly manner, we’ve legally frozen official Iranian prop-
erty and financial assets. The order does not affect any accounts other
than those of the Government of Iran, the Central Bank of Iran, or other
government-controlled entities.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Yesterday I further instructed Secretary of State Vance and Ambas-
sador McHenry to oppose any discussion of Iran’s problems in the
United Nations Security Council as long as American hostages are
being held. Only after the hostages are released will we be willing to
address Iran’s concerns and, then, under the provisions of international
law and under the charter of the United Nations. The members of the
United Nations Security Council, I am pleased to announce to you,
have agreed unanimously with our own proposal.
It’s important for all of us to remember that we will not compro-
mise our fundamental principles of justice no matter how grave the
provocation nor how righteous our indignation. At the same time, we
will continue to use our influence around the world to obtain the same
kinds of human rights for people everywhere.
In this instance, we are upholding an important principle on behalf
of the entire world community. It’s a clear tenet of international law
and diplomatic tradition that the host government is fully responsible
for the safety and well-being of the property and the legal repre-
sentatives of another country. Less than a year ago—and this is a fact
not generally known or recognized—less than a year ago, 70,000 Amer-
ican citizens were in Iran. As you know, thousands of people were
killed during the upheavals there, but almost miraculously and be-
cause of the good work of Cyrus Vance and others, our people were
brought home safely. I thank God for it. Despite the turmoil, each suc-
ceeding Iranian Government—and they were being changed, as you
know, quite rapidly—protected the citizens of other countries.
Foreign visitors are often vulnerable to abuse. An embassy is not a
fortress. There are no embassies anywhere in the world that can long
withstand the attack of a mob, if the mob has the support of the host
government itself. We had received repeated assurances of protection
from the highest officials in the Iranian Government, even a day or two
before the mob was incited to attack and before that protection was
withdrawn at the last minute. The principle of inviolability of em-
bassies is understood and accepted by nations everywhere, and it’s
particularly important to smaller nations which have no recourse to
economic or military power. This is why the United Nations Security
Council has also unanimously supported our demand for the release of
the American hostages.
In accordance with this principle, as recognized and observed by
all civilized countries, the Iranian Government and its leaders are fully

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
responsible for the safety and well-being of our representatives in Iran,
in Tehran, and they will be held accountable for that responsibility. It is
unthinkable that any responsible government in today’s modern world
could regard the seizure and the holding of the diplomatic officials of
another nation as a realistic means to advance any cause whatsoever.
Terrorism is not an acceptable means to resolve disputes between indi-
viduals or between nations.
No act has so galvanized the American public toward unity in the
last decade as has the holding of our people as hostages in Tehran. We
stand today as one people. We are dedicated to the principles and the
honor of our Nation. We’ve taken no action which would justify con-
cern among the people or among the Government of Iran. We have
done nothing for which any American need apologize. The actions of
Iranian leaders and the radicals who invaded our Embassy were com-
pletely unjustified. They and all others must know that the United
States of America will not yield to international terrorism or to
blackmail.
These difficult days have reminded us of basic facts and principles
which are fundamental to the existence of us as a people. We will honor
all constitutional protections and international law and custom, and we
will not let our freedom and our security be jeopardized.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the President’s remarks.]

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
131.
Remarks by President Carter
Washington, December 12, 1979
United States Defense Policy
Chairman Reg Jones, members of the Business Council:
It’s indeed a pleasure for me to be with you again. This afternoon I
would like to make a very important statement to you, following which
the Chairman and I will walk down the hall, and I’d like to greet each
one of you individually, as has been my custom in the past when we’ve
been together. And then we’ll have a chance for a few questions that
you might want to put to me concerning energy or inflation or legisla-
tion before the Congress or Iran or other matters of interest to you.
But my first concern, and the first concern of every President who
has ever lived in this house, is and must be the security of our Nation.
This security rests on many kinds of strength, on arms and also on arms
control, on military power and on economic vitality and the quality of
life of our own people, on modern weapons, and also on reliable energy
supplies. The well-being of our friends and our allies is also of great im-
portance to us. Our security is tied to human rights and to social justice
which prevails among the people who live on Earth and to the institu-
tions of international force and peace and order, which we ourselves
have helped to build.
We all hope and work and pray that we will see a world in which
the weapons of war are no longer necessary, but now we must deal
with the hard facts, with the world as it is. In the dangerous and uncer-
tain world of today, the keystone of our national security is still mili-
tary strength, strength that is clearly recognized by Americans, by our
allies, and by any potential adversary.
Twice in this century, each time in the aftermath of a global war,
we were tempted in this country by isolationism. The first time, we suc-
p.m. in the East Room of the White House before members of the Business Council. Brze-
zinski sent a proposed speech outline to the President under an October 17 cover memo-
randum, requesting the President’s “reactions and guidance.” He indicated that he and
his staff planned to develop a draft for subsequent revision by the President’s speech-
writers, adding, “It is meant to be a serious speech and not an exercise in oratory, and
therefore I do want to focus on substance above all.” Brzezinski continued: “I think it
would also be better to keep plans for the speech restricted, because otherwise the exer-
cise will degenerate into ‘group-think’ (like the Cuban brigade speech, which at one time
had as many as 14 people drafting it). It is impossible to do a decent job in such a context.”
The President wrote “Zbig, ok—proceed. J” in the top right-hand corner of the memo-
randum. (Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical Material, Speech Files, Box 12,

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
cumbed to that temptation, withdrawing from our global responsibil-
ities, and you know what the result was. A generation later the world
was again engulfed by war. But after the Second World War, we built a
national consensus, based on our own moral and political values,
around the concept of an active role for America in preserving peace
and security for ourselves and for others.
Despite all the changes that have swept across this world in the last
30 years, that basic consensus has endured. We’ve learned the mistake
of military intervention in the internal affairs of another country when
our own American security was not directly involved. But we must un-
derstand that not every instance of the firm application of the power of
the United States is a potential Vietnam. The consensus for national
strength and international involvement, already shaken and threat-
ened, survived that divisive and tragic war.
Recent events in Iran have been a vivid reminder of the need for a
strong and United America, a nation which is supported by its allies
and which need not bluff or posture in the quiet exercise of our strength
and in our continued commitment to international law and the preser-
vation of peace. Today, regardless of other disagreements among our-
selves, we are united in the belief that we must have a strong defense
and that military weakness would inevitably make war more likely.
So, the issue we face is not whether we should be strong; the issue
is how we will be strong. What will be our defense responsibilities for
the 1980’s and beyond? What challenges must we confront in meeting
those responsibilities? What defense programs do we need, and
how much will we spend to meet them? How can we correlate most
successfully our military readiness and our arms control efforts? To
begin with, our defense program must be tailored to match our
responsibilities.
In Europe our military forces have provided the foundation for
one of the longest periods of peace and prosperity that continent has
ever enjoyed. Our strength, both conventional and nuclear, helps to
maintain peace while our allies work together and build together
through the European Community and also nurture their historical ties
to the countries of Eastern Europe. Our mutual commitments within
the Atlantic Alliance are vital to us all, and those commitments are per-
manent and unshakable.
American military strength provides the framework within which
our mature friendships with Japan, Korea, Australia, New Zealand, the
Philippines, and Thailand all contribute to stability in the Pacific basin
and throughout the world.
The prospects for peace in the Middle East have been enhanced by
a strong America and by confidence in us among our friends in Egypt

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
and in Israel. We are determined to continue the progress which has
been made in the Middle East.
We must and we will continue to meet these and our other respon-
sibilities. But there are reasons for concern about our ability to sustain
our beneficial and our peaceful influence throughout the world—real
reasons for concern.
For nearly 20 years now, the Soviet Union has been increasing its
pounded annually. In contrast, our own defense spending has declined
in real terms every year from 1968 through 1976. This is creating a real
challenge to American leadership and to our influence in the world.
We will almost certainly face other challenges, less direct, though
no less serious. The 1980’s are very likely to bring continued turbulence
and upheaval, as we’ve experienced in the 1970’s. Problems of energy
price and energy supply will continue to strain the economy of the de-
veloped world and will put even more severe pressures on the devel-
oping nations. Political instability, which is already serious enough,
may even intensify as the newer nations struggle to cope with these
problems, which are serious enough for us.
As in the past, when the winds of change threaten to arouse storms
of conflict, we must be prepared to join our friends and our allies in re-
sisting threats to stability and to peace.
The steady buildup by the Soviets and their growing inclination to
rely on military power to exploit turbulent situations call for calm, de-
liberate, and sustained American response.
Through the mid-1970’s, the United States relied on the defense
strategy and also on force structures devised during the early 1960’s, a
time when we enjoyed strategic nuclear superiority and a tactical nu-
clear monopoly, when Soviet seapower was limited and the Soviet mil-
itary presence outside Eastern Europe almost nonexistent. All that had
changed by the time I took office as President.
Beginning in 1976 and continuing in my own administration,
we’ve set out to counterbalance the growth in Soviet military power by
launching new efforts that draw on our own considerable strengths.
During each of the last 4 years, there has been a moderate increase in
real defense spending. In Europe we’ve taken steps, as you know, to re-
verse a decade of relative decline in the military strength of the Atlantic
Alliance.
When I first began to meet with Atlantic Alliance leaders almost 3
years ago, I found them very troubled by the state of our military
strength in the Atlantic Alliance. I promised to raise our own level of
defense spending, in real terms, by some 3 percent per year and our
NATO allies responded by making the same pledge. With American

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
leadership, NATO also took the crucial step of adopting a bold,
long-term defense program, which will extend over 15 years. That pro-
gram is helping us to increase our capacity to deter or to defeat any sur-
prise attack that may be launched against our European allies and,
therefore, against ourselves.
We are also taking steps to redress the balance in other theater nu-
clear forces. This action, as you know, we’ve been pursuing in the last
few days.
In the early 1960’s, the United States removed its medium-range
missiles from Europe. We could do this then because there was over-
whelming United States strategic superiority. But the Soviet Union did
not show similar restraint. The accelerating development of their rela-
tively long-range, mobile, multiwarhead SS–20 missile is a major esca-
lation in theater nuclear armaments. With the advent of rough strategic
parity, this new missile creates a potentially dangerous weakness in
NATO’s ability to deter aggression. In the SALT II negotiations, we
carefully protected our freedom to correct this weakness.
Just a few hours ago, I was informed that the NATO Alliance re-
solved to strengthen its theater nuclear weapons to offset actual Soviet
deployments. The agreement reached this afternoon in Europe was a
unanimous agreement very encouraging to all of us. Now, on the ba-
sis of strength, we can negotiate with the Warsaw Pact to reduce nu-
clear weapons and also to reduce, we hope, conventional weapons
throughout the European theater.
In the area of intercontinental or strategic forces, we also face ad-
verse trends that must be corrected. Improved Soviet air defenses now
threaten to make our strategic bombers vulnerable. The cruise missile
will be our solution to that problem. Production of the first generation
of air-launched cruise missiles will begin next year.
In addition, our land-based Minuteman ICBM’s are becoming in-
creasingly vulnerable because of the improved accuracy of the Soviet
Union’s multiwarhead missiles. That’s why we decided last spring to
produce the MX missile. The relatively small number of MX missiles to
be deployed will have mobility and a large number of shelters and will
be far less vulnerable than our present fixed-shelter Minutemen.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Further, in response to any first strike against us, the MX will have
the capability to attack a wide variety of Soviet military targets. The MX
missile, deployed as I’ve just described, will not undermine stability,
but it will deter attack and encourage negotiations on further nuclear
arms limits. In addition, by increasing the difficulty of any contem-
plated Soviet strike, it will contribute to the survivability of our own
strategic bombers and submarines. Even with SALT II, America needs
the MX to maintain the strategic nuclear balance.
We are also modernizing our strategic submarine force. The first
new Trident submarine has already been launched, and the first of our
new Trident missiles, with a range of more than 4,000 miles, have al-
ready been put to sea.
Thus, each leg of our strategic triad is being modernized—cruise
missiles for our bombers, the MX for our intercontinental missiles, and
Trident for our undersea deterrent. Nor will we neglect our conven-
tional forces, though here we must rely heavily on the parallel efforts of
our allies, in Asia as well as in Europe. They must bear their propor-
tional share of the increased costs of a common defense.
I’m determined to keep our naval forces more powerful than those
of any other nation on Earth. Our shipbuilding program will sustain a
550-ship Navy in the 1990’s, and we will continue to build the most ca-
pable ships afloat. Seapower is indispensable to our global strategy, in
peace and also in war.
And finally, we are moving rapidly to counterbalance the growing
ability of the Soviet Union, directly or through surrogates, to use its
military power in Third World regions, and we must be prepared to
deal with hostile actions against our own citizens or our vital interests
from others as well. For this purpose, we need not only stronger forces
but better means for rapid deployment of the forces that we already
have.
Our 1981 defense budget and our 5-year defense program will
meet this need in two different ways. The first will be a new fleet of
maritime prepositioning ships that will carry the heavy equipment and
the supplies for three Marine brigades that can be stationed in forward
areas where United States forces may be needed. With their supplies al-
ready near the scene of action, the troops themselves can then be
moved in by air very rapidly. The second innovation will be a new fleet
of large cargo aircraft to carry Army tanks and other equipment over
intercontinental distances. Having rapid deployment forces does not
necessarily mean that we will use them. We intend for their existence to
deter the very developments that would otherwise invoke their use.
We must always remember that no matter how capable or ad-
vanced our weapons systems, our military security depends on the
abilities, the training, and the dedication of the people who serve in our

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
Armed Forces. I’m determined to recruit and to retain, under any fore-
seeable circumstances, an ample level of such skilled and experienced
military personnel.
To sum up, the United States is taking strong action: first, to im-
prove all aspects of our strategic forces, thus assuring our deterrent to
nuclear war; second, to upgrade our forces in NATO and in the Pacific,
as part of a common effort with our allies; third, to modernize our naval
forces and keep them the best in the world; fourth, to strengthen our
rapid deployment capabilities to meet our responsibilities outside
NATO; and fifth, to maintain an effective force of highly trained mili-
tary personnel.
We must sustain these commitments in order to maintain peace
and security in the 1980’s. To ensure that we press forward vigorously,
I will submit for fiscal year 1981 a budget to increase funding authority
for defense to more than $157 billion, a real growth of more than 5 per-
requested outlays for defense during fiscal year 1981 will grow by more
than 3 percent, in real terms, over the preceding year. We will sustain
this effort.
My 5-year defense program provides a real funding increase that
will average more than 4½ percent each year. I intend to carry out this
program. With careful and efficient management, we should be able to
do so within the budget increases I propose. If inflation increases or ex-
ceeds the projected rates that we now expect, I intend to adjust the de-
fense budget as needed, just as has been done in 1980 fiscal year.
Much of this program which I’ve outlined to you will take 5 years
or more to reach fruition. The imbalances it will correct have been
caused by more than a decade of disparity. This cannot be remedied
overnight, so we must be willing to see this program through. To en-
sure that we do so, I’m setting a growth rate for defense that will be tol-
erable for our country over the long haul.
The most wasteful and self-defeating thing that we could do
would be to start this necessary program, then alter it or cut it back after
a year or two when such an action might become politically attractive.
The defense program that I’m proposing for the next 5 years will re-
quire some sacrifice—but sacrifice that we can well afford. It will not
increase at all the percentage of our gross national product devoted to
defense, which will remain steady at almost exactly 5 percent per year.
We must have a long-range, balanced approach to the allocation of
Federal expenditures. We will continue to meet such crucial needs, of
his remarks at the budget signing ceremony and the text of the budget message, see

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
course, as jobs and housing and education and health, but we must re-
alize that a prerequisite to the enjoyment of such progress is to assure
peace for our Nation. So in asking congressional support for our de-
fense efforts, I’m asking for consistent support, steadfast support—not
just for 1980 or 1981, but until these commitments have been fulfilled.
Sustained American strength is the only possible basis for the
wider, truly reciprocal de´tente which we seek with the Soviet Union.
Only through strength can we create global political conditions hospi-
table to worldwide economic and political progress and to controlling
both conventional and nuclear weapons.
As the strongest, most advanced country on Earth, we have a spe-
cial obligation to seek security through arms control as well as through
military power. So, I welcome the debate by the Senate in its consider-
ation of the SALT II treaty. It will enable us to build a clearer under-
standing that these efforts in both arms control and in defense are vital
to our security and they are mutually compatible, one with another.
There are several reasons why SALT II will strengthen the military
aspect of our national security:
First, we can better maintain strategic equivalence in nuclear
weapons with SALT II. Without it, the Soviet Union can add more to
the power of their own forces, widen any advantage that they may
achieve in the early 1980’s, and conceal from us what they are doing.
For us, maintaining parity with these uncontrollable Soviet activities
would add to our costs in time, money, and also uncertainty about our
own safety.
Second, we can better maintain the combat efficiency and read-
iness of our non-nuclear forces with SALT II than we can without it.
Whatever the level of the defense budget, more of it will have to go into
strategic weapons, atomic weapons, if SALT II is not ratified.
Third, we can better strengthen the unity, resolve, and capability
of the NATO Alliance with SALT II than we can without it. That’s why
the heads of other NATO countries have urged strongly its ratification.
Fourth, we can better continue the SALT process, which has now
been going on for more than 30 years, the process of negotiating further
reductions in the world’s nuclear arsenals, with SALT II than without
it. Without SALT II and all its limits, its rules, and definitions in place,
any agreement in SALT III would, at the very best, take many more
years to achieve.
And finally, we can better control the proliferation of nuclear
weapons among currently non-nuclear nations with SALT II than
without it. This could be one of the most important factors involved in
our pending decision on the SALT treaty.
All of these issues are extremely important and they are intimately
interrelated. A strong defense is a matter of simple common sense; so is
SALT II.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
I will do my utmost as President to keep America strong and to
keep our Nation secure, but this cannot be done without sustained ef-
fort and without some sacrifice, which our Nation can certainly afford.
The best investment in defense is in weapons that will never have
to be used and in soldiers who will never have to die. But the peace we
enjoy is the fruit of our strength and our will to use this strength if we
need to. As a great nation devoted to peace, we must and we will con-
tinue to build that American strength.
Thank you very much.

132.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, December 29, 1979
SUBJECT
Our Response to Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan (U)

133.
Editorial Note
Carter participated in a taped television interview with Frank
Reynolds, a correspondent with ABC News and co-anchor of ABC’s
“World News Tonight.” Portions of the interview were scheduled to air
that evening on the program with other segments scheduled to air on
ABC throughout the week. Reynolds conducted the interview from the
ABC News studios in New York; the President was in the Oval Office.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Earlier, on December 29, Carter had sent a hotline message to So-
viet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev regarding the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan. For additional information about this message, and
Brezhnev’s response, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VI, So-
viet Union, Document 248. Reynolds devoted a portion of the interview
to this development:
“Mr. Reynolds. Mr. President, you’ve mentioned Afghanistan.
Could you tell us what was Brezhnev’s response to your message to
him?
“The President. He responded in what I consider to be an inade-
quate way. He claimed that he had been invited by the Afghan gov-
ernment to come in and protect Afghanistan from some outside third
nation threat. This was obviously false. Because the person that he
claimed invited him in, President Amin, was murdered or assassinated
after the Soviets pulled their coup.
“The leader that’s presently been imposed upon the Afghan
people was apparently brought in by the Soviet Union or either has not
yet come into Afghanistan—He’s not been seen since he was anointed
to be the leader by the Soviets and their cohorts in Afghanistan. He also
claimed that they would remove their forces from Afghanistan as soon
as the situation should be stabilized and the outside threat to Afghani-
stan was eliminated.
“So that was the tone of his message to me, which as I say, was
completely inadequate and completely misleading.
“Mr. Reynolds. Well, he’s lying, isn’t he, Mr. President?
“The President. He’s not telling the facts accurately, that’s correct.
“Mr. Reynolds. Have you changed your perceptions of the Rus-
sians in the time that you’ve been here? You started out it seemed to a
great many people believing that if you expressed your good will and
demonstrated it that they would reciprocate it.
“The President. My opinion of the Russians has changed most
[more] drastically in the last week than even the previous two and one-
half years before that. It is only now dawning upon the world that the
magnitude of the action that the Soviets undertook in invading Af-
ghanistan. . . . This is a circumstance that I think is now causing even
former close friends and allies of the Soviet Union to re-examine
their opinion of what the Soviets might have in mind. . . . I think it is im-
perative that within the next few days, after we consult with one
another that the leaders of the world make it clear to the Soviets
that they cannot have taken this action to violate world peace not only
in that region, but throughout the world without paying severe
consequences. . . .
“What we will do about it, I cannot say. But, to repeat myself, the
action of the Soviets has made a more dramatic change in my opinion

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
of what the Soviets’ ultimate goals are than anything they’ve done in
the previous time that I’ve been in office.
“Mr. Reynolds. But what we and the other nations allied with us
do will involve more than stiff notes of protest . . . ?
“The President. Yes it will.
“Mr. Reynolds. It will. Action will be taken?
“The President. Yes.” (American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents
published in The New York Times on January 1, 1980, Reynolds also
asked the President about the return of U.S. hostages in Iran, protection
of broader U.S. interests, and the difficult decisions facing the Presi-
dent. He inquired as to whether or not the President would be forced to
“make a choice,” presumably regarding the rescue of the hostages. The
President responded:
“A. That’s an option that we have explored very thoroughly. Obvi-
ously we cannot separate the safety of the 50 hostages from our
long-term American interests because they are intertwined. I don’t see
any conflict between the two and for us to peremptorily cause
bloodshed or start a war in Iran and in that entire Persian Gulf region
just to show that I am brave or courageous or forceful or powerful
would be exactly the wrong thing to do for the hostages and for our
long-range interests. So I don’t see any conflict between the two.”
(“Transcript of President’s Interview on Soviet Reply,” page 4)
In his diary entry for December 31, the President noted:
“I had a one-hour interview with Frank Reynolds of ABC. He’s
going to chop up the interview into four or five sections and broadcast
them on prime time the rest of the week. Jody thought the interview
was great, and I think it was a very good one.” (White House Diary,
page 383)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I

134.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, January 2, 1980
SUBJECT
Relevance of the Truman Doctrine to Current Situation (U)
As you consider options regarding the situation in Southwest Asia,
I would like to recall for you an earlier crisis which in my judgment has
some striking parallels with the present challenge we face in Afghani-
stan, in that region and globally. I have in mind the events which led up
to the promulgation of the Truman Doctrine, announced by Truman in
Truman’s message responded to what he perceived to be a clear
and present danger. It was the threatened collapse under Soviet pres-
sure of two countries which at the time were at the outer limits of
American consciousness—Greece and Turkey. Communist govern-
ments had been established with the aid of Soviet troops throughout
the Balkans. Greece was in the midst of a civil war, instigated in the
main by communist-led insurgents. Concurrently, Moscow was put-
ting pressure on Ankara to revise the Montreux Convention3 to prevent
access of non-Black Sea powers into the Black Sea, and had raised
claims of sovereignty against two areas in Turkey. (C)
All this in a region which prior to 1947 had been a British sphere of
influence of little or no strategic interest to the United States. Within
this country there was strong sentiment for a rapid U.S. disengagement
from all of Europe and a return to isolationism. Truman was also under
considerable pressure from a number of politicians, especially Henry

135.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, January 3, 1980
SUBJECT
Strategic Reaction to the Afghanistan Problem
The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan is the first time since 1945
that the Soviet Union used its military forces directly to expand its
power. This took place even though we warned the Soviet Union of ad-
verse consequences. Moreover, Afghanistan is the seventh2 state since
1975 in which communist parties have come to power with Soviet guns
and tanks, with Soviet military power and assistance (Vietnam, An-
gola, Laos, South Yemen, Cambodia, Ethiopia, and now probably Af-
ghanistan). Four of these takeovers occurred since January 1977.
I think it is clear that the Soviets have discounted our likely reac-
tion and that they have concluded that our previous expressions of con-
cern need not be heeded. In effect, because we did not overreact to their
previous acts of assertiveness, they have discounted the likelihood of a
genuinely punitive reaction on our part to this extraordinary applica-
tion of Soviet military power.
In the light of the foregoing, I would like to urge you to consider
altering our formula on arms for China from “we will not sell arms to
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
China” to “we will not sell offensive arms to China.” This shift in for-
mulation would enable you to provide the Chinese with the over-the-
horizon radar and perhaps later with anti-tank weaponry. Given the
scale and the boldness of the Soviet move, these reactions are both
needed and hardly excessive. Moreover, they would communicate tan-
gibly our willingness to support those who are prepared to stand up to
the Soviets, and the Chinese are certainly in that category.
More broadly, we have to move deliberately to fashion a wider se-
curity arrangement for the region, lest Soviet influence spread rapidly
from Afghanistan to Pakistan and Iran. I cannot emphasize strongly
enough the strategic consequences of such a development. It would
place in direct jeopardy our most vital interests in the Middle East.
The recommended subtle change in terminology, initiating a lim-
ited defense arrangement with China, could be the point of departure
for a wider security effort in the region. You are already moving firmly
on Pakistan, and I believe the Congress will support you. We should
implement rapidly your decisions on new bases in the Indian Ocean/
Gulf of Oman area, and survey teams will now be going out.
Beyond the above, we will need an aid package for Pakistan, and
that could be expensive, though it might be shared with Saudi Arabia.
Also, if we can stiffen Pakistan’s back, we should be in a position to
extend some aid to the Afghani rebels, in order to keep the Soviets
bogged down.
Finally, we need to do something to reassure the Egyptians, the
Saudis, and others on the Arabian peninsula that the U.S. is prepared to
assert its power, and that requires a visible military presence in the area
now. You might consider consulting with Sadat about military deploy-
ment to an Egyptian base of a U.S. brigade for joint maneuvers. This
would be an impressive demonstration of U.S. determination to con-
test, if necessary, Soviet military preeminence in the region.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The above recommendations require major decisions by you, but I
believe that a major historical turning point has been reached. You have
the opportunity to do what President Truman did on Greece and Tur-
key, and I believe that this is desirable both for domestic and interna-
tional reasons. The country will respond to a firm call for measured but
also sustained action, and I am sure the Congressional leadership will
support you.
I would recommend that you raise the above issues at the break-
fast, and provide Harold with whatever guidance you think is appro-
priate for his trip.
tion of Afghanistan, which had hitherto not been an occupied satellite
of the Soviet Union.
Fifty thousand heavily armed Soviet troops have crossed the bor-
der and are now dispersed throughout Afghanistan, attempting to con-
quer the fiercely independent Muslim people of that country.
The Soviets claim, falsely, that they were invited into Afghanistan
to help protect that country from some unnamed outside threat. But the
President, who had been the leader of Afghanistan before the Soviet in-
vasion, was assassinated—along with several members of his family—
after the Soviets gained control of the capital city of Kabul. Only several
days later was the new puppet leader even brought into Afghanistan
by the Soviets.
This invasion is an extremely serious threat to peace because of the
threat of further Soviet expansion into neighboring countries in South-
west Asia and also because such an aggressive military policy is unset-
tling to other peoples throughout the world.
This is a callous violation of international law and the United Na-
tions Charter. It is a deliberate effort of a powerful atheistic govern-
ment to subjugate an independent Islamic people.
We must recognize the strategic importance of Afghanistan to sta-
bility and peace. A Soviet-occupied Afghanistan threatens both Iran
and Pakistan and is a steppingstone to possible control over much of
the world’s oil supplies.
The United States wants all nations in the region to be free and to
be independent. If the Soviets are encouraged in this invasion by even-
tual success, and if they maintain their dominance over Afghanistan
and then extend their control to adjacent countries, the stable, strategic,
and peaceful balance of the entire world will be changed. This would
threaten the security of all nations including, of course, the United
States, our allies, and our friends.
Therefore, the world simply cannot stand by and permit the Soviet
Union to commit this act with impunity. Fifty nations have petitioned
the United Nations Security Council to condemn the Soviet Union and
to demand the immediate withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Afghan-
istan. We realize that under the United Nations Charter the Soviet

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Union and other permanent members may veto action of the Security
Council. If the will of the Security Council should be thwarted in this
manner, then immediate action would be appropriate in the General
Assembly of the United Nations, where no Soviet veto exists.
In the meantime, neither the United States nor any other nation
which is committed to world peace and stability can continue to do
business as usual with the Soviet Union.
I have already recalled the United States Ambassador from
Moscow back to Washington. He’s working with me and with my
other senior advisers in an immediate and comprehensive evaluation
of the whole range of our relations with the Soviet Union.
The successful negotiation of the SALT II treaty has been a major
goal and a major achievement of this administration, and we Amer-
icans, the people of the Soviet Union, and indeed the entire world will
benefit from the successful control of strategic nuclear weapons
through the implementation of this carefully negotiated treaty.
However, because of the Soviet aggression, I have asked the
United States Senate to defer further consideration of the SALT II treaty
so that the Congress and I can assess Soviet actions and intentions and
devote our primary attention to the legislative and other measures re-
quired to respond to this crisis. As circumstances change in the future,
we will, of course, keep the ratification of SALT II under active review
in consultation with the leaders of the Senate.
porters assembled in the Briefing Room at the White House; in it, he noted that by letter
the President had asked Byrd to delay consideration of SALT II. (Public Papers: Carter,

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
The Soviets must understand our deep concern. We will delay
opening of any new American or Soviet consular facilities, and most
of the cultural and economic exchanges currently under considera-
tion will be deferred. Trade with the Soviet Union will be severely
restricted.
I have decided to halt or to reduce exports to the Soviet Union in
three areas that are particularly important to them. These new policies
are being and will be coordinated with those of our allies.
I’ve directed that no high technology or other strategic items will
be licensed for sale to the Soviet Union until further notice, while we re-
vise our licensing policy.
Fishing privileges for the Soviet Union in United States waters will
be severely curtailed.
The 17 million tons of grain ordered by the Soviet Union in excess
of that amount which we are committed to sell will not be delivered.
This grain was not intended for human consumption but was to be
used for building up Soviet livestock herds.
I am determined to minimize any adverse impact on the American
farmer from this action. The undelivered grain will be removed from
munity as well. I might also point out that we did not use the food weapon in the case of
the holding of American hostages and I believe to do so now would also raise questions
as to how the differences in policy might be justified. I try very hard not to be a hair shirt
for you, but I feel very strongly about this matter and have therefore written this memo.”
(Carter Library, Donated Historical Material, Mondale Papers, Office of the Vice Presi-
text of Mondale’s memorandum, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union,
Document 253. In his diary entry for January 3, the President commented: “After much
debate, my inclination is to stop all grain sales to the Soviets above the 8 million tons
guaranteed by an international agreement—all for animal feed. Fritz very strongly op-
posed.” (White House Diary, p. 388)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the market through storage and price support programs and through
purchases at market prices. We will also increase amounts of grain de-
voted to the alleviation of hunger in poor countries, and we’ll have a
massive increase of the use of grain for gasohol production here at
home.
After consultation with other principal grain-exporting nations, I
am confident that they will not replace these quantities of grain by ad-
ditional shipments on their part to the Soviet Union.
These actions will require some sacrifice on the part of all Amer-
icans, but there is absolutely no doubt that these actions are in the in-
terest of world peace and in the interest of the security of our own Na-
tion, and they are also compatible with actions being taken by our own
major trading partners and others who share our deep concern about
this new Soviet threat to world stability.
Although the United States would prefer not to withdraw from the
Olympic games scheduled in Moscow this summer, the Soviet Union
must realize that its continued aggressive actions will endanger both
the participation of athletes and the travel to Moscow by spectators
who would normally wish to attend the Olympic games.
Along with other countries, we will provide military equipment,
food, and other assistance to help Pakistan defend its independence
and its national security against the seriously increased threat it now
faces from the north. The United States also stands ready to help other
nations in the region in similar ways.
Neither our allies nor our potential adversaries should have the
slightest doubt about our willingness, our determination, and our ca-
pacity to take the measures I have outlined tonight. I have consulted
with leaders of the Congress, and I am confident they will support leg-
islation that may be required to carry out these measures.
History teaches, perhaps, very few clear lessons. But surely one
such lesson learned by the world at great cost is that aggression, unop-
posed, becomes a contagious disease.
sion a country—an independent, free-standing state. The President had a choice to make.
Do we sit idly by and continue to accommodate the Soviet’s whims and demands? Or do
we say no, we’re not going to simply conduct business as usual? He took the proper ac-
tion. I support him and I think ultimately the farmers and other citizens of the country
will support the President in this enterprise.” (American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents,

137.
Editorial Note
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brze-
zinski took part in a briefing for non-Washington editorial page editors
to 12: p.m. in the Old Executive Office Building. Brzezinski initiated
the session by stating:
“I thought that it might be most useful if I were to open with a few
little comments, and then perhaps respond to any questions that you
may wish to raise. We are obviously going through a very serious be-
ginning for the new decade. Perhaps, however, it is not only symbolic
that these events are taking place in the first year of the 1980s.
“We have entered the fifth decade of U.S.-Soviet competition. I
think it is useful to think about that, particularly for you, since you are
editorial writers, in an historical perspective. The decade of the ’40s
was the decade of U.S. entrance into world affairs, and of Soviet expan-
sion because of the vacuum that developed as a consequence of World
War Two.
“The decade of the ’50s brought the definition of clear lines in the
West and in the Far East; Berlin and Korea; and obviously I am over-
simplifying here. The decade of the ’60s was that premature global
competition, with the Soviets, under Khrushchev, moving out too
abruptly and without sufficient power base, resulting in the conflict in
Cuba and the respite for the United States, this shaken by the U.S. in-
volvement in Vietnam.
“The decade of the ’70s was the decade of Soviet build-up, but also
accommodation; the search for a more enduring cooperative relation-
ship. What will the decade of the ’80s be? That is the central issue now
confronting us. And that is the issue which is at stake in Afghanistan.
“It can also be a decade of cooperation, not only under arms con-
trol but over the wider issues that should concern too much U.S. global

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
power—global cooperation and so forth. It can, however, also be a
decade of conflict, of conflict arising out of the new reality of overlap-
ping imperial power. For the first time, not only is American power
global but Soviet power is becoming global.
“The President takes a very serious view of the Soviet action in Af-
ghanistan because it is an exercise of power outside of the established
perimeters, whatever the moral justification, drawn as a consequence
of World War Two. It is the first time that Soviet military forces have
been used beyond the lines that were drawn historically by May, 1945.
And they are being used, also, not against a country engaged in the
East-West conflict, but a neutral, non-aligned country.
“We have undertaken a response to this action of Soviet interven-
tion and aggression. That response is designed to be punitive and also
to be a warning. That response requires national support. I do hope, I
expect, that it will be forthcoming, because I think the American people
realize that there are important issues involved. That response will be a
sustained one. It is not a flash in the pan.
“But beyond that, as a nation, and U.S. opinion-makers, we have to
think about not only responding to the act, but also of responding to the
consequences of the act. The consequences of the act are regional and
strategic in nature, and not local and limited; they are regional and stra-
tegic in nature. They do involve the stability of the region, which is po-
tentially of vital importance to us, and to those who are of vital impor-
tance to us.
“And this is why we are confronted with a problem which in some
respects bears historical analogy to the challenge that President Tru-
man confronted when, in the late winter of 1947, he was abruptly in-
formed that he had six weeks in which to decide whether to replace the
British as the stabilizing ally for two wobbly, internally-ruled, highly-
vulnerable countries remote from the United States by distance and
culture: Turkey and Greece. These were countries much further from
us geographically then than are Pakistan and Iran today.
“So this is the perspective which I would like to share with you on
a problem which is a serious one, and which requires a great deal of na-
tional attention, which calls for a very mature and responsible re-
sponse, which we do not view as a subject that requires a debate, but
rather a serious national commitment.
“It is useful in this context to be reminded that this is not, this is the
Soviet Union—this is part of a process which has involved us now over
four decades. Perhaps that is enough by way of a very broad connec-
tion. Perhaps I can now respond to more specific points. And I would
appreciate it if you would identify yourselves, because I don’t know
who you are, and maybe your colleagues don’t know.”

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
Brzezinski then responded to questions concerning Afghanistan,
Iran, Pakistan, and India. He concluded his remarks by thanking the
participants, adding:
“I wish this could go on longer because we are dealing here with
some vital issues. But I wish you well. And I think particularly at this
time it is terribly important that the American public, through you,
look at the problems we face in a realistic way—but also not in an
overly dramatized fashion. I think what they have to understand is that
this is a long haul proposition. The competition has lasted for 40 years;
it is not going to end quickly; there are not going to be victors or losers
in it very quickly, unless we fold up entirely, which we do not intend to
do.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Schecter/Friendly (Press) File, Box 1, Brzezinski Briefings and Back-
grounders (Press and Public): 1/80)
138.
Address by President Carter on the State of the Union Before
a Joint Session of Congress
Washington, January 23, 1980
Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the 96th Congress, fellow citizens:
This last few months has not been an easy time for any of us. As we
meet tonight, it has never been more clear that the state of our Union
depends on the state of the world. And tonight, as throughout our own
generation, freedom and peace in the world depend on the state of our
Union.
The 1980’s have been born in turmoil, strife, and change. This is a
time of challenge to our interests and our values and it’s a time that
tests our wisdom and our skills.
p.m. in the House Chamber at the Capitol. O’Neill introduced the President. The address
was broadcast live on radio and television. Additional information about the preparation
of the State of the Union address is in the Carter Library, Hertzberg Donated Historical
In telegram 21783 to all diplomatic and consular posts, January 26, the Department pro-
vided background information for use in discussions with host country officials con-
cerning the address or broader foreign policy themes. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D800044–1090)
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
At this time in Iran, 50 Americans are still held captive, innocent
victims of terrorism and anarchy. Also at this moment, massive Soviet
troops are attempting to subjugate the fiercely independent and deeply
religious people of Afghanistan. These two acts—one of international
terrorism and one of military aggression—present a serious challenge
to the United States of America and indeed to all the nations of the
world. Together, we will meet these threats to peace.
I’m determined that the United States will remain the strongest of
all nations, but our power will never be used to initiate a threat to the
security of any nation or to the rights of any human being. We seek to
be and to remain secure—a nation at peace in a stable world. But to be
secure we must face the world as it is.
Three basic developments have helped to shape our challenges:
the steady growth and increased projection of Soviet military power
beyond its own borders; the overwhelming dependence of the Western
democracies on oil supplies from the Middle East; and the press of so-
cial and religious and economic and political change in the many na-
tions of the developing world, exemplified by the revolution in Iran.
Each of these factors is important in its own right. Each interacts
with the others. All must be faced together, squarely and courageously.
We will face these challenges, and we will meet them with the best that
is in us. And we will not fail.
In response to the abhorrent act in Iran, our Nation has never been
aroused and unified so greatly in peacetime. Our position is clear. The
United States will not yield to blackmail.
We continue to pursue these specific goals: first, to protect the
present and long-range interests of the United States; secondly, to pre-
serve the lives of the American hostages and to secure, as quickly as
possible, their safe release, if possible, to avoid bloodshed which might
further endanger the lives of our fellow citizens; to enlist the help of
other nations in condemning this act of violence, which is shocking and
violates the moral and the legal standards of a civilized world; and also
to convince and to persuade the Iranian leaders that the real danger to
their nation lies in the north, in the Soviet Union and from the Soviet
troops now in Afghanistan, and that the unwarranted Iranian quarrel
with the United States hampers their response to this far greater danger
to them.
If the American hostages are harmed, a severe price will be
paid. We will never rest until every one of the American hostages are
released.
But now we face a broader and more fundamental challenge in this
region because of the recent military action of the Soviet Union.
Now, as during the last 3½ decades, the relationship between our
country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be
engulfed in global conflict.
Since the end of the Second World War, America has led other na-
tions in meeting the challenge of mounting Soviet power. This has not
been a simple or a static relationship. Between us there has been coop-
eration, there has been competition, and at times there has been
confrontation.
In the 1940’s we took the lead in creating the Atlantic Alliance in
response to the Soviet Union’s suppression and then consolidation of
its East European empire and the resulting threat of the Warsaw Pact to
Western Europe.
In the 1950’s we helped to contain further Soviet challenges in
Korea and in the Middle East, and we rearmed to assure the continua-
tion of that containment.
In the 1960’s we met the Soviet challenges in Berlin, and we faced
the Cuban missile crisis. And we sought to engage the Soviet Union in
the important task of moving beyond the cold war and away from
confrontation.
And in the 1970’s three American Presidents negotiated with the
Soviet leaders in attempts to halt the growth of the nuclear arms race.
We sought to establish rules of behavior that would reduce the risks of
conflict, and we searched for areas of cooperation that could make our
relations reciprocal and productive, not only for the sake of our two na-
tions but for the security and peace of the entire world.
In all these actions, we have maintained two commitments: to be
ready to meet any challenge by Soviet military power, and to develop
ways to resolve disputes and to keep the peace.
Preventing nuclear war is the foremost responsibility of the two
superpowers. That’s why we’ve negotiated the strategic arms limita-
tion treaties—SALT I and SALT II. Especially now, in a time of great
tension, observing the mutual constraints imposed by the terms of
these treaties will be in the best interest of both countries and will help
to preserve world peace. I will consult very closely with the Congress
on this matter as we strive to control nuclear weapons. That effort to
control nuclear weapons will not be abandoned.
We superpowers also have the responsibility to exercise restraint
in the use of our great military force. The integrity and the independ-
ence of weaker nations must not be threatened. They must know that in
our presence they are secure.
But now the Soviet Union has taken a radical and an aggressive
new step. It’s using its great military power against a relatively de-
fenseless nation. The implications of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
could pose the most serious threat to the peace since the Second World
War.
The vast majority of nations on Earth have condemned this latest
Soviet attempt to extend its colonial domination of others and have de-
manded the immediate withdrawal of Soviet troops. The Moslem
world is especially and justifiably outraged by this aggression against
an Islamic people. No action of a world power has ever been so quickly
and so overwhelmingly condemned. But verbal condemnation is
not enough. The Soviet Union must pay a concrete price for their
aggression.
While this invasion continues, we and the other nations of the
world cannot conduct business as usual with the Soviet Union. That’s
why the United States has imposed stiff economic penalties on the So-
viet Union. I will not issue any permits for Soviet ships to fish in the
coastal waters of the United States. I’ve cut Soviet access to high-
technology equipment and to agricultural products. I’ve limited other
commerce with the Soviet Union, and I’ve asked our allies and friends
to join with us in restraining their own trade with the Soviets and not to
replace our own embargoed items. And I have notified the Olympic
Committee that with Soviet invading forces in Afghanistan, neither
the American people nor I will support sending an Olympic team to
Moscow.
The Soviet Union is going to have to answer some basic questions:
Will it help promote a more stable international environment in which
its own legitimate, peaceful concerns can be pursued? Or will it con-
tinue to expand its military power far beyond its genuine security
needs, and use that power for colonial conquest? The Soviet Union
must realize that its decision to use military force in Afghanistan will be
costly to every political and economic relationship it values.
The region which is now threatened by Soviet troops in Afghani-
stan is of great strategic importance: It contains more than two-thirds of
the world’s exportable oil. The Soviet effort to dominate Afghanistan
has brought Soviet military forces to within 300 miles of the Indian
Ocean and close to the Straits of Hormuz, a waterway through which

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
most of the world’s oil must flow. The Soviet Union is now attempting
to consolidate a strategic position, therefore, that poses a grave threat to
the free movement of Middle East oil.
This situation demands careful thought, steady nerves, and reso-
lute action, not only for this year but for many years to come. It de-
mands collective efforts to meet this new threat to security in the Per-
sian Gulf and in Southwest Asia. It demands the participation of all
those who rely on oil from the Middle East and who are concerned with
global peace and stability. And it demands consultation and close co-
operation with countries in the area which might be threatened.
Meeting this challenge will take national will, diplomatic and po-
litical wisdom, economic sacrifice, and, of course, military capability.
We must call on the best that is in us to preserve the security of this cru-
cial region.
Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by any outside
force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an
assault on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such
an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military
force.
During the past 3 years, you have joined with me to improve our
own security and the prospects for peace, not only in the vital
oil-producing area of the Persian Gulf region but around the world.
We’ve increased annually our real commitment for defense, and we
will sustain this increase of effort throughout the Five Year Defense
Program. It’s imperative that Congress approve this strong defense
budget for 1981, encompassing a 5-percent real growth in authoriza-
tions, without any reduction.
We are also improving our capability to deploy U.S. military forces
rapidly to distant areas. We’ve helped to strengthen NATO and our
other alliances, and recently we and other NATO members have de-
cided to develop and to deploy modernized, intermediate-range nu-
clear forces to meet an unwarranted and increased threat from the nu-
clear weapons of the Soviet Union.
We are working with our allies to prevent conflict in the Middle
East. The peace treaty between Egypt and Israel is a notable achieve-
ment which represents a strategic asset for America and which also en-
hances prospects for regional and world peace. We are now engaged in
further negotiations to provide full autonomy for the people of the
West Bank and Gaza, to resolve the Palestinian issue in all its aspects,
and to preserve the peace and security of Israel. Let no one doubt our
commitment to the security of Israel. In a few days we will observe an

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
historic event when Israel makes another major withdrawal from the
Sinai and when Ambassadors will be exchanged between Israel and
Egypt.
We’ve also expanded our own sphere of friendship. Our deep
commitment to human rights and to meeting human needs has im-
proved our relationship with much of the Third World. Our decision to
normalize relations with the People’s Republic of China will help to
preserve peace and stability in Asia and in the Western Pacific.
We’ve increased and strengthened our naval presence in the In-
dian Ocean, and we are now making arrangements for key naval and
air facilities to be used by our forces in the region of northeast Africa
and the Persian Gulf.
We’ve reconfirmed our 1959 agreement to help Pakistan preserve
its independence and its integrity. The United States will take action
consistent with our own laws to assist Pakistan in resisting any outside
aggression. And I’m asking the Congress specifically to reaffirm this
agreement. I’m also working, along with the leaders of other nations, to
provide additional military and economic aid for Pakistan. That re-
quest will come to you in just a few days.
In the weeks ahead, we will further strengthen political and mili-
tary ties with other nations in the region. We believe that there are no
irreconcilable differences between us and any Islamic nation. We re-
spect the faith of Islam, and we are ready to cooperate with all Moslem
countries.
Finally, we are prepared to work with other countries in the re-
gion to share a cooperative security framework that respects differing

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
values and political beliefs, yet which enhances the independence, se-
curity, and prosperity of all.
All these efforts combined emphasize our dedication to defend
and preserve the vital interests of the region and of the nation which we
represent and those of our allies—in Europe and the Pacific, and also in
the parts of the world which have such great strategic importance to us,
stretching especially through the Middle East and Southwest Asia.
With your help, I will pursue these efforts with vigor and with determi-
nation. You and I will act as necessary to protect and to preserve our
Nation’s security.
The men and women of America’s Armed Forces are on duty to-
night in many parts of the world. I’m proud of the job they are doing,
and I know you share that pride. I believe that our volunteer forces are
adequate for current defense needs, and I hope that it will not become
necessary to impose a draft. However, we must be prepared for that
possibility. For this reason, I have determined that the Selective Service
System must now be revitalized. I will send legislation and budget pro-
posals to the Congress next month so that we can begin registration and
then meet future mobilization needs rapidly if they arise.
We also need clear and quick passage of a new charter to define the
legal authority and accountability of our intelligence agencies. We will
guarantee that abuses do not recur, but we must tighten our controls on
sensitive intelligence information, and we need to remove unwar-
ranted restraints on America’s ability to collect intelligence.
The decade ahead will be a time of rapid change, as nations every-
where seek to deal with new problems and age-old tensions. But
America need have no fear. We can thrive in a world of change if we re-
main true to our values and actively engaged in promoting world
peace. We will continue to work as we have for peace in the Middle
East and southern Africa. We will continue to build our ties with devel-
oping nations, respecting and helping to strengthen their national inde-
pendence which they have struggled so hard to achieve. And we will
continue to support the growth of democracy and the protection of
human rights.
In repressive regimes, popular frustrations often have no outlet ex-
cept through violence. But when peoples and their governments can
approach their problems together through open, democratic methods,
the basis for stability and peace is far more solid and far more enduring.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
That is why our support for human rights in other countries is in our
own national interest as well as part of our own national character.
Peace—a peace that preserves freedom—remains America’s first
goal. In the coming years, as a mighty nation we will continue to
pursue peace. But to be strong abroad we must be strong at home. And
in order to be strong, we must continue to face up to the difficult issues
that confront us as a nation today.
The crises in Iran and Afghanistan have dramatized a very impor-
tant lesson: Our excessive dependence on foreign oil is a clear and
present danger to our Nation’s security. The need has never been more
urgent. At long last, we must have a clear, comprehensive energy pol-
icy for the United States.
As you well know, I have been working with the Congress in a
concentrated and persistent way over the past 3 years to meet this need.
We have made progress together. But Congress must act promptly now
to complete final action on this vital energy legislation. Our Nation
will then have a major conservation effort, important initiatives to de-
velop solar power, realistic pricing based on the true value of oil, strong
incentives for the production of coal and other fossil fuels in the United
States, and our Nation’s most massive peacetime investment in the de-
velopment of synthetic fuels.
The American people are making progress in energy conservation.
Last year we reduced overall petroleum consumption by 8 percent and
gasoline consumption by 5 percent below what it was the year before.
Now we must do more.
After consultation with the Governors, we will set gasoline conser-
vation goals for each of the 50 States, and I will make them mandatory
if these goals are not met.
day—well below the level of foreign oil purchases in 1977. I expect our
imports to be much lower than this, but the ceiling will be enforced by
an oil import fee if necessary. I’m prepared to lower these imports still
further if the other oil-consuming countries will join us in a fair and
mutual reduction. If we have a serious shortage, I will not hesitate to
impose mandatory gasoline rationing immediately.
The single biggest factor in the inflation rate last year, the increase
in the inflation rate last year, was from one cause: the skyrocketing
prices of OPEC oil. We must take whatever actions are necessary to
reduce our dependence on foreign oil—and at the same time reduce
inflation.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
As individuals and as families, few of us can produce energy by
ourselves. But all of us can conserve energy—every one of us, every
day of our lives. Tonight I call on you—in fact, all the people of Amer-
ica—to help our Nation. Conserve energy. Eliminate waste. Make 1980
indeed a year of energy conservation.
Of course, we must take other actions to strengthen our Nation’s
economy.
First, we will continue to reduce the deficit and then to balance the
Federal budget.
Second, as we continue to work with business to hold down prices,
we’ll build also on the historic national accord with organized labor to
restrain pay increases in a fair fight against inflation.
Third, we will continue our successful efforts to cut paperwork
and to dismantle unnecessary Government regulation.
Fourth, we will continue our progress in providing jobs for Amer-
ica, concentrating on a major new program to provide training and
work for our young people, especially minority youth. It has been said
that “a mind is a terrible thing to waste.” We will give our young
people new hope for jobs and a better life in the 1980’s.
And fifth, we must use the decade of the 1980’s to attack the basic
structural weaknesses and problems in our economy through measures
to increase productivity, savings, and investment.
With these energy and economic policies, we will make America
even stronger at home in this decade—just as our foreign and defense
policies will make us stronger and safer throughout the world. We will
never abandon our struggle for a just and a decent society here at home.
That’s the heart of America—and it’s the source of our ability to inspire
other people to defend their own rights abroad.
Our material resources, great as they are, are limited. Our prob-
lems are too complex for simple slogans or for quick solutions. We
cannot solve them without effort and sacrifice. Walter Lippmann once
reminded us, “You took the good things for granted. Now you must
earn them again. For every right that you cherish, you have a duty
which you must fulfill. For every good which you wish to preserve, you
will have to sacrifice your comfort and your ease. There is nothing for
nothing any longer.”
Our challenges are formidable. But there’s a new spirit of unity
and resolve in our country. We move into the 1980’s with confidence
and hope and a bright vision of the America we want: an America
strong and free, an America at peace, an America with equal rights for
all citizens—and for women, guaranteed in the United States Constitu-
tion—an America with jobs and good health and good education for
every citizen, an America with a clean and bountiful life in our cities

139.
Editorial Note
On January 28, 1980, President’s Assistant for National Security
Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski took part in a briefing for editorial page
editors and writers on foreign policy issues. The briefing took place
indicated in his opening remarks that he would emphasize three
points:
“The first is that the constructive agenda that the President set for
himself three years ago remains both still valid and binding in spite of
the events that have transpired in the last few weeks and which do call
for sustained response. When we assumed office we were deeply con-
scious of the fact that America was somehow becoming increasingly ir-
relevant to a world of very rapid change and there were many concerns
that were apparently indifferent to us and yet were motivating much of
mankind, and there were problems of a global type which needed ur-
gent addressing: nonproliferation, development, food, regional con-
flicts, human rights.
“I want to stress that even though we have been necessarily preoc-
cupied in recent weeks with matters of a more traditional type, a mili-
tary challenge with strategic consequences, these issues still remain of
importance to us and we will pursue them, for a very good reason.
Unless we do so, we are going to be living in a world which will be
more and more hostile to our values and more and more opposed to
our interests. We owe it to ourselves, we owe it to our children, to try to
shape a more decent world. I know it sounds maudlin and it sounds
trite, but it is a central fact, that if this country is to preserve its
well-being and its way of life, we have to shape a more decent world, a

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
more cooperative world, and that in turn means addressing ourselves
to the genuine and real concerns of the world that is now politically
awakened, that is no longer controlled by a few empires based in Eu-
rope, that is genuinely organized politically.
“This is why the constructive agenda to which we remain dedi-
cated is still binding and I stress that particularly because I know that I
am seeing, as the person who in this administration is more preoccu-
pied with the other things that I will be talking about in a second, and
indeed I am and have been, because my job is national security, and
these other things are an immediate danger to our national security.
But I simply wish to put it to you that our national security also de-
pends on shaping a more decent world, and this is something that con-
cerns the President, that concerns me very deeply, and I know the Sec-
retary of State has been very actively and successfully engaged in
dealing with these problems, and I do not wish the inference to be
drawn that we are now fundamentally altering our foreign policy. We
are not.
“This being said, let me go on to the other two points. The first is
that de´tente is indivisible. We probably will be facing before too long a
Soviet peace offensive designed at dividing us from our allies, the West
Europeans, the Japanese, from us. It should not work. In my judgment
it will not work. There is no such thing as having de´tente with the So-
viet Union in one part of the world and open competition and the use of
force in another part of the world. This is something which I am sure
our allies understand well, and I think that the Soviets will find the
West, by which I mean essentially the industrial democracies, in-
cluding Japan, to be united on this very fundamental issue.
“This doesn’t mean that we want to drive the West Germans, for
example, into renewed Cold War intentions in an area of great sensi-
tivity to them, such as Berlin and the flow of human beings across the
German frontier. We have recognized the specificity of some of the
countries concerned.
“But on the fundamental issues we feel and they feel that our
common stakes are engaged and that we will not let a Soviet propa-
ganda campaign divide us. But we ought to expect such a campaign.
Indeed, it is beginning to surface.
“The final point which I want to stress is that security is increas-
ingly indivisible. It may seem like an obvious point but it really isn’t
yet, in practice. The fact of the matter is that there are three central stra-
tegic zones of importance to the United States: Western Europe, the Far
East, and the Mideast. In two of these zones we have a permanent mili-
tary presence and obligatory commitments. In the third one, the Mid-
east, we do not. We have neither. Yet in recent years all three have
become almost equally important to us and of an interdependent im-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
portance to us in the sense that jeopardy to any one of the three jeop-
ardizes the other two and directly involves—and jeopardizes our own
interests. We could not afford to lose Western Europe. We could not af-
ford to lose the Far East and we cannot afford to lose the Mideast.
“So we have now a situation in which there are three central stra-
tegic zones, each of which is important to us, and a jeopardy to any one
of those three means jeopardy to the other two and cumulatively to us.
Yet we do not have security arrangements which fully reflect that re-
ality. We do not have that. And we will not have them, in an identical
sense, in all three regions. We are not aiming at a repetition of the Euro-
pean experience, for example, in the Mideast, a NATO-type alliance.
“But we are moving, clearly, towards an enhancement of our polit-
ical and military presence in that part of the world in order to increase
its security. That is an important strategic development and it reflects
the notion that security is increasingly indivisible, and this being the
case, there will be some pressures towards greater consultations within
the Alliance and with our allies on these matters, and thus over time a
more symbiotic relationship will develop in terms of political consulta-
tions, perhaps even some military arrangements between all three
zones.
“We are far from it yet. The Japanese, certainly, are not even mili-
tarily engaged fully in their own defense so we can’t expect them to be
engaged in the defense of the Mideast. The Europeans have enough on
their own hands to assure the defense of Western Europe and we have
some very active business that we are conducting with them such as
theater nuclear force deployments. So they are not going to move into
the Mideast to help us.
“Nonetheless, there is emerging now a greater sense of concern, a
willingness to consult on security matters, a greater willingness to con-
sult on economic aid to the Persian Gulf, West Asia and East region and
thus in effect a new important historical trend is being set into motion,
translating on the political/military plane to reality of the interdepend-
ence of the three security zones.
“So those are the three propositions which I would like to put to
you very broadly and perhaps it may serve as a conceptual framework
for the discussion we can now have on current developments or pol-
icies.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Schecter/Friendly (Press) File, Box 1, Brzezinski Briefings and Back-
grounders (Press and Public): 1/80)

140.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, January 30, 1980
SUBJECT
The Skeleton of a Strategy for the Middle East
The purpose of our Persian Gulf strategy is to protect our vital in-
terests there—interests shared with Europe and Japan. Because the pro-
jection of Soviet power and influence into the region is the major threat
to those interests at the moment, countering those is the first priority
strategic task.
In effect, we have to complete the third phase of the great architec-
tural task undertaken by the United States after World War II. We con-
structed an alliance in Western Europe; we undertook explicit defense
commitments in the Far East; we built CENTO, a regional security or-
ganization that never really flourished. Now we need to shape a more
flexible framework for regional security in the Middle East. That re-
gional security framework will have to avoid excessive formality,
adapt to the realities of intraregional conflicts, and facilitate varieties of
participation by concerned friends both in the region and in the other
two central strategic zones, Western Europe and the Far East.
The following outlines a number of steps we are either taking or
need to consider taking in order to fulfill your vision of the security re-
quirements and American interests in the region. The essence of our
strategy is to strengthen our presence and capability by
—establishing facilities for U.S. forces;
—strengthening friendly governments and the security coopera-
tion among them; and
—reducing the influence of the Soviet Union, its surrogates (Cuba,
the GDR) and its friends (PDRY).
You are well aware of our work on obtaining facilities in the re-
gion and improving our rapid reaction force capabilities. We plan to
strengthen friendly governments and the security cooperation among
them by engaging in joint efforts to protect Pakistan, support the Af-
ghan rebels, and reduce the threat of the PDRY against Oman, North
Yemen and Saudi Arabia. In the latter connection, we will also be coop-
erating with our European allies, and possibly the Jordanians and
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Egyptians, both in operations and contingency plans. Our long-term
objective can be described as a Persian Gulf/Indian Ocean region with
a permanent U.S. naval presence and surge capability, an Afghanistan
whose neutrality has been restored, a strengthened Pakistan, a more co-
hesive and cooperative Iran, and an Arabian Peninsula free from threat
from the PDRY.
We have taken a number of actions to begin the implementation of
our Persian Gulf strategy. A status report follows.
Please indicate whether you would wish an NSC meeting on some
of the following subjects, whether some of them in your judgment
should be dropped, and whether you have any specific or general guid-
ance that you could give us as we continue to work on the following:
Actions Undertaken and/or Ongoing
1. Political/Diplomatic:
—The State of the Union Address.
—Agha Shahi visit to Washington.
—Reaffirmation of the 1959 Agreement with Pakistan, new defini-
tion of assurances, and consultations with Congress.
—Development of political assurances for states providing mili-
tary facilities (Oman, Somalia, Kenya—before SCC).
—Approaches to Spain, Morocco, and others about enroute basing
and overflight support (in progress).
—Christopher trip to Europe on Afghanistan and East-West
relations.
—Brown mission to China.
—Clifford mission to India.
—Brzezinski/Christopher mission to Pakistan.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
2. Economics:
—Actions for the Persian Gulf region:
• Economic aid package for Pakistan: bilateral (ready); multilateral
(being negotiated).
• German efforts to reschedule Turkish debt.
• Bilateral refugee aid to Pakistan.
3. Military:
—Bartholomew/Murray mission to Oman, Somalia, and Kenya
for military facilities (in progress).
—Technical teams for base surveys in Oman and Somalia (there).
—Initial effort to create a military consortium for aid to Pakistan
(Japan, Saudi Arabia, U.K., France, and FRG—underway).
—Bilateral U.S. military aid to Pakistan.
—Military exercises:
• AWACs to Egypt.
• B–52 flights over Indian Ocean.
• Marine Amphibious Unit enroute to the Arabian Sea may con-
duct one or more exercises if local states agree (Oman, Saudi Arabia, or
Egypt), and if you approve.
—Increased U.S. Naval presence in the Indian Ocean (two carrier
battle groups).
—RDF (forces allocated, JTF in progress of formation, limited con-
tingency planning).
4. Intelligence:
—Special efforts toward Iran.
—[1 line not declassified]
—Carlucci mission to Saudi Arabia.
—Several “Presidential findings.”
Actions Under Consideration
1. Political/Diplomatic:
—Meeting of the seven foreign ministers on aid to Pakistan (being
scheduled).
2. Economic:
—7-nation consortium for Pakistan: German lead on Turkey.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
3. Military:
—RDF sea-lift improvement: rapid acquisition of commercial RO/
RO ships and SL–7 class transports.
—Expansion of Diego Garcia facilities.
—Brigade exercise in Egypt (employing forces now based in the
U.S. 82nd Airborne Division, for example).
—Contingency planning with Jordan and with U.K. and France for
a crisis in Arabian Peninsula.
4. Intelligence:
—Iraq connection.
Additional Steps to Consider
1. Political/Diplomatic:
—Western Summit (in addition to the foreign ministers meeting).
—Propaganda offensives against Cuban and GDR involvement in
the Persian Gulf region.
—Steps to accelerate the West Bank autonomy talks.
—Further high level China/U.S. visit (President to China; Hua to
2. Economic:
—Long-term program of economic aid to Turkey and Pakistan by
Europeans and Japan.
—Alter U.S. position on sanctions toward Iran.
3. Military:
—Form a separate U.S. unified command for the Persian Gulf
region.
—Shift our military assistance groups into training and manage-
ment assistance, not just military sales (critical for all MAAGs on the
Arabian peninsula).
—Military facilities in Pakistan.
—French aircraft carrier to replace U.S. carrier in the Mediterranean?

141.
Memorandum From Hedley Donovan to President Carter
Washington, February 20, 1980

142.
Editorial Note
On March 27, 1980, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance testified before
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in order to provide an over-
view of the Carter administration’s foreign policy. Vance noted that for
the past 4 months concern had been focused on southwest Asia, Iran,
the Persian Gulf, and Afghanistan. Decisions made in any of those
areas, he continued, had to be placed within a broader, strategic out-
line. Responses needed to focus on immediate concerns, while taking
into account long-term strategic interests. Vance suggested that his ap-
pearance before the Committee could serve the purpose of solidifying
“broad agreement on the general course that best suits America’s in-
terests and needs in the coming decade.” Recognizing that a full con-
sensus proved unlikely given the complexity of an independent world,
he, nonetheless, stated:
“But I do believe that despite differences on decisions that we have
made and that we and others will make during the 1980s, our nation
can now shape a new foreign policy consensus about our goals in the
world and the essential strands of our strategy to pursue them.
“This consensus can be built around agreement on two central
points.
“—First, the United States must maintain a military balance of
power. Our defense forces must remain unsurpassed. Our strategic de-
terrent must be unquestionable. Our conventional forces must be
strong enough and flexible enough to meet the full range of military
threats we may face. As a global power, we must maintain the global
military balance. Our strength is important to our own safety, to a
strong foreign policy free from coercion, to the confidence of allies and
friends, and to the future of reciprocal arms control and other negotia-
tions. Our strength also buttresses regional balances that could be upset
by the direct or indirect use of Soviet power.
“—The second central point is this: that our military strength,
while an essential condition for an effective foreign policy, is not in it-
self a sufficient condition. We must nurture and draw upon our other
strengths as well—our alliances and other international ties, our eco-
nomic resources, our ability to deal with diversity, and our ideals. By
drawing fully on these strengths, we can help shape world events
now in ways that reduce the likelihood of using military force later. A
global American foreign policy can succeed only if it has both these
dimensions.
“Some have argued that a strong response to Soviet military
growth and aggression is overreaction. But to disregard the growth of
Soviet military programs and budgets or to explain away aggression as
a defensive maneuver is to take refuge in illusion.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“It is just as illusory, and just as dangerous, to believe that there
can be a fortress America or that the world will follow our lead solely
because of our military strength. America’s future depends not only on
our growing military power; it also requires the continued pursuit of
energy security and arms control, of human rights and economic devel-
opment abroad.
“As we look to the 1980s, our first obligation is to see the world
clearly. We confront a serious and sustained Soviet challenge, which is
both military and political. Their military buildup continues unabated.
The Soviet Union has shown a greater willingness to employ that
power directly and through others. In that sense, Afghanistan is a
manifestation of a larger problem, evident also in Ethiopia, South
Yemen, Southeast Asia, and elsewhere.
“The world economic order is undergoing dramatic change. An
energy crisis has rocked its foundations. Economic interdependence
has become a daily reality for the citizens of every nation. At the same
time, the assertion of national independence has reshaped the political
geography of the planet. There is a profusion of different systems and
allegiances and a diffusion of political and military power. Within na-
tions, we see an accelerating rise in individual expectations.
“These challenges require a full American engagement in the
world—a resolve to defend our vital interests with force if necessary
and to address potential causes of conflict before they erupt. These
hearings can help illuminate how best to order and serve the wide
range of interests we have in a world grown increasingly complex.
“In my remarks today, I will discuss eight central American in-
terests for the coming years. Each is broad in its own terms. But I do not
believe that any of these interests can be narrowed, much less disre-
garded, without doing damage to the others.
“—Our most basic interest, and first priority, is the physical secu-
rity of our nation—the safety of our people. This requires strong de-
fense forces and strong alliances.
“—It also requires that we and our allies firmly and carefully
manage a second area of concern: East-West relations.
“—A third area of interest—controlling the growth and spread of
nuclear and other weapons—enhances our collective security and in-
ternational stability.
“—Fourth, we must confront the global energy crisis and
strengthen the international economy; for doing so is central to our
well-being as a people and our strength as a nation.
“—A fifth interest, peace in troubled areas of the world, reduces
potential threats of wider war and removes opportunities for our rivals
to extend their influence.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
“—Our diplomacy in troubled regions and our ability to pursue
our global economic goals are strengthened by pursuing a sixth in-
terest: broadening our ties to other nations—with China, for example,
and throughout the Third World.
“—The advancement of human rights is more than an ideal. It, too,
is an interest. Peaceful gains for freedom are also steps toward stability
abroad and greater security for America.
“—And finally, we cannot disregard our interest in addressing en-
vironmental and other longer term global trends that can imperil our
future.”
Vance then discussed in greater detail these eight elements of a
broader American foreign policy before offering his concluding
remarks:
“I know that no one is more acutely aware of the breadth and com-
plexity of our challenges than the members of this committee. We face a
broad agenda. It requires constant, hard choices among compelling yet
competing interests. In a dangerous world, it requires a willingness to
defend our vital interests with force when necessary and a diplomacy
of active and constructive engagement to reduce the dangers we may
confront. It requires sacrifice in resources for our defense and help for
other nations, in reduced consumption of energy, and efforts to control
inflation. It will test our wisdom and our persistence.
“We will be badly served if we fail to understand a world of rapid
change and shy away from its complexity. The flat truth is that complex
problems can seldom be resolved by simple solutions.
“Some have said that we are trying to do too much. I say that we
cannot afford to do less, in our own national interest.
“Some say that in trying to do too much, we have accomplished
too little. I say that in strengthening our military posture, in reempha-
sizing and strengthening NATO, in negotiating the SALT II Treaty, in
normalizing relations with China, in helping to achieve peace between
Israel and Egypt and a framework for a comprehensive peace in the
Middle East, in advancing peace in Zimbabwe, in the Panama Canal
treaties, in the successful multilateral trade negotiations and other im-
provements in the international economic system, in closer ties to de-
veloping nations, and in promoting human rights—in all these areas, I
say we are on the right road, even if it is a long and difficult one.
“Some say that in seeking peaceful change toward human justice
in every area of the world, we encourage radicalism. I say that the
world is changing, that human beings everywhere will demand a better
life. The United States must offer its own vision of a better future, or the
future will belong to others.
“Some have said that the executive and legislative branches cannot
collaborate effectively on foreign policy. I say that the record over the
past few years has been a good one.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“Some say that America is in a period of decline. I am convinced
they are wrong.
“There is no question that the years to come present a somber pros-
pect. Soviet challenge in Afghanistan and beyond, energy crisis, revo-
lutionary explosions when expectations run ahead of progress—such
current events are all too likely to be harbingers of the trends of the
coming decade. This is the reality we confront.
“But it is also a reality that our strengths—military, economic, and
political—give us an unmatched capacity for world leadership. We can
succeed if we combine power with determination, persistence, and pa-
tience. We can make progress if we promote the full range of our in-
terests and use the full range of our strengths.” (Department of State
Vance later wrote that his March 27 testimony served as his “final
opportunity as secretary of state to define and explain America’s for-
eign policy and its role in a changing world.” In assessing his appear-
ance, he noted:
“I had hoped the March 27 hearing would spark a serious discus-
sion in Congress, the press, and inside the administration about the
way the United States should conduct itself in a world in which the
many complex problems are not susceptible to solution by simple an-
swers or the use of military power alone. I was convinced that the main
lines of our foreign policy remained valid and would stand up well
under a searching cross-examination. But televised hearings do not en-
courage such debate. The senators were more interested in the events of
the moment, such as the grain embargo and energy. Senator Si Haya-
kawa carried this one step further by pressing me on the burning issue
of collecting traffic fines from Iranian students in Washington.” (Hard
Choices, pages 395–397)

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
143.
Address by Vice President Mondale
Colorado Springs, Colorado, April 12, 1980
U.S. Call for an Olympic Boycott
I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you on behalf of the hon-
orary President of the U.S. Olympic Committee—the President of the
United States. And I am delighted to be in the lovely community of Col-
orado Springs, the home of the U.S. Olympic Committee.
I speak to you as leaders dedicated to amateur sport and as citizens
dedicated to America’s best interests. I know that everyone in this room
loves our country. And I want to express the nation’s gratitude for your
efforts at Lake Placid to persuade the International Olympic Com-
mittee (IOC) to move or postpone the Moscow games. I thank your
leaders as well for stating that the committee would be guided by the
President’s decision on the best interests of the nation.
As we meet today, the lesson of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
still waits to be drawn. History holds its breath; for what is at stake is
no less than the future security of the civilized world. If one nation can
be subjugated by Soviet aggression, is any sovereign nation truly safe
original. Mondale delivered his address before the U.S. Olympic Committee House of
Delegates. Earlier drafts of the address are in the Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale
Papers, Vice Presidential Papers, Special Assistant for Speech Writing, Speech Text Files,
Address to United States Olympic Committee House of Delegates, Colorado Springs,
Colorado, April 12, 1980. Later that day, the United States Olympic Committee voted to
support the President’s call for a boycott of the Moscow games. (Steven R. Weisman,
“U.S. Olympic Group Votes to Boycott the Moscow Games,” The New York Times, April
similar mailgrams to the House of Delegates members reiterating his belief that the
USOC should vote not to send the U.S. Olympic team to Moscow: “There are times when
individuals and nations must stand firm on matters of principle. This is such a time. If we
clearly and resolutely show the way, other nations will follow.” (Public Papers: Carter,
tion in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume XXV, United Nations; Law of the Sea.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
from that fate? If 100,000 Russian troops, and the barbaric use of lethal
gas, and the specter of nightly assassinations—if these fail to alarm us,
what will? If the Soviet lunge toward the most strategic oil-rich spot on
Earth fails to unite us, what will? And if we and our allies and friends
fail to use every single peaceful means available to preserve the peace,
what hope is there that peace will long be preserved?
While history holds its breath, America has moved decisively. To
show the Soviet Union that it cannot invade another nation and still
conduct business as usual with the United States, our country has em-
bargoed 17 million tons of grain, tightened controls on high technology
trade, limited Soviet fishing in our waters, raised our defense budget to
upgrade all aspects of our forces, strengthened our naval presence in
the Indian Ocean, intensified development of our rapid deployment
forces, and offered to help other sovereign states in the region to main-
tain their security.
In the U.N. General Assembly, the United States joined more than
100 other nations in an unprecedented majority calling for the imme-
diate, unconditional, and total withdrawal of Soviet troops from Af-
ghanistan. But the President, the Congress, and the American people
understand that a world which travels to the Moscow games devalues
its condemnation and offers its complicity to Soviet propaganda.
I am convinced that the American people do not want their ath-
letes cast as pawns in that tawdry propaganda charade. And I urge you
to respect that undeniable consensus. Your decision today is not a ques-
tion of denying our Olympic team the honor they deserve; for the
American people, as you know, deeply respect the sacrifice we are
asking our athletes to make. It is no longer a question of whether partic-
ipation in the Moscow Olympics confers legitimacy on Soviet aggres-
sion. When the Communist Party prints a million handbooks to tell its
top activists that the Summer Games mean world respect for Soviet for-
eign policy, surely that issue is behind us.
Nor is it a question of drawing a line between sports and politics.
That line the Soviets long ago erased. When billions of rubles are di-
verted to the games from Soviet domestic needs; when Moscow and
other Olympic cities are purged of dissidents who might speak out;
when Soviet children who might meet Western people and ideas on the
streets are packed off to internal exile; when Soviet emissaries roam the
globe offering athletes expense-paid trips to Moscow; when Soviet
sports officials distort the number of teams committed to partici-
pating—surely the issue of Soviet politics in Soviet sports is also behind
us.
Above all, the decision you will make today is not a choice be-
tween a sports issue and a national security issue; for the President and
Congress have made it clear that the Olympic boycott is a genuine ele-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
ment of America’s response to the invasion of Afghanistan. It is an un-
ambiguous statement of our national resolve. It is a keystone in our call
to our allies for solidarity.
We must not—and cannot—break that link between America’s
power to check aggression and America’s call for an Olympic boycott.
Your vote is a test of our will, our confidence, our values, and our
power to keep the peace through peaceful means. It is not a partisan
issue—for both political parties resoundingly supported the Presi-
dent’s action in Congress. It is not a parochial issue; for the American
people overwhelmingly agree that we must not go to Moscow.
And it is not just a national issue—for citizens and governments
throughout the world share our judgment. From his exile in Gorky, An-
drei Sakharov—the unsilenceable father of human rights and the father
of the Russian H-bomb—calls on America, saying that “a united posi-
tion on the Moscow Olympic Games must obviously be a basic part” of
the world’s response. This morning, as many as 50 nations—leading
political and sports powers—await your signal to join us.
Athletes and sports organizations and national bodies around the
world await your lead to mobilize their commitment. They do so for
good reason. Today virtually every industrial nation on Earth is dan-
gerously dependent on Persian Gulf oil. How could we convince the
Soviets not to threaten the gulf, if a blow was dealt to our deterrent?
How could our government send a message to Moscow, if tomorrow’s
Pravda brags that our policies have been repudiated?
It is fitting that the same ancient nation that gave us the Olympics
also gave us democracy; for your decision here is truly a referendum on
freedom.
Berlin Olympic Games
And thus it is also a referendum on America’s character and fun-
damental values. The athletes here, and the athletes you represent, may
have been born a full generation after the Berlin Olympics. But as their
advisers and trustees, you bear the responsibility of linking that history
to their duty. For the story of Hitler’s rise is more than an unspeakable
tragedy, more than a study in tyranny. It is also a chronicle of the free
world’s failure—of opportunities not seized, aggression not opposed,
appeasement not condemned.
By the fall of 1935, the Nazis had passed the notorious Nuremberg
laws reducing the Jews to nonpersons and were flexing their military
muscle. For a hopeful moment, American opinion was galvanized—
and editorials and amateur athletic unions across the country urged a
boycott of the Berlin Olympics. An American member of the Interna-
tional Olympic Committee, Ernest Jahncke, made the plea most elo-
quently when he wrote the President of the IOC.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
If our committee permits the games to be held in . . . Germany, . . .
there will be nothing left to distinguish [the Olympic idea] from the
Nazi ideal. . . . It will take . . . years to reestablish the prestige of the
games and the confidence of the peoples of the world. Sport will lose its
beauty and its nobility and become, as it has already become in Nazi
Germany, an ugly, ignoble affair.
The call for a boycott was rejected. And the reasons for rejection
are bone chilling—even across all these decades. Do not drag sports
into the arena of politics, they were told. It will destroy the Olympic
movement, they were told. It will only penalize our American athletes,
they were told. Solutions to political problems are not the responsibility
of sporting bodies, they were told. Let us take our Jews and blacks to
Berlin and beat the Nazis, they were told. If America refuses to go, we
will be the only ones left out in the cold, they were told.
Such reasons prevailed. Only weeks after American attendance
was assured, Nazi troops took the Rhineland; and Hitler readied Ger-
many for the games. His preparations cast uncanny foreshadows. For
he expelled foreign journalists, who told the truth about persecution.
He ordered his vicious propaganda concealed from foreign visitors.
And he too looked forward to legitimacy. As Joseph Goebbels boasted
on the eve of the Olympics, the Reich expected the games “to turn the
trick and create a friendly world attitude toward Nazi political, eco-
nomic, and racial aims.”
It worked. Not even Jesse Owens’ magnificent personal triumph
diminished Hitler’s international propaganda success—a coup he
linked directly to his master race doctrine. We revere Jesse in death as
in life; for he was an exemplary American, an inspiration to millions ev-
erywhere, and a personal friend loved by many of you here today. But
neither Jesse’s achievements in Berlin nor any words spoken at the
games prevented the Reich from exploiting the Olympics toward their
own brutal ends. Listen to Nazi War Minister Albert Speer’s report on
the Fuhrer’s mood as the happy spectators left Berlin: “Hitler was ex-
ulting over the harmonious atmosphere that prevailed. . . . Interna-
tional animosity toward Nazi Germany was plainly a thing of the past,
he thought.” Before long, the Nazi war machine scarred the face of Eu-
rope, and soon the night closed in.
The Need for Sacrifice
We are far from that time—but not from that script. Like you, I un-
derstand the ideals of sport—for sportsmanship is synonymous with
President of the International Olympic Committee. (“Jahncke Asks Ban On Olympic
Games: American Committee Member Charges Germans Violate Tenets of Fair Play,”

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
fair play. Like you, I am in awe of the Olympic tradition—stretching
over centuries, reaching out across cultures.
And like every American, I know the exhilaration of Olympic vic-
tory. Few moments in my life match the electricity I felt at Lake Placid.
And few human experiences can compare to the years of sacrifice, pain,
and yearning that you and our athletes have invested in this summer.
But I also know, as you know, that some goals surpass even personal
achievement. To any young athletes who feel singled out for suffering,
I say, it is war above all that singles out our young for suffering. And it
is war that our peaceful resolve can prevent.
Everyone across the board is being asked to sacrifice. We need
only ask the farmers of the midlands if they have sacrificed. Or ask the
workers in our export industries if they have sacrificed. Or ask the com-
puter companies whose products have been embargoed. Or ask the
businesses whose years of planning have come undone. Or ask the
young sailors in the Indian Ocean task force. Or ask the American fam-
ilies whose taxes support our defense budget. Or ask the Afghan ath-
lete who faces the Soviets not on a field in Moscow but as a resistance
fighter in Kabul.
A heavy burden lies on your shoulders. We recognize the
enormous price we are asking our athletes to pay. We recognize the tre-
mendous sacrifice we are asking of sports officials. But on behalf of the
President of the United States, I assure you that our nation will do ev-
erything within its power to insure the success of the Los Angeles
games; to help the Olympic Committee restore its finances; to provide
even greater assistance to the development of amateur sport; and,
above all, to recognize the true heroism of our athletes who do not go to
Moscow.
I believe all Americans will thank you—both for the contribution
you make to our national security and to the further integrity you
confer on amateur sport; for I believe that the Olympic movement will
be forever strengthened by your courage. You will have restored to the
modern Olympics the ancient “truce of the gods.” No nation may serve
as the Olympic host while invading and subjugating another: That was
the rule for the Greek city-states, and that must be the rule again today.
Forty-five years ago, when an American official took his stand
against Berlin, he said this:
Place your great talents and influence in the service of the spirit of
fair play and chivalry—instead of the service of brutality, force, and
power . . . Take your rightful place in the history of the Olympics . . .

144.
Editorial Note
Secretary of State Cyrus Vance submitted a resignation letter to
President Jimmy Carter on April 21, 1980, citing his inability to support
Carter’s decision to launch a rescue operation to free the American hos-
tages held in Iran. At an April 11 National Security Council meeting,
participants supported the rescue attempt; Vance did not attend the
meeting as he was away from Washington. In his resignation letter,
Vance noted, “I know how deeply you have pondered your decision on
Iran. I wish I could support you in it. But for the reasons we have dis-
cussed I cannot.
“You would not be well served in the coming weeks and months
by a Secretary of State who could not offer you the public backing you
need on an issue and decision of such extraordinary importance—no
matter how firm I remain in my support on other issues, as I do, or how
loyal I am to you as our leader. Such a situation would be untenable
and our relationship, which I value so highly, would constantly suffer.”
(Department of State Bulletin, June 1980, page 2)
Vance delivered the letter to the President the afternoon of April
21:
“With great sorrow, I handed him the letter. He started to put it
away. I asked him to read it. He did, and then slowly put it in his
pocket. He said we would have to talk again. I told him that I wanted to
make it clear that I would resign whether or not the mission was suc-
cessful. I agreed to his request not to make my resignation public until
after the rescue attempt, and to remain in my position until the mission
was completed. It was clearly understood that my decision was irrevo-
cable, whatever the outcome of the rescue operation. Over the next
three days I offered whatever advice and help I could to make the oper-
ation a success.” (Hard Choices, page 411)

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
During the subsequent attempt on April 24, two U.S. aircraft col-
lided during a refueling stop, resulting in the deaths of eight Amer-
icans. For the text of Carter’s April 25 address to the nation, wherein he
indicated that the rescue operation had been aborted but that casualties
During the morning of April 28, Vance met with the President at
the White House, where he received the President’s letter accepting his
resignation. He and Department of State Spokesman Hodding Carter
III rode back to the Department of State and discussed the press confer-
ence Vance intended to hold later that morning. Vance recalled that it
was “a sad moment and not the way I had wanted to end the work we
had begun in January 1977 when we had forged what I believed, and
still believe, was a foreign policy worthy of a great nation.” (Hard
Choices, page 412)
Vance announced his departure from his position during a
briefing held in the Department of State’s press room:
“I believe that all of you have received copies of my letter to the
President and the President’s letter to me.
“I have the greatest admiration for the President, and I am most
grateful for the opportunity which he has given me to serve him and
our nation.
“As I leave office, I’m proud to have been able to participate in the
important foreign policy actions and new directions which have been
taken under President Carter’s leadership. They are important, not
only for the present but for the future of our nation as well.
“As you know, I could not support the difficult decision taken by
the President on the rescue operation in Iran. I, therefore, submitted my
resignation to the President last week. I have told the President that I
continue to support fully his policies on other foreign policy issues. I
have assured him that he can count on my support for his continued
leadership of our nation. He will always have my deepest respect and
affection.
“Thank you all whom I have gotten to know well over these last 3½
years. That has also been a pleasure for me.
“Q. What is it about the rescue mission that you could not support?
“A. I do not want to go into details. I think my position is very clear
on that, and that’s all I want to say. Thank you very much.
“Q. Is anybody else leaving with you?
“A. No. I hope that everyone in the Department will stay and sup-
port the Acting Secretary and the President, and I’m going to tell him
that.
“Q. Are you going back to Wall Street?

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
“A. I haven’t made up my mind what I’m going to do. That might
On April 29, the President announced from the Briefing Room at
the White House that he had designated Senator Edmund S. Muskie
(D–Maine) as his Secretary of State nominee, touting Muskie’s “exten-
sive knowledge of foreign affairs.” Following Carter’s announcement,
Muskie offered a brief statement:
“The world is in turmoil. The issues are complex. But I believe that
in this instability the United States must be perceived as stable and as a
source of strength in the free world. As Secretary of State, I will devote
my full energies to achieve these goals. I respond to this challenge with
genuine hope. America remains a land of great opportunity.
“If these are dangerous times, they are also times of uncommon
opportunity. I harbor no doubt that the great majority of Americans
share that view and will sacrifice to that end, and I cannot stand in the
wings when so much is at risk and so many have raised questions
about the country’s sense of purpose.
“And so let me end as I began: First to thank the people of Maine
for their unstinting support for many years and to recognize a great
contribution already made by Secretary Vance and my thanks to the
President for an awesome but a stimulating challenge as I face the
months ahead. Thank you, Mr. President.” (Public Papers: Carter,

145.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, May 1, 1980
SUBJECT
Foreign Policy Discussion (U)
I think it would be useful if in the informal group discussion you
took Senator Muskie through the following process:
1. Outline to him your fundamental approach to world affairs and
the key principles of your foreign policy.
2. Indicate to him very clearly the central guidelines that you have
set on some key issues. This is essential to avoid new disputes and zig-
zags. The world must understand that there is constancy and conti-
nuity in Washington and that we are not entering into a new grand de-
bate. (You might give him your State of the Union message2 to read and
tell him that this is where you stand.)
3. Focus on those genuinely important issues that do require a
policy review and new decisions. Indicate the preparations needed and
our approach to upcoming key events (a calendar is attached).
4. Run through more quickly the remainder of the U.S. foreign
policy agenda (as per the attached papers).
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
To facilitate the above, I would recommend that you proceed as
follows:
1. Fundamental Approach. The distinctive quality of the Carter for-
eign policy is that it blends the two main strands of traditional Amer-
ican thinking on foreign policy issues—strands that have often been
seen as in conflict.
You favor a more open, positive approach toward the Third
World—but you also believe it is essential to maintain a power equilib-
rium. The former is designed to shape a more decent world in a revolu-
tionary age—for otherwise America would be isolated and increasingly
vulnerable. The latter is designed to prevent Soviet exploitation of that
revolutionary process and to create the preconditions for a more gen-
uine and stable detente. (McGovern and Kennedy have emphasized the
former and slighted the latter; Nixon and Kissinger have stressed the
latter and ignored the former.)
In addition, in the more immediate future, we must face the fact
that the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan poses a very major strategic
threat, both in the region and because it is clearly international aggres-
sion, and failure to resist it undermines a central principle of world
order since the Second World War. It is not Afghanistan per se which is
the issue but the simultaneous disintegration of Iran as the American
strategic pivot and the disappearance of Afghanistan as a buffer that in-
vites Soviet political meddling and quite possibly even military intru-
sion into a region of vital importance to us. This is why it is no exagger-
ation to say that we confront the most serious long-term strategic
challenge since the inception of the Cold War. Failure to recognize its
magnitude and to respond accordingly would be an historic error, with
probably irreversible consequences.
(Your State of the Union message is germane here.)
2. Central Guidelines. On four broad issues, your position is clear
and firm, and there will be no deviation:
a. Soviet Union: The Soviet Union must be made aware tangibly that
aggressive behavior entails costs. This means no sudden warming of
relations while the Soviets are busy suppressing the Afghans and thus
altering the strategic situation in the third central strategic zone of vital
importance to us.
b. Western Europe/Japan: We need to establish close unity, and that
will be the major purpose of the Venice Summit. At the same time, the
Allies must be made to recognize that detente is not divisible and they
tation on the summit is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. III, Foreign Economic
Policy. For the text of the declaration issued at the conclusion of the summit, see Depart-

146.
Statement by Secretary of State-Designate Muskie
Washington, May 7, 1980
Let me begin with a basic point: I believe now, as I believed a week
ago, that the Congress must be a full partner in designing our interna-
tional posture and must be fully informed on its implementation. The
Administration, the nation, and our foreign policies are the stronger
when the Congress is consulted before major policy decisions are
made, and during the course of major negotiations.
This is the first of what I expect to be many discussions with this
committee. I look to Capitol Hill—to my colleagues and friends here—
for guidance as well as support, for suggestions and healthy challenge.
I also want to take a moment to offer some general views—on our for-
eign policy, on the role of the Secretary of State, on the connection be-
tween our international posture and our condition at home.
We are a nation of great power. Our actions and decisions have
global effects. For our own people, for our friends around the world—
and for those who are not our friends—our fundamental course must
always be clear.
I have brought no detailed new blueprint to this hearing. Only
days ago I was seated on your side of this room. In the days ahead I will
be carefully reviewing all significant elements of our international pos-
ture. Presumably I will recommend to the President that we adjust
some old policies and assert some new initiatives. But I can certainly
state this much now; I would not be here if I did not support the central
elements of the foreign policy now in place—the policy that has been
fashioned by President Carter and Secretary Vance.
While there may be changes, there will also be continuity. Our na-
tion’s foreign policies will continue to serve our nation’s interests—the
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in support of his nomination. The Senate con-
on May 8, Muskie was sworn in as Secretary of State. For the President’s and Muskie’s

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
same interests that previous Administrations and previous Secretaries
of State have sought to defend and advance.
Foreign Policy
Let me begin with my fundamental beliefs. I believe in strong
American defenses. We must maintain the military balance. We must
continue to modernize all elements of our defense forces. Dollars spent
on defense, as in any other area, must never be dollars wasted.
I believe in strong alliances—in our collective defense, in contin-
uing to strengthen our forces, in consulting regularly and with trust.
I believe in a firm and balanced policy toward the Soviet Union.
The search for common ground has been disrupted not by American
preference but by Soviet action. While aggression continues we must
not relent in imposing a heavy price. As Soviet policies allow, we must
never be blind to opportunities to work for peace.
I believe that balanced arms control agreements fortify our secu-
rity. The SALT II agreement is no gift to our rivals; it can serve our own
interests by limiting the threats we face.
I believe in a positive diplomacy of active engagement. It is in our
interest to work for peace in troubled areas, especially the Middle East.
It is to our advantage to improve our relations with nations which have
interests in common with us—including many whose views and values
differ from ours. We must build our new relationship with the People’s
Republic of China. We must continue to broaden our ties to the nations
of the Third World and of Eastern Europe.
And I believe that America must stand for human progress. Our
freedom and rights are more secure when freedom and human dignity
are advanced around the world. Our own economy is strengthened by
the economic progress of others. We must lead international efforts to
surmount an international energy crisis and its consequences; to ad-
dress the condition of hundreds of millions of human beings living in
degrading poverty; and to strengthen an international trading system
that is fair to our workers and our farmers, our businessmen and our
consumers.
These past months have been times of great trial. Terrorism in Iran,
aggression in Afghanistan, radical escalation in the price of petro-
leum—these and other challenges will test us fully in months to come.
But the past few years have been times also of accomplishment
and strong American leadership. Modernization of conventional and
theater nuclear forces in NATO, Camp David, SALT II, China normali-
zation, the Panama Canal treaty, peace in Zimbabwe, regular economic
summits, successful multilateral trade negotiations, human rights ad-
vances in many countries, each is a new strength we can use to buttress
American leadership in the future.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I am confident of that leadership or I would not be here before you.
Americans want their country to be a constructive international pres-
ence. And we are. We have many strengths, not least of which is our
system of values, founded upon a belief in individual worth.
Role of the Secretary of State
Your inquiry today is directed not only to the substance of our for-
eign policies but also to my concept of the role of the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State must carry out a number of duties. And priorities
must be set among them. These are my priorities.
First, and most important, the Secretary of State is the principal ad-
viser to the President on foreign policy issues. He must have the pri-
mary responsibility for recommending our foreign policy course, and
seeing that the President’s decisions are then implemented. President
Carter has made it clear that he expects me to play this role, and I in-
tend to do so.
Second, the Secretary of State is the President’s principal spokes-
man for his foreign policies. I intend to be very active in this role. I
strongly believe in the value of clear and direct public discussion of our
foreign policies. And I intend to consult very closely with the Congress
on the shape and direction of our foreign policies.
Third, the Secretary of State must make sure that the State Depart-
ment and the Foreign Service, as a whole, are fully engaged in the proc-
esses by which policy is made and in discussions of foreign policy with
the Congress and our public. Neither the Secretary nor the Department
can succeed if they do not have confidence in each other, and work
together.
I intend to make full use of the Department and our Ambassadors
in a fourth role: the conduct of our diplomacy abroad. There are times
when only a Secretary of State can manage a negotiation for our nation.
But to the extent possible, I will limit my own travel and rely on our
skilled diplomats.
A Secretary of State has other roles, as well: in administration of
the State Department, in helping manage and coordinate the overseas
activities of U.S. Government agencies, and in managing the flow of in-
formation from the State Department to the White House and other
agencies. Each must be carried out efficiently. Each should require less
of the Secretary’s time than the first roles I discussed.
This is my concept of the job. The President has said that he sup-
ports me in it. I will need your support, and counsel, as well.
Concluding Thoughts
Let me conclude with these thoughts. I come to this new assign-
ment after 22 years as a member of the U.S. Senate. I have participated

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
with many of you in the foreign policy debates of the past decade—in-
deed, the past generation.
Through these trials our society has been moved to strengthen and
vigorously exercise our machinery for dissent and disagreement. That
is all to the good. We are better for it.
But our challenges call on us to focus as intently upon another part
of our national character—our ability to pull together and respond as
Americans when our interests are under attack.
I do not believe there can be unanimity on the great and complex
questions before us. But there can be a spirit of cooperation as we ad-
dress them. I appear before you today in that spirit.
147.
Address by President Carter
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, May 9, 1980
Chairman Yarnall and President Bodine, Members of Congress, ladies and
gentlemen:
[Omitted here are the President’s introductory remarks.]
For the past 6 months, all of our policies abroad have been con-
ducted in the glare of two crises: the holding of American hostages in
Iran and the brutal invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. In
meeting these crises our tactics must change with changing circum-
stances. But our goals will not change and have not wavered.
We will not rest until our fellow Americans held captive in Iran—
against every tenet of law and decency—are safe and home free.
Along with other nations who have condemned Soviet aggression,
we will continue to impose economic and political costs on the Soviet
Union until it withdraws its armed forces and restores the independ-
ence of Afghanistan.
These two crises underline the reality that our world is indeed a
dangerous place, but what I want to emphasize today is that amid the
crises of the moment, no matter how profoundly significant they are,
1: p.m. in the Grand Ballroom of the Fairmont Hotel before the World Affairs Council
of Philadelphia.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the fundamentals of American foreign policy are being carried forward
with consistency, with strength, and with determination.
The central reality that confronts America today is that of a com-
plex world, a world that is turbulent because it is politically awakened
in its entire breadth for the first time in its collective history.
Our world is one of conflicting hopes, ideologies, and powers. It’s
a revolutionary world which requires confident, stable, and powerful
American leadership—and that’s what it is getting and that’s what it
will continue to get—to shift the trend of history away from the specter
of fragmentation and toward the promise of genuinely global coopera-
tion and peace. So, we must strive in our foreign policy to blend com-
mitment to high ideals with a sober calculation of our own national
interests.
Unchanging American ideals are relevant to this troubling area of
foreign policy and to this troubled era in which we live. Our society has
always stood for political freedom. We have always fought for social
justice, and we have always recognized the necessity for pluralism.
Those values of ours have a real meaning, not just in the past, 200 years
ago or 20 years ago, but now, in a world that is no longer dominated by
colonial empires and that demands a more equitable distribution of po-
litical and economic power.
But in this age of revolutionary change, the opportunities for vio-
lence and for conflict have also grown. American power must be strong
enough to deal with that danger and to promote our ideals and to de-
fend our national interests. That’s why the foreign policy which we’ve
shaped over the last 3 years must be based simultaneously on the pri-
macy of certain basic moral principles—principles founded on the en-
hancement of human rights—and on the preservation of an American
military strength that is second to none. This fusion of principle and
power is the only way to ensure global stability and peace while we ac-
commodate to the inevitable and necessary reality of global change and
progress.
The complexity of interrelated and sometimes disturbing events
and circumstances requires that we in America increase the degree of
public understanding of our foreign policy and public support for it. It
is extremely complicated. It is rapidly changing in its tactical confronta-
tions on a day-by-day basis, and the degree in a democracy with which
Americans do understand these complex issues is a prerequisite for
success. Foreign policy no longer has a single or a simple focus, such as
defeating Nazi aggression or repelling a monolithic Stalinist threat. In-
stead, Americans must be mature enough to recognize that we need to
be strong and we need to be accommodating at the same time. We need
to protect our own interests vigorously while finding honorable ways

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
to accommodate those new claimants to economic and political power
which they have not had in the past.
There are two obvious preconditions for an effective American for-
eign policy: a strong national economy and a strong national defense.
That’s why I placed the highest priority on the development of a na-
tional energy policy, which our country has never had. That’s why we
must win the struggle against inflation—and I’ve been very pleased
lately at the trend in interest rates and the good news we had this
morning on the Producer Price Index. The Congress and I are moving
resolutely toward this goal; in fact, every single American is involved.
This common effort to deal with a worldwide economic challenge does
require some sacrifice, and I’m determined that the sacrifice will be
fairly shared.
The response of our democracy to economic challenges will deter-
mine whether we will be able to manage the challenge of other global
responsibilities in the 1980’s and beyond. If we cannot meet these inter-
national economic problems successfully, then our ability to meet mili-
tary and political and diplomatic challenges will be doubtful indeed.
Although it will not be easy, the innate advantages of our Nation’s nat-
ural bounty which God has given us and the common commitment of a
free people who comprise American society give us the assurance of
success.
We must also be militarily strong. The fact is that for 15 years the
Soviet Union has been expanding its military capabilities far out of pro-
portion to its needs for defense—a 4- or 5-percent real growth above the
inflation rate compounded annually for 15 years has caused us some
concern. For much of this same period, our spending for defense had
been going down. If these adverse trends had continued, we would
have found ourselves facing a severe military imbalance, an imbalance
all the more threatening because of mounting global turbulence. That’s
why I have launched a broad modernization of our strategic and con-
ventional forces and worked to strengthen our alliances. We and our
allies have pledged ourselves to sustained, real annual increases in our
defense spending.
Our task is to build together a truly cooperative global community,
to compose a kind of global mosaic which embraces the wealth and di-
versity of the Earth’s peoples, cultures, and religions. This will not be
an easy task. The philosophical basis of such a community must be re-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
spect for human rights as well as respect for the independence of
nations.
In promoting that prospect for a future of peace, we will stay on
the steady course to which we’ve been committed now for the last 3½
years. We pursue five major objectives; first, to enhance not only eco-
nomic but also political solidarity among the industrialized demo-
cracies; second, to establish a genuinely cooperative relationship with
the nations of the Third World; third, to persevere in our efforts for
peace in the Middle East and in other troubled areas of the world;
fourth, to defend our strategic interests, especially those which are now
threatened in Southwest Asia; and fifth, to advance arms control, espe-
cially through agreed strategic arms limitations with the Soviet Union,
and to maintain along with this a firm and a balanced relationship with
the Soviets.
Our first objective, solidarity with our allies, is the touchstone of
our foreign policy. Without such solidarity, the world economy and in-
ternational politics may well degenerate into disorder. This is why
we’ve led the North Atlantic Alliance in its program to upgrade its con-
ventional forces. And last winter, in an historic decision, NATO agreed
to strengthen its nuclear missiles in Europe in order to respond to a
very disturbing Soviet missile buildup there.
Next month the seven leading industrial democracies will hold a
summit meeting in Venice. I look forward to being there with the other
six leaders of our most important allies. It’s our collective intention not
only to make the summit another milestone for global economic coop-
eration but also to advance our political and our strategic solidarity.
Second, we will persevere in our efforts to widen the scope of our
cooperation with the newly awakened nations of the Third World. By
the end of this century, 85 percent of the world’s population will be
living in Latin America, Asia, and Africa. In the last several years,
through the Panama Canal treaties, through our commitment to ma-
jority rule in Africa, and through normalization of relationships with
China, we have vastly improved the relationship of the United States
with these regions. We can be proud of our accomplishments in
building strong new bridges to the developing world.
The United States respects the desire of the developing nations for
genuine nonalignment, and we respect the nonaligned movement as
the expression of that desire. Nations which value their own independ-
ence are already resisting efforts to subvert the nonaligned movement
and make it a tool of Soviet foreign policy. Last year’s meeting in Ha-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
vana was a notable example of Soviet failure, through their puppet
Castro regime, to convince the other nonaligned countries to be subser-
vient to the Soviets. The United States is eager to work with countries
who pride themselves on their independence for the resolution of con-
flicts and for the promotion of greater global social justice.
Third, we’ll continue to work for peace in the Middle East. Such
peace is essential to all parties concerned. Israel deserves peace, and Is-
rael needs peace for its long-term survival. The Arab nations require
peace in order to satisfy the legitimate rights of the Palestinians and to
ensure that their own social development can move forward without
disruption and without foreign intrusion. The West, including the
United States, must have peace in the Middle East or run grave risks
that the radicalization of that area will draw outsiders into its explosive
conflicts.
The Camp David process has already led to the first peace treaty
between Israel and an Arab state. Of course, Egypt is the largest and the
most important and the strongest Arab state. We are determined to
reach a comprehensive settlement, and we will not be diverted from
that goal.
Sol Linowitz, our negotiator, is just now returning from the Middle
East. And I will be meeting with him this weekend to get a full report
from him on progress made and to determine the steps that our country
will take in the coming weeks to bring a successful conclusion to this
very difficult effort.
As we continue our efforts in the Middle East, I take pride as well
in the contributions that we have also made in other areas, such as the
Panama Canal Treaty already mentioned and the achievement of peace
and majority rule in Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe. These are major accom-
plishments, not only of benefit to the people directly involved but to
our national interest as well. And it may very well be that in retrospect
in years ahead, looking back on this administration and this time, that
those particular efforts, making new friends among literally billions of
people, as in China and Africa, this will be recognized as the most im-
portant achievement of our time.
And fourth, and very important: The West must defend its stra-
tegic interests wherever they are threatened. Since 1945 the United
States has been committed to the defense of our hemisphere and of
Western Europe, and then later of the Far East, notably Japan and

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Korea. These commitments for a common defense are very valuable to
the people involved in those other areas, and of course they are ex-
tremely valuable to us as well.
In recent years it’s become increasingly evident that the well-being
of those vital regions and our own country depend on the peace, sta-
bility, and independence of the Middle East and the Persian Gulf area.
Yet both the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the pervasive and pro-
gressive political disintegration of Iran put the security of that region in
grave jeopardy.
I want to reemphasize what I said in my State of the Union Ad-
dress on January 23d, and I quote:
“Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by any outside
force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an
assault on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such
an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military
force.”
Peace is what we want. Peace is what we have maintained. Peace is
a prerequisite to progress. Peace is a policy of our country. The mainte-
nance of peace must be predicated on adequate American strength and
a recognition of that strength, not only by our own people and our
allies but by our potential adversaries as well.
We have been provoked in the last few months. Every action has
been designed to take advantage not of our military force, which is for-
midable and unequaled, but on the benefits of the use of our alliances
and on economic, political, and diplomatic efforts. The steps that we
are taking on our own, and with the cooperation of others, involve
complicated measures, considerable expense, and a careful balance be-
tween the collective security needs of the region involved and its polit-
ical realities. These political realities, again, are difficult to understand,
extremely complex, and in every instance rapidly changing. We are
making good progress. We must, and we will, make more progress.
The necessity of common action in the Southwest Asian region is
dictated not by any belligerence on the part of peace-loving nations, but
by the clear strategic threat that stems from the Soviet invasion of Af-
ghanistan. A failure to respond convincingly to that contemptuous act
of aggression would only invite its repetition.
Beyond the violence done to Afghanistan’s independence and its
people, the Red Army troops consolidating their hold there are also
taking positions from which Soviet imperialism could be extended
more deeply and more dangerously in the politics of this vital area. Af-
ghanistan had long been a buffer against outsiders seeking to dominate
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
that region. Any quick examination of a map will convince you of the
truth of that statement. That is the historic role to which Afghanistan
must be restored.
Soviet success in their invasion of Afghanistan, even at the high
cost in blood and the high cost in respectability which Moscow is now
paying, could turn Afghanistan from a roadblock against aggression
into a launching pad for future incursions. This would threaten Pak-
istan and Iran, but not just those nations alone. Soviet aggression in Af-
ghanistan, unless checked, confronts all the world with the most se-
rious, long-term strategic challenge since the cold war began. To
underestimate the magnitude of that challenge would constitute an his-
toric error, an error with probably historic consequences.
America’s position is clear. It is consistent, as well, with the in-
terests and with the commitment of our allies, whose well-being, along
with our own, is intimately tied to the security and the independence of
this strategically vital region. We must therefore work together in
meeting the challenge which we face in common.
Our goal is the withdrawal of Soviet occupying troops, the neu-
trality or non-alignment of Afghanistan as a nation, and the encourage-
ment of the formation there of a government acceptable to the Afghan
people. Those goals and commitments are clear, they are simple,
they’re extremely important, and they are shared with almost every
other people on Earth. Within this region itself the nations must also re-
alize that our desires match theirs—to cooperate in the preservation of
the region’s independence, stability, and peace.
Fifth, this administration has been and remains committed to arms
control, especially to strategic arms limitations, and to maintain a firm
and balanced relationship with the Soviet Union. Our resolve to pursue
this goal remains as strong as ever.
Early this morning I had breakfast with the new Secretary of State,
Ed Muskie, and with my other close foreign affairs and defense ad-
visers. We expect later on this coming week that Ed Muskie will meet
with the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union. They will be discussing
these issues, again, in a clear, consistent, forceful, proper, balanced
way. One statement that we will make very clearly is that arms control
and strategic arms limitation is of crucial importance to the United
States, to the people of the Soviet Union, and to all other people on
Earth.
Attendees included Muskie, Brown, Christopher, Jordan, Donovan, Cutler, and Brzezin-
ski. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary)

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The SALT II agreement is a major accomplishment of my adminis-
tration. It contributes directly to the security of the United States, and
we intend to abide by the treaty’s terms as long as the Soviet Union, as
observed by us, complies with those terms as well. Of course, we will
seek its ratification at the earliest opportune time.
The time is also fast approaching when we must think beyond
SALT II, to negotiating wider and more comprehensive arrangements
dealing both with additional categories of strategic nuclear weapons
and with weapons of less than intercontinental capability. If the decade
of the 1980’s is not to become the decade of violence, we must make re-
newed efforts to stabilize the arms competition and to widen the scope
of arms control arrangements. After close consultation with our allies
and with the Soviet Union we intend to pursue these expanded efforts
to control weapons of all kinds.
De´tente with the Soviets remains our goal, but de´tente must be
built on a firm foundation of deterrence. The Soviets must understand
that they cannot recklessly threaten world peace. They cannot commit
aggression, and they, in doing that, must realize that they cannot still
enjoy the benefits of cooperation with the West, and specifically with
us. They must understand that their invasion of Afghanistan has had a
profound adverse effect on American public attitudes toward the So-
viet Union.
We represent a strong but peaceful nation, and there can be no
business as usual in the face of aggression. The Soviets will not succeed
in their constant efforts to divide the Alliance in Europe or to lull us
into a false belief that somehow Europe can be an island of de´tente
while aggression is carried out elsewhere. But let me be equally clear
that the way to improved relations is open if the Soviets alter their con-
duct. That is the path we prefer.
Together these five objectives that I have outlined are the compass
points that guide America’s course in this world of change and chal-
lenge. They link our specific actions to each other, to the past, and to the
future.
Our foreign policy is designed to be responsive to the revolu-
tionary age in which we live. To be effective it must have the wise un-
derstanding and the wide support of the American people. That de-
pends on public realization that foreign policy is not a matter of instant
success. We must expect prolonged management of seemingly intrac-
table situations and often contradictory realities. To play our historic
role of protecting our interests and at the same time preserving the
peace, the United States must be steady and constant. Our commitment
to American ideals must be unchanging, and our power must be ade-
quate and credible.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
While we seek to attain our broad ultimate objectives, we must
never lose sight of immediate human suffering. We’ve not forgotten
and we will not forget the 53 Americans imprisoned in Iran. Our Na-
tion places a great value on human life and on human freedom. We will
continue to make every effort, using peaceful means if possible, and
through collective action with our allies, to obtain the release of our
countrymen. And we will remind the Iranian leaders that the integrity
and the independence of their own country can only suffer from this
policy of theirs that led to international isolation and also internal dis-
integration. We have no permanent quarrel with the Iranian people.
We wish to fashion a relationship of dignity with them, once this illegal
action has been put behind us.
Our Nation has continued to act responsibly and in good faith
toward both the people and the leaders of Iran. Our rescue attempt was
a mission of mercy, not a military attack. No Iranian was killed or
harmed in any way. Its only aim was to rescue innocent victims of ter-
rorist exploitation. I regret only that it did not succeed and that eight
gallant young men died in the accident as the rescue team was leaving
its desert rendezvous.
This morning I participated in a memorial service for those eight
young men. And before the service I met individually with every
family involved. As I approached them I had some trepidation, but in
every instance they reached their arms out for me, and we embraced
each other, and I could tell that their concern was about me, not about
them. And they made comments to me, “God bless you, Mr. President.
We are praying for you, Mr. President. And we are proud of our son or
our husband, who was willing to give his life for our country and for
freedom.”
Our commitment to a world that represents human rights has been
heard by all people, by free people and also by those who do not know
the meaning of freedom. The eagerness of large numbers of Cubans, for
instance, to flee their own country is eloquent testimony to the failure
of the totalitarian Castro regime. We must ensure that the Cubans who
arrive in the United States and the Haitians who arrive in the United
States will be treated with all the humanity and the compassion which
we’ve extended to other groups and which we extend to each other.
Every family, probably, in this room which came to our country
came here as immigrants, sometimes as refugees, and we should not be
callous to those who come in our present day and age under the same
or even more difficult circumstances. In order to bring an end to the
suffering and the death on the high seas and to permit us to best allo-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
cate scarce Federal resources, the process of bringing in these refugees
must be orderly, and it must be in accordance with our laws.
We’re working vigorously, yesterday and today, with 16 nations
and with international organizations, at a conference on refugees in
Costa Rica, to develop alternatives that will permit safe and orderly
evacuation of the Cubans who are seeking to leave. For ourselves, we
will give highest priority to family reunification, and we prefer, of
course, prescreening in Cuba or in a third country, such as Costa Rica.
Let me emphasize again that we treat those seeking asylum and those
who are refugees from Cuba, from Haiti, and from other countries,
equally, on a case-by-case basis as is required by American law.
And finally I’d like to say to you that America’s foreign policy
must always reflect the kind of people we are. We are a strong people,
we are a caring people. We care about human rights, we care about de-
cent living standards, we care about the independence of nations, and
we care about the rights of individual human beings. We have a sober,
responsible recognition that American power is especially important in
a turbulent world where others depend upon us for their safety and for
their freedom. Our interests and our ideals serve each other. Our power
must be used in the service of both—interest and ideals.
The course I have mapped to you today in this brief outline form is
neither simple nor easy, but it’s a sound course, it’s a safe course, which
we must pursue.
Our foreign policy deserves your understanding and your sup-
port, not only for our Nation’s own security but in order that people ev-
erywhere can be certain of America’s commitment to use its vast power
with a clear, firm, steady purpose—to seek for all humankind what we
have: a future of progress, of freedom, and of peace.
Thank you very much.

148.
Summary of Conclusions of a Policy Review Committee
Meeting
SUBJECT
U.S. Relations with the Allies (S)
PARTICIPANTS
State
Secretary Edmund Muskie
Deputy Secretary Warren Christopher
Mr. George Vest, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of European Affairs
Mr. Harold Saunders, Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Near Eastern and South
Asian Affairs
Treasury
Deputy Secretary Robert Carswell
OSD
Ambassador Robert Komer, Under Secretary for Policy
Mr. Frank Kramer, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for International
Security Affairs
Agriculture
Secretary Bob Bergland
Dr. Dale Hathaway, Under Secretary for International Affairs and Commodity
Programs
Commerce
Deputy Secretary Luther Hodges (Acting Secretary)
Mr. Homer Moyer, General Counsel
JCS
Lt. General John Pustay, Assistant to the Chairman
Mr. Bruce Clarke, Director, National Foreign Assessment Center
Mr. Joe Zaring, NIO for Western Europe
USUN
Ambassador Donald McHenry
White House
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski
Mr. David Aaron
Ambassador Henry Owen
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
NSC
Mr. Robert D. Blackwill
Brig. General William Odom
Mr. Marshall Brement
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
In opening the discussion, Secretary Muskie asked CIA if our lack of
success with the Allies in persuading them to respond vigorously to the
Afghanistan crisis was an indication that they disagreed with our stra-
tegic analysis of the situation. He noted that our original rationale had
been to try to persuade the Soviets to withdraw and to deter repetition
of the Soviet invasion. The Secretary asked if the Europeans had in ef-
fect accepted a permanent Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. CIA said
yes, Ambassador Komer thought that was indeed the case, and David
Aaron added that there was an important train of thought in Eu-
rope that argued that we would in the end have to trade Western ac-
ceptance of the Babrak regime for eventual Soviet withdrawal from
Afghanistan. (S)
Responding to Secretary Muskie’s observation that these issues
should be discussed at the Venice Summit, Dr. Brzezinski stressed that
it was important for the leaders of the West to talk together in detail
about the strategic challenge, either formally or informally at dinner.
Before going to the Summit, the President would have to decide if he
wished to pose sharply and directly the strategic issues we confront, or
to soft-pedal them. Dr. Brzezinski thought that the President should
use the Venice forum to portray the Soviet challenge as he saw it and to
make clear that palliatives such as a partial Soviet withdrawal from Af-
ghanistan would not work. With this approach the President would
stress that if we did not act to meet the Soviet threat in Southwest Asia,
a fundamental tipping of history would occur. Giscard, Schmidt and
Ohira all had said that they more or less concurred with our strategic
assessment, but it was important to get their collective agreement at
Venice to our view of the implications of Afghanistan. If we could do
that, the individual measures we had proposed would then be easier to
achieve. Therefore, the President should make a tough-minded, force-
ful statement at Venice. (S)
Secretary Muskie observed that if we fell back from any of our ef-
forts so far to apply punitive measures against the Soviets, we would
inevitably have reduced in European eyes the urgency of our evalu-
ation of the crisis and made it easier for them to minimize their own
ticipants released statements on Afghanistan, diplomatic hostage-taking, refugees, and

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
contributions in meeting the crisis. He thought the President should
make a statement in Venice in a way to force the Allies to face up to the
issue. The President should ask whether the Allies agreed with our
strategic evaluation or not. Dr. Brzezinski agreed and said that it was
important to set a higher standard for European action than we thought
they could probably meet. This would show U.S. leadership and also
realistically recognize that we had to ask for more in order to get the
minimally acceptable. (S)
In beginning to go through the individual measures we had pur-
sued relating to Afghanistan, Secretary Muskie asked Secretary Bergland
to address the issue of the grain embargo. Bergland observed that this
matter would be decided by something over which we had no con-
trol—weather. If the Soviet Union could harvest 225 metric tons of
grain this year, it could muddle through with minimal grain imports
whatever we did. We would not know until late June or July how the
Soviet crop would turn out. Under Secretary Hathaway added that Ar-
gentina would not cooperate with us in this endeavor and that the key
to holding at last year’s export level to the Soviet Union was Canada. If
Canada cooperated with us, Australia would follow. (S)
Hathaway stressed that in order to gain Canadian cooperation,
Presidential intervention would be necessary. The Canadian bureau-
cracy was dead set against our approach. In stressing that the Allies
were generally against us on this matter, Henry Owen said that the
chances of Canadian cooperation were less than 50–50. Moreover, if the
Soviets had an average crop year, our efforts to reduce grain exports
would not make much difference anyway. In any case, the Canadians
would make a decision on this issue in the next week or so and if we in-
tervened, it would have to be soon. Bergland agreed and stressed we
had only two alternatives—to pressure the Canadians or to abandon
this effort altogether. He thought the Canadians could be pressured but
we must act now. Secretary Muskie, observing that this issue was a cen-
terpiece of our post-Afghanistan measures, said if we dropped it this
would signal to the Europeans and the Soviets that we were in effect
dropping our anti-Afghanistan effort. We would be saying that the
problem was too tough. That would be perceived abroad as a relaxa-
tion of our determination to respond to the Soviet invasion. Dr. Brzezin-
ski agreed and said that we had no choice except to go to the Canadians.
It would be better to fail because Ottawa did not agree than to drop the
effort ourselves. The consensus at the table was thus that talking points
should be urgently drafted for the President to use in a telephone con-

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
versation with Trudeau asking that the Canadians maintain their grain
exports to the Soviet Union at last year’s level. (S)
Noting that the Allied response to our efforts to restrain export
credits to Moscow was very bleak, Secretary Muskie asked if we should
nevertheless press ahead on this issue. Dr. Brzezinski said he thought
that tactically we should continue to pressure the Europeans on credits
even though we knew we would not get their complete cooperation. To
do otherwise would send the wrong message to the Allies. At the same
time, Dr. Brzezinski stressed that we should keep our efforts private
since we did not wish to inflate this matter publicly to a point at which
our lack of success became a public defeat for the President. Secretary
Muskie registered the participants’ agreement that we should continue
to push the Europeans on credits. (S)
Moving on to COCOM, Komer emphasized that this issue had
long-range strategic implications and that we should press the Euro-
peans hard. The JCS agreed. Secretary Muskie thought reduced tech-
nology transfer to the USSR had the greatest potential for giving pain to
the Soviets over time. The group thought that we should do our best
to expand the COCOM list, recognizing that the Europeans would re-
sist. Again, all concurred that this should not be a matter for public
discussion. (S)
On the Olympics, it was agreed that we should send messages this
week to ensure that there is no slippage among those who had already
decided not to go to the Olympics and to try to persuade individual
federations not to attend the Moscow Games. Near the time of the
Moscow Games, we should also emphasize to those who would be at-
tending that we hoped they would insist on reduced ceremonies (no
flags, anthems, etc.) at Moscow. Dr. Brzezinski suggested that we try to
think of ways to give more credit to those governments which would
not be going to the Olympics. Secretary Muskie agreed, and thought
perhaps the Senate might do something in this respect, as might the UN
and public groups in the U.S. Aaron wondered whether we might

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
schedule bilateral games—track with the Kenyans, swimming with the
Australians, and the like—and it was agreed that these suggestions
would be followed-up. (S)
On the remaining issues before the group, it was agreed that we
should make clear to the Allies that, aside from political-level contacts,
we intended to maintain our basic practice of minimal contacts with the
Soviets and hoped they will do the same; State promised an options
paper on the issue of debt relief for Pakistan; and all thought it would
be useful to press the Allies harder on the NATO defense response to
Afghanistan, especially the Belgians and Dutch who were apparently
not going to make their three percent defense commitment. (S)
Dr. Brzezinski then reminded the participants that the President
had endorsed the following division of labor concepts for coordinating
U.S. and Allied contributions to the security of the Persian Gulf region:
1. Most important is that our Allies increase their commitments to
NATO’s defense. This is the greatest contribution they can make while
the U.S. is building a security system for the Persian Gulf region. (S)
2. Facilitating U.S. enroute access for military contingencies in the
region is the next most helpful thing the Allies can contribute. They
should be pressed to provide that access. (S)
3. On military exercises and deployments, we should encourage
our Allies to go through with those they have already planned but not
to do more at this time. (S)
4. We should encourage the British, French, and Australians to im-
prove their rapid deployment capabilities, but we should not en-
courage them to go beyond their current plan. (S)
5. We should encourage the Allies to expand their security assist-
ance to key regional countries, particularly Turkey, but also Oman, So-
malia, Djibouti, and Sudan. We should encourage them to maintain at
least the same level of economic aid to Egypt, Turkey, and Pakistan and
to expand economic aid with the smaller countries in the region. (S)
Finally, David Aaron observed that another matter of trans-
atlantic concern in the next months was CSCE and the CDE. It was
agreed that there would be a follow-on to this meeting next week
which would discuss how this issue might affect our relations with the
Allies and, if required, what steps we should take after the President’s
call to Trudeau on Canadian grain exports. (S)

149.
Memorandum of Conversation
SUBJECT
US-Soviet Relations
PARTICIPANTS
President Jimmy Carter
Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs
Ambassador Thomas J. Watson, Jr., United States Ambassador to the Soviet
Union
Mr. Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member
The President. Congratulations on your daughter’s wedding. I hope
everything went well. (U)
Ambassador Watson. Everything was fine. Thank you very much. (U)
The President. I understand you appeared before the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee this morning. How did it go? (U)
Ambassador Watson. I think it was a good session. There were no
problems. (U)
The President. What message did you bring them? (U)
Ambassador Watson. I voiced complete support for all your policies
and everything you have been doing. I stressed the importance of even-
handedness and of getting the country behind the President. I talked
about the need for the draft, and even for universal military training, if
our adversaries as well as our allies and others throughout the world
are not going to regard us as paper tigers. (C)
The President. That is a very good message. (U)
Ambassador Watson. I very much appreciate the chance to talk with
you and I know that your time is very short. There are four points that I
would like to make to you and I have written them down. The first
point at the top of my list is real congratulations for the appointment of
Ed Muskie. I have a summer house in Maine, have had it since 1958,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
and I know Senator Muskie very well. The appointment was terrific, a
real ten strike. Was this your own idea? (U)
The President. Sometimes other people around here think of good
ideas, but this was something I thought of myself. (U)
Ambassador Watson. Well, you deserve real congratulations for it!
My second point is the need to find some way to go on with a strategic
dialogue with the Soviets, particularly if the SALT process flounders.
Both my DCM2 and I think it would be a good idea to form high level
groups of strategists from both sides to continue the dialogue process.
There has to be some way to follow up and to talk together, especially if
SALT won’t apply. (C)
(Dr. Brzezinski entered the Oval Office.)
As far as the sanctions which we are undertaking against the So-
viets, I am completely with you all the way, even though many of them
will lose their effectiveness as time goes on. But we have no choice, it
seems to me, except to continue them, and not to make any basic
changes in what we are doing. (C)
The President. I think we ought to hold firm on that. (C)
Ambassador Watson. My third point (turning to Dr. Brzezinski) and
here you might disagree with me, because I’m going to mention China.
The Soviets have a paranoid fear of China. They have a long border
with that country and they are irrational on the subject. They do not
talk about China. In fact, during my tour there no Soviet has even men-
tioned the subject to me. So I think it important that we do not take ac-
tions that will be misunderstood by them and that we maintain an even-
handed policy and not hurt them in this regard just to hurt them. (C)
The President. All the actions we have taken toward China are
based on our desire to improve relations with that very important
country. We are not normalizing our relations with the Chinese just in
order to hurt the Soviets. (C)
Ambassador Watson. I am no historian, and Dr. Brzezinski certainly
knows more about the subject than I do, but it seems to me that the Chi-
nese have a tendency to jump around from bed to bed. And I think we
ought to make sure that they are lashed down to our bed before we un-
dertake actions which we might regret later on. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski. You have to remember that we are very sexy peo-
Ambassador Watson. The fourth point I would like to make, if I may,
is to raise the confusion and conflict between the NSC and the State De-
partment. This is bad for our country and, when such confusion exists,

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
it cannot help but affect morale in our embassies, particularly when
there is disagreement about basic policies. (C)
The President. What kinds of policies? (C)
Ambassador Watson. Well, China would be one thing—the policy of
evenhandedness, especially the question of MFN and of supplying
strategic products to the Chinese. We seem to be sending out mixed
signals. (C)
The President. This is a misconception. There have been no high
level differences on China policy. You can ask both Ed Muskie and Cy
Vance and they will tell you that all our decisions about China were
reached with complete compatibility at the top level. There are, of
course, differences within the State Department, with each area and
head of area thinking his area should be preeminent and that his area is
the most important for our foreign policy. Dick Holbrooke’s attitude
toward China is different from that of the man in charge of European
affairs. I think that is the real origin of any confusion regarding our
policies. The State Department is an unwieldly, compartmentalized bu-
reaucracy. That is its nature and it is not going to change. On MFN, we
wanted to move together with both the Soviets and the Chinese, but
events made that impossible. I can assure you that on the question of
normalization with China and on the sale of military related equipment
to China there have been no major differences at the top levels of this
Administration. Isn’t that so, Zbig? (C)
Dr. Brzezinski. There’s been only one difference that I am aware
of. And that is that Fritz pushed for MFN for China even before we
Ambassador Watson. Still, I think we should keep in mind the basic
nature of the Chinese and what they believe in. What are the real differ-
ences between the Chinese takeover of Tibet and what has happened in
Afghanistan? (C)
Dr. Brzezinski. One main difference is that the Chinese invasion of
Tibet took place many years ago and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
took place last December. We cannot as policy-makers deal with events
which took place in the distant past, or continually place in the fore-
front such occurrences as the Soviet takeover of the Baltic States. In fact,
the President’s policy on the USSR was quite clearly articulated in his
speech in Philadelphia. (C)
Ambassador Watson. I did not in any way mean to suggest that we
should condone what the Soviets did in Afghanistan. If you look back
at the original telegram sent out by Garrison and me on December 25,
Europe with him to discuss with our allies. But the letter will be deliv-
ered through you in Moscow. We think it is important that the Em-
bassy be used more in the future than it has been in the past, when we
relied too much on Dobrynin. You should know that it is the NSC that
has been urging greater utilization of Embassy Moscow. (C)
The President. We will be greatly minimizing our use of Dobry-
Ambassador Watson. I think that is important. Thank you very much.
I certainly appreciate all the support which you have given me. (C)
The President. Has there been any change in the way they have been
treating you since the Afghanistan crisis began? (C)
Ambassador Watson. Nothing at all. They treat me with the greatest
respect. And I have instant access to high level Soviets. It was for this
reason that I thought it important to see you. I wanted to demonstrate
the importance which you attach to the work of my Embassy. And I in-
tend to go out now and get our message across to every member of the
Politburo. (C)
(The President walked across the room to his desk, took a copy
of his Philadelphia speech from the desk and handed it to the Ambas-
The President. This is a basic document. Ed Muskie worked on it.
You ought to take a careful look at it, if you have not read it. (C)
Ambassador Watson. I have not seen it as yet. I think it may have
been given when I had already left Moscow. I will study it carefully.
Thank you very much for your time. I hope that someday we will have
a chance to see you in Moscow. Mrs. Brement has been there recently,
but we have not had many other visitors and no high level visits. (C)
In it, he listed various options for U.S. counteractions to the Soviet invasion of Afghani-

150.
Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Staff
(Lake) to Secretary of State Muskie
Washington, June 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Issues for the Coming Months
This memorandum suggests a way you might wish to order pri-
ority issues for the remainder of this year. It represents my personal
views; I have not had time before your trip to clear it with others.
I have divided these issues into three categories:
(1) core issues which deserve your close personal attention;
(2) priority issues you could delegate but should monitor closely;
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
(3) secondary issues for which responsibility should be clearly
fixed, and which need only be monitored by you in a general way.
I suggest that, however you decide to order these issues, you use a listing
such as this to make sure that responsibility for each issue is clearly fixed
among Chris, the Under Secretaries, and the Assistant Secretaries.
I hope this listing of issues also provides useful background in de-
ciding on specific accomplishments to pursue and in choosing speech
topics.
Presidential campaigns are not periods conducive to grand accom-
plishments. This period is no exception. The Soviets, the Europeans,
Middle Eastern leaders and others—as in similar periods before—will
prefer to wait for our election results before committing themselves to
us on most issues.
But much can still be done:
—In a few areas, tangible accomplishments are possible.
—We can position ourselves—and, to some degree, events—for
early accomplishments in the second term.
—As an essential means to this positioning, you are in an extraor-
dinarily strong position to explain publicly our policies in important
areas, clearly and directly.
Unhappily, the specific accomplishments which might be pos-
sible—e.g., in southern Africa, in Law of the Sea negotiations—do not
generally lie in areas of current, central concern: our relations with our
allies, East-West relations, our position in the Middle East and South-
west Asia, and the state of the international economy.
Despite this fact, the major problems we face in these central areas
require your putting them at the core of your personal agenda.
We must give our allies, our adversaries and our public a clear sense of a
strategy for dealing with expanded Soviet capabilities and involvement;
with the economic challenges afflicting the industrial democracies; and
with the Third World instabilities and tensions that involve the in-
terests of the superpowers and their allies.
By the end of the year, we can realistically seek to be in a position
in which:
—We and the allies are closer to agreement on the strategic impli-
cations of Afghanistan. There will not be complete agreement and we
will still need to be pressing on them our view of the relationship be-
tween deterrence and detente, but the current trans-Atlantic sniping
can at least be muted. The temptation to score points off each other in
our and some of our allies’ electoral campaigns will continue to be
strong; succumbing will continue to be shortsighted and, in the long
run, politically damaging.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—The Soviets (and our allies) understand that progress in East-
West relations is possible if Moscow shows restraint, and that we re-
main committed to arms control.
—And, perhaps most important, we will be able to move rapidly on the
two key issues that can unlock other doors: SALT II and the Arab-Israeli
negotiations.
One caveat before turning to a discussion of these core issues:
while they should be given priority attention in your public statements,
we must avoid giving the impression that these issues now represent
the sum and substance of all our foreign policies. To the degree that we
have made our response to Afghanistan synonymous with our foreign
policy in recent months, we have made the Russians seem stronger
than they are; the U.S. weaker than we are; our allies concerned that
there has been a basic American shift back towards a bipolar view of
the world; and our foreign policy appear more reactive than it is.
At Tab A3 is a summary of broader themes you may wish to review
as background for your coming speeches.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
to wring our hands and react to crises.
address before the Foreign Policy Association.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
The issue is this: Are we willing to commit sufficient resources to
the defense of our interests and the promotion of our ideals abroad?
The issue was raised again by the decision last week on Capitol Hill to
lop off still more of the funds we budget to help other countries bolster
their security, develop their economies, and help their people to sur-
with no aid appropriation for 1980. We’ve limped along at last year’s
spending levels. The practical effect has been deep cuts in critical pro-
grams and projects. Now we have a supplemental appropriation. It be-
latedly funds a few of the most urgent activities—but then excludes all
the others. This is not a solution. It has simply prolonged much of the
problem.
Consider just a few examples of what we are forced to neglect be-
cause of the delay and the deletions I have mentioned.
• There is currently a serious shortage in Export-Import Bank
lending authority, a vehicle to promote American trade. That means
fewer American jobs and reduced American profits.
• Foreign military credit sales are curtailed—credits that could
have been used in areas of the world important to our security. Can
anyone look at Soviet activism in the world and conclude that this is the
time to neglect the security needs of our friends?
• The international military education and training program—a
program that increases the professionalism of military officers in devel-
oping countries—has been cut by 25%.
• We are funding international narcotics control efforts at 20%
below the amount approved earlier by a conference of the House and
Senate. This is not a large program, but it serves our interests by at-
tacking the drug problem that costs the American people billions each
year in crime, in lost health, and in ravaged lives.
• We have to absorb serious cuts in the Agency for International
Development’s (AID) programs to promote food production, rural de-
velopment, and nutrition. Projects in the Caribbean, in Kenya, and in
North Yemen are among those in jeopardy.
• The multilateral programs are especially hard hit. Only 16% of
what we owe the World Bank has been approved. Funding for the Af-
rican Development Fund would drop 40% from the budgeted

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
amount—inviting interpretations that America’s concern for this im-
portant African institution is waning and reversing the steady im-
provement in our relations with Africa under President Carter. There is
also a serious deficiency in funds for the Asian Development Bank.
When we fall short in our contributions to these banks, develop-
ment—and people—suffer. Our influence in the banks suffers. Our
ability to get others to contribute suffers. Ultimately, our diplomacy
suffers. Our contributions to the banks are not simply invented by the
Administration; they are negotiated. The Carter Administration has
been scrupulous about consulting the Congress at every stage of those
negotiations. When the funds are then cut, developing countries lose
help they desperately need. And in the process, other contributors—
our allies and friends—lose confidence in America’s word.
I am not here simply to mourn the fate of a single aid bill, though
in these times that would be cause enough for concern. What concerns
me even more is a pattern. There is no lack of rhetoric calling for more
American leadership in the world—leadership we must continue to
provide. But if we are to continue to lead, then we must be prepared to
pay the costs that leadership requires.
Humanitarian Concerns
If this declining trend in foreign assistance persists, we will con-
tribute to a human tragedy of massive proportions. For we should
always keep in mind that these programs work to help people. Let me
cite just a few examples.
systems in rural villages in Thailand. The program was successful and
continued by the Thai Government. Now 800 villages are served. As a
result, water-borne disease—a major Third World killer—has declined.
At the same time, incomes have climbed and village life is more stable.
• In another case, AID started a credit system in Colombia en-
abling small farmers to take advantage of land reform. In a 15-year
span, almost 35,000 small farms in Colombia have been financed. AID
has sponsored similar programs throughout the Third World.
• An AID program in rural Guatemala has stressed improved
teacher training and better school equipment. Through this program,
the dropout rate in participating rural schools has been cut by over
30%.
Viewed from a distance no single project is dramatic. But for the
people helped, even small projects are transforming lives. And the cu-
mulative global impact is profound.
Impact on U.S. Interests
Let me emphasize that these programs involve far more than our
humanitarian instincts. They bear strongly on our national interests.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
For the fact is that we have a deep and growing stake in developing
countries. We cannot get along without them—as trading partners and
markets; as sources of essential materials; as necessary partners in ef-
forts to address pollution and population, the proliferation of nuclear
weapons, and countless other issues touching all of our lives. We want
them to progress because we care about people. We also want them to
succeed because our own economic health is bound up with theirs.
Our economic support funds—a central element in our security
assistance—have been essential to our efforts to help strengthen the
economies of such friends as Israel, Egypt, and Turkey. These funds
also have provided major support for our effort to help bring stability
and peaceful change to southern Africa.
There is nothing mysterious about the purpose of our international
programs. It is an approach that makes sense in the world just as it does
in our businesses, our families, or in any other aspect of our lives.
Anticipating a problem and dealing with it is invariably safer and
cheaper than waiting for crisis to erupt.
It is in our interest to do all we can now to counter the conditions
that are likely to drive people to desperation later. It costs less to invest
now in clean water systems than to work later at curing the diseases
caused by foul water. It is prudent to help people toward agricultural
self-sufficiency, instead of offering later the emergency programs
needed to sustain life against drought and famine. We would rather
send technicians abroad to help grow crops than send soldiers to fight
the wars that can result when people are hungry and susceptible to ex-
ploitation by others. So let there be no mistake. By slashing these inter-
national programs we are not saving money. We are merely post-
poning and dramatically raising the costs that one day will come due.
These programs are important for another reason. With them, we
have an opportunity to influence events in crucial areas of the world.
Without them, our power to shape events is drastically diminished. All
of us are concerned—and rightly so—that we not slip into military
weakness. We are steadily modernizing our military posture. Yet cut-
ting back our other international programs contributes to another kind
of weakness, every bit as dangerous. It cuts back our arsenal of influ-
ence. Our support for liberty in the world—our defense of American
and Western interests—cannot be mounted with military weapons
alone. The battle for American influence in the world requires more
than rockets, certainly more than rhetoric. It requires the resources that
make our diplomacy effective.
Consequences
What are the likely consequences for America if we lack those re-
sources? The first consequence is American isolation. We need healthy

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
trading partners. We need access to facilities and resources. We need
the support of others in helping to achieve peaceful alternatives to re-
gional conflicts. We need political support—whether it be in resisting
terrorism in Iran or aggression in Afghanistan. But we cannot expect
the cooperation and support of others on issues of importance to us if
we are unprepared to offer concrete support on matters of importance
to them—particularly their own economic development and social
progress.
Isolation would be only one consequence. Declining American aid,
and declining American influence, would also help the Soviets exploit
internal instability—in Nicaragua, in El Salvador, and in many other
places where the Soviets are prepared to exploit tensions to expand
their power and to limit Western influence. Nothing that I know of the
American people suggests to me that they want to give the Soviets this
kind of free ride. I believe the American people want their nation to re-
sist Soviet expansionism—not only militarily but by helping other na-
tions defend their freedom and feed their people. I believe the Amer-
ican people want their nation to be actively involved in the world.
Finally, the decline of American aid and influence would hamper
our efforts to settle dangerous disputes and build peaceful, democratic
solutions.
Let me give you an example. Over the past 3 years, many in the
Congress fought bitterly against President Carter’s Rhodesian policy.
President Carter—courageously and almost alone—insisted that the
United States actively support Britain’s effort to bring a democratically
elected government to Rhodesia. Fortunately President Carter pre-
vailed against bitter opposition. In fact, his refusal to compromise pre-
maturely on Rhodesia helped bring to an end a bloody civil war in that
country. The result has been good for the people of Zimbabwe and bad
for the Soviets, who sought to exploit turmoil there.
Consider another case. We have been trying for a year and more to
strengthen the center in Nicaragua to help moderates there resist ex-
tremist solutions. Every time we tried to appropriate the funds neces-
sary to support our efforts in Nicaragua, the effort was defeated. Fi-
nally, Congress has acted to make possible $75 million needed to fulfill
our commitment. But in the delay, we suffered a loss of credibility. The

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
willingness of the United States to work for democracy was called into
question throughout the region.
The point is this: Those most concerned about Soviet and Cuban
activism in the world should be the strongest supporters of our efforts
to support the moderate transition from repressive tyranny to demo-
cratic development. For by failing to support the alternatives to radi-
calism, we help radicalism to breed.
This continuing assault on foreign assistance is not only short
sighted; it is dangerous to American interests. For it threatens the ca-
pacity of the United States to play a positive role in the world, to com-
pete effectively with the Soviets, to encourage emerging—and threat-
ened—democracies. It threatens to strip America of all its instruments
except the instruments of destruction.
I believe that the American people, if they have the facts, will un-
derstand what is at stake. I believe they will understand that a generous
investment in security assistance and economic development abroad is
necessary to a strong America.
I am not new to this issue. Twenty-two years ago I made my sup-
port for international assistance a centerpiece of my first Senate cam-
paign. And I am fully prepared to press the message until it gets
through.
I think it is time for a healthy national debate on this subject. And I
invite you, as citizens vitally concerned with America’s role in the
world, to contribute to that debate. The price of silence could be
growing isolation and even irrelevance for America. That is a price no
American should want us to pay.

152.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, August 7, 1980
SUBJECT
NSC Weekly Report #149
1. Opinion
Foreign Policy and the Elections
Foreign policy should offer you the greatest opportunity for the
exercise of Presidential leadership, in a manner that could significantly
influence the outcome of the elections. Despite the constraints on Presi-
dential power, foreign affairs is the area in which you have the greatest
discretion and, thus—at least in theory—the most opportunity for dem-
onstrating effective leadership, for taking dramatic action, and for mo-
bilizing national support. Indeed, I have already heard from a number
of well-informed sources that the Republicans are very much con-
cerned that you will stage some sort of a foreign policy coup or under-
take some bold initiative, or cut some significant deal in the area of for-
eign affairs shortly before the elections.
Unfortunately, the present international situation simply does not
lend itself to some sudden and dramatic stroke—unless we are con-
fronted by a crisis. (In that event, a very strong and firm response, even
involving military action, is likely to be quite popular. Moreover, I have
confidence in our crisis-management machinery, and I believe that our
performance would be good.) But short of that, I cannot offer a pre-
scription for a major Presidential initiative of a type that would have
significant electoral effect. Something like Eisenhower’s “I would go to
Korea” does not seem to be available, and we must be careful not to ini-
tiate some move in the Middle East or regarding the Soviets that will
appear contrived.
In any case, whatever happens, we need to do much better than we
have done so far in making the country understand both the construc-
tive character of your foreign policy and the dangers inherent in
Reagan’s approach.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
Accordingly, in this memorandum I plan to address myself as
briefly and concisely as I can to four broad themes that deal with for-
eign affairs:
I. The distinctive character of the Carter foreign policy;
II. Public criticism of Reagan’s approach;
III. Crises that we might confront;
IV. Initiatives that we might take.
I. The distinctive character of the Carter foreign policy:
I think the most distinctive hallmark of your foreign policy is that
you have blended together two elements that traditionally have been
seen in America as being in conflict: concern for moral principle and
recognition of the importance of American power. In recent years,
McGovern and later Kennedy have stood for the former, while Nixon
and Kissinger have stood for the latter.
In contrast, you have managed to combine the two in order to
shape a foreign policy that has been both moral and realistic. It can be
best summarized by the following themes:
(1) Restoring America’s military and economic strength for the
long-term.
(2) Recognition of global complexity.
(3) Progress toward a genuine partnership both with Western Eu-
rope and the Far East.
(4) On the basis of renewed strength, Allied cooperation, and dip-
lomatic firmness we can also seek accommodation with the Soviet
Union.
(5) Importance of the Third World.
(6) Human rights is a dominant idea of our times.
Finally, we neither run the world nor can run away from it. We
cannot be guided by nostalgia for the fifties (U.S. preponderance) or by

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
the partial isolationism of the early 1970s. The many tangible accom-
plishments of your term (Panama, Camp David, China normalization,
etc.) are the consequence of this approach. They demonstrate how re-
sponsible use of American power and influence can contribute to
global peace and human progress.
I believe the above summarizes the themes of your Administra-
tion’s foreign policy, and that in time it will become clear that this was
the proper course for the nation at this time: a building presidency, not
a flamboyant, “fire-fighting” one. However, many of these themes—
and even some specific actions, like the Panama Canal treaties—are
clearly not popular politically. To be sure, there is merit in an “educa-
tional campaign”; but the direct electoral benefits of discussing all the
central themes of your foreign policy are less obvious. “Complexity”
and “change,” for example—however real in today’s world—are a
source of anxiety, not political approbation.
It is possible to group these themes in more politically attractive
ways, however, around two primary themes and two secondary ones:
Primary:
—American strength (defense, economic, energy, alliances); and
—peace.
Secondary:
—morality (human rights, Third World); and
—building for the future (alliances, economic summits, Third
World).
In my judgment, you are in fact on strong grounds on national
strength—where the Republicans are trying to make you look weak—
and on peace. In the former area, you have reversed nearly a decade’s
(Republican) decline in our spending, are increasing the defense
budget by 3–4% in real terms, buying the right modern weapons, and
creating a capacity to protect (through deterrence, not conflict) Western
vital interests in the Persian Gulf. There is the NATO 3% commit-
ment, the Long-Term Defense Program, and the TNF decision. There is
the energy program—for the first time beginning to reduce our na-
tional vulnerability to decisions taken by other countries in this area.
MTN directly helps U.S. businessmen, farmers, workers and con-
sumers. And the economic summits (plus your building efforts in the
U.S. economy) are also contributing directly to U.S. strength in the
world.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
These are facts; but another fact is that we have not publicized our
successes as we need to do—and, for that and other reasons, thus do
not get the credit that you and your Administration justly deserve. We
can be assertive—not defensive—in this area.
With regard to peace, the record is clear: despite the anxieties and
difficulties of various crises (like Iran), no U.S. soldier has died in
combat. This is the first four-year term since Eisenhower’s second
when that has been true; and in fact you are the first President since
Hoover (!) to have no combat losses. You also did the “impossible” in
bringing Egypt-Israel peace and the end of the Rhodesia-Zimbabwe
race war.
Strength and peace are two excellent themes. And combining them
also brings in arms control, the effort to reduce the risks of conflict from
a position of strength, and the balanced, mature approach to the Soviet
Union.
The morality issue has primarily a selective audience—e.g.
ethnic-Americans on CSCE; the “Humphrey wing” of the party on
developing-country problems. But there is also a general sense in the
country of the importance of “standing for something”—a theme you
used in good effect in 1976.
Finally, there is value in emphasizing how your policies build for
the future, beginning with national strength, but also in strengthening
our alliances (where, of course, there will be considerable press/public
skepticism); dealing with economic and energy realities; and creating
openings to the new poor centers of the future. Put in this sense—not
as adjusting to “complexity” or “change”—I believe most Americans
would welcome straight talk from their President, as opposed to the
simplicities of a Reagan. Americans are also responsive to challenge,
provided at the same time they are told what to do about it—as we
have been doing, though often without the clarity and persistence that
is needed.
II. Public criticism of Reagan’s approach:
In contrast, Reagan’s approach can be attacked head-on for being
both escapist and dangerous. In brief:

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—The Reagan Platform is an escape from reality. The Platform
and Reagan’s own statements seem to view the world only in terms of
the U.S.-Soviet struggle and by over-simplifying virtually every world
problem. There is no recognition of the new forces in the world nor of
the need for the United States to give historical change a positive direc-
tion. (Reagan also calls for massive defense increases, while also prom-
ising a tax cut.)
—Reagan is nostalgic for the past, especially in his dangerous
hankering for strategic superiority which would produce a massive
arms race, as well as the general nostalgia for the world of the 1950s,
when American military and economic preponderance were the conse-
quences of the collapse of Europe and Japan in World War II.
—The Reagan Platform is a repudiation of even the limited
achievements of past Republican foreign policy. This comes across
most strongly in Reagan’s skepticism regarding arms control. Given
his objection to SALT II, is Reagan for or against Nixon-Kissinger’s
arms control centerpiece, SALT I?
—The Reagan Platform is an endorsement for what Carter has
been doing. In its few positive parts, the Reagan Platform in effect en-
dorses what the Carter Administration has been doing on the Middle
East (though the words “Camp David” are never mentioned), your ef-
forts to enhance NATO and defense capabilities, your tough response
to the Soviets on Afghanistan (though it undercuts the latter by recent
expedient statements on the grain embargo).
—Moreover, Reagan’s approach is woefully inadequate on arms
control, which it slights, and in regard to the Third World, which it
largely ignores. It could also jeopardize the expanding U.S.-Chinese re-
lationship by inflaming the Taiwan issue (with the emphasis on the
U.S.-Taiwan military connection).
In brief, his foreign policy is unrealistic, simplistic, and indifferent
to moral issues. It is historically antiquated and potentially dangerous.
It is easy to slide from over-simplification into extremism, and Rea-
gan’s foreign policy would take America on such a slide.
III. Dangers that we might confront:
Public debate over foreign policy aside, this coming fall could be
punctuated by a series of crises, the handling of which could decisively

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
affect the outcome of the elections. Such a crisis might include any of
the following:
(1) A tragic hostage development: Some of our hostages could be put
on trial, or one or more of them could die, or we might simply learn that
some of them have disappeared. Khomeini appears determined to em-
barrass you in whatever way possible.
(2) Break-up in Iran: Khomeini’s death and the collapse of public
order could prompt the disintegration of Iran and the outbreak of civil
war, precipitating even a Soviet intervention. At the present moment,
we have relatively few means of influencing the outcome of such a civil
war, while we do know that the Soviets have started training for mili-
tary operations directed at Iran.
(3) A Soviet peace offensive, or a new military offensive in Afghanistan,
or (most probably) both: The Soviets will most likely intensify their efforts
to woo Western Europe and perhaps even the United States through
arms control initiatives, while maintaining their assertive posture in
Afghanistan. Their objective will be to achieve Western acquiescence
while splitting the West even further.
(4) A crisis in the Middle East: Some violent act (West Bank, Syria,
Lebanon) could occur, sparking a new cycle of emotion and retaliation,
or—less likely—there could be some upheaval in either Saudi Arabia or
Egypt jeopardizing the stability of the region.
(5) A confrontation with Cuba: The Cubans could launch a new ref-
ugee wave, in order to embarrass you and to hurt you politically.
(6) Caribbean instability: There could be even more violence and in-
stability—perhaps another “Nicaragua.”
At the same time, all of the above could also offer opportunities for
decisive leadership. Such a reaction could galvanize national support
and cause a patriotic upsurge. Thus, on the hostage issue we should at
least have the option to take prompt military action, either through a
blockade or (perhaps) the seizure of Kharg Island. I believe you should
ask Harold Brown to take some quiet steps to make sure that prompt
military action could be initiated in the event of such crisis. We will not
be able to wait for days to react.
The break-up of Iran would pose serious dilemmas, and our reac-
tion would have to be calibrated to any Soviet initiative. In any case, we
would want to act here in concert with some of the key regional coun-
tries, as well as our Allies, although again the adoption of a very firm
posture could have a very positive effect.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Insofar as the Soviets are concerned, we should keep reiterating
that Afghanistan is the litmus test of Soviet intentions—though with-
out putting ourselves in the position of emphasizing Soviet failure to
respond. If the Soviet Union wishes accommodation, we are ready for
the solution of the Afghanistan problem, which combines transitional
security arrangements with a total Soviet withdrawal. In any case, we
cannot afford any zig-zags in our policy toward the Soviet Union, and a
tough public posture by you and by Muskie is essential, especially if we
are at the same time to be able to argue credibly that we are prepared to
seek arms control arrangements with the Soviets as a matter of mature
realism.
With respect to Cuba, it seems to me that renewed provocations by
Castro should be very firmly rebuffed; and the forcible deportation to
Cuba, through the use of the U.S. Navy, of some Cuban criminals might
be an appropriately dramatic step, designed to signal Castro that there
are limits beyond which the U.S. cannot be pushed. In the Caribbean,
we need to be able to act promptly and credibly, without the appear-
ance of indecisiveness with which we are (unfairly) charged over
Nicaragua.
IV. Initiatives that we might take:
There are some initiatives that you could take that might be helpful
in demonstrating effective Presidential leadership in the area of foreign
affairs. The following come to mind and you may wish to indicate here
(by marginal notes) as well as above, whether you want me to develop
any of these further:
(1) The hostage crisis: I think we should think about a more aggres-
sive strategy—though recognizing the political liabilities of an effort
that does not work. We might explore the possibility through our
various intermediaries of a meeting between Muskie and some respon-
sible Iranian official, if anyone emerges in the next three months. In-
deed such a meeting, if held in October, could have significant impact
even if it did not lead to the immediate release of the hostages—pro-
vided, of course, that a legitimate and realistic process toward resolu-
tions is the result. There are undoubtedly some other ideas; but the
problem is that without some initiative we will surely be accused of
permitting the crisis to have become routine.
(2) We might explore secretly with the Soviets the possibility of
some major withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan just prior to the
elections. Though such an eventuality is not likely, it is conceivable that
the Soviets might reach the conclusion that Reagan will be too dan-
gerous, especially given his repudiation of arms control. One must be
extremely careful how one undertakes any such probes because they
could contribute to the impression of zig-zagging. That is why they

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
should not be undertaken formally in the Muskie-Gromyko channel
but more by indirection and quiet hints (for example, in some of my in-
formal talks with Dobrynin and especially with the Poles, who are
anxious to promote a peaceful resolution of the Afghanistan problem).
(3) Though the political benefit of U.S.-Soviet TNF talks would not
be great, it probably would be useful to have some exploratory discus-
sions no later than October. That would demonstrate that your per-
sonal interest in nuclear arms control can be promoted alongside the
policy of firmness on Afghanistan. Indeed, such discussions would
demonstrate that the kind of mature and two-track policy that we wish
to pursue with the Soviets is a more viable alternative to Reagan’s ex-
tremism. We would need to judge the value of this somewhat later, in
terms of Soviet behavior in Afghanistan and the effectiveness of
Reagan’s attacks on our Afghan policy.
(4) If the Soviets continue to be beastly on Afghanistan, and if the
Bush visit to China24 goes reasonably well, you might consider having
me visit Beijing for consultations, in late September or early October,
thereby underscoring your special accomplishment in expanding the
U.S.-Chinese relationship.
(5) A summit meeting with Begin and Sadat would probably not
produce any results between now and November. In any event, we
need to try inducing Sadat and Begin to help infuse new life in the
Camp David process. The downside is that Begin probably will not
wish to be helpful. Yet we should in any case seek to restart the talks,
and have Sol25 go to the area for a sustained period of time. A September
trip by Muskie could also be helpful, both for the negotiations and for
reasserting our commitment to Israel.
(6) You might contemplate convening a summit meeting on East-
West relations with our principal Allies (or, alternatively, a Schmidt
meeting here in September). With the Olympics behind us, it might be
timely to hold a 1–2 day meeting of the Guadeloupe type, but including
also the Italians and Japanese in order to discuss where do we go from
here on the Soviet strategic threat posed through the Afghanistan inva-
sion. There happens to be a real need for such a meeting, but it should
not be convened unless we are certain that it would prompt some tan-
gible steps going beyond the Venice Communique. Nonetheless, this
could be an effective demonstration of leadership, and perhaps by
early fall our friends might be inclined to go along because of in-
creasing concern over what foreign policy Reagan might pursue, plus

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
their increasing awareness of the common challenge in the Persian
Gulf.
(7) There are also a series of specific military-defense initiatives
that you could take, showing that there is bite to your emphasis on en-
hanced defense capabilities, both generally and in regard to the new
Soviet strategic challenge in West Asia. These could include:
(a) Altering our carrier deployments, reducing our presence in the
Mediterranean and enhancing our presence in the Indian Ocean;
(b) Creating a Middle East/Persian Gulf unified command, taking
this territory out of the regional responsibilities of PACOM and
EUCOM and underlining the seriousness of the Carter doctrine;27
(c) Announcing the production of ERWs, to be stored in the United
States for rapid deployment to Europe when needed;
(d) Adopting some of the Steadman study recommendations28 and
streamlining and upgrading the JCS. This could move us toward the
general (not joint) staff system, and could be justified by a need to
streamline the JCS as an outgrowth of the Iranian raid experience;
(e) Further, sustained exposition of our Southwest Asia strategy
and the specific steps we are taking through a major strategic speech.
None of the above are major steps, but cumulatively they could
underline the seriousness of your commitment to enhance defense,
without at the same time requiring major budgetary reprogramming.
In general, I believe that the best posture in this area is assertiveness in
expounding what we have done in the past three and a half years. It is a
creditable record—in defense, arms control, peacemaking, peace itself,
energy, human rights, and international economics. As I indicated
above, our biggest problem is not with the charges the Republicans will
level against us, but the need to get our story out more forcefully and
effectively.
For the past few years, there has been merit in a low-key approach
in presenting our case—and it has worked, in terms of taking the nation
beyond the phobias of Vietnam and Watergate, which so weakened our
capacity to have an effective or assertive foreign policy. In my judg-
ment, we can now move towards a greater highlighting of our pur-
poses, achievements, and challenges to the nation for further action—
and gain a good public response. The themes of strength and peace do
not need to be elaborate; but only if we constantly pound them home,
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
in a series of statements, speeches, etc., are we finally going to get some
of the credit we deserve. This, after all, was the central tactic of your re-
cent trip to Europe, where each speech and statement reinforced all
the others—and eventually it got through to the media, which saw this
as a highly effective foreign policy effort. The message also got through
to our Allies, and their response also played well here. This can, in my
view, be repeated in the campaign here this fall—starting with your ac-
ceptance speech.
[Omitted here is the remainder of the memorandum.]
can be secure while the freedom of others is stifled, that our purpose in
the world is to preserve the status quo.
I say, and I believe you say, that is an invitation to trouble. It is a
narrow vision of ourselves and of the world. It would be a foreign
policy of reaction.
We must, of course, equip ourselves with the arms to defend our
vital interests. But that’s not enough. We must also arm ourselves with
the conviction that our values have increasing power in today’s world.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
For if America is not the companion of human progress in the
world, if we do not work to shape events in progressive directions, the
world will pass us by. If we do not promote freedom in the world, there
will be less freedom in the future for Americans.
Today, let me describe to you the kinds of freedom we must pro-
mote and the tools we need to promote it.
First is the freedom of nations: the freedom of nations, including
our own, to be independent, to be free of outside domination. That has
been and is the enduring goal of U.S. foreign policy. But it cannot be
our only goal, for America’s national interest, America’s national
ideals, require that we support other kinds of freedom in the world.
This Administration is committed to a second kind of freedom: the
political freedom of people within nations.
And we are committed to a third goal: the freedom from poverty
and human misery, conditions that destroy human lives and create un-
rest in the world.
A narrower approach, an approach which ignores the hopes and
needs of people within nations, cannot succeed. For it would ignore the
political stirring of humanity, the current of human freedom that is
gaining strength in the world. And when peaceful change is frustrated,
violent and radical change can explode in a storm that damages
America’s interests and creates opportunities for our adversaries.
So when Soviet troops seek to crush the freedom of an independ-
ent nation, we will oppose it.
When an adversary threatens our vital interest in the Persian Gulf,
in Europe, in the Caribbean, in Asia or elsewhere, we will oppose them.
When foreign governments allow the seizure of American citizens,
as in Iran, we will not give up until they are home safe and free.
And when governments anywhere suppress the freedoms of their
own people, when malaria or malnutrition degrade human lives, we
will oppose that as well.
We believe, in short, that America can flourish best in a world in
which freedom is growing—freedom in all its aspects: national inde-
pendence, political liberty, and freedom from hunger, poverty, and
disease.
To promote these freedoms, we need to maintain a foreign policy
that rests on four pillars.
• The first is an unwavering commitment to our security through a
strong defense, solid alliances, and unyielding opposition to aggression.
• The second is an unrelenting effort to help resolve the regional
disputes that threaten peace.
• The third is our foreign assistance programs which support the
security and progress of other nations around the world, while pro-
viding us with the influence we need to advance our interests.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
• The fourth is our support for human rights and human dignity.
In each of these four areas, this Administration has been active,
and it has achieved results. The world is an unruly place. The headlines
will always reflect new crises and new challenges. But I’m tired of
hearing the fear merchants who overstate the dangers and undersell
America for their own political profit. Let’s listen to the facts and not
their fears.
Military Modernization
First, this Administration is devoted heart and soul and sinew to a
strong national defense. We have undertaken the most sweeping mili-
tary modernization program in nearly 20 years.
In the 8 years before President Carter took office, real defense
spending after inflation had declined by more than 35%.
Since taking office, this Administration has increased real defense
spending every year by 10% overall.
We are modernizing every element of our strategic nuclear forces,
with the new MX missile on land, with a new Trident submarine and
missile at sea, and with new cruise missiles in the air. We are building a
new rapid deployment force and obtaining new basing rights abroad to
strengthen our hand in emergencies. We have led our NATO allies in
several major initiatives: a new long-term modernization of NATO’s
conventional forces, real increases in allied defense spending, and de-
ployment of new missiles in the European theater to meet the Soviet
buildup.
Let us be clear. This military modernization program has, and will
continue to involve, heavy costs. Our 5-year defense program will put
defense spending in fiscal 1985 at a level more than 25% higher than in
fiscal 1978. This is a price we must pay to preserve our strength.
In recent weeks, you and I have heard this effort described as inad-
equate. We have heard the call for a military buying binge. And we
have heard demands that we radically alter our fundamental national
security objective from a stable military balance to a quest for across-
the-board military superiority.
Let there be no mistake. That is a prescription for a dramatic new
arms race. For having achieved a position of equivalence, the Soviet
Union will not accept military inferiority anymore than we will—no
matter what the price to the people of the Soviet Union.
The costs of a new arms race would be staggering. We would have
to cut back significantly on vital human services. And most impor-
tantly, we would increase the risk of a nuclear nightmare.
The consequence of a new arms race would not be greater security.
It would be greater insecurity at home and abroad.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
And there is a further point. In this effort to achieve military supe-
riority, we would destroy the future of arms control. For arms control
can only move forward on the basis of genuine equivalence. That is the
basis of the preliminary agreement reached with the Soviets by Presi-
dent Ford in Vladivostok in 1974. It is the basis of the SALT II Treaty. It
is the basis on which we have agreed with our allies to pursue further
arms control, including limits in Europe.
Let us have no illusions. If we abandon the quest for arms control
now, if we cast aside the treaty negotiated by three Presidents—two Re-
publicans and one Democrat—the threats we face will be greater. Our
knowledge about Soviet military plans will be less certain. Our own de-
fense will be more difficult.
Today America is strong, and we are growing stronger. We have
already reversed more than a decade of inattention to our national de-
fense. We are prepared as a nation to spend whatever is needed.
But we must be as hard on overspending on the military as we are
on waste in our domestic programs. And we should reject outmoded
military doctrines that add danger to an already dangerous world.
Our commitment to the freedom of nations also means that we
must be prepared to oppose aggression against the freedom of others.
Every day Afghan people are dying in defense of freedom. Every
day the Soviet Union is paying a price for their aggression. Every day
the free nations of the world must demonstrate their opposition to this
assault on freedom.
Measures like our grain embargo and the Olympic boycott express
not only our disapproval; they express the readiness of the American
people to sacrifice in the cause of freedom. These sacrifices were neces-
sary. And they have been felt in the Soviet Union.
I am proud of our athletes who did not go to Moscow, and I know
you are, too. I am proud of our farmers and our businessmen and
workers who have given up exports to send the Soviets a message. And
I know you are, too. For the message has been received in an Olympics
that was a sham, in declining meat supplies on Soviet shelves, and in
the stinging rebuke of world opinion.
The rhetoric of the past few weeks calls for us to be firmer on So-
viet aggression but to reverse the grain embargo, to write off the
Olympic boycott, to conduct business as usual.
There is a short answer. We cannot fight Soviet aggression more by
doing less.
We know, and the American people know, that we cannot oppose
aggression abroad without exerting ourselves at home. We know, and
the American people know, that security cannot be bought without sac-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
rifice. To suggest otherwise in the hope of gaining partisan advantage
is not leadership but expediency.
Achieving Peace
A second element of a foreign policy of freedom is to build peace:
to help achieve peaceful, negotiated settlements to dangerous disputes
in the world.
You know of President Carter’s patient efforts to bring forth an
agreement between Israel and Egypt at Camp David. That agreement
was a beginning, not an end. It was the beginning of a long and difficult
process that is not yet over. Camp David was one of the finest achieve-
ments of this or any other Administration. It has already produced
peace between Israel and Egypt. And it provides the only practical
process yet devised that can lead to a comprehensive peace.
In a similar fashion, the Panama Canal Treaty, which ended 14
long years of negotiations, healed festering resentments in Latin
America and laid the groundwork for sounder relations between the
United States and our neighbors in this hemisphere.
To build peace and buttress our strategic position, we have nor-
malized relations with the People’s Republic of China.
President Carter’s unswerving support for a negotiated settlement
in Rhodesia helped end a bitter and bloody civil war. It helped bring
forth a new nation, Zimbabwe, based on majority rule and minority
rights. It helped calm a dispute that could have become a broader con-
flict in Africa. By working toward a settlement, by refusing to lift sanc-
tions against Rhodesia until a fair settlement was insured, we empha-
sized not only our commitment to peace but our willingness to support
abroad the principles of democracy and freedom we espouse at home.
Lloyd McBride3 and the steelworkers stood by the President in that
difficult moment. You supported continuing the sanctions until a fair,
free election could be held. You can be proud that this union has con-
tributed in an important way to a solution that fostered peace.
There is a lesson in this experience. The same people who call now
for a narrow vision of our foreign policies were bitterly opposed to our
approach in southern Africa. Had they prevailed, there would not have
been a settlement in Rhodesia. The fighting would have raged on. This
would have been bad for the people of Zimbabwe, bad for the region,
bad for our allies, bad for us, and good only for the Soviets who stood
to profit from conflict.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Foreign Assistance
A third element of a foreign policy of freedom is helping devel-
oping nations defend their independence, expand their economies, and
dispel poverty.
For a good many years, this union and its members have under-
stood an important fact—that a generous foreign assistance program is
not a giveaway but a gateway: a gateway to new markets and new in-
fluence for the United States and a gateway to greater world stability.
That fact needs to be better understood by the American people.
American foreign assistance dollars are investments we make in
others and in ourselves. These U.S. investments mean security aid to
nations whose independence is threatened by outside intervention.
These investments mean economic development for poorer nations.
They help developing countries buy American equipment to build
highways and dams, help hire American experts to strengthen their in-
stitutions, help them produce the food and the jobs that increase living
standards for their people. And these investments directly benefit our
own people.
Seventy cents of every dollar we commit for country-to-country
development programs are spent here in the United States. They pur-
chase American goods and American services, from farm equipment to
technical training. Those purchases amounted to nearly $2 billion last
year alone. Our Agency for International Development has spent over
$650 million for goods and services just in California over the past 10
years. Well over another billion dollars last year went to American
farmers for grain and other agricultural commodities.
The economic return to the American people goes beyond what is
spent here, for our investments in development abroad create new
markets for U.S. goods. Every dollar we pay into institutions like the
World Bank, for example, generates between $2 and $3 of new growth
in our own economy. The activities of these development banks mean
50,000–100,000 new American jobs each year.
In such transactions everyone gains. The United States gains jobs
and markets and the capacity to help shape events in constructive
ways. Small, struggling nations gain strength against aggression and
subversion; they gain economic and social progress. Millions of people
gain the beginnings of a better life. And the cause of freedom also gains.
So I would urge you to continue to defend these programs and
help defeat attacks and cuts recently suffered in the Congress. To-
gether, we must convince the American people that the defense of

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
freedom requires not only a strong military fist but also an extended
hand.
Human Rights
Finally, let me emphasize a fourth element of a foreign policy of
freedom: support for human rights.
Throughout a long history of struggle and success, the trade union
movement in general, and the steelworkers in particular, have sup-
ported that cause.
Today, as hundreds of thousands of refugees flee from assaults on
human rights around the world, the steelworkers once again are
showing their concern. Your effort on behalf of the AFL–CIO Cam-
bodia Crisis Campaign, which Lloyd McBride unveiled this week, is a
dramatic testament to the power of this great union for good. And it is
an eloquent expression of your support for human rights.
Human rights has been a special concern of this Administration.
We stand for the right of people to be free of torture and repres-
sion, to choose their leaders, to participate in the decisions that affect
their daily lives, to speak and write and travel freely.
There are limits on our capacity to influence affairs in other coun-
tries. And we must seek a practical approach that builds the long-term
strength of our friends. But the fact that there are obstacles and risks
should not keep us from holding up the banner of human rights—and
it will not.
Ultimately, our firm support for human rights, for human free-
dom, will help build a more stable world. It will help remove the causes
of violent and convulsive change.
There is, in various places in the world, a strong tide for human
rights. We see the evidence for this in Spain, in Greece, in Portugal, in
Ghana, in Nigeria, in Ecuador and in Peru, in other nations which have
recently embraced and strengthened democracy. America cannot claim
sole credit for these developments. But we can take pride that we have
encouraged abroad the freedoms we enjoy at home, for they run hand
in hand.
I have sketched the outlines of the foreign policy of freedom: a
strong emphasis on security, a vigorous quest for peace, concrete de-
velopment for nations and peoples, and practical support for human
rights. This has been our policy for the past 4 years. And despite the dif-
ficulties, despite limits to our influence, it is working.
We must not succumb to the voices which say we should now turn
back. These voices are pessimistic about the possibilities of freedom in
the world. They see change abroad, for the most part, as dangerous for
America. They are hostile to it. We see in change not only threats to be
met but opportunities to be seized.

154.
Editorial Note
On August 21, 1980, President Jimmy Carter delivered remarks at
the annual convention of the American Legion, taking place in Boston,
Massachusetts at the John B. Hynes Veterans Auditorium. The Presi-
dent began his remarks by outlining the efforts of the Veterans Admin-
istration in providing support for veterans, especially those who served
during the Vietnam war. He then described the four specific objectives
of his administration’s national security policy: preventing war,
sharing in the protection of industrial democracies in Europe and Asia,
safeguarding and strengthening links to nations in the Middle East,
and defending America’s vital interests if threatened anywhere. After a
brief summary of the administration’s efforts to enhance U.S. strategic
forces and deterrent capabilities, the President explained the relation-
ship of this effort to projections of American force:
“Our strategy, now modernized to take advantage of Soviet plan-
ning and Soviet attitudes, must leave them no room for the illusion that
they can obtain any advantage over the United States of America by the

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
use of their force. And we will keep our forces that strong and that
clearly dominant.
“Recently there’s been a great deal of press and public attention
paid to a Presidential directive that I have issued, known as PD–59. As
a new President charged with great responsibilities for the defense of
this Nation, I decided that our Nation must have flexibility in re-
sponding to a possible nuclear attack—in responding to a possible nu-
clear attack. Beginning very early in my term, working with the Secre-
taries of State and Defense and with my own national security advisers,
we have been evolving such an improved capability. It’s been recently
revealed to the public in outline form by Secretary of Defense Harold
Brown. It’s a carefully considered, logical, and evolutionary improve-
ment in our Nation’s defense capability and will contribute to the pre-
vention of a nuclear conflict.
“No potential enemy of the United States should anticipate for one
moment a successful use of military power against our vital interest.
This decision will make that prohibition and that cautionary message
even more clear. In order to ensure that no adversary is even tempted,
however, we must have a range of responses to potential threats or
crises and an integrated plan for their use.
“Equally vital for our strategic purposes is the pursuit of nuclear
arms control and balanced reduction of nuclear arsenals in the world.
Just as we build strategic forces equal to our needs, we seek through
negotiated agreements to keep unnecessary competition from carrying
us into a purposeless and dangerous nuclear arms race to the detriment
of our Nation’s security and to the detriment of the adequate strength
of our conventional and other forces. We will continue to make every
responsible effort to bring our forces and those of any potential foe
under strict, balanced, and verifiable controls, both in the quantity of
strategic arms and in their quality.
“I want to make clear that if an unlimited nuclear arms race should
be forced upon us, we will compete and compete successfully. Let no
one doubt that for a moment. But to initiate such a dangerous and
costly race, abandoning our efforts for nuclear weapons control, would
be totally irresponsible on our part.
“The destructive power of the world’s nuclear arsenals is already
adequate for total devastation. It does no good to increase that destruc-
tive power in search of a temporary edge or in pursuit of an illusion of
absolute nuclear superiority. To limit strategic nuclear weapons, as the
SALT treaties do, is not to reduce our strength, but to reduce the danger
that misunderstanding and miscalculation could lead to a global catas-
trophe. This is a course that has been pursued by the last six Presidents,
both Democratic and Republican. To go beyond the reductions that

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
were outlined in the SALT II treaty, as I firmly intend to do, is to ad-
vance the stability on which genuine peace can be built.”
The President then surveyed the steps his administration had
taken to uphold U.S. strategic interests in several geographic regions
and to support democratization, independence, and development in
other nations. In his concluding remarks, he returned to the theme of
American strength:
“We do not maintain our power in order to seize power from
others. Our goal is to strengthen our own freedom and the freedom of
others, to advance the dignity of the individual and the right of all
people to justice, to a good life, and to a future secure from tyranny. In
choosing our course in the world, America’s strength must be used to
serve America’s values.
“The choices ahead are every bit as demanding as the ones we’ve
already made. Facing them takes a clear understanding of where we
are and where we want to go as a nation. Responding to dangers that
might menace our future security also will measure America’s common
sense and courage, just as previous history has measured America’s
common sense and courage.
“I’ve known America’s courage by seeing it tested. I’ve seen it in
the men who went to Iran to attempt so valiantly in an isolated desert to
rescue their fellow Americans who are still held hostage there. I saw it
in the families of the men who died in that effort, and I’ve seen it in the
families with whom I’ve met as frequently as possible of the citizens
who are still held captive in Iran. What a nation we are to produce such
men and women. All Americans are thankful to them.
“And finally let me say that our country also has the courage to re-
ject the easy illusions of something for nothing, the fantasy goals of
strength without sacrifice, the irresponsible advocacy of shortcut eco-
nomics and quick-fix defense policy. There are no magic answers. Easy
solutions are very difficult to find. Courage, sometimes quiet courage,
unpublicized courage, is the most to be appreciated.
“I see this kind of courage in you, as veterans who have served and
sacrificed already, but who still work continuously for the sake of serv-
ice, not for recognition or reward. Your example strengthens my faith
in our Nation and in the future of our Nation. With your help and with
your courage and with your common sense, I know America will con-
tinue to be a nation of unmatched strength, a nation that faces the
world as it is today and works with realism to bring to the world of the
future freedom, peace, and justice.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81,
Book II, pages 1549–1556)
Documentation on PD/NSC–59 “Nuclear Weapons Employment
Policy,” issued July 25, is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.

155.
Statement by Secretary of State Muskie
New York, August 25, 1980
Securing the World’s Common Future
I welcome this opportunity to address the U.N. special session on
economic development. I intend to speak frankly. And I will suggest
some specific obligations of the world’s nations—including my own—
to secure our common future on a fragile planet.
We meet because we are in the midst of a world economic crisis.
We cannot escape it. We must respond to it. Millions of our fellow
humans are starving, and millions more are malnourished, on what can
be a bountiful planet. Soaring oil prices have crippled the developing
world; even the strongest industrial economies are struggling. Infec-
tious recession and inflation touch us all. Nations in desperate need of
growth and development instead face worsening trade deficits, deeper
debt, and diminishing prospects for meeting the needs of their people.
The work ahead is substantial. The time is short. But if we take an
ambitious view, seasoned with realism, we can accomplish our main
purposes at this special session. We can adopt a realistic international
development strategy that will help improve development prospects.
And we can agree on procedures and an agenda for a new round of
global economic negotiations—serious work aimed at concrete prog-
ress where the need is urgent and consensus appears within reach. My
country will participate constructively in these proceedings. Progress is
essential for the world’s interest and also our own.
We are encouraged that progress is possible because progress has
been made. The fact is that over the past decade many people in devel-
oping nations have attained better lives. Per capita income in the Third
annually. Manufacturing output is higher. Life expectancies and lit-
eracy rates have improved. Infant mortality rates have declined.
Striking progress has been made, much of it recently, in adjusting the
system to improve Third World prospects.
• The flow of aid to poorer nations has steadily increased. More
than $100 billion in replenishments for the multilateral development
banks and their affiliates have been agreed.
the original. Muskie made the statement before the 11th Special Session of the UN Gen-
eral Assembly. The General Assembly met in special session from August 25 until Sep-
tember 15 in order to discuss progress made in the establishment of the New Interna-
tional Economic Order and actions related to economic cooperation (see footnote 3,
Document 99).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
• Access to International Monetary Fund resources has been
sharply increased. Terms are more flexible. New facilities are in opera-
tion. A major quota increase is in process. The World Bank has also
launched an innovative program of lending for structural adjustment.
• The common fund negotiations have been completed. We have
moved ahead on individual commodity agreements.
• On trade, last year’s multilateral trade agreement will mean an
average cut of 25% in tariffs on principal developing-country exports.
Preferential tariff systems have been adopted by all Western industrial
countries.
• Use by developing countries of world capital markets has in-
• The effort to increase world food supplies has been advanced
through the International Fund for Agricultural Development and
through the concentration of World Bank resources. In the past 5 years
the World Bank committed some $11. billion to agricultural projects.
• And in another urgent priority area—energy—the World Bank
will be lending well over $10 billion for energy projects between now
and 1985.
This partial listing is not the record of a world community frozen
in shortsighted self-interest, rigidly divided by ideology or stalemated
on methods. Those tendencies do afflict us. Yet in recent years we have
also found the common sense and good will to move forward.
But our accomplishments are still far short of our needs. My gov-
ernment has just completed a major study of the world’s population,
resources, and environmental prospects for the year 2000—just 20
years away. Its conclusions remind us again why these debates must
move from rhetoric to reality. Our “Global 2000” study begins with a
harsh truth. In the year 2000, the world population will be more than
half again higher than in 1975. Over the last quarter of this century,
more than 2 billion people will be added—2 billion more mouths to
feed, bodies to clothe, individual hopes to be fulfilled.
Given this fact, the study tells us what could happen if nations fail
to act in time and with reason. Based on current trends, food produc-
tion should nearly double. Still, the number of people going hungry
will rise by millions. Many nations already hungry see their croplands
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
and grasslands drying to desert—a loss each year equal to the size of
my home State of Maine.
On energy, from the vantage of a precarious present, we could face
a punishing future. Unless trends are changed, oil supplies will be in-
sufficient and, for many, unaffordable. Wood, the main household fuel
for over 1 billion people, will be found only at ever greater distances
and in dwindling amounts.
We have become accustomed to warnings about the need to con-
serve nonrenewable resources such as oil. But the “Global 2000” study
also points up serious stresses on renewable resources—croplands and
forests, fisheries, air, water, and land—resources we have taken for
granted as endless.
Another central observation of the study is that protecting the en-
vironment and succeeding in economic development are not com-
peting goals but complementary paths. Poverty worsens the most acute
environmental dangers, such as the loss of forests and soil. Thus we
will not save the environment unless we also solve the problems of the
poor and move the global economy forward.
“Global 2000” is not a forecast. It is a projection of present trends.
But it is another chilling reminder that our common future depends on
our common success, here and throughout the complex of relations
known as the North-South dialogue. We must work together to raise
food production, to diversify energy sources and to use energy and
other resources more efficiently, to protect our common environment,
to restrain population growth, to deal effectively and equitably with
mounting deficits, and to keep an open system of trade.
It falls to us to rewrite the future. It is within our power to do so.
But it will require a change not only in the quantity but in the character
of our effort. For as fast as we have run in recent years, the challenges
still outpace us. Too often, as the Brandt Commission reminds us, we
have engaged in a “dialogue of the deaf,” in which “we judge ourselves
by our good points and the other side by their failings. The result is
frustration and deadlock.”
Global Responsibilities
That deadlock must be broken. The demands of our common fu-
ture require it. They compel a new inquiry. We must ask not only what
individual nations can take from the global system but what each na-
tion must bring to it. Without exception, we must recognize that as-
signing responsibility for the future to others is not an answer but an
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
abdication. Such excuses will not feed, nor clothe, nor heal, nor comfort
our successors if we fail. And fail we will, unless all nations are fully
engaged.
Industrial Countries. I do not by any means exclude my own
country from this prescription. In suggesting what different societies,
differently situated, should offer, let me begin with the industrial
countries.
• First, we must reduce the rate of our domestic inflation. Spiraling
prices restrain growth and make the world economy more vulnerable
and less fair.
• Second, we should keep our markets open, particularly to prod-
ucts from developing countries.
• Third, the industrial nations must use energy more efficiently,
increase domestic production, spur the development of new energy
sources, and cut our reliance on imported oil.
• Fourth, despite the need for budget restraint to control inflation,
we should increase our aid to the developing nations. This Administra-
tion has said many times to the American Congress and the American
people that our present levels of assistance to lower income countries
are not enough. I intend to keep doing all in my power to change that
condition.
• Fifth, developed countries should continue to accept an in-
creasing role for developing countries in international economic deci-
sionmaking—a role commensurate with their growing importance
in the world economy and their willingness to share international
obligations.
• Sixth, we must increase the capacity of developing countries to
apply science and technology for development. We must accelerate the
transfer of information, technology, pollution-control strategies, and
other skills.
Most of these steps will entail short-term sacrifice for the sake of
long-term returns. I believe the American people will support those in-
vestments. But as a former practicing politician, let me speak frankly.
The American people will insist that their contributions have an ef-
fect—that people’s lives must actually be changed for the better. And
we can assure that only if other nations are also prepared to do their
part.
Oil-Exporting Nations. The oil-exporting nations have a unique re-
sponsibility. In recent years rising oil prices have been a ponderous
drag on development and growth and a major cause of inflation. This
year the oil-importing developing countries will have to spend—for
that single commodity—almost double the amount they will receive

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
from all sources in aid. Thus steps such as these by oil-exporting na-
tions will be vital to our common goals:
• First, they must adopt stable price and supply policies to avoid
further trauma to the international economy.
• Second, the oil-exporting countries must increase their aid and
recycle more of their surpluses directly to developing countries.
• Third, oil-exporting countries should join with consuming na-
tions in working for rational global energy arrangements.
Developing Countries. Whatever the level, external assistance will
always be a secondary factor. The major determinants are internal—the
ability to use resources effectively, to encourage innovation, and to
share broadly the benefits of growth. Thus, there are responsibilities
that developing countries must shoulder.
• First, domestic and external resources must be used efficiently
and fairly, with concentration on such priority areas as energy and
food.
• Second, serious family-planning efforts are vital. Nine-tenths of
the world’s population increase in the next 20 years will be in devel-
oping countries. No other single factor does more to darken their
future.
• Third, as their economic strength grows, individual developing
nations should accept more responsibility for the common manage-
ment of international economic problems.
• Fourth, as their development proceeds, they must open their
own economies to free flows of world trade.
Centrally Planned Countries. The market economy countries have
received dominant attention in the North-South dialogue. But the cen-
trally planned countries have global responsibilities as well. Empty
bellies will not be filled by polemics. No nation or group of nations has
grounds to remain aloof from this struggle. World opinion looks to the
centrally planned countries:
• First, to increase their assistance to developing countries;
• Second, to increase their unconditioned purchases of LDC [less
developed country] products; and
• Third, to cooperate in international efforts to stabilize com-
modity markets.
Proposals
For all of us, the principles I have outlined must be the basis for
practical action. For our part the United States is prepared to join with
others to meet the global challenge.
Our most urgent task is to confront the specter of imminent famine
haunting Africa. This summer alone the United States has provided an

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
additional 235,000 tons for emergency African food relief. We strongly
urge that all nations able to contribute foodstuffs or funds join under
the leadership of the Food and Agriculture Organization to coordinate
relief to drought-afflicted regions. I am happy to note that the Director
General will convene a meeting of concerned governments and inter-
national organizations in the coming weeks.
Targets have been set for annual food assistance in the new Food
Aid Convention, and for emergency food aid through the international
emergency food reserve. We encourage others to join us in the effort to
reach those targets, to guarantee that food will be available to those in
need. Further, we should develop reserves that are adequate to back up
donor commitments and assure that food emergencies can be met. My
government is working toward a 4-million-ton reserve of wheat to as-
sure our food aid commitments.
Despite efforts to produce more food, many poor developing
countries will still have to import substantial quantities over the next
decade. We should consider new arrangements to assist those devel-
oping countries that are improving their own food production.
We should explore ways to channel more international funds, both
concessional and nonconcessional, into food production. We, therefore,
support rapid agreement on an equitable replenishment of the Interna-
tional Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). We would also con-
sider further measures to strengthen IFAD.
To help developing countries adjust to oil-driven balance-of-
payments deficits, we favor continued improvements in International
Monetary Fund facilities, including subsidizing the Supplementary Fi-
nancing Facility. Such arrangements should receive strong support

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
from those who prosper as oil prices climb. Private capital flows also
will continue to play a critical role. We look forward to the Develop-
ment Committee’s report on proposals for increasing nonconcessional
flows to developing countries.
We are committed to the stimulation of energy production world-
wide and to the increased use of renewable fuels. The United States
strongly supports an expansion of World Bank energy programs, to
permit Bank participation in multinational risk-sharing ventures to dis-
cover and develop new energy sources. Here, too, as we agreed at the
Venice summit, we are open to new institutional and financial arrange-
ments. We will participate positively in the U.N. Conference on New
and Renewable Energy Sources. We urge the U.N. Secretariat and
member nations to make every effort to insure its success.
Coal is an attractive alternative to high-priced oil. We will expand
our capacity to produce and ship coal, and we are ready to help devel-
oping countries establish coal-burning facilities and increase their use
of coal.
We support discussions between oil-exporting and oil-importing
nations on ways to insure orderly market conditions and on further
assistance for non-oil developing countries.
Requests for population program assistance have outpaced the in-
ternational community’s ability to respond. We are ready to join an in-
ternational commitment to double, in this decade, the availability and
use of family-planning and related health services.
On trade, my country would support a pledge by all countries to
restrain protectionism and case adjustment. Such a commitment would
provide more assured market access to developing countries. Also, be-
yond the sharp reductions in tariffs already agreed, we are prepared to
increase the benefits of our generalized system of preferences for
poorer developing countries.
These proposals reflect the positive approach we believe our
common problems demand and this special session deserves.
Let me conclude with this observation. I am persuaded, to the
depth of my being, that the challenges ahead are not beyond us. The
“Global 2000” report has been described as a reconnaissance of the fu-
ture. It describes the possibility. I believe it will not be the reality. The
vision we share is a vision of opportunity and of peace. It is within our
capacity to alter the future to fit that vision. The resources do exist. The
solutions can be found. Together we can summon the will. Knowing
what is at stake, we must not fail.

156.
Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski)
Washington, September 3, 1980
SUBJECT
East-West Relations: A Formula for U.S. Policy in 1981 and Beyond
I want to offer some perspectives on the current state of East-West
relations and an integrating formula for putting both the resources and a
clear sense of strategic direction into our policies toward the Soviet
Union in the next four years. You will recognize much of the analysis,
but I hope the framework is helpful for tying rhetoric to actions and
programs in a comprehensive fashion. The inspiration for this memo
comes in part from Sam Huntington’s recent paper on U.S.-Soviet rela-
tions which he wrote for Hedley Donovan, but it also stems from my
own efforts in strategic doctrinal changes, the Persian Gulf Security
Framework, and East-West technology transfers. We have accom-
plished a great deal over the past three years, and I would like to main-
tain the momentum and include additional areas and programs.
The East-West Balance
In early 1977 you told Sam and me to “tell us how we are doing in
the world vis-a-vis the Soviets.” PRM–10 Comprehensive Net Assess-
ment was the reply. It treated military and non-military categories as
well as all major regions of U.S.-Soviet competition.
1. The military balance was judged as “essential equivalence” and
the trends as adverse. That judgment looks sound in retrospect.
2. In the non-military categories of technology, economics, diplo-
macy, and political institutions, the U.S. was ahead although the critical
military-related technology gap was closing in several areas. In retro-
spect this judgment has been vindicated.
3. In the major regions outside Europe, Soviet prospects were
judged best in Africa and the Persian Gulf region. The Caribbean was
cited but without alarm. In retrospect, the record is mixed in Africa;
Iran as a crisis point was predicted; we were too optimistic about the
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
Caribbean; and Southeast Asia has been more volatile than anticipated.
In East Asia, our normalization with the PRC faces the USSR for the
first time ever with a China-Japan-U.S. tie of good relations.
4. In Europe, PRM–10 emphasized the certainty of political uncer-
tainty in both Eastern and Western Europe. That judgment remains
valid. The emergence of a more traditional German Ostpolitik, exploited
by Moscow in the traditional manner, signals growing difficulties in
West-West relations, i.e., within the Alliance. The Soviet invasion of Af-
ghanistan has given unambiguous evidence of the strategic interaction
between the Persian Gulf region and European-Soviet relations: Soviet
power projection that affects the oil states of the Persian Gulf tends to
reinforce the accommodationist politicizing forces in Western Europe
and thereby exacerbates U.S.-European relations vis-a-vis Moscow and
the Persian Gulf.
The Transition from Era I to Era II in East-West Relations
Critics within the U.S. and abroad have complained that the U.S.
has not pursued a steady or consistent course in U.S.-Soviet affairs. The
President, in particular, is believed by many to be responsible for this. It
is, in their view, all his fault.
To some extent, the apparent inconsistency is real. Soviet power
projection has been used more extensively in the last few years than
even informed policy and intelligence circles believed it would be.
“Changing” U.S. policy, therefore, has been “catching up” U.S. policy.
Consistent policy outputs are impossible when the inputs differ sub-
stantially from those anticipated.
To a larger extent the inconsistency is only apparent. It looks that
way because the foreign policy and press elites themselves are split on
fundamental assumptions about U.S. foreign policy. They are awak-
ening to and becoming disturbed by the transition from the first era in
East-West relations—1945 to the mid-1970s (U.S. dominance and Pax
Americana)—to the second era—the 1980s and 1990s (the nature of
which is still being defined, as Soviet military power makes itself felt).
But they are reacting to this awakening in quite different ways. At least
three fissures divide foreign policy and media elite views, and perhaps
even the broader public, as they assess the incipient realities of Era II.
First, there are fundamental differences over the political utility of
military force. At the strategic nuclear level, some believe “assured de-
struction” is enough. Others believe force balances and capabilities
make a political and diplomatic difference. At the conventional level,
some argue that our Vietnam experience shows that conventional mili-
tary power is greatly overrated. Others say that Vietnam proves the
importance of using conventional military power effectively, of not
squandering it where our interests are small.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The second fissure is East-West versus North-South primacy, be-
tween those who view East-West relations as still the cornerstone of
U.S. foreign policy and those who believe that North-South relations
rival if not exceed East-West relations for the cornerstone role.
The third fissure concerns economics—the growing incongruities be-
tween economic power on the one hand (Europe, Japan, and Saudi Arabia)
and military security responsibilities on the other hand (the U.S. carries
them all). It is only vaguely recognized, but it has enormous potential
to evoke an “isolationist-internationalist” dichotomy in security policy
prescriptions.
These fissures prevent a foreign policy consensus on East-West re-
lations and mean that in the 1970s, and perhaps into the 1980s, no U.S.
policy toward the USSR can have broad and constant support. The do-
mestic need to accommodate both sides of each fissure, particularly in
Congress for budgets, inevitably creates the impression, if not the re-
ality, of a wavering U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union and our allies.
Thus, blaming the President is far from an adequate explanation.
The primary task for U.S. foreign and defense policy in the early
1980s, therefore, is to complete the transition to Era II peacefully and to
give that era a definition and direction appropriate to changed realities.
Success will depend in part on closing the three fissures, and a compel-
ling formula articulated by the President will help close these. Only
their closure will provide the liberal consensus necessary for a sus-
tained realistic policy.
A U.S. Policy for Era II
Era II may or may not be dominated by the U.S. A return to the
Cold War is not possible because regaining the military preponderance
of that time is not feasible. Were it feasible, a Cold War balance would
be the best choice because it was a period relatively secure from general
war. A return to detente of the early 1970s is equally infeasible. The So-
viets would demand higher terms and be no less aggressive in pro-
jecting power into the disputed regions. Even if the Soviet leaders per-
sonally desired a relaxation, the centrifugal forces within the USSR, in
the Warsaw Pact, and in client states elsewhere would make it too
risky. They are trapped in their own expansive dynamic which limits
fundamental choices.
Neither the containment policy nor the detente policy alone is ade-
quate to deal effectively with the new level of Soviet power. A more
comprehensive approach is essential. The U.S. must neither rely largely
on military power nor passively “contain” Soviet power. The U.S. must
engage the USSR competitively.
Huntington defined four elements of a policy toward the USSR on
which “competitive engagement” can be built.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
a. Maintenance of military deterrence.
b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails.
c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits.
d. Reduction of Soviet influence over client states, bloc states, and
minority nationalities in the USSR.
A number of things have been accomplished over the past three
years to provide the programs and policies for “competitive engage-
ment” over the next four years. When they are specifically related to the
four elements of the policy, a clear view of how to proceed in East-West
relations begins to emerge. That follows for each element.
a. Maintenance of military deterrence through military pre-eminence.
58, and 59 provide the direction our military programs must take to
maintain deterrence in the 1980s. The gap between our political objec-
tives and our military capabilities must be reduced. This can be accom-
plished through simultaneous improvements in our force posture and
meaningful arms control agreements.
—Force Improvements. We must address our military deficiencies in
a three-pronged attack which includes:
—The Budget. Not only must the budget be increased, but Defense,
FEMA, and the DCI must let the strategic PDs guide their program
choices. To date, they have yielded little to the new doctrine.
—Organization. All three agencies must be reorganized to improve
“factor productivity,” with particular emphasis on the Pentagon. The
President tried to reorganize DoD once, but the effort failed. He suc-
ceeded with FEMA. He must succeed in the next term with DoD.
—Manpower. We must also solve the military manpower problem.
That probably means a return to the military draft.
The objective of these measures may not be “military superiority”
but it should be “military pre-eminence” for the US and its allies, in
terms of both nuclear and conventional forces.
—Arms Control. Arms control, too, plays a part in the military bal-
ance. Arms control, however, is headed for indefinite dormancy in the
1980s unless it is tied symbiotically to our defense policy. PD–50 pre-
scribed the process that can achieve that symbiosis. ACDA, State, and
even ISA at Defense have failed to see this merit in the directive. Yet it is
precisely arms control that is at risk without the PD–50 approach.
Planning,” March 3, 1980, can be found at the Jimmy Carter Presidential Library website.
Documentation on PD/NSC–59 is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
SALT I and II were developed to support our assured destruction
defense policy of the 1960s. In the 1970s, that policy became inade-
quate. ACDA and State drifted into the position of seeing arms control
as a surrogate for a defense policy. Now we are hesitantly awakening to
the defense policy problem in Europe. We cannot move with confi-
dence into TNF and SALT III negotiations because we are in transition
with our defense policy. That is not the only defense policy problem for
arms control. ASAT negotiations move on although we have not the
slightest idea of our force goals for space. No military service has re-
sponsibility for them. The same is true for CTB. We have not developed
our defense requirements for nuclear weapons development and pro-
duction of nuclear materials. Yet we are on a CTB track that enjoys no
interagency consensus.
Two major PD–50 tasks must be launched to extract us from this
disastrous course on which arms control now proceeds toward self-
destruction. First, an across-the-board assessment of all negotiations
vis-a-vis one another is essential. Second, a somewhat more narrow re-
view of the TNF/SALT III sector is needed to clarify what kind of SALT
III can assist our national security in an unambiguous and objective
way. To do that, we must also review the whole of our strategy and force
structure for the defense of Europe. Both efforts should be complete by
next spring. To make these serious endeavors, the President will have
to reconfirm his commitment to the PD–50 process within the agencies.
b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails.
We must devote special attention to the three interrelated strategic
regions of Europe, East Asia, and the Persian Gulf. The Caribbean re-
gion is also overdue for our security attention as is Southeast Asia.
We have major work to accomplish in each area, notwithstanding
much that has already been accomplished. NATO, as mentioned in
connection with PD–50, needs a reassessment of our strategy for its de-
fense. The Persian Gulf Security Framework effort must be kept on
track, a separate unified command being one of the first steps next year.
For the Caribbean we must begin a similar security framework effort.
In East Asia, the nature of military ties with China will need further
definition.
In addition to these regional activities, some key functional area re-
views must be accomplished:
—A successful policy of containment depends on capable conven-
tional force projection. We have a modest beginning in the RDF.
—Security Assistance policy needs significant revision, budgeting,
and perhaps changed legislation.
—Our intelligence capabilities in each region must be improved
and expanded with all the speed possible.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
—Military training assistance and advisory policy needs repair.
The most difficult area in the 1980s may prove to be Europe,
West-West relations. Overcoming the lag between our own recovery
from the hopes of the early 1970s and Europe’s recovery from its
present illusion of divisible detente, will not occur without political
trauma. How to defend Europe effectively cannot be dodged as it has
been for three decades. And until that is decided, arms control within
that theater will be difficult to implement in a way that is not politically
and militarily injurious to the West. The LTDP was a modest beginning
which must be turned into a major revolution in the 1980s.
c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits to the East.
The Soviet Union and East Europe will continue to look to the
West as a source of reprieve from their economic plight. The West must
exploit that need with offers of economic assistance based on rigorous
and measurable political conditions.
With the new COCOM policies, we have begun to control more ef-
fectively the strategic technology transfers. The next step is East-West
trade coordination. Credits and trade must be coordinated on an alli-
ance basis. Such a step logically follows from our COCOM policy. Oth-
erwise, the “alternative supplier” problem will continue to deny us the
political advantages of our greatest edge over the Soviets—economic
advantage. In the “process know-how” proposal to COCOM we have
already moved slightly toward trade coordination. That is why Europe
resists it. The diplomatic efforts now in progress to prevent the FRG
(Kloeckner) and France (Creusot-Loire) from taking our ARMCO and
ALCOA deals with the Soviet Union can be the seed from which
East-West trade coordination grows. If the Germans believe that Soviet
markets are critical for their machine exports, then we can retaliate by
denying them our import market. We have strong laws that allow the
President to force Europe to choose between the US as a trading partner
and the Soviet Bloc as a market. Once the allies are whipped into line,
we can dictate the political terms of East-West trade.
The Soviets deeply fear a Western united economic front. If we do
not present them with one in the 1980s, the incongruities between secu-
rity burdens and economic power in NATO will create a political back-
lash in the US which will destroy public support for US troops in Eu-
rope. The Mansfield Amendment was merely a hint of what can come
if the Europeans continue to can get without paying for, because we
choose not to tax them [sic].
ican troop presence in Europe. Both were defeated.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
To move from the rhetorical to the operational, we should use the
post-Afghanistan policy with our allies to lay the basis for East-West trade
coordination at the Economic Summit in Canada next summer. Once the So-
viets see an emerging united economic front, we will have important
opportunities for our economic diplomacy.
d. Reduction of Soviet influence over 1) client states, 2) bloc states, and
3) national minorities in the USSR.
It is time to reduce the spheres of Soviet influence, and the oppor-
tunities are large. We have the beginnings of a policy for the three non-
Russian areas of Soviet influence.
—Client States. In Southwest Asia, in the Horn of Africa, in
Southern Africa (Angola), in Yemen, in the Caribbean, and in Southeast
Asia we can and should bring some reverses to the Soviet projection of
power. This will involve more vigorous support for anti-Soviet move-
ments afoot in all areas.
—Bloc States. We already have a policy for East Europe of encour-
aging its autonomy vis-a-vis the USSR. We must help Poland consolidate
recent gains.
—Minorities in the USSR. We can do more on the nationality ques-
tion within the USSR. The human rights policy is, of course, already a
weapon in our arsenal. In an age of nationalism, there is nothing per-
manent about Soviet “internationalism” and Soviet borders—some-
thing we can imply and encourage others to say explicitly.
A competitive approach to spheres and areas of Soviet influence
will make further Soviet projection of power more difficult. A passive
containment approach will permit Soviet consolidation of recent gains
and new efforts to expand further.
The Soviet Union, however militarily strong it is becoming, suffers
enormous centrifugal political forces. A shock could bring surprising
developments within the USSR, just as we have seen occurring in Po-
land. The dissolution of the Soviet Empire is not a wholly fanciful pre-
diction for later in this century. US policy should sight on that strategic
goal for the longer run. When it comes, Era II will be at an end, and we
can anticipate Era III.
To sum up, through a strategy of “competitive engagement” the
President can, I believe, heal some of the fissures in our foreign policy
and media elite opinion on the three key assumptions for US military,
foreign, and economic policy. In a second term he will be freer to stand
above the day-to-day criticisms that have heretofore made a steady
course difficult to follow, particularly funding programs and pursuing
adequate legislation. He also has the enormous advantage of several in-
choate policy developments (as outlined above) that will allow him,
rather than the Soviets and our allies, to define the nature of Era II in

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
East-West relations. Basic steps have already been taken in each of the
four elements of “competitive engagement.” As policy slogans form
each element, the following are possibilities:
a. Maintenance of military deterrence.
US “military pre-eminence” is the essential basis for deterrence
and security. We shall acquire it and maintain it with our allies.
b. Containment of Soviet expansion where deterrence fails.
“Three interrelated security zones” are the basis for containing So-
viet power projection.
c. Offers of politically conditioned economic benefits.
“Reciprocally advantageous East-West trade” is our goal, but
trade is not compatible with threats to our security and foreign policy
interests.
d. Reduction of Soviet influence over client states, Bloc states, and non-
Russian minorities in the USSR.
“Resistance to Soviet internationalism” is encouraged wherever
states and nations find it oppressive and unwanted.
157.
Briefing Memorandum From the Director of the Policy
Planning Staff (Lake) to Secretary of State Muskie
Washington, September 5, 1980
Presenting U.S. Foreign Policy to the American People: Bureau Ideas
In response to your request last week, twenty-two bureaus and of-
fices have prepared the attached memoranda2 on the ways in which
U.S. foreign policy problems can best be presented to the American
people. This memo summarizes their answers to the questions that
were posed to them.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
I. What does the public need to know about the world to make it more
receptive to the “hard options” of our policies?
Complexity:
Several of the bureaus see a need to convey a greater sense of the
complexity of today’s world and the constraints on our freedom of ac-
tion. We should not minimize the costs or risks associated with our pol-
icies, suggest quick or easy fixes, or downplay the degree to which
American foreign policy success depends on the support of other na-
tions, such as our NATO allies or Third World countries.
David Newsom singles out four issues that are particularly hard to
explain to the American people: Third World demands, unanticipated
political change, the relative strength of the U.S. in the world, and the
independent views of our allies.
A number of the memos suggest that more can be done to make
foreign policy seem relevant to everyday concerns. We can stress the
economic stakes we have in foreign relations (jobs, resources and
the prices paid for imports are three immediate suggestions). We can
relate development efforts abroad to pressures to emigrate to the
U.S. (OES), or to narcotics flows (INR, OES). A number suggest that
we can do more to explain foreign policy in human terms, without
oversimplication.
Resources
The growing reluctance of Americans to dedicate sufficient re-
sources to foreign affairs, particularly to economic and military assist-
ance, is a commonly recognized problem. It is also agreed that we
should actively seek to build support for aid, stressing that it is crucial
to our effectiveness in changed international economic and political cir-
cumstances. In addition to the competitive (with the Soviets) and hu-
manitarian rationales, we can show that aid helps create stable growing
economies which are increasingly important to us as markets for our
exports (H, IDCA, PA). Developing countries are sources of raw mate-
rials (AID, H). Helping LDC’s address their pressing social and eco-
nomic problems can enhance political stability (IDCA). The public be-
moans a supposed loss of U.S. influence in the world, yet desires
reduced aid levels. We can highlight the cost of aid cuts in terms of in-
fluence (NEA). One caveat, however: a tendency to exaggerate the ben-
efits of aid in the past is part of our problem today. We should, there-
fore, be willing to keep expectations reasonable (EB).
Specific Issue Ideas
Third World needs: dramatize with use of Caribbean area. Poverty at
home leads to migration pressures on U.S. (P).

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
Fault found with U.S. policy “weakness” whenever unfavorable change
occurs: recall radical changes which occurred during period of prepon-
derant U.S. power (Nasser, Iraq, Castro etc.) (P).
Strategic balance: selective use of “how does it look from Moscow”
(P); sober respect for Soviets but not all-powerful, long run mutual in-
terests (PM, PA).
Refugees, immigrants: historical success stories, always adjustment
problems (RP); need to share burdens (PA).
Congressional relations: agreement on policies takes work but
strengthens policy; legislated constraints can be costly (H).
Intelligence: stress role of intelligence community in digestion of
mass of data needed for modern policymaking (INR).
Energy: challenge myths, e.g. no energy problem, U.S. deserves
subsidized oil, can break cartel with wheat. Stress collateral role of
allies, LDC’s (EB).
Trade: economic/political costs of protectionism, injury alterna-
tives available, effective competition not unfair, LDC’s offer markets
Narcotics: example of modest assistance program with direct do-
mestic benefit (INM).
Human Rights: grounded in U.S. and international law, pragmatic,
promotes security, strong card in ideological competition, long term so-
lution to refugee problems (HA, PA).
Arms Control: preserve base; push SALT without catalyzing
business as usual attitude; SALT in our interest, not “favor” to Soviets;
TNF—keep low visibility/freedom of action (PM, PA).
Terrorism: decade of violence likely—need to attack root causes
Latin America: Unsung success story; convey sense of changing
scene and our confidence that we advance U.S. interests by promoting
LA democracy; coolness with southern cone only temporary. (ARA)
II. How can the problems confronting U.S. foreign policy be best presented
to the American people?
—Use an overall framework or strategy statement; perhaps revive
annual foreign policy statements3 (H).
—Need quicker adaptation of speaking engagements to changing
foreign policy priorities, more aggressive use of FSO visits to home-
towns (EUR).
—The Secretary should make a Report to U.S. People on U.S. for-
eign policy goals and responsibilities. Work in foreign service role in
conceiving and carrying out U.S. foreign policy (PER).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—Need to reiterate themes, particularly those of allies speech
(Commonwealth/WAC August 8). Make two economic speeches in
next two months (EB).
—Require that all Deputy Assistant Secretaries and above make a
speech monthly. Add speaking skills section to efficiency report on
—Stress citizen services stories to personalize department, build
support, combat ivory tower image (CA).
—Consider establishment of consular services office on Capitol
—Intensify and institutionalize communications with key interest
groups interested in foreign policy. Improve press guidance to avoid
cliches, evasiveness. Department Spokesman should be willing to deal
with reasonable hypothetical questions. Testify on Hill on interagency
agreed positions only. Consider monthly summaries of current foreign
policy with Q’s and A’s. Make senior officials available to networks
for a series of TV specials on the problems and imperatives of foreign
policymaking (AF).
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
tional interests in a dangerous and often unstable world. And we’ve
done so without recourse to violence and war. This is no accident. It’s
the result of a careful exercise of the enormous strength of America.
Today I want to talk to you about what we must do together in the
next 4 years to ensure our own security and to keep the peace.
The cornerstone of both security and peace is our ability to defend
ourselves. In the last analysis we must be able to meet our commit-
ments and pursue our goals peacefully, with calm assurance and confi-
dence. That requires military strength.
We face a potential adversary, the Soviet Union, whose gov-
ernment has funneled much of the wealth and talents of its own people
into the construction of a military machine. We would prefer to com-
pete peacefully with Soviet farmers to feed the world, with Soviet tex-
tile workers to clothe it, with Soviet doctors to heal it, with Soviet sci-
entists to give it new forms of energy. Those races would be a joy to
run. But that is not the challenge they lay before us. Instead, we see a
large buildup of Soviet military forces; we see the arming and use of
client states such as Cuba; and we see the brutal Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan.
This long-term challenge demands a steady, resolute response.
Historically, our country has moved sharply up and down in its sup-
port for defense. After each war we have disarmed and demobilized,
and then later embarked on crash buildups. Such erratic actions are
always wasteful and sometimes dangerous.
My commitment has been different. It’s been to provide for a
steady rebuilding of our defenses. We’ve increased our real spending
for defense—spending above and beyond inflation—every year since I
became President. For 7 of the previous 8 years it had declined sharply,
effects of this long decline cannot be eliminated at a stroke. But we have
made an excellent start, especially by putting our technological superi-
ority to work.
For example, by producing a number of types of long-range cruise
missiles, we can multiply the power of our existing ships and aircraft.
We are doing just that. When I took office, we had no new battle tank or
modern armored fighting vehicle. Now they are both in production. No
answer had been found to the prospective vulnerability of our Min-
uteman missiles and silos. Now there’s an answer—the mobile MX
missile.
There was no overall plan for strengthening United States and
other Allied forces in Europe. Now we have a good plan, and we are
putting it into effect. We’re deploying antitank missiles at a rate five
times faster than the Soviets are deploying their tanks. On NATO’s

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
eastern flank, we’re working to reintegrate Greece into the NATO com-
mand structure, and we attach great importance to this effort.
Our purchases of army equipment, jet fighters, and attack aircraft
had dropped by some two-thirds in the 8 years before I became Presi-
dent. Since then, we have increased them by 50 percent.
When I came into office, I found that we had little capability for
quick action in the critical Persian Gulf region. Now we have preposi-
tioned equipment for 12,000 Marines and munitions for 500 aircraft.
We’ve arranged for the use of five different sites in the region. We’ve
deployed two carrier task forces in the Indian Ocean. They give us air
and naval superiority to act instantly to keep open the Straits of
Hormuz, through which much of the world’s oil trade flows.
More will have to be done. Even further increases in pay and ben-
efits will be needed to keep trained service men and women in our vol-
unteer forces. Barring some unexpected decrease in Soviet military ef-
forts, we will also need to increase our investments in the ships,
aircraft, tanks, and other weapons that are the muscle of our conven-
tional forces. Military forces give us security, but they are not an end in
themselves. As I’ve said many times, the best weapon is one which
need never be fired in combat, and the best soldier is the one who never
has to shed his blood on the field of battle.
Besides our military programs, we’ve devised something else,
what might be called a secret weapon. This weapon will knock out
about a fourth of all the Soviet long-range missiles and bombers that we
project for 1985. It will eliminate thousands of nuclear bombs and
warheads the Russians could otherwise have. It will enhance our
intelligence-gathering capabilities to monitor what the Soviet Union is
doing. It will do all this without firing a shot, without interfering with a
single one of our own planned military improvements, without costing
a dime. Indeed, it will save us billions of dollars.
This secret weapon, of course, is not a weapon at all. Nor is it a se-
cret. It is SALT II, the strategic arms limitation treaty which we have
signed after 7 years of negotiations with the Soviet Union, and which
now awaits approval by the Senate.
This agreement strengthens our strategic position. It also strength-
ens peace, for what is at stake is more than a single treaty, however ad-
vantageous. What is at stake is a process, an extremely important
process, the process of gradually reducing the possibility of nuclear
war.
Thirty-five years after Hiroshima, the shadow of what was un-
leashed there still hangs over the world. We’ve lived with it for so long
that we are in danger of becoming casual about it. We must not do that.
Even a single hydrogen bomb dropped on a single major city could
cause millions of deaths and injuries in the first few seconds and mil-

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
lions more in its wake. It is beyond the power of words to describe the
horror of a nuclear holocaust. It would dwarf all the accumulated bar-
barities and cruelties of mankind’s long history put together. More
people would die in a few hours than in all the wars of all nations since
the dawn of recorded history.
Most of us seldom think seriously about the possibility of nuclear
war. But as the President of the United States, entrusted with the power
to unleash that force, charged with the responsibility to bend every ef-
fort of mind and heart and will to see to it that it need never be un-
leashed, then it is something I think about every day and every night of
my life.
Over the last 20 years we’ve taken some tentative steps away from
the nuclear precipice. Now, for the first time, we are being advised to
take steps that may move us toward it.
A few days ago my opponent in the current election campaign
promised to scrap the nuclear arms treaty we’ve already signed. He
said, and I quote, “The one card that’s been missing in these negotia-
tions is the possibility of an arms race.” He also urges that we seek nu-
clear superiority. His position—and I think I state it accurately—is that
by abandoning the current agreement and suggesting an all-out nu-
clear arms race, we could perhaps frighten the Soviets into negotiating
a new agreement on the basis of American nuclear superiority.
I’ve had 4 years of sobering experience in this life-and-death field,
and in my considered judgment this would be a very risky gamble. It is
most unlikely that it would lead to any new agreement. A much more
likely result would be an uncontrolled nuclear arms race and almost
certainly a new rupture in Soviet-American relations. The long, slow
momentum of arms control would be broken. Any future effort to ne-
gotiate arms limits—for example, on antisatellite systems, on nuclear
weapons tests, on conventional and nuclear arms in Europe—would all
be imperiled.
dustrial capacity and all that we can do.” (“Reagan Would Toughen U.S. Stand on Arms
Pact,” and “Excerpts From Reagan Interview on Policies He Would Follow,” both The

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The most important duty of a President is to defend the Nation
and its vital interests. Part of that duty is to judge what course of action
will diminish the possibility of nuclear war. My considered judgment,
based on a very thorough knowledge of all the factors involved, is that
the course I am following would do that, and that the departure recom-
mended by my opponent would have just the opposite effect.
His argument is not with me alone. It is with our allies who,
without exception, support both the SALT treaty and the continuing
process of nuclear arms control. His position is a departure from the
policies of President Truman, President Eisenhower, and all Demo-
cratic and Republican Presidents who have served in this office since
then. Whatever their other differences, all of them saw a duty to slow
the arms race and to bring the terrible weapons of nuclear annihilation
under some kind of rational control.
I do not propose to turn away from that duty. I propose to lead our
country in fulfilling it.
Though we must continue to work for arms control, which is in
our mutual interest, we must recognize that Soviet-American relations
have grown colder in the wake of the invasion of Afghanistan. The
world has condemned this act of aggression, and the Soviets are being
made to realize that this military occupation of a freedom-loving nation
cannot be continued without severe adverse consequences. But we
must not let ourselves become obsessed by fear and rivalry. If we do,
we run the risk of neglecting the many other problems which are re-
lated to the Soviet Union only indirectly or not at all.
Peace is the work of many hands. It’s the struggle for justice in
many dark corners. It is striving to solve problems long stalemated and
bitterly disputed. It’s having the courage to rise above old failures and
to act upon new hope. As we raise our shield against war, let us also
hear the stricken voice of the homeless refugee, the cry of the hungry
child, the weeping of the bereaved widow, the whispered prayer of the
political prisoner. We are one with the family of all people, and the con-
cerns to the human family are many. Around the world we’ve rejected
the counsels of pessimism and have dared to make progress toward
peace.
In the Far East, we’ve placed our relations with China on an honest
and sensible footing. This makes the global balance of power more
stable and strengthens peace both in Asia and around the world.
In the Middle East, 7 years ago this month, there was war—the
fourth Arab-Israeli war in just 25 years. Today Egypt and Israel are at
peace, and Israel is more secure from attack than she has ever been.
We’ve recognized the strategic interrelationship between Israel’s secu-
rity and our own. When I first met President Sadat at the White House
in April 1977, I told him that I intended to work for a complete peace

159.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter
Washington, October 21, 1980
SUBJECT
Themes for your Foreign Policy Debate
It is important that in the debate you not only demonstrate a supe-
rior knowledge of foreign affairs (which you clearly have) but also
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
convey to the public several broad themes, which show clearly the con-
trast between you and Reagan. The war/peace theme is the obvious
one, but in the discussion of foreign affairs you may want to relate any
specific comments to two or three broader themes, contrasting your
foreign policy with Reagan’s. By emphasizing such broader themes, the
public will get a better sense of your statesmanship, in contrast to
Reagan’s sloganeering. To the extent possible, every comment on for-
eign policy should reflect the themes discussed more fully below.
The distinctive quality of your foreign policy is that it combines re-
spect for morality with the recognition of the importance of power in
world affairs. When you assumed office in 1977, you set yourself two
central tasks:
1. To improve America’s political position in the world, over-
coming the isolation in which America found itself after eight years of
Republican rule and fifteen years of the Vietnam war;
2. To improve America’s strategic position, after eight years of Re-
publican neglect of our strategic needs and some fifteen years of a sus-
tained Soviet defense effort.
As a consequence, you have succeeded in greatly improving our
relations with the Third World, in identifying America through your
human rights policy with the basic aspirations of our time (and this is
why you have a right to be optimistic in your historical vision), and your
various concrete policy successes reflect this progress (Panama, Zim-
babwe, Camp David, China, etc.). It is important that in your comments
you emphasize this theme, noting that Reagan’s administration would
be likely to produce again America’s global isolation.
At the same time, you have not neglected the dimension of power.
Here you have pursued a sophisticated policy of emphasizing arms
control with a long-term effort to improve our overall defense posture
(NATO modernization, RDF, MX, Trident, PD–59). Moreover, the nor-
malization of relations with China has also contributed to an improved
strategic situation for the United States. By moving forward with
SALT, you have held out the possibility of a greatly reduced or even
contained arms race, and that too enhances our security.
In effect, your foreign policy has been responsive to the fact that
we live in an age of complexity, and that the President has to make
careful and mature judgments, weighing carefully a variety of trade-
offs while avoiding simplistic slogans. You have done this throughout
by stressing the proposition that on the one hand America must positively
identify itself with global change (and thus also improve its own political posi-
tion in the world) and on the other hand remain strong, both through its
system of alliances as well as its own defense effort.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Accordingly, your foreign policy, by combining the ability to work
with the new forces in the world with an emphasis on American
strength, is more likely to generate a condition of global peace and
gradual accommodation of regional or ideological disputes.
All of the foregoing enables you to state confidently and very af-
firmatively that “tyranny is everywhere on the defensive”; that “free-
dom is the genuine inevitability of our times”; that “American prin-
ciples and values are relevant to our times.” These optimistic themes
regarding the future follow logically from your broad approach to the
world.
In contrast, Reagan’s foreign policy can be defined as:
1. Dominated by a nostalgia for the past;
2. Preoccupied one-dimensionally with weaponry.
The nostalgia for the conditions of the fifties, a time of unique
American military and economic preponderance, shows the degree to
which Reagan has no sense of history and particularly no vision for the
future. Neither our relations with the Third World nor our relations
with the Soviet Union can be shaped in the eighties on the basis of what
existed thirty years ago. Any effort to do so is simply likely to produce
America’s isolation in a hostile world. At the same time, Reagan’s one-
dimensional preoccupation with weaponry is likely to precipitate an
arms race while giving the Soviets no incentive to exercise any re-
straint, be it in the Persian Gulf area or in regard to Poland. It is likely to
generate more intense confrontations and thus threaten world peace.
In connection with the foregoing, it might be also possible to reg-
ister subtly the relevance of Reagan’s advanced age to our concerns
with the future. The decade of the eighties cannot be managed by an
America led by an aged President, dominated by nostalgia for the past.
America must convey a vital message to the world, 80% of whose pop-
ulation is composed of politically awakened Third World peoples,
most of them quite young. A world of change and youth requires a vital
and forward-looking America.
To conclude, the three themes which you should have very clearly
in your mind as you speak are:
1. That your foreign policy reflects an optimistic recognition of the
nature of change in the world and America’s ability to convey a mor-
ally relevant sense of direction to that world;
2. That under your stewardship American strength has been in-
creased, our Allies have been strengthened, and our strategic position
in the world has also improved;
3. That the proper response to complex global change is not nos-
talgia for the fifties.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
The Qs and As which are attached focus on more specific issues,
but are designed with the above considerations in mind.
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
bringing about an orderly transition of government in the weeks ahead.
My best wishes are with you and your family as you undertake the re-
sponsibilities that lie before you.” And I signed it Jimmy Carter.
I have been blessed as only a few people ever have, to help shape
the destiny of this Nation. In that effort I’ve had your faithful support.
In some ways I’ve been the most fortunate of Presidents, because I’ve
had the daily aid of a wise man and a good man at my side, in my judg-
ment the best Vice President anybody ever had, Fritz Mondale.
I’ve not achieved all I set out to do; perhaps no one ever does. But
we have faced the tough issues. We’ve stood for and we’ve fought for
and we have achieved some very important goals for our country.
These efforts will not end with this administration. The effort must go
on. Nor will the progress that we have made be lost when we leave of-
fice. The great principles that have guided this Nation since its very
founding will continue to guide America through the challenges of the
future.
This has been a long and hard-fought campaign, as you well know.
But we must now come together as a united and a unified people to
solve the problems that are still before us, to meet the challenges of a
new decade. And I urge all of you to join in with me in a sincere and
fruitful effort to support my successor when he undertakes this great
responsibility as President of the greatest nation on Earth.
Ours is a special country, because our vast economic and military
strength gives us a special responsibility for seeking solutions to the
problems that confront the world. But our influence will always be
greater when we live up to those principles of freedom, of justice, of
human rights, for all people.
God has been good to me, and God has been good to this country,
and I’m truly thankful. I’m thankful for having been able to serve you
in this capacity, thankful for the successes that we have had, thankful
that to the end you were with me and every good thing that I tried
to do.
There’s an old Yiddish proverb that I’ve often thought of in the
days and months that I’ve held this office. It says simply, “God gives
burdens; also shoulders.” In all the days and months when I have
served you and served this country, you’ve readily given me your
shoulders, your faith, and your prayers. No man could ask any more of
his friends.
I’ve wanted to serve as President because I love this country and
because I love the people of this Nation. Finally, let me say that I am
disappointed tonight, but I have not lost either love.
Thank you very much.

161.
Minutes of a Cabinet Meeting
The seventy-fourth meeting of the Cabinet was called to order by
the President at 11: a.m. The Vice President and all members of the
Cabinet were present except Secretary Goldschmidt, who was repre-
sented by Deputy Secretary Beckam. In addition, the following people
were in attendance:
Rosalynn Carter
Sol Linowitz
Max Cleland
Gus Speth
Douglas Costle
Stansfield Turner
Roland Freeman
Jack Watson
Rex Granum
Anne Wexler
Thomas Higgins
Eugene Eidenberg
Bruce Kirschenbaum
1. The President opened the meeting by expressing his gratitude to
the members of the Cabinet for their work during his administration.
He commented on their fine working relationship, and said they had
made a significant contribution to the country. He said the transition
had been both graceful and generous so far, and mentioned that his
meeting with President-elect Reagan had gone well.
—The President reminded the Cabinet that this administration still
had the authority and responsibility to run the government and urged
them not to be timid in exercising that authority.
—The President encouraged the Cabinet to compile an accurate
historical record of their time in office, and to be aggressive in dissemi-
nating that record.
—The President also reported his plans to return to Plains,
Georgia, after the inauguration. He said he and his family would make
their home there, although he would spend some portion of his time in
Atlanta, where the Presidential papers would be housed until a library
is built.
—The President told the Cabinet they would be receiving informa-
tion prepared by Lloyd Cutler, Counsel to the President, concerning
the identification and handling of Presidential papers.
corner of the first page of the minutes.
3: p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) For Carter’s
recollection of the meeting, see White House Diary, pp. 486–487.

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—The President commented on the preparation of the FY 1982
budget. He said it would be restrained while at the same time honoring
commitments of the Democratic Party. He praised the Congress for its
recent approval of the Alaska Lands Bill, and the creation of a “super-
fund” to clean up toxic wastes. The President asked if any Cabinet
members wanted to make any comment.
2. The Vice President began his remarks by stating that history
would deal more kindly with the Carter Administration than had the
voters.
—He mentioned especially the record established in behalf of
human rights, saying that the U.S. had asserted fundamental American
values.
—He said that the U.S. had been at peace during the Carter years,
and noted the absence of any major scandal touching the presidency.
Finally, the Vice President praised Mrs. Carter for her graceful tenure
as First Lady.
[Omitted here are comments by McIntyre, Miller, the President,
Schultze, and Muskie.]
8. The President commented on some of the difficulties in pro-
viding leadership to the Western Alliance.
—The President also reviewed the difficulties involved in
achieving the release of the American hostages in Iran, while noting
that over 50,000 Americans had been safely removed from that country.
—He reported that the last U.S. response to Iran’s conditions for
the hostages’ release preserved American honor and integrity.
—The President also expressed his appreciation for Ambassador
Linowitz’s work on the Egyptian/Israeli negotiations. He said he en-
couraged President-elect Reagan to maintain the Camp David process
and stated that both President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin want it
to continue.
—Finally, the President expressed the hope that the new adminis-
tration would state publicly that the new provisions of SALT II would
govern American policy until either the Treaty was ratified or new
agreements were achieved. The President observed that the SALT II
Treaty effectively protects U.S. interests.
9. Secretary Brown noted that a dramatic change had occurred in
the American public’s attitudes toward defense in the last four years.
He said he believed a consensus had emerged in support of a respon-
sible growth in military power. Mr. Brown pointed out that there were
greater moral restraints on our use of power than the Soviets. He con-
cluded with a statement of personal respect for the President.
10. The President responded by saying he thought relationships
between the State Department, Defense Department and NSC had been

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
mostly harmonious. He suggested that reports of divisions had been
exaggerated by the press. The President said he had made the final de-
cisions, and that he was proud of the Administration’s legacy in foreign
affairs.
[Omitted here are comments by Askew.]
12. The President commented that many of the Administration’s
foreign policy initiatives had been difficult politically, but were good
for the country.
13. Mr. Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security,
observed that the President had fashioned a foreign policy that fused
principle with power. He said that these two concepts no longer
needed to be viewed as antithetical. He also warned that the foreign af-
fairs of the U.S. could not be conducted effectively without a President
who takes an active role in them.
[Omitted here are comments by Harris.]
15. Ambassador McHenry praised the President for his sensitivity
to civil rights issues, as well as the opening toward Africa. He said that
during the Carter Administration relations with the new nations of Af-
rica were greatly strengthened.
[Omitted here are comments by the President and Hufstedler.]
expressing the hope that the achievements of the Administration
would be neither denigrated or ignored. The President and Mrs. Carter
left the Cabinet Room to standing and sustained applause.
Respectfully submitted,
Eugene Eidenberg

162.
Paper Prepared in the Department of State
Washington, December 3, 1980
CARTER ADMINISTRATION—ACCOMPLISHMENTS
1. Building America’s military strength.
—In eight years preceding President Carter, defense spending—
after inflation—declined by more than 35%. Spending on strategic nu-
clear forces declined 20%.
—Since January 1977, real defense spending has increased every year.
Overall increase of 10%—after inflation. Under Five-Year Defense Plan,
real defense spending will have increased more than 27% between FY
1978 and FY 1985.
—Engaged in most comprehensive modernization of military posture in
over a decade.
Strategic forces
—Upgrading each leg of strategic nuclear triad:
—four years ago, no program for a mobile ICBM; today, MX missile
is in full-scale engineering development.
—four years ago, Trident submarine program bogged down in con-
tractor disputes, way behind schedule. Today, shipbuilder claims re-
solved; first Trident will undergo sea trials this year; join fleet next year.
Already begun to equip Poseidon subs with longer range, more accu-
rate Trident I missile; by 1982, 12 Poseidons will be armed with Trident I.
—four years ago, no long-range, air-launched cruise missiles in-
cluded in defense program. Today, well on way to equipping B–52’s
with over 3000 cruise missiles; first squadron ready in 1982. Will be able
to penetrate Soviet air defenses for foreseeable future, as opposed to
B–1 bomber the President rejected; would have been obsolete and a
waste of money.
U.S.-Allied defense cooperation
—Four years ago, the defense posture of NATO was in serious
trouble. Today, NATO is engaged in a broad-scale defense moderniza-
tion effort.
Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
—At President Carter’s initiative, NATO adopted, in 1978, a com-
prehensive Long-Term Defense Program to upgrade its forces in ten spe-
cific areas, from air defense to command and control.
—Following U.S. leadership, the Alliance members committed
themselves to 3% annual increases in real defense spending through the
mid-1980’s.
—In December 1979, NATO agreed to modernize and upgrade its
long-range theater nuclear forces by deploying Pershing II and ground-
launched cruise missiles in Europe.
—With recent reintegration of Greece into NATO, the southeastern
flank of the alliance is strengthened.
—Congressional repeal of Turkish arms embargo, at urging of Ad-
ministration, resulted in reopening of U.S. installations there; strength-
ening of NATO’s southeastern flank.
—Recently agreed with Great Britain to assist it in modernizing its
nuclear arsenal.
—Steady growth in our strategic relationship with Japan. New Joint
Defense Guidelines of 1978.
—Renegotiated base agreement with Philippines which stabilizes mil-
itary presence in Southeast Asia through 1991.
Non-allied contingencies
—Engaged in significant enhancement of our capability to move
forces rapidly to distant trouble spots, particularly Persian Gulf.
—Increased our naval presence in Indian Ocean.
—Prepositioning military equipment in region.
—Negotiating access rights to key local port and airfield facilities in
region; concluded agreements with Kenya and Oman.
—Expanding airlift capability through development of new CX
cargo aircraft.
—Establishing new Rapid Deployment Force, composed of units
from all services.
—Persuading our allies to assume more of defense burden in their
own regions as we shift resources to Southwest Asia-Persian Gulf
contingencies.
2. Balanced, enforceable arms control to reduce enormous dangers and costs
of an all-out nuclear arms race.
—After nearly seven years of negotiation by three Presidents, Pres-
ident Carter concluded SALT II Treaty. Would make us more secure by

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
limiting the threats we face. All U.S. strategic programs could go for-
ward under the treaty. But the Soviets would be restrained in signifi-
cant ways.
—Under President Carter’s leadership, the United States has led in
the search for ways of enjoying the benefits of nuclear energy without
increasing the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation. In 1977 President
Carter initiated the International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation, in-
volving 66 nations in an effort to expand international consensus on
safer nuclear technologies. US has led the drive to expand membership
of the Non-Proliferation Treaty—to 115 countries today. We have
worked with International Atomic Energy Agency to tighten interna-
tional safeguards and standards for nuclear commerce.
3. Exercising leadership to strengthen the international stand against Soviet
aggression.
—Firm response to Soviet aggression in Afghanistan serves two
purposes: to impose a substantial, continuing cost on the Soviet mili-
tary presence in Afghanistan; to demonstrate that Soviet aggression
anywhere will meet firm resistance. Have acted in three areas:
• First, in our direct relations with the Soviets, we have:
—cancelled grain sales (decision denied Soviets 17 MMT of grain;
Soviets able to replace less than half. Together with poor Soviet harvest,
has meant less meat on Soviet shelves. Per capita meat consumption
down to 1975 levels. Thwarted important objective of Soviet gov-
ernment—increasing meat supplies to Soviet people).
—led Olympic boycott (61 nations chose not to attend. Turned
Olympics into largely Eastern European affair. Denied Soviets desired
goal of using Olympics as symbol of world acceptance of Soviet foreign
actions).
—tightened controls on sale of high technology items to Soviet
Union.
—sharply restricted Soviet fishing in US waters (lost their allocation
of about 300,000 tons of fish; about 4% of their total worldwide catch).
—curtailed exchange programs.
—limited Aeroflot flights to US.
—suspended plans for opening new US consulate in Kiev and So-
viet consulate in New York.
• Second, we have moved to address the new security situation in
the region:
—increased and accelerated military preparedness for contingencies
in the area (greater naval presence in Indian Ocean; RDF; preposi-
tioning of equipment; new base and port access rights).

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
—President Carter placed the Soviets on notice that we would regard
an attempt to control the Persian Gulf region as an assault on our vital
interests, to be met by any means necessary including military force.
—have worked to strengthen security and stability of nations in re-
gion (e.g. Western aid to Turkey, Pakistan; Camp David peace process).
• Third, we have worked with other nations to strengthen the inter-
national response to this Soviet aggression:
—few nations have been so sharply and broadly condemned (104
nations in the UN; Islamic nations—twice).
—have pressed our friends and allies to support the direct meas-
ures we have taken and to sustain their own sanctions against the So-
viet Union.
4. Search for peaceful, negotiated solutions to potentially explosive regional
disputes.
—President Carter’s leadership was instrumental in achieving the
historic Camp David agreements between Egypt and Israel. For the first
time since its creation, Israel today is at peace with its most powerful
Arab neighbor, Egypt. For the first time, a negotiating process has been
created to address both Israel’s security and Palestinian rights.
—The President’s unwavering support for negotiating in Rhodesia
helped bring an end to a bloody civil war, a majority rule government
and a decent hope for peace and long-term stability.
—Together with the other Western members of the UN Security
Council, we have made substantial progress toward a peaceful transi-
tion to independence and majority rule in Namibia.
—After fourteen years of negotiation, we concluded a new Panama
Canal Treaty which provides a more secure future for the Canal and re-
moves a long-time irritant in our relations with nations throughout the
Hemisphere.
5. Broader cooperation with our allies than ever before.
—Largely as a result of US leadership, NATO has done more in the
past four years to strengthen its collective defense than in any comparable
period in its history.
—Long-Term Defense Program.
—commitment to annual 3% real increases in defense spending.
—theater nuclear weapons modernization.
—NATO allies stood firm against considerable Soviet pressure to
reverse TNF modernization decision.
—unprecedented degree of genuine consultation on defense and
arms control matters (during SALT negotiations, for example).

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
—The scope of our cooperation has moved beyond collective
defense:
—through progressively more constructive economic summits, in-
dustrial democracies have coordinated domestic as well as interna-
tional energy and economic policies to a greater extent than in the past
(e.g. national energy import goals).
—Venice Summit demonstrated essential unity of allies in in-
sisting on total, not cosmetic, Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan.
—while we sought broader measures, the fact is that our allies
have joined us in imposing significant economic sanctions on Iran for
holding US hostages.
—industrial democracies have joined together in a massive aid pro-
gram for Turkey.
—over past few years, Western democracies have shown an un-
precedented degree of cooperation toward resolving dangerous regional dis-
putes (e.g. Rhodesia, Namibia, Zaire-Angola).
6. Building stronger relationships with countries of growing importance on
the world scene.
—Normalization of relations with China has enabled us to deal di-
rectly and forthrightly with a quarter of the world’s population; but-
tressed our strategic position.
—Have given new attention to our relations with developing nations
of particular importance—Mexico, Saudi Arabia and Nigeria, for example.
—Have strengthened our cooperation with regional organizations of
growing importance—the OAS, the Andean Pact and the Caribbean
Group in Latin America; the OAU in Africa; and ASEAN in Southeast
Asia.
—Our commitment to a fair result in Panama, to majority rule in
southern Africa, and to the advancement of human rights and human
freedom around the world has demonstrated that US is prepared to
deal with developing nations on basis of shared interests and mutual
respect. Significantly improved relationships in Africa, Latin America and
Asia. In recent UN votes on Afghanistan and Iran, for example, most of
developing nations stood with the US. Would have been highly un-
likely a decade ago.
—Made important progress on economic issues of shared impor-
tance with developing world:
—new trade arrangements with developing nations under the new
multilateral trade negotiations framework;
—access of developing nations to International Monetary Fund re-
sources sharply increased—including new $10 billion supplementary
financing facility.
—on energy, have supported commitment of World Bank to join
with private and governmental sources to fund $33 billion to LDC oil
and gas projects by 1985.

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
—on commodities, have reached agreement on common fund to
support agreements which stabilize international commodity supplies
and prices. Individual commodity agreements under discussion or in place
for sugar, coffee, tin, cocoa and rubber.
—have strengthened the coordination of our foreign assistance
programs with creation of International Development Cooperation Agency.
7. Building a sounder international economy.
—US provided leadership necessary to revitalize the multilateral
trade negotiations which resulted in new long-term trade agreement.
Agreement will open greater access to international markets; provide
fairer trading rules for the next decade.
—Negotiated a number of orderly marketing agreements to regu-
larize the flow of certain imports which threatened to severely disrupt
American producers; instituted—and now reviewing adequacy of—
“trigger price” mechanism on steel to prevent other nations from en-
gaging in unfair trading practices.
—Reached agreement with Japan for substantially improving
access of goods and services to Japanese markets; substantially improved
our balance of trade with Japan.
—Through successive economic summits and in the International
Energy Agency, have played leadership role in setting reduced oil import
targets by major consuming nations. Groundwork has been laid for
major expansion of US coal exports that will aid US economy and help our
allies cut oil imports. President’s far-reaching domestic energy program al-
ready resulting in lower oil imports—imports down 10% in 1979; down
even more so far in 1980. We are working to augment and diversify the
world’s energy sources by supporting increased World Bank lending for
LDC energy projects and by a number of innovative programs for co-
operating in energy planning, research and development in Third
World countries.
8. Asserting our national commitment to human rights.
—Our pursuit of human rights progress around the world has
given renewed meaning to America’s purpose in the world—to defend our
freedom and to help advance freedom of others. And it serves our
long-term interest in building a more stable world.
—Have infused our national commitment to individual freedom
and dignity into day-to-day conduct of foreign policy. Human rights con-
siderations now taken into account fully in allocation American assist-
ance; President has signed number of important international human
rights covenants.
—While we cannot claim full credit, we believe our practical ef-
forts have contributed to significant human rights improvements in many
countries. Thousands of political prisoners have been released in over a

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
dozen countries; in a number of cases, torture of prisoners has been re-
duced; trials opened to the public.
—Spotlight of international attention has been focused on those gov-
ernments which consistently violate human rights, as our efforts are
joined by other nations, individuals, regional and international
organizations.
—Have taken a leadership role in resettlement of refugees from In-
dochina and the Caribbean; and in international relief effort for people
of Kampuchea.
163.
Farewell Address by President Carter to the Nation
Washington, January 14, 1981
Good evening.
In a few days I will lay down my official responsibilities in this of-
fice, to take up once more the only title in our democracy superior to
that of President, the title of citizen.
Of Vice President Mondale, my Cabinet, and the hundreds of
others who have served with me during the last 4 years, I wish to say
now publicly what I have said in private: I thank them for the dedica-
tion and competence they’ve brought to the service of our country. But
I owe my deepest thanks to you, to the American people, because you
gave me this extraordinary opportunity to serve.
We’ve faced great challenges together, and we know that future
problems will also be difficult. But I’m now more convinced than ever
that the United States, better than any other country, can meet success-
fully whatever the future might bring. These last 4 years have made me
more certain than ever of the inner strength of our country, the un-
changing value of our principles and ideals, the stability of our political
system, the ingenuity and the decency of our people.
at 9 p.m. from the Oval Office at the White House. His remarks were broadcast live on
radio and television. In his diary entry for January 14, the President wrote: “I delivered
the farewell address, and the response was good. I described the pressure of special in-
terest groups, how they fragment the country. Primarily I emphasized, however, the
threat of nuclear destruction, environmental issues, and consideration for human rights.
These are the same themes I used in my acceptance speech in 1976, my inaugural address
four years ago, and that I pursued when I was president.” (White House Diary, p. 507)

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
Tonight I would like first to say a few words about this most spe-
cial office, the Presidency of the United States. This is at once the most
powerful office in the world and among the most severely constrained
by law and custom. The President is given a broad responsibility to
lead but cannot do so without the support and consent of the people,
expressed formally through the Congress and informally in many ways
through a whole range of public and private institutions. This is as it
should be.
Within our system of government every American has a right and
a duty to help shape the future course of the United States. Thoughtful
criticism and close scrutiny of all government officials by the press and
the public are an important part of our democratic society. Now, as in
the past, only the understanding and involvement of the people
through full and open debate can help to avoid serious mistakes and
assure the continued dignity and safety of the Nation.
Today we are asking our political system to do things of which the
Founding Fathers never dreamed. The government they designed for a
few hundred thousand people now serves a nation of almost 230 mil-
lion people. Their small coastal republic now spans beyond a continent,
and we also now have the responsibility to help lead much of the world
through difficult times to a secure and prosperous future.
Today, as people have become ever more doubtful of the ability of
the Government to deal with our problems, we are increasingly drawn
to single-issue groups and special interest organizations to ensure that
whatever else happens, our own personal views and our own private
interests are protected. This is a disturbing factor in American political
life. It tends to distort our purposes, because the national interest is not
always the sum of all our single or special interests. We are all Amer-
icans together, and we must not forget that the common good is our
common interest and our individual responsibility.
Because of the fragmented pressures of these special interests, it’s
very important that the office of the President be a strong one and that
its constitutional authority be preserved. The President is the only
elected official charged with the primary responsibility of representing
all the people. In the moments of decision, after the different and con-
flicting views have all been aired, it’s the President who then must
speak to the Nation and for the Nation.
I understand after 4 years in this office, as few others can, how for-
midable is the task the new President-elect is about to undertake, and
to the very limits of conscience and conviction, I pledge to support him
in that task. I wish him success, and Godspeed.
I know from experience that Presidents have to face major issues
that are controversial, broad in scope, and which do not arouse the nat-
ural support of a political majority. For a few minutes now, I want to

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
lay aside my role as leader of one nation, and speak to you as a fellow
citizen of the world about three issues, three difficult issues: the threat
of nuclear destruction, our stewardship of the physical resources of our
planet, and the preeminence of the basic rights of human beings.
It’s now been 35 years since the first atomic bomb fell on Hiro-
shima. The great majority of the world’s people cannot remember a
time when the nuclear shadow did not hang over the Earth. Our minds
have adjusted to it, as after a time our eyes adjust to the dark. Yet the
risk of a nuclear conflagration has not lessened. It has not happened
yet, thank God, but that can give us little comfort, for it only has to
happen once.
The danger is becoming greater. As the arsenals of the super-
powers grow in size and sophistication and as other governments,
perhaps even in the future dozens of governments, acquire these
weapons, it may only be a matter of time before madness, desperation,
greed, or miscalculation lets loose this terrible force.
In an all-out nuclear war, more destructive power than in all of
World War II would be unleashed every second during the long after-
noon it would take for all the missiles and bombs to fall. A World War
II every second—more people killed in the first few hours than in all
the wars of history put together. The survivors, if any, would live in de-
spair amid the poisoned ruins of a civilization that had committed
suicide.
National weakness, real or perceived, can tempt aggression and
thus cause war. That’s why the United States can never neglect its mili-
tary strength. We must and we will remain strong. But with equal de-
termination, the United States and all countries must find ways to con-
trol and to reduce the horrifying danger that is posed by the enormous
world stockpiles of nuclear arms.
This has been a concern of every American President since the mo-
ment we first saw what these weapons could do. Our leaders will re-
quire our understanding and our support as they grapple with this dif-
ficult but crucial challenge. There is no disagreement on the goals or the
basic approach to controlling this enormous destructive force. The an-
swer lies not just in the attitudes or the actions of world leaders but in
the concern and the demands of all of us as we continue our struggle to
preserve the peace.
Nuclear weapons are an expression of one side of our human char-
acter. But there’s another side. The same rocket technology that de-
livers nuclear warheads has also taken us peacefully into space. From
that perspective, we see our Earth as it really is—a small and fragile
and beautiful blue globe, the only home we have. We see no barriers of
race or religion or country. We see the essential unity of our species and

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
our planet. And with faith and common sense, that bright vision will
ultimately prevail.
Another major challenge, therefore, is to protect the quality of this
world within which we live. The shadows that fall across the future are
cast not only by the kinds of weapons we’ve built, but by the kind of
world we will either nourish or neglect. There are real and growing
dangers to our simple and our most precious possessions: the air we
breathe, the water we drink, and the land which sustains us. The rapid
depletion of irreplaceable minerals, the erosion of topsoil, the destruc-
tion of beauty, the blight of pollution, the demands of increasing bil-
lions of people, all combine to create problems which are easy to ob-
serve and predict, but difficult to resolve. If we do not act, the world of
the year 2000 will be much less able to sustain life than it is now.
But there is no reason for despair. Acknowledging the physical re-
alities of our planet does not mean a dismal future of endless sacrifice.
In fact, acknowledging these realities is the first step in dealing with
them. We can meet the resource problems of the world—water, food,
minerals, farmlands, forests, overpopulation, pollution—if we tackle
them with courage and foresight.
I’ve just been talking about forces of potential destruction that
mankind has developed and how we might control them. It’s equally
important that we remember the beneficial forces that we have evolved
over the ages and how to hold fast to them. One of those constructive
forces is the enhancement of individual human freedoms through the
strengthening of democracy and the fight against deprivation, torture,
terrorism, and the persecution of people through the world. The
struggle for human rights overrides all differences of color or nation or
language. Those who hunger for freedom, who thirst for human dig-
nity, and who suffer for the sake of justice, they are the patriots of this
cause.
I believe with all my heart that America must always stand for
these basic human rights at home and abroad. That is both our history
and our destiny.
America did not invent human rights. In a very real sense, it’s the
other way around. Human rights invented America. Ours was the first
nation in the history of the world to be founded explicitly on such an
idea. Our social and political progress has been based on one funda-
mental principle: the value and importance of the individual. The fun-
damental force that unites us is not kinship or place of origin or reli-
gious preference. The love of liberty is the common blood that flows in
our American veins.
The battle for human rights, at home and abroad, is far from over.
We should never be surprised nor discouraged, because the impact of

Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
our efforts has had and will always have varied results. Rather, we
should take pride that the ideals which gave birth to our Nation still in-
spire the hopes of oppressed people around the world. We have no
cause for self-righteousness or complacency, but we have every reason
to persevere, both within our own country and beyond our borders.
If we are to serve as a beacon for human rights, we must continue
to perfect here at home the rights and the values which we espouse
around the world: a decent education for our children, adequate med-
ical care for all Americans, an end to discrimination against minorities
and women, a job for all those able to work, and freedom from injustice
and religious intolerance.
We live in a time of transition, an uneasy era which is likely to en-
dure for the rest of this century. It will be a period of tensions, both
within nations and between nations, of competition for scarce re-
sources, of social, political, and economic stresses and strains. During
this period we may be tempted to abandon some of the time-honored
principles and commitments which have been proven during the diffi-
cult times of past generations. We must never yield to this temptation.
Our American values are not luxuries, but necessities—not the salt in
our bread, but the bread itself. Our common vision of a free and just so-
ciety is our greatest source of cohesion at home and strength abroad,
greater even than the bounty of our material blessings.
Remember these words: “We hold these truths to be self-evident,
that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator
with certain inalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and
the pursuit of Happiness.”
This vision still grips the imagination of the world. But we know
that democracy is always an unfinished creation. Each generation must
renew its foundations. Each generation must rediscover the meaning of
this hallowed vision in the light of its own modern challenges. For this
generation, ours, life is nuclear survival; liberty is human rights; the
pursuit of happiness is a planet whose resources are devoted to the
physical and spiritual nourishment of its inhabitants.
During the next few days I will work hard to make sure that the
transition from myself to the next President is a good one, that the
American people are served well. And I will continue, as I have the last
14 months, to work hard and to pray for the lives and the well-being of
the American hostages held in Iran. I can’t predict yet what will
happen, but I hope you will join me in my constant prayer for their
freedom.
As I return home to the South, where I was born and raised, I look
forward to the opportunity to reflect and further to assess, I hope with

Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
accuracy, the circumstances of our times. I intend to give our new Presi-
dent my support, and I intend to work as a citizen, as I’ve worked here
in this office as President, for the values this Nation was founded to
secure.
Again, from the bottom of my heart, I want to express to you the
gratitude I feel. Thank you, fellow citizens, and farewell.
