628  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
it moving toward the left; the resumption of public student meetings; 
efforts to intimidate University students and faculty members oppos-
ing the Communist student leadership in the recent disturbances; and 
the arrest on a vague assault charge of an ex-­deputy who had pushed 
hard for anti-Communist legislation before the fall of Lemus.
d) The reported return from exile of Cuban “Prensa Latina” staffers, 
rumored plans for the re-­opening of the Cuban Embassy in El Salvador 
and rumors regarding plans for the creation of a civilian militia.
The new Government appears to lack agreement on any real doc-
trine and it certainly contains anti-U.S. elements, with the inherent risk 
that these, though in a minority at present, could possibly take over. 
Col. Osorio admits that the situation is delicate. He appears to be influ-
encing the three military members of the six-­man Junta, but possibly 
has less influence on the civilian members. While he has implied to 
our Charge that proper action would be taken when the time came, he 
apparently does not intend to curb Communist activities, organization-
ally or propaganda-­wise, at present. He feels this kind of a coalition is 
necessary and desirable at this time.
On the question of recognition, Ambassador Kalijarvi, presently 
here on consultation, and the Embassy recommend deferring recogni-
tion indefinitely. They consider that the complexion and trend of the 
present Government is leftward towards a Castro-Communist take-
over; that the reported plans for a counter-­coup may make it short-­
lived; that recognition would cast a cloak of respectability about the 
new Government in the eyes of other countries and peoples and encour-
age attempts to effect similar overthrows elsewhere in Central America; 
and that immediate recognition would thus encourage and strengthen 
forces hostile to the United States without any realistic prospect of our 
being able to control the situation or to effect a change in the course of 
the new government.
There is, of course, always a possibility that Communist-Castro 
elements will succeed in getting an upper hand in El Salvador. The 
question is, however, whether it is in the U.S. interest to work with the 
new Government and endeavor, through the moderate elements of 
the regime, and particularly Osorio, to achieve an orientation toward 
the West, or whether, by failure to recognize or delay in recognition, 
we should alienate the Government, weaken Osorio and help to cre-
ate a situation of uncertainty propitious for Communist and Castro 
influence. On balance, recognizing there are risks in whatever we do, 
I believe we can more effectively pursue U.S. objectives by working 
with the present Government. This conclusion is based largely on the 
hope that Osorio will remain influential, and the history of our rela-
tions with Osorio.
