Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX with the Cabinet tomorrow, you’ll get a complete reply. On the bilateral letter, I’ll take it to the Cabinet tonight. We think the pledge of economic and military assistance is perhaps too general. President Carter: Secretary Brown can talk to Weizman. Prime Minister Begin: We’ll include the questions of ambassadors and oil. You will have a Cabinet reply on all issues. After the session of the Cabinet, we will have agreement on some issues, and maybe it will be some issues on which the United States will have to [go] back to Cairo. Secretary Vance could go to Cairo if you must leave. Then you can bring the reply of Egypt. If there is agreement, we’ll tell you. We will have an agreed communique. Before signature, we will have to deal expeditiously with the question of autonomy in the Cabinet. We will have to bring it to the Knesset. This will take eight to ten days. That means next week there could be approval before we were ready to sign. Tomorrow morning we will give you a full answer between eight and nine o’clock. Then Secretary Vance can go to Cairo with our proposals. Then next week between Monday12 and Wednesday,13 we will possibly get Knesset approval. If we do not get approval, then the government will resign. President Carter: Secretary Vance knows the Egyptian position intimately. Instead of your Cabinet meeting now, I suggest that you let Secretary Vance consult with you as you evolve your language. Secretary Vance will not shuttle between Cairo and Jerusalem. Let him work with you before your Cabinet decision. Prime Minister Begin: Dayan can meet with Secretary Vance. Foreign Minister Dayan: On Article 6, that can be clarified before the Cabinet meeting. Rosenne, Zamir and I will meet with the Secretary and his group. We can find agreed language. That is not so easy on the joint letter. There are matters of substance there. In a short hour we cannot solve this. It is not just a question of words. There are matters of substance. Maybe during the Cabinet meeting we can be in touch, but not before the Cabinet meeting. Prime Minister Begin: I am very tired. We need time. I asked for an adjournment. The two foreign ministers will sit together. On Article 6, we need Cabinet agreement. We can’t convene again for these matters. I am totally tired. I have reached my limit. President Carter: Let Secretary Vance and Dayan work through the banquet. 12 March 12. 13 March 14.
