3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 560 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 196. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 24, 1979 SUBJECT Decisions on Summit Objectives Much of what we do at the Summit must be prepared beforehand. Accordingly, we need your guidance on the particular objectives we should pursue on the major Summit agenda topics. As we discuss these with the Soviets, we will come back to you for further guidance. I will also shortly give you an agenda paper for your use at the Summit, with suggested points keyed to the topics and our objectives. I have divided the objectives into two categories (following the order of the agenda in each): A. Agreements/Understandings: Specific outcomes that would be agreed between you and Brezhnev. B. Positions. Areas where specific outcomes are not attainable or appropriate, but where we want to use the Summit to register/advance our positions and increase mutual understanding. You will see that there are no regional issues under Agreements/ Understandings and that all come under Positions. As I describe in my strategy memorandum, specific outcomes are unlikely at the Summit. This said, it will be critically important to convey our perspectives and positions clearly and firmly to the Soviets so they know where we (and they) stand. This may, at a minimum, heighten their sensitivity to our concerns and possible actions and reduce the chances of miscalculation. Opportunity to go further and reach some understandings could conceivably develop before and during the Summit. We will position ourselves to capitalize on it in the unlikely event that it does.2 A. AGREEMENTS/UNDERSTANDINGS • Communique vs. Declaration. The Soviets have hinted interest in a broad declaration of principles on the relationship, picking up on the 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 21, President, US–USSR Summit in Vienna, 9/16–18/79: Aaron Briefing Book. Secret. Sent for action. Brzezinski handwrote the date on the memorandum. Carter wrote in the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum: “Zbig, CC Warren [Christopher]. J.” Carter checked “yes” for each option, unless otherwise indicated. 2 Carter wrote in the margin: “Too Timid. We should have clear goals & strive for them.”
