520 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX that formula. On the contrary, we should add to it and give it every chance for success. In my view, you should not attempt, or appear to attempt, to evade your obligations under the Camp David “Framework”. Since we agreed that certain steps shall take place in the immediate future to effect a transfer of authority to the inhabitants of West Bank and Gaza,9 I frankly see no reason why we should not agree on a timetable for these steps. You have asked for a timetable for such steps as the exchange of diplomatic relations,10 the conclusion of an agreement on trade and commerce,11 the conclusion of another agreement on cultural exchange and the conclusion of a civil aviation agreement.12 Is it not equally, if not more, important to fix a timetable for the envisaged transformation in the West Bank and Gaza? An argument has been advanced in this respect which we do not find convincing. It is said that you do not want to be bound to produce certain results which require the cooperation of a reluctant party. My answer is that one should not assume the worse if we really believe in the necessity and wisdom of the course we are taking. If the implementation of any of these steps is hindered because of reasons beyond your control, you will not be held responsible for that.13 There is always an assumption of rationality. Furthermore, I must tell you in all candor that you are not doing much to encourage the moderate elements among the Palestinians to cooperate. On the contrary, much of your acts and words seem to be designed to dissuade them from joining in with us. I need not list to you any examples of these deeds and words for you are quite aware of them. If the Palestinians are left with the impression that the self-government plan, and not the administrative autonomy as you call it, is a sham, they will remain embittered and the voice of reason will be drowned among them. As you well know, peoples never abandon their cause in the face of neglect or force. You might recall that your predecessor Ben Gurion14 once said: “forgive . . . but never forget”. This admonition applies to the Palestinians too. The issue of “linkage” underwent much distortion and confusion. Let me tell you that we are not seeking that linkage as a means of shirking our commitments or breaking our promises. If we make a commitment, we intend to honor it fully regardless of the cost. Our 9 Carter underlined “authority to the inhabitants of West Bank and Gaza.” 10 Carter underlined “exchange of diplomatic relations.” 11 Carter underlined “agreement on trade and commerce.” 12 Carter underlined “cultural exchange” and “civil aviation agreement” in this sentence. 13 Carter underlined this sentence. 14 David Ben-Gurion, Israeli Prime Minister from 1948 until 1954 and from 1955 until 1963.
