706 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the main points taken. 1. PORT SECURITY: Proposed Revision of Paragraph 19 of NSC 5802/1 on Continental Defense and Paragraph 33–­b of NSC 5808/1 on Poland (NSC 5802/1; NSC 5808/1; NSC 5819, Part 9; NSC Action No. 2051; Memos for NSC from Executive Secretary, same subject, dated April 8, 21 and 22, 1959) Mr. Gordon Gray briefed the Council in detail concerning the sub­ ject. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s briefing note is filed in the Minutes of the Meeting, and another is attached to this Memorandum.) Mr. Gray then called on the Secretary of State for comment. Secretary Herter observed that two separate problems were involved in the Port Security problem; the first related to Polish ships and the Second to other Soviet Bloc ships. He indicated that in the case of Polish ships, State considered it of very great importance, in terms of increased peaceful trade and in terms of effecting reciprocal arrangements with Poland, that the U.S. liberalize its policy on the number of Polish ves­ sels permitted entry into the U.S. and on the kind of cargo such vessels were permitted to carry. He said that in the case of Soviet ships, State was very conscious of the threats to our internal security which were inherent in the visits of such vessels to our shores. As regards the threat of clandestine entry of nuclear weapons, however, it was his under­ standing that the intelligence community had reviewed this problem and had come to the conclusion that this was the least likely method that the Soviets would employ for the purpose of introducing nuclear weapons into this country. He observed that introduction by this means would be unlikely not only because of the possibility of detection but also because the vessel carrying such a bomb would be destroyed at the time the weapon was detonated. Secretary Herter indicated that only this morning the State Department had received a note from the Canadians saying that a Soviet ship was headed for the St. Lawrence Seaway and expressing the hope that the U.S. would not interfere with it. Secretary Herter indicated that the Department of State recog­ nized that its proposal posed a most serious problem for the Coast Guard, and hoped that it could accomplish its objective without add­ ing greatly to the burdens of that service. To that end, it was hoped that the present situation could remain substantially as it is until the fall with the Treasury Department, in the interim, exercising a degree of flexibility concerning Soviet Bloc ships attempting to enter our ports. It was also hoped that, in exercising its responsibilities for the Port Security Program, the Treasury Department would take into account the foreign policy implications involved. It was the Department of State’s thought that the whole matter might subsequently be reviewed
