114
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
18. Khlestov stated that he had listened with interest to Bradburn’s
ideas. He said the mechanism of consultations between sides partici-
pating in a treaty is a normal process. Even if the sides do not specify in
the treaty that they will consult, it is nevertheless presumed. Khlestov
did not know of any case in normal diplomatic relations in which a side
wished to consult about a problem and the other side said it did not
want to talk. Usually they started an exchange of opinions on the ques-
tion. What Bradburn had just said about the consultations sounded log-
ical but it did not resolve the problem at hand, namely, how to deal
with space objects used for pernicious acts. He thanked Bradburn for
his attempt to find a mutually acceptable solution to the problem, but
did not regard this way as an answer.
19. Buchheim said he wished to try to understand the essence of
the Soviet side’s viewpoint. The Soviet side’s main considerations
seemed to boil down to two. The first is the view that there is a hypo-
thetical possibility that space objects could be used for missions of such
character that they must be countered in order to preserve national in-
terests, and that no other measures that might be taken against such
missions were adequate except for damage, destruction, or changing
the trajectory of the object being used. The second consideration is that
such a hypothetical possibility could materialize into a reality so sud-
denly that it would require immediate action. Therefore, consultations
and accommodation between the sides were not feasible approaches. Is
this the essence of the Soviet side’s point of view?
20. Khlestov said that he would emphasize different things so that
Buchheim could understand his viewpoint better. First of all, an agree-
ment was being concluded and the sides would undertake obligations
not to damage, destroy or change the trajectories of space objects. In
other words, all the most effective means of countering the space object
that had been invented were included in this list. The U.S. and Soviet
sides together had listed all the effective ways of countering space ob-
jects. The Soviet side proceeded from the premise that always and in
every case the sides were committed to carry out their obligations; that
is, not to commit prohibited acts. A state did not have the right to act
otherwise. It was obligated always and in every case to observe the
“prohibited-acts” element of the agreement. He wished to direct Buch-
heim’s attention to the second side of the problem, a hypothetical case
which could arise in which a space object carried out a pernicious act. A
state must have the right to protect itself against these acts. This was the
common approach of both sides. Perhaps in practice this would never
happen, and the Soviet side did not want it to happen. However, the
sides were concluding an agreement of unlimited duration and they
did not know what might happen in practice.
21. Khlestov said that, according to the agreement’s present shape,
it was possible that suddenly this hypothetical situation could occur for
