206 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement “book value” set was erroneous.) The former owners would appear to have little motive, for purely financial reasons, to want to reach a final settlement so long as they continue to receive with each shipment of tin ore to the smelters in England a portion of the value of the smeltered ore. It would seem likely that they would be content to continue indefinitely receiving these retentions. So long as the problem of Comibol remains unsolved, the United States Government cannot expect that its economic and financial assistance to Bolivia will have any really significant effect in terms of improving the country’s economy. Indeed, in a sense, our cash grants are little more than an indirect subvention which serves to make up for Comibol’s losses. It is understood that the Government of Bolivia will shortly announce agreed measures for the reform of Comibol. While the Embassy has no precise advance information concerning the nature of the measures which the Government will propose to take, it seems likely that they will include the dismissal of many Comibol supernumeraries, the closing of some unproductive mines, possibly a rationing system in the mine commissaries to reduce commissary losses, and some personnel changes. Such reforms, in themselves, however, will have little more effect than to cut Comibol losses. A major difficulty is that even if the Government is determined to carry out these reforms it does not have the funds available to do so. It is estimated, for example, that the dismissal of 4,500 employees would cost around $2,500,000 in severance pay and other social welfare benefits, and because of the probable need to resettle the workers. This assumes that the Government would not have to pay any benefits in the case of about 1,500 of these workers who, although on Comibol’s payroll, have been drawing disability and regular retirement pensions from the social security system. Furthermore the reforms mentioned, while they should cut Comibol losses considerably and perhaps even enable that entity to show small profits, would not constitute a long-­term solution to Comibol’s problems. In other words, Comibol would almost surely be operating before very long at a deficit again unless other essential measures are also adopted. In short, Comibol will require new capital to replace worn and outmoded equipment, to carry out intensive exploration for new ore deposits, to install concentration plants to process low-­grade ores, and for other improvements. Capital for these investments is not available in Bolivia; it is unlikely that private foreign capital would be forthcoming except on some basis whereby foreign investors have a share in the management of Comibol or of its individual mines, an arrangement which the Embassy believes the Government of Bolivia is loath to accept, given the political symbolism of Comibol, except possibly in the case of idle properties such as
