Non-Proliferation
785
ticles I and II of this treaty.” Article IV also calls for all parties to facili-
tate and participate in the “fullest possible exchange of equipment, ma-
terials, and scientific and technological information for the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.” Special attention was to be given to the needs
of developing countries.
4. Starting in 1972 the US adopted a national policy of imposing
special restraints and review procedures over requests for so-called
sensitive nuclear exports, i.e., equipment and technology related to
uranium enrichment, plutonium reprocessing, and heavy water pro-
duction. In practice, this policy resulted in an embargo on such exports
from the US. When the London Suppliers Group convened in 1975, the
US sought to persuade other major suppliers to adopt a parallel policy
on these exports. However, in the agreed guidelines, we were only able
to obtain multilateral consensus for restraint in, but not an embargo on,
sensitive transfers. If such transfers are to be made, the guidelines call
for improved safeguards over such transfers going beyond NPT re-
quirements (e.g., safeguards triggered by technology in addition to
equipment and material). We have subsequently called for a three-year
moratorium on such exports.
5. While the US approach to sensitive transfers has been supported
by most if not all key suppliers, some suppliers and recipients have crit-
icized this policy as incompatible with Article IV of the NPT. These na-
tions argue that the NPT places an explicit responsibility on supplier
states party to the treaty to make any and all types of peaceful nuclear
assistance available to recipients party to the treaty, as long as the mate-
rials and facilities are under safeguards. To strengthen this position,
these nations cite US assurances and statements to this effect issued
during the treaty negotiations. For example, citations from some of
these US statements appear in the FRG “Non-Paper” transmitted by
Hermes to Secretary Vance at their recent meeting (we understand that
Assistant Secretary Hartman is carrying this paper).
6. The US position in response to these criticisms rests on the fol-
lowing points:
A. We do not believe that safeguards necessarily provide an ade-
quate basis for transfering all nuclear items, while supporting the over-
riding non-proliferation objective of the NPT. Transfers of sensitive
equipment and technologies can lead to the direct availability of stra-
tegic quantities of weapons-usable material (notably plutonium but
also highly-enriched uranium) in non-nuclear weapons states. It is
presently uncertain whether safeguards could be devised and imple-
mented to provide timely detection of diversion of these materials.
Moreover, if safeguards were to be terminated or abrogated, the recip-
ient could then rapidly utilize the materials and facilities in order to ac-
quire nuclear explosives capacity.
