3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1979 537 Sudan. I have the sense that we are headed in the right direction with Sudan—a combination of military and economic assistance. But the vital importance of the success of this program must be reemphasized, and we should be more attentive to helping Nimieri with his growing Ethiopia refugee problem, and his increasing requirements for security along his lengthy border with Ethiopia. Kenya. I feel that State in general, and our Embassy in particular, does not fully appreciate the present vital (to us) role being played by Kenya, as our one solid, reliable friend in old East Africa. Nor is there a real understanding of the pressures on Kenya—the Somali threat, the problem of the probable installation of a government in Uganda which will be greatly influenced by Nyrere, the worry of the Soviet/Cuban force on their northern border. We should: (1) continue to be more responsive to Kenya’s need for both economic and military assistance; (2) reassure Kenya of our determination to restrain the Somalis; (3) actively assist GOK in its internal security function, with special attention to possible Soviet/Cuban activity; (4) encourage Kenya to exert some influence on the Ugandan war, so as to gain an IOU from Nyrere; and (5) encourage Nyrere to cooperate with GOK in establishing a new order in Uganda acceptable to both Kenya and Tanzania. Somalia. We must gain clear acceptance of the notion that Somalia is a threat to regional stability for so long as Siad (or successor) continues active support of Ogaden expansion, and that to support him in the name of Soviet containment is counter productive. We must continue to make it unmistakably clear to Siad that we will not arm him until he renounces Somali claims on Kenya and Ethiopia. Yemen. Our stand with North Yemen is right on, certainly as far as sending some badly needed signals to the Horn and indeed to the rest of Africa. Ethiopia. I am firmly convinced that we can and will regain a large measure of influence in Ethiopia at the expense of the Soviets, and I feel we can and should actively hasten the day. As a basis for such a program, we need to do all we can to maintain as large and as active a mission as possible, including an AID component. There remains in all walks of Ethiopian life significant and important friendship, and proclivity for things American and Western. The Soviets (and to a lesser extent) the Cubans have certainly not won the hearts and minds of the people, and the veneer of Marxism-Socialism is very thin. (This does not mean that the reforms of the revolution would or could be rescinded.)
