1048 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement problems, the critical need for housing, and the need to resettle Indians who live in the relatively crowded and unproductive altiplano and are a ripe target for Communist agitators. There is plenty of virgin cultivable land on the other side of the Andes, but funds are needed to build access roads and to clear the lands. If the United States were to provide financial assistance for housing and resettlement, it would have an immediate impact on Peruvians all over the country and would make a great contribution toward countering the appeal of the Communists. Sr. Beltran’s idea is to apply the soles obtained from selling the dollar exchange provided as balance of payments assistance to financing housing and resettlement projects. The Peruvian Government has an excellent housing program, drafted by experts provided through ICA, which could be quickly implemented if funds could be obtained in this way. The Government would not build houses itself, but would finance technical services and provide mortgage loans in the manner of the HOLC and Fanny May programs in the United States. The United States need not fear it would be creating an uncomfortable precedent for itself by financing housing in this way, since it could be pointed out to other prospective borrowers that the loan to Peru was related to a balance of payments problem. Sr. Beltran emphasized that the financing needs for housing were large. He implied that the size of any loan the United States might make to Peru at this time should be measured by the extent of the housing problem rather than the balance of payments problem. Mr. Dillon said he was not certain whether it would be feasible to arrange a loan in the way Sr. Beltran had suggested.4 He thanked Sr. Beltran for taking the time to fill him in on the situation on Peru. 4 During calendar year 1960 the Development Loan Fund authorized a $25 million loan to the Government of Peru for housing, resettlement, and roads. For information, all Development Loan Fund, Report of Activities During Calendar Year 1960 (Washington, 1961), p. 3 (table). PE–14. Editorial Note Public Law 532, Both Congress, approved July 18, 1958, authorized the transfer of naval vessels to friendly foreign countries (72 Stat. 376). In telegram 68 to Lima, August 13, the Department of State instructed
