International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
385
frankly, bluntly. Why he is reticent with me, I can’t understand. I’ll try
to break that down.
Callaghan: If I might suggest, perhaps you could have Miller with
you, and he might bring Emminger or someone else from the
Bundesbank.
The President: That’s a good idea. We might perhaps have a lun-
cheon, with a tiny group.
Callaghan: I think I would do that. If it’s a tiny group, he’ll talk
frankly. He knows economic issues very well . . .
The President: Much better than I do.
Callaghan: . . . he was Finance Minister, he has had considerable
experience, and he cares a great deal. He thinks the United States posi-
tion is all wrong.
The President: I appreciate your advice, Jim, your admonition. It is
very valuable to me.
Callaghan: Let me leave it there. Whatever you hear, you can be
sure that I won’t allow action on the “snake” before Bonn. Perhaps by
then you’ll have the measure of it.
The President: I do have one source of confidence—the strength of
the U.S. economy. We did meet our goals for inflation and growth set at
the London Summit, while some other countries did not. Barring un-
foreseen circumstances, we will meet them again this year. The goal for
unemployment by the end of the year we’ve met already. There is no
potential problem with our economy.
Callaghan: That’s right. What is a matter of concern in Europe is
the external value of the dollar. That is a difficult technical problem. If
you could reduce your balance-of-payments deficit by some action on
energy, that would be very healthy.
The President: Jim, thank you. I appreciate you being a good
enough friend to speak frankly.
Callaghan: I would hope that in May at the NATO Summit we
could have a declaration that means something, that talks about the in-
terdependence of Europe and the United States.
The President: Right.
Callaghan: You know, as do I, that the Soviet Union believes it is
the largest power in Europe but without comparable, matching influ-
ence in Western Europe. It will try to strengthen its position. Unless Eu-
rope responds and the United States recognizes that it is inextricably
bound up with what happens in Europe, we’ll all go under at some
point. I saw Harold Brown for an hour today, and I have asked him and
Fred Mulley to begin working on such a statement. I knew you
wouldn’t mind. Then I could raise the idea with Helmut Schmidt, who
