1024 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II merit, are likely to encourage other donors to be more generous and receiving nations to apply themselves more vigorously in coping with excessive population growth. Yet, despite all the progress achieved over the past decade, there is urgent need for a broader and more concerted effort by donors and receiving nations alike to deal with the problem. In this situation, AID, while extending the availability of family planning services and building on that base, is now tackling the population problem along a broader front, recognizing the relevance of the many factors that bear upon fertility determination. As a result, 1977 witnessed the initiation of multi-year population strategies; the development of comprehensive performance criteria; the extension and support for low-cost and community-based delivery systems, increasingly integrated with health services; intensified research on the determinants of fertility, and more focus on motivation for smaller families. Most of these developments are described in detail in this Report. The Report also spells out how AID’s Fiscal Year 1979 Congressional population funding request for $205.4 million will enable the Agency to accelerate implementation of its broader approach, including continued major emphasis on expanding and improving family planning services and delivery systems. We continue to believe, based on reports from our Missions in developing nations, that the most successful population programs usually depend on: (1) national leaders being clearly, firmly, and actively committed to promoting broadly based national population programs; (2) rooting family planning in communities (villages) and relating family planning to the economic interests and social development of the community; (3) training paramedics and others to provide general health services, including family planning, in communities (villages) where these people are known and trusted and ensuring that these paramedics provide personalized family planning advice and support; and (4) advancing the legal, social, and economic status of women. Although U.S. policy requires that our leaders, Ambassadors, and others be knowledgeable on population issues and that they discuss them, as appropriate, in their contacts with key figures in other governments, particularly those in developing nations, this is often overlooked in the press of day-to-day business. Opportunities are thus lost for high-level exchanges, at least on an informal basis, on this fundamental issue. One of the most effective ways in which we could bring our influence to bear in discussions with developing country leaders would be in encouraging and supporting them to undertake programs for enlisting the support of their own people in community or village programs. Population programs have enjoyed greater success in commu-
