3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
259
We would appreciate receiving assurances that there will be no So-
viet involvement in combat, and we would urge the USSR to dis-
courage Cuba from any such combat role.
US spokesmen have repeatedly stated publicly, as did the Presi-
dent in his January 12 press conference,5 that we are not supplying
arms to either side or injecting ourselves into the Ogaden conflict. This
self-imposed prohibition specifically applies to both direct and indirect
supplies of US arms. We find it thoroughly unhelpful, therefore, for the
official Soviet news agency to make the charge, which the Soviet gov-
ernment must know to be false, that Middle Eastern countries are deliv-
ering American arms to Somalia “in unmarked crates.”
We have also repeatedly stated that we support Ethiopia’s territo-
rial integrity, which is also true of Somalia’s.
Our objection to the Soviet supply of arms on a massive scale to
Ethiopia stems from our conviction that no lasting solution to the
Ogaden problem can come from military means, but can only come
from negotiation. The supply of arms encourages continued recourse to
armed conflict and therefore undermines efforts to secure a negotiated
settlement.
Given the obvious importance the USSR attaches to its position in
Ethiopia, it seems to us that it is very much in the Soviet interest to have
a peaceful settlement and that therefore the Soviet Union should be
prepared to take steps which will facilitate a settlement.
For our part, we have approached the Somalis and urged them to
start thinking of the compromises they would have to make for negoti-
ations to lead to a settlement. We urge the Soviet Union to make a sim-
ilar approach to the Ethiopians.
We would hope to hear if the USSR is prepared to make the effort
to persuade the Ethiopians to proceed to negotiations without precon-
ditions as we have with the Somalis.
Meanwhile, we would hope to see some evidence that the Soviet
Union is prepared to exercise restraint in order to promote a negotia-
ting atmosphere rather than further recourse to armed conflict.
The US does not have the same leverage with Somalia that the
USSR has with Ethiopia, but we would be prepared to work with So-
malia and her friends to develop a negotiating atmosphere.
5 For the text of Carter’s January 12 news conference, see Department of State Bul-
letin, February 1978, pp. 21–22.
