924 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement November 28 are not directed against the Canal Zone and no further violence occurs, our relations may be improved. The main point at issue between the two governments revolved around differing interpretations of the 1955 Treaty, but a new element has now been added—the flying of the Panamanian flag in the Canal Zone. Panama alleges that we are not complying with certain of our commitments; i.e., (1) continuing discrimination against Panamanian labor employed by Canal Zone agencies, (2) continuing imports of merchandise from “third country” sources, (3) sales of so-­called “luxury items” in Canal Zone sales outlets, and (4) unfair competition to Panamanian enterprise by Canal Zone agencies. Panama has never been satisfied with the 1955 Treaty and has sought to obtain by diplomatic action what it failed successfully to negotiate. The Panamanian Foreign Minister both at Santiago in August and at the UNGA in September2 aggravated the situation by public attacks against us alleging non-­compliance with our Treaty undertakings. We had been aware of some inequities but were deterred from acceding to Panamanian demands by intransigence on the part of the Panama Canal Company—Canal Zone Government and its principal, the Department of the Army. On October 12, the President, at a White House meeting, directed that certain changes be made in the operating policies of Canal Zone agencies and implementation was commenced. President Eisenhower called in Panamanian Ambassador Arias just after the meeting and told him of his personal interest in our Panamanian relations, alluding in a general way to certain changes which could be anticipated. We assume that Arias, who was departing for Panama where he is a candidate for the presidency in national elections to be held in May 1960, informed his President of the interview with President Eisenhower. The Panamanian campaign, although in its early stages, is populated by politicians of widely varied views. Among them are Aquilino Boyd and Ernesto Castillero who although former Foreign Minister and Vice Minister, respectively, have by demagoguery called for ever greater benefits to Panama from the United States presence in the Canal Zone. About four months ago, Boyd and Castillero started promoting a “peaceful invasion of the Canal Zone coincident with Panama’s Independence Day, November 3, to reaffirm Panama’s sovereignty over the Zone. All available information indicated no wide acceptance of this proposal, recognized as a political maneuver by these two extremists. The Embassy and the Canal Zone viewed the march with misgiving and so told the Government, but the Panamanian authorities minimized its importance. The Embassy by Aide Memoire, 2 For the text of Foreign Minister Moreno’s speech on September 23, 1959, before the United Nations General Assembly, see U.N. doc. A/PV. 804.
