however, that what he said left me with the impression that in a couple of ways his note was not wholly satisfactory: In the first place, I was uncertain that he had even now grasped your meaning precisely. I was merely your agent and had no authority to read into the treaty any more than it said, but that in my personal belief the proposal boiled down to three elements: (1) A general acceptance of the status quo; (2) renunciation by each signatory of right to wage private war to break that status; (3) violation of the treaty by any nation automatically released other signatories as toward the offending nation. That is to say, a nation making war for its own private purposes would become an offender against all the others. Each nation was left entirely free, of course, to take such action as was suitable to the situation in whatever manner it saw fit or to remain quiescent, but that the offending nation would necessarily occupy a position somewhat analogous to that of a lawbreaker in any community. Chamberlain seemingly found in this analysis a new point of view; he seized upon it and said that he agreed with it wholly. He thought that France would also agree when the proposal was understood, but that at present France undoubtedly was fearful that the treaty in some way would prove inimical to the League Covenant and the Locarno agreement and the existing treaties. I replied that I thought that you had cleared all this ground satisfactorily, and he said that he had thought so too, but that the French must be given sufficient time to accommodate themselves to what, after all, was a new conception of international relations. He added that the French Ambassador (Fleuriau) had told him that as your recent note had not been addressed to France there was no assurance that France would reply to it. I replied that I was not informed. I then remarked, as my second point, that my feeling was that his reference to a British “Monroe Doctrine” was unfortunate, as it opened a veritable Pandora’s box of difficulties. Were Great Britain now to set up a Monroe Doctrine would France and Italy and Japan also find expedient the development of Monroe Doctrines of their own? If they did, a serious situation must result. This comment seemed greatly to trouble Chamberlain, who expressed the hope that his statement would be followed by no such result, as he had made it only to reassure Parliament over Egypt. As for Japan, he had heard that an unconditional acceptance would be forwarded. I
