Covert and Overt Operations 827 —There is a sincere appreciation in Washington for the quiet but very helpful role Algeria has played in the crisis. The Algerians are not only highly perceptive in analyzing the crisis, but they enjoy superb access and influence in Tehran. We would like to encourage them to continue their quiet contact work on behalf of an early settlement. Christopher 301. Memorandum From the Commander of the Joint Task Force (Vaught) to the Assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Pustay)1 Washington, June 24, 1980 SUBJECT Hostage Rescue Mission (Operation SNOWBIRD) 1. (TS) Summary. Due to the lack of definitive intelligence, adequate force proficiency and available launch bases, development of a specific operational plan to rescue the American hostages held in Iran is not possible at this time. Force proficiency is expected to be realized by 15 July. Action is ongoing to produce an adequate intelligence base and some effort is being made to assure the availability of staging facilities near enough to Iran to enable the secure launch and recovery of the rescue force. 2. (TS) Intelligence. The location and security conditions of the hostages remain largely unknown. [4 lines not declassified] Several innovative technological approaches to improve intelligence gathering are being pursued. Despite the possible near-term future release of some of the hostages, it is expected that others will experience protracted detention and possibly trial. 3. (TS) Launch Bases. It is essential to at least obtain an indication that one or more of Iran’s neighbors would ignore our use of its soil for a rescue mission. No such indication is in hand. A survey is being made with a view towards the possible use of Turkey and Pakistan. [2½ lines not declassified] 1 Source: Department of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff Records, RG 218–07–0002, Records of J–3 DDSO, Box 8, Iranian Hostage Crisis 1979–1984, J90–110 Operations. Top Secret. All tabs (A–G) are attached but not printed.
