Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —SALT—Differences between the US and Soviet positions have been narrowed over time. Nevertheless, some distance between us still exists on key issues. We cannot predict when a SALT agreement will be signed. —Cyprus—We believe that the Cyprus problem must be resolved under UN auspices by the parties directly involved, the Greek and Turkish Cypriots. —We support UN SYG Waldheim in his efforts to mediate the dispute and will help him in every possible way. —Bulgarian-Soviet Relations—How would you characterize the present Soviet view of E–W relations? —Balkan Cooperation—What is your Government doing to enhance the multilateral project for cooperation in the Balkans? —Albania—What direction do you think Albania’s foreign relations will take now that the Chinese have ended their economic aid? 2. Bilateral Relations Essential Factors—Since the advent of detente, improvement in US- Bulgarian relations has occurred. We have negotiated a number of agreements with the Bulgarian Government, and several high-level visits have taken place, including visits by the Secretaries of Commerce and Agriculture.4 Progress has been made in resolving divided family cases, although markedly less in the past year. Now, however, the GOB appears to be attempting to cut off further discussions of divided family questions with the US and other Western embassies. On November 9 our Embassy was told that there are no outstanding humanitarian issues facing the GOB and that the Foreign Ministry will accept for discussion only cases involving US citizen sponsors and spouses and minor children (defined as under 16) of US citizens. Last summer the Bulgarian Government retained a New York law firm to advise it on what it would have to do to obtain MFN. The firm’s report may have sobered Bulgarian expectations somewhat. Tsvetkov may allude to MFN although the Bulgarians do not wish to appear in Moscow to be taking an initiative. Our position is that we would be prepared to discuss the process for obtaining MFN in detail with GOB officials, should they be interested in such discussions. The GOB has been unable or unwilling to assist Embassy Sofia effectively in finding another chancery site. The lease on the present building expired last June, and the GOB has informed the Embassy that it must move as soon as possible. Thus far, the Bulgarian Govern- 4 The last U.S. Cabinet-level official to visit Sofia was Secretary of Agriculture Butz in 1976.
