1956  1209
We should like to have your candid views as to the advantages and 
disadvantages of reintroducing this subject at this time, and also your 
estimate of the kind of support you would require from Defense should 
you undertake this task. Defense’s capabilities to supply the kind of 
information you would want is, of course, limited. The enclosed copy 
of a memorandum from General Erskine to the Secretary of Defense 
indicates what Defense is undertaking to do to supply some of the defi­
ciencies pointed out in Dave’s letter of August 23.
5. Our feeling here based more on our appraisal of the general 
attitude of the Chinese Communists than the tactical situation in the 
Geneva talks is that the Communists are probably not moving toward 
a recess or break-­off of the talks at least not until after the elections 
and the opening of the UNGA. It appears to us they have more to gain 
by holding on than by breaking off. The latter move seems contrary to 
their general posture in international affairs. We are concerned at the 
adverse effects that the continuation of these talks are reported to be 
having in some parts of the Far East. We are considering asking key 
posts for up to date reports on this matter.
6. You will be interested in the latest Chinese Communist gambits 
in the cultural field. A number of American publishers have received 
orders for American newspapers and magazines. The official Chinese 
Communist book and periodical agency the Gnozi Shudian has sent 
letters to a large number of American publishers requesting the con­
tribution or sale at discount of large selections of scientific and techni­
cal books for a proposed exhibit in Peiping early in 1957. The Chinese 
Communists have also announced on the China Mainland that a wide 
range of American publications including Time and Life can now be sub­
scribed to. Teaching of English is being introduced in the middle schools 
to the extent that teachers are available.
7. By way of general comment, don’t expect any new tack to be 
authorized here on either of the two big issues. The emphatic conclu­
sion here is that our position is unassailable on both questions and that 
any attempt to look for new wording on renunciation otherwise show 
any “give” would only weaken our position, both from a tactical stand­
point and from the standpoint of our public position when the eventual 
public showdown comes. We are somewhat more skeptical than you 
apparently are as to the likelihood of a Chinese Communist suspension 
of the talks or other major move within the next few weeks. The Chinese 
Communists are exploiting the talks in various ways, as we have seen in 
connection with the 8th Party Congress, and in their talks with visiting 
delegations, such as the Malayan Chinese, and the Indonesian delegation 
headed by Sukarno. Their present tactics seem to envisage a continuation 
of the talks and further misrepresentation and exploitation of the fact that 
the talks are private and are continuing. We are making a new study in
