Chile 281 CH–29. Memorandum of Conversation, by the Counselor of Embassy in Chile (Krieg)1  Santiago, February 19, 1960. US/MC/25 SUBJECT Disarmament and Rearmament PARTICIPANTS 1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files, Lot 64 D 559, CF 1596. Confidential. Information on the source text indicates that this conversation took place between 4:30 and 5:30 p.m., and that the memorandum was approved at the White House on March 22. United States The President Secretary Herter Ambassador Howe Mr. Rubottom Gen. Goodpaster Mr. Hagerty Col. Waltere Mr. Krieg Chile President Alessandri Foreign Minister Vargara Sr. Walter Muller, Chilean Ambassador to the U.S. President Alessandri opened the conversation by stating that all educated men must be grateful for the tremendous efforts and sacrifices being made by the United States on behalf of the entire free world. He said he desired to cooperate fully with the United States and felt it essential to this end that he explain frankly his points of view on various pending problems. Disarmament—President Alessandri then said that, in contrast with some Latin American countries, Chile was a genuine democracy like the United States, the United Kingdom and other western European countries; Chile was proud of its democratic traditions, but as a consequence was more vulnerable than certain countries to the onslaught of Communism. He said he fully recognized that the principal responsibilities for the welfare and progress of Chile lay with the Chileans themselves; at the same time, he recognized the need for foreign help and capital. President Alessandri then stated that military expenses were a heavy burden to the nation’s economy, holding back the government’s efforts to develop the country economically. He intimated that he was less concerned about the present level of expenditures than he was about the possibility of future increases. In some countries, he said, the Government was dependent upon the military for its continuance in office and the civil authorities were therefore forced to yield to the demands of the military for needless armament. For this reason, President Alessandri said, he attached great importance to disarmament
