National Security Policy  829
Rear Admiral W.F. Raborn
Major General Osmond J. Ritland
Dr. Albert D. Wheelon
2. Based on the foregoing, this Panel has arrived at the following 
conclusions:
a. Evidence acquired, primarily at the TYURA TAM missile test 
range, indicates the Soviets are following an orderly, and effective 
ICBM program, and intend to acquire a substantial capability at the ear­
liest reasonable date. We believe the Soviets are now testing the initial 
complete system capable of the intercontinental range required by their 
needs. Although there is only indirect evidence of KAPUSTIN YAR 
support to this program, it is considered reasonable that the ranges 
have been mutually supporting with respect to component testing and 
shared experience.
b. The Panel believes that a Soviet IOC capability with a very few 
operational missiles (10)2 is at least imminent. This number of missiles, 
however, represents only a highly limited capability, and an opera­
tional capability sufficient to assure the application of effective force in 
the international field (100 missiles) will probably not be available until 
late 1960 or later. It is also believed that the Soviet determination as to 
their balanced needs may result in a deployment of not more than 400 
to 500 ICBM’s which could be attained by the latter part of 1962. The 
Panel no longer believes that this latter capability will be obtained in 
two years after IOC, as the evidence is now firm that the Soviets are not 
engaged in a “crash” program.
c. Regarding the characteristics of the ICBM at IOC, the Panel 
finds the subject thoroughly discussed in the GMAIC report and, on 
most points, generally valid. Two additive statements to the GMAIC 
report are submitted, however, and in one instance, the Panel favors the 
minority statement, as follows:
(1) In the area of system mobility vs fixed sites, we find the GMAIC 
statement well considered. We believe further that whatever the opera­
tional launching mode, the Soviet railroad will play a central role in the 
operational deployment and usage of ICBMs.
(2) The Panel considers the determination of the CEP to be 
extremely important, but does not find hard evidence to substanti­
ate the CEP figures in the GMAIC report. Recent successes in the U.S. 
program indicate that achievement of CEPs considerably better than 3 
n.m. theoretical and 5 n.m. operational may not be as difficult a prob­
lem as initially believed. Recognizing the difficulties of equating U.S. 
2 There is no evidence to support or deny the present availability of ten IOC mis­
siles. However, the test program observations support the judgment that the ten IOC 
missile availability is imminent and that the probable production buildup to an accumu­
lation of 100 is reasonable by late 1960 or later. [Footnote is in the original.]
