262
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
of three months, agreement will be reached on the modalities for estab-
lishing the elected self-governing authority in Judea, Samaria, and the
Gaza Strip. Thereafter, the course of future settlement activity in those
areas will be the subject of negotiations among the parties, including
the representatives of the elected self-governing authority. End text.10
11. With only a moment’s hesitation, Begin indicated he could
agree to my first sentence but that the second one was totally unaccept-
able. It meant that Arabs could veto Israeli settlements in Judea and Sa-
maria which were Israel’s inalienable right. Jews had as much right to
live in Hebron as in Tel Aviv. Under no circumstances would he
commit himself to a freeze beyond three months. If the Sinai negotia-
tions lasted six months, his commitment to no new settlements re-
mained only for three months.
12. Was there no way, I asked, that the Prime Minister could state
his readiness at least to discuss the future settlements issue with the
parties after the three month period? Begin said no.11 He believed with
all his heart that Israel had a right to settle in Judea and Samaria and he
would agree to no language which prejudiced that right.
13. Weizman, who had joined us a few moments earlier, then said
that in his judgment it was a gross mistake for the US to press the Prime
Minister on this issue at a moment when the party he had led for so
many years was in open revolt against him. Vigorously picking up this
point, Begin contended that if he were to do what Washington was
asking, “there would be a revolution in my own party”.
14. Winding up the conversation, I suggested to Begin that I trans-
mit his long letter as a private oral message to the President. In that
way, he could honestly say to the press if asked that he had not sent a
letter to the President. I would also send the text of his short message
although it had no status since it had not been signed. I urged him to do
nothing more with either of his messages until I had an opportunity to
report this conversation and to get Washington’s reaction. Begin
agreed and said he was willing to send the long letter and make it pri-
vate or public, send the short letter and make it private or public, send
both letters and make them private or public, or send no letters at all.
He was sure his memory of the September 16 conversation was correct.
He had not agreed to the US formulation, and Professor Barak’s notes
proved him right.
15. Comment: Throughout the conversation Begin was intense and
emotional but always in control. He listened carefully to what I had to
10 Brzezinski wrote in the right-hand margin next to this text: “I suggested this to
Lewis.”
11 Brzezinski underlined this sentence.
