636 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement G. In making these suggested amendments I have taken full account of our discussion and believe I have entirely met your objections to my November 10 draft. (I then handed draft Deptel 1466 to Wang.) H. As soon as you have had opportunity to study it, I will be glad to explain any points that may not be clear or discuss with you in greater detail changes we have suggested. I. I desire subsequently to discuss with you today questions raised in your letters December 28 and January 5, as well as other matters related to September 10 announcement. Gowen Note: Advance copies to FE & SS 1/12/56, 12:55 pm FMH (CWO) 442. Telegram 1363 from Geneva1 Geneva, January 12, 1956, 4 p.m. 1363. From Johnson. 1. Three hour twenty-­five minute meeting this morning. 2. I opened with long statement on renunciation of force closely following outline Deptel 1465. After relatively cursory study my draft Wang rejected it, renewed charges US occupation Taiwan, and particu­ larly centered attacks my amendments as renewed effort by US obtain PRC recognition validity US collective defense arrangements Taiwan area. He ended with prepared statement renewing charges US stall­ ing and proposing this and subsequent meetings be “open”. (Later in response questions he indicated that by “open” he meant release of communique giving full substance following each meeting). There followed long give and take during which I stressed appar­ ent significance failure their side during three months since my Oct. 8 proposal to agree to specific inclusion Taiwan in any statement, as well as pressed him on willingness include in statement recognition as gen­ eral principle right individual and collective defense. There was long give and take toward end of which apparently recognizing weakness their public position on inclusion specific mention Taiwan, he stated would consider our amended draft if reference individual collective 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–1256. Confidential; Niact; Limited Distribution.
