480
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
—Human rights considerations are affecting bilateral economic
aid more than our role in the IFIs. This is because AID itself is factoring
such considerations into its country allocations. In 1978 the Central Af-
rican Empire and Uruguay were deleted entirely; levels for Paraguay
were lowered; and allocations to Costa Rica and India were increased,
all on human rights grounds. Human rights concerns are likely to show
up even more in AID allocations in the future, since PD/NSC–30 di-
rects us to intensify efforts to channel assistance to countries with good
or improving human rights records. This will mean reduced assistance
to human rights problem countries, even though assistance could be
designed to benefit needy people there. But these shifts will not be re-
flected in interagency group decisions, because fewer assistance pro-
posals for human rights problem countries will be forwarded by AID to
that group.
—If asked we are working on ways to better factor human rights
considerations into military assistance and sales, and to integrate our
decisions on military and economic assistance. This is difficult, because
important military relationships have been designed to serve our own
security interests as well as that of the recipient country. But even here,
the record already is better than it sometimes is made to seem. Of the
twelve countries whose loans we have opposed in IFIs, we either had
no security assistance programs, or have eliminated or sharply reduced
them, to all but three: South Korea; the Philippines; and Zaire. South
Korea faces an active external threat, and our military assistance is de-
signed to enable it to defend itself without the presence of American
combat troops. Zaire also faces an external threat, from Cuban-assisted
guerillas operating from Angola. Because of human rights and other
considerations, however, our military assistance to it is limited to
non-lethal materiel. And military assistance to the Philippines is impor-
tant to our security interests in the Pacific. The human rights policy,
moreover, has ended or reduced security assistance programs to some
countries whose IFI loans (including non-needy loans) we routinely
support (e.g., Brazil and Guatemala).
