Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII the legislation on the 1959 agreement and waiver of the Symington Amendment should only be presented to Congress in the context of a specific aid proposal, rather than being sent up independently. The Pakistanis were evasive on non-proliferation. In the initial series of talks, there was some indication that a nuclear explosion might be imminent, but this was probably a negotiating tactic and was specifically denied later by Agha Shahi. (S) Mr. Christopher noted that the Pakistanis appear to be considering an “Islamic option,” which would include a security umbrella from the United States but rely primarily on the Islamic states for the bulk of direct support and cooperation.3 The Pakistanis were very pleased by the degree of support they received at the Islamic Conference, and they may find this an attractive alternative to a total reliance on the U.S. However, they did not seem to have thought this through, and the exact form of an “Islamic option” remains very unclear at this point. In general, the SCC thought that such an option could be entirely consistent with what we are trying to do. The nature of the security umbrella and the exact role of our cooperation would have to be defined much more precisely. (S) In Saudi Arabia, the mission was struck by the change of mood from a year ago. The Saudi response to our proposals for a closer security relationship was much more positive. Both the Saudis and the Pakistanis seem to have reacted very positively to the President’s State of the Union address and the explicit security commitment which it announced. The Saudis took an alarmist view of the situation in the PDRY, including a report of Soviet and Cuban troop exercising there which we cannot confirm. They asked for more reconnaissance overflights. Mr. Carlucci noted that our overflights along the border had failed to discover any useful information, [2 lines not declassified]. The Saudis complained about the slowness and inadequacy of the U.S. response to their requests for advanced military equipment. They outlined the levels of aid they were prepared to provide to Pakistan but asked that these numbers be very tightly held and, if necessary, that the actual levels be revealed by the Pakistanis rather than us. [Omitted here is information unrelated to Afghanistan.] 3 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “good.”
