1650 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement (a) Studies and development under contract by private institutions and corporations on specific aspects of the broad area encompassed. Examples of possible contractors might be the RAND Corp., Lincoln Lab, STL, JPL, ORO, ITEC, Russian Research Center at Harvard, etc. (b) Studies and development on request of the suggested organi­ zation and possibly with the transfer of funds, by several departments which have active interests in the problems, e.g. studies by groups setup in the State Dept, Defense Dept or in AEC. (c) Conferences of limited duration (but perhaps as long as the entire academic summer vacation) in which competent people from gov­ ernment departments concerned (e.g. Defense and State), from groups engaged in continuing studies under (a) and competent “outsiders” take part. The main purpose of such conferences would be the integration of data obtained under (a) and (b) and the planning of future work. 461. Memorandum From Herter to Eisenhower1 Washington, April 20, 1959 SUBJECT Voluntary Temporary Moratorium on Underground and High Altitude Tests On April 11 you directed that the interested agencies give urgent consideration to Prime Minister Macmillan’s proposal that we offer to accompany a controlled agreement for suspension of atmospheric tests with a temporary moratorium on other nuclear weapons tests provided the Soviet Union did likewise. This question has been carefully examined with the Secretary of Defense, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Director of Central Intelligence Agency, and the Special Assistant to the President for Sci­ ence and Technology. We have concluded that proposing an extended uncontrolled moratorium on outer space and underground tests, even if the Soviets agree to negotiate controlled suspension of atmospheric tests, is an undesirable course of action at the present time. Such a proposal would undercut our basic principle of effective control, and would be unlikely to increase Soviet interest in serious negotiations. 1 Source: Recommends against Macmillan proposal for moratorium on under­ ground and space nuclear testing. Secret. 5 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technol­ ogy, Disarmament-­Nuclear Policy.
