Arms Control and Disarmament  1613
only agreement reached was that there would be further scientific and 
diplomatic discussions prior to the April 13 resumption. Sir William 
Penny and Sir Edward Bullard would arrive in Washington on April 2 
for the scientific discussions on the Berkner and Panofsky reports. We 
have a stiff deadline which will require early decisions within the U.S. 
Government on the approach to be taken on April 13. It was agreed that 
Dr. Killian would bear the responsibility for conducting the scientific 
discussions with the British representatives and that the Departments 
of State and Defense and the AEC would have representatives at these 
discussions.
Mr. Herter then described the views of the Secretary and the Pres­
ident on the future course of the negotiations. The President feels that 
any detection system that could be devised would be imperfect and 
that even if there were no agreed threshold, we should be prepared to 
reach agreement with the Soviets if they give in on the veto. The Pres­
ident feels that we need to be sure only that there is a reasonable level 
of deterrence. Mr. Herter then read from a memorandum prepared by 
Mr. Dulles on a subsequent meeting with the President and the Prime 
Minister, in which Mr. Dulles said that effective mobile inspection 
would be a sine quo non of agreement. This would be of great political 
importance. Whereas our scientists can advise us on the size, compo­
sition and nature of controls, they are not in a position to make the 
required judgment as to the over-­all value to us of the establishment of 
mobile control personnel behind the Iron Curtain. Both the President 
and the Secretary consider this element of the Geneva negotiations of 
extreme importance for future progress in disarmament. Dr. Killian and 
Mr. McCone agreed with this and Dr. Killian observed that the problem 
is how the objective could be accomplished, and what imperfections 
would be acceptable.
Mr. Herter said that there were two contingencies which must be 
considered. The first was to consider our position in the event that the 
Russians stick on the veto. In this case we must decide what our fall­
back position would be and when it might be presented. The second 
contingency would arise in the event that the Soviet Union gave in on 
the veto. In this case we would have to face the question of how much 
imperfection we could accept and whether it would be necessary to 
press for a threshold. Dr. Killian said that the British suggestion on 
the ceiling on inspections would represent a possible approach if it 
were coupled with a threshold. He said also that we would have to 
have experimentation in order to test the practical possibilities of con­
cealment by decoupling which were now only theoretical. Mr. Quarles 
said that we should not drop the possibility of a threshold, although 
he recognized the validity of the tactics of not taking the initiative in 
proposing it.
