Chapter 4, February–April 1990 563 we are reducing 50% more missiles than the US is. So, please understand that our positions reflect an awareness of some of our political pressures as well. There certainly are many interesting and reasonable points in President Bush’s letter and we want to look for solutions and variants that will be acceptable to both sides. Also, in order to record the interests of both countries in continuing the START process, both Presidents really should sign a statement of intent at the Summit on future talks. Many of the ideas in the President’s letter should be reflected in such a statement of intent. We have come with a draft of such a statement or declaration of intent.4 Your people should take a look at it and we will try to take into account their ideas. When you were in Namibia, you mentioned that the proposal that you were passing on to us was one that you were keeping confidential. Do you intend to keep it confidential or are you going to go public with it? Baker: Well, I think we will keep it confidential. But, undoubtedly, it will become public when we have to testify to Congress on our discussions. I must tell you that I have heard at the White House that an arms control reporter has already been inquiring about this matter. So I don’t know how much longer we will be able to keep it confidential. Shevardnadze: Well, then let’s not make that a problem. If it comes out, it comes out. Baker: We sought to keep it confidential because we did not want to publicize a proposal in the period between the time you got it and had a chance to come back with an answer on it. Shevardnadze: I understand. Baker: Two other points in response to what you said about the letter. First, we too have a statement of intent or joint declaration of principles for follow-­on negotiations5 that we would like to see signed. And secondly, in light of your response to our proposal, maybe we could put in that statement or that joint declaration the concept of de-MIRVing, noting that the concept ought to be explored because it is something that would promote stability. Our initial view is that we would prefer not to talk about START II, but rather talk of building on the START agreement because this is something that will facilitate our ratification process here. But these matters we can discuss further. Shevardnadze: Yes, let’s discuss them in greater detail and get our experts to discuss that. Of course, when we speak of the arms reduction process we have in mind MIRVed missiles too, not only ICBMs, but 4 Not found. 5 Not found.
