804
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
We also believe that a key element in developing international sup-
port for our non-proliferation policy is establishment of an Interna-
tional Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program that objectively and thoroughly
examines the economic, environmental and non-proliferation advan-
tages and risks of the current fuel cycle and major alternatives. The
domestic component must relate our future energy needs with our
non-proliferation and environmental objectives. The international com-
ponent must seek to involve countries with major nuclear energy pro-
grams (both existing and projected) and address their legitimate con-
cerns, to ensure that the evaluation will be internationally accepted.
This international component is particularly important because
many other countries, including most key suppliers, strongly disagree
with the US assessment that reprocessing is not necessary in the near
term. Rather they consider this technology essential for resource con-
servation, for meeting waste handling and environmental require-
ments and for breeder development and fuel purposes.
C. MAJOR ISSUES
While the approaches identified above—controls, denials, incentives,
together with an International Fuel Cycle Evaluation Program—are key
policy elements in our proposed overall non-proliferation strategy, a
number of major policy implementation choices need to be made.
1. How should the US deal with reprocessing and the export and disposi-
tion of weapons-usable materials?
There is interagency consensus7 on the need for an international morato-
rium on the export of enrichment and reprocessing plants and tech-
nology, the most difficult cases being the existing French and German
agreements to export such facilities to Pakistan and Brazil, and our ef-
forts to ensure the absence of reprocessing in Taiwan.
There is an interagency consensus on the need for assessment of repro-
cessing and examination of alternatives for recovering energy value from
irradiated fuel and that this evaluation should be international and
broad based.
There is also an interagency consensus that domestic, regional, and inter-
national spent-fuel storage arrangements are needed in supporting our ap-
proach to reprocessing.
Differences among Agencies exist, however, on the following
issues:
7 Consensus, as used here and subsequently in the report refers to the working level
only, and not necessarily to official Agency views. [Footnote is in the original.]
