116 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Major General Avraham Tamir, Director, Army Planning Branch Ambassador Simcha Dinitz Dr. Meir Rosenne, Legal Advisor to the Foreign Minister SUBJECT Meeting with Israeli Foreign Minister and Defense Minister Secretary Vance introduced this first meeting of the two delegations by outlining the schedule of meetings for the rest of the day. Lebanon He then turned to Lebanon, saying that the President had sent a message2 to President Assad of Syria this morning as Prime Minister Begin had asked last night. Although there were no answers as yet to his earlier letter or, of course, to the President’s message, we hoped for some response soon. We were also waiting for a response to our approach to the Saudis. Secretary Vance then said that Prime Minister Begin had mentioned to the President an attack by Syrian aircraft on Israeli aircraft. He asked whether such an attack had occurred. Weizmann said that there had been no exchange of fire. However, three times in recent days Syrian fighters had scrambled and attempted to go into an attack mode in a menacing fashion. They were unable, however, to join combat as the Israelis broke away. He said that over twenty Syrian aircraft had been scrambled over Lebanon in these incidents. Secretary Vance said we have no late intelligence suggesting that the Syrians have yet deployed any missiles into Lebanon, only anti-aircraft guns. Weizman said their intelligence agreed, so far, although missiles were deployed right on the border. Peace Negotiations Turning to major subjects for the Camp David meetings, Dayan said that Weizmann wanted to clarify something after his informal talk3 the previous evening with Secretary Vance concerning Sinai. Weizmann said it was important to emphasize there are still serious unresolved problems over Sinai, although great progress has been made in the various earlier meetings. If the Egyptians have the idea that everything is settled, this should be clarified. He agreed with Secretary Vance that in essence the remaining issues are the future of the settlements and the air fields. Weizmann said that although there are many records of the meetings at which the Sinai has been discussed, there is nothing in the way of a written agreement at this stage. Dayan asked 2 See Document 29. 3 No record of this meeting has been found.
