First Responses 171 which would say that we had heard this rumor, that we are checking it out, but that we cannot confirm its accuracy. We should also be prepared to state that we have sent a démarche to the Iranian authorities on this issue, and we may wish to background on the possible implications of this act in order to structure the speculation in the press. On one hand, it means less centralized control. On the other, it may fit together with information about mining the embassy walls, etc., as evidence that this is a measure to protect the hostages. State is preparing a statement which will make these points and reiterate that we hold the authorities in Tehran accountable for the safety of the hostages. (C) Next Steps: (All of the following is Top Secret) Dr. Brzezinski opened the discussion by noting that we may be facing a situation where Iran will continue to defy all of our diplomatic and international moves while gradually undercutting international and domestic U.S. support by focusing on U.S. intelligence activities. In the meantime, we will have locked ourselves into a litigation strategy which ties our hands. The President had asked the group to think about the following options, to reflect on them, refine them and discuss them with him later: 1. Seek strong condemnation of Iran in the Security Council; 2. Have the Shah leave the country this weekend. There is concern that Khomeini may at some point commit himself to trials if the Shah is permitted to leave the country; 3. Call publicly for the embargo of all shipments to Iran until the hostages are released, and ask other nations to support us in this; 4. Seek sanctions against Iran under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter; 5. Mine Iranian ports and issue a statement that strong punishment will be inflicted on Iran if any of the hostages are harmed; adding that the mining will be lifted immediately once they are released; 6. Taking of stronger reactions which have been planned in the event the hostages are harmed. Dr. Brzezinski wondered if we should not escalate the situation in a measured way as a means of bringing other nations into support for us rather than let the crisis subside into a condition of normalcy. Hamilton Jordan observed that it was not only the President’s political situation that was at stake but also U.S. national interests. He was surprised that the situation had not turned sour already, but he did not see how the country could go on for two or three months this way. Secretary Vance agreed but noted that the question is what can be done to change the situation in an effective way without making it worse. Hamilton Jordan said that once the Shah leaves, they will have to respond. With all that is going on, a lot might happen by next week.
