842 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII March, they made strong diplomatic and public protests following an air violation in which a Soviet aircraft apparently penetrated some 20 to 40 kilometers into Pakistan. Subsequently, in mid-May, Pakistani personnel reportedly fired on intruding aircraft and on Soviet-Afghan forces in confirmed ground incursions. Pakistan has steadily but discreetly increased its military readiness opposite Afghanistan in hopes of deterring more serious Soviet and Afghan incursions. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) The Soviets probably will increase their efforts to seal the Pakistani border on the Afghan side rather than alter their policy of restraint. If this fails, the Soviets may authorize a campaign of sustained smallscale air penetrations or border incursions to force Pakistan to stop supporting the insurgents. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) Pakistani authorities expect a Soviet-Afghan ground incursion; a few believe it might occur as early as this fall. Pakistan’s efforts to reinforce the Afghan border will probably continue but may be complicated by a shortage of military equipment and by substantial highlevel Army resistance to redeployments that would weaken Pakistani defenses on the Indian border. ([classification marking and handling restriction not declassified]) [Omitted here is the body of the memorandum.] 313. Article in the National Intelligence Daily1 [article number not declassified] Washington, August 30, 1980 USSR-PAKISTAN: Increased Soviet Pressure Moscow appears to be increasing its diplomatic and propaganda pressure on Pakistan. ([classification marking not declassified]) In his speech yesterday, President Brezhnev again accused Pakistan of allowing itself to be used as the principal channel of support for 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977– 81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—August 1980, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword and handling restriction not declassified].
