Chapter 4, February–April 1990 481 heavy bombers that had not yet been built should be equipped and counted at 10. Burt said that the 40% advantage, then, would have to apply only to existing types of bombers. Akhromeyev said this was correct, provided that future bombers were equipped and counted at 10. The 40% advantage would only apply to those that existed today. The Secretary suggested moving on to the next issue. The U.S. would give consideration to the sliding rule, and he asked again if the Soviets would reconsider their position on range. Akhromeyev responded that the Soviet side had moved toward the U.S. on counting rule. It was clear that the U.S. would get a great advantage from the agreed approach in terms of the number of ALCMs. Therefore the U.S. must accommodate the Soviet side on the range for SRAM missiles. The U.S. had an advantage of thousands in cruise missiles, and so it needed to accommodate the Soviet side in other respects. The Secretary said he didn’t want to debate this point. He agreed that the Soviets had moved in our direction on the counting rule, but we had also gone from 1500 to 1000 km on the range question. He suggested moving on to chemical weapons or SLCMs to see if any progress had been made there. START: SLCMs Bartholomew said that in the morning’s discussion with Gorbachev, the Soviet leader had said that the Soviets’ main problem with the U.S. proposal on SLCMs was the absence of a range cut-­off. We thought it was only fair, given the vulnerability of our coastlines to Soviet short-­ range SLCMs, to include nuclear SLCMs of any range in our reciprocal declarations. This was what our draft declaration3 did. The question he would like to pose, however, was whether, in the event the U.S. moved on this point—­i.e. if the U.S. established a range cut-­off—­the Soviet side would be prepared to accept the other elements of the U.S. proposal as set forth in our draft declaration. To put the question more specifically, Bartholomew asked whether the Soviets, with U.S. agreement to a range cut-­off, would agree that we would exchange declarations of the sides’ nuclear SLCMs plans for three years ahead and update these declarations annually over the life of the treaty. Under this approach declarations would not be subject to verification measures, although as Secretary Baker had said we would be prepared to have Ambassadors Burt and Nazarkin hold informal exchanges on the problems of verification for SLCMs. In sum, 3 See footnote 3, Document 72.
