those tariffs were seldom available for the information of foreign merchants, who were
hampered in their business by the irregular and arbitrary methods adopted in the
assessment and the collection of the duties. It is believed that these conventional tariffs
were welcomed not only by the United States and the other Powers but by China as a
happy solution of a question which for more than forty years had vexed the relations
between China and the other countries.
The last commercial treaty affecting the tariffs between the United States and China
was made in 190329 and various treaties with other Powers were made substantially at
the same time. The rates under these treaties have been revised twice since that time.
There seems to be some confusion in the public mind as to just what rights Americans
and other foreigners enjoy under the extraterritorial provisions of the treaties with
China. I do not have the time to describe in detail the conditions under which foreign
merchants lived and carried on their trade in China during the sixty-odd years prior to
1842, the year when immunities as to persons and property, now termed extraterritorial
rights, first appeared in a formal treaty between China and a Western Power. It is
sufficient for me to say that the account of the relations between resident foreign
merchants in China and the Chinese authorities of that period is replete with incidents
involving conflicting claims, the foreigner claiming exemption from Chinese law and
the Chinese claiming jurisdiction over him and his property. To borrow the language of
the Encyclopædia Britannica30 as quoted in Webster’s Dictionary31 “extraterritoriality”
is defined as a term of international law “used to denominate certain immunities from
the application of the rule that every person is subject for all acts done within the
boundary [boundaries] of a state to its local laws.” Insofar as China is concerned the
British Treaty of Nanking of 1842 marks the legalized beginning of the system of
extraterritorial rights in China. Extraterritorial rights as applicable to Americans were
first defined in the American Treaty of 1844 which stipulates clearly the method by
which the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the United States Government was to be
exercised. Article XXI of that Treaty reads as follows:
“Subjects of China who may be guilty of any criminal act toward citizens of
the United States, shall be arrested and punished by the Chinese authorities
according to the laws of China; and citizens of the United States, who may
commit any crime in China, shall be subject to be tried and punished only by
the Consul, or other public functionary of the United States thereto
authorized, according to the laws of the United States. And in order to the
prevention of all controversy and disaffection, justice shall be equitably and
impartially administered on both sides.”
With respect to civil suits, between Americans, or between Americans and citizens or
subjects of other non-Chinese States, Article XXV of the same treaty provides:
