National Security Policy 461 reduce the net gain in labor time even further. On the other hand, if further reductions in military manpower occur, they will have some offsetting influence. 52. For these reasons, and because labor cannot be freely drawn from agriculture, the USSR must rely heavily on productivity gains to maintain the extremely high growth rates it desires. There is much room in the Soviet economy for gains in labor productivity resulting from the use of more modern machinery, from a wider and more precise appli­ cation of incentives, and from improved efficiency in a multitude of planning and managerial activities. As a result of the vigorous attention being given to such problems and Khrushchev’s relatively undogmatic approach to them, we expect continued gains in labor productivity over the next five years. The impetus to growth obtained from this source, however, seems unlikely to be so great as to offset the limitations cited above. 53. Thus we estimate that the average yearly growth of Soviet GNP will drop from perhaps as much as seven percent in recent years to around six percent during the next five years. Even so, the USSR will slowly gain further ground upon the US economy, which is expected to grow at an annual rate of about 3.5 percent. In dollar terms, Soviet GNP will rise from about 40 percent of US GNP in 1956 to about 45 percent in 1962. The USSR and the US, however, will allocate resources in sharply different ways. With a GNP only two-­fifths that of the US, the dollar value of Soviet defense expenditures is estimated to be about equal to those of the US, and investment is about 55–60 percent as large as American investment; Soviet consumption outlays, on the other hand, have a dollar value only about one-­quarter that of US consumption. Trends in Defense Expenditures5 54. We estimate that in 1957 Soviet defense expenditures are about 15 percent of GNP in terms of rubles (the comparable US figure in dol­ lars is about 9 percent). If our estimates of military trends are correct, defense expenditures will increase gradually, reaching in 1962 a level one-­quarter to one-­third higher than at present. Since GNP will proba­ bly increase at the same rate or faster, the relative burden on the econ­ omy will become no heavier in the aggregate, although defense needs will have to compete with other programs for manpower and for spe­ cific industrial products, such as electronics. 5 Estimates of Soviet defense expenditures are subject to a wider margin of error than other statistical estimates in this section and should therefore be used with greater caution. [Footnote is in the original.]
