Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
483
centage of our gross national product transferred concessionally to de-
veloping countries. Today we have dropped to twelfth.
• We have changed our approach to foreign aid in part as a result
of congressional legislation. In the face of a continued need by many
countries for infrastructure assistance, particularly in Africa, we are
concentrating more and more on the needs of the poor. We look to the
multilateral institutions to provide infrastructure assistance. We are
unable to supply straight budgetary assistance to meet the special
problem of middle-income countries. This problem is particularly
acute in the Caribbean.
Some of the most active negotiations have related to commodities.
The developing countries have given a high priority to stabilizing
broad fluctuations in commodity prices which have such a profound
effect on countries depending almost entirely on one or two primary
products.
We have now indicated our acceptance in principle of the idea of a
common fund which would be used to help commodity agreements to
stabilize commodity prices.8 We still have differences over the form of
such a fund and whether it would also be used to provide resources not
directly related to stabilization of commodity prices. Those who follow
both our relations with the developing countries and our relations with
Congress will hear more of the common fund in the days ahead.
Debt Relief. Debt is a highly important and highly emotional issue,
as it is with individuals. We have always taken the position that debt
relief should be conditioned upon a debtor country promising to un-
dertake a comprehensive sound economic development or stabilization
program, one that would insure that excesses in resource mismanage-
ment are not repeated. Many feel strongly that the developed countries
have an obligation to relieve them of their debt burden. We are now
committed to debt forgiveness for the poorest countries and are study-
ing how much relief we should provide in 1980.
The two principal multilateral financial institutions—the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund—were founded well before
the creation of most of the nations in the United Nations today. Newly
independent countries and many other Third World countries as well
wish to move away from voting in international institutions based on
financial contributions toward a one state, one vote system giving a
8 The Common Fund negotiations began in Geneva in November 1977; see footnote
3, Document 58. Talks on the Common Fund were scheduled to resume in Geneva on No-
vember 14, 1978. On November 16, The Washington Post reported that the Carter adminis-
tration agreed to make a direct contribution to the Fund. (Hobart Rowen, “U.S., in Key
Shift, Accepts Demand of Third World,” p. A–21) See also Foreign Relations, 1977–1980,
vol. III, Foreign Economic Policy, Document 318.
