790 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI agreement. What I am asking you to do is to understand our political problem. Tell me a figure within which you will be comfortable. Certainly a million tests a year would be comfortable. Shevardnadze: No. Baker: I can see we are not going to make much progress on this issue. Shevardnadze: What matters in not the number, basically it is our view that all questions related to heavy missiles have been settled. They are subjects for follow-­on negotiations. Why is it that we should limit flight tests of heavy missiles while leaving outside of our purview other strategic offensive arms? I am quite sure we may point to other types that need constraint as well. There would be no end. Baker: This is the only place in the treaty where there is a ban on a new type of weapon. Therefore a limit on testing would be at the very least a confidence building measure. Shevardnadze: We have agreed not to develop new types. Akhromeyev: Now this issue has been in the center of discussion for quite some time. We did a lot to accommodate the US position. We have agreed to no new types, but we need to maintain the combat readiness of existing types. This issue has been continuously under discussion, and we have done a lot to accommodate the US position. Some time in the past the Foreign Minister and I were involved in the acceptance of the heavy cut, and we have been subjected to criticism ever since. Shevardnadze: That is why Marshal Akhromeyev now wears civilian clothes. Frankly speaking, Mr. Secretary, when this issue was raised in Moscow we were surprised. We thought everything was settled. Baker: I have never taken that position. We see this as primarily a political problem for us. Other issues present political problems for you. If there is no give here, we ought to go on. We have got three issues left. Let’s talk about Backfire. Bartholomew: Let me begin where we are agreed: 1.The Soviet Union will give us a politically binding declaration. 2. This declaration will include a commitment not to give Backfire the capability to operate at intercontinental ranges in any manner, including in-­flight refueling. 3. There will be a number that the Soviet Union will not exceed. We differ on two points: 1. We propose a limit on all Backfire at 400. The Soviet Union is proposing to give a limit of 400, but only on air force Backfire and not Naval Aviation Backfire. We believe this means we will have no overall limit on the number of Backfire at all, and that the Soviet Union can
