Covert and Overt Operations
839
enough for the Iranians to act if they intended to. If we do nothing,
we run the risk of sleeping on our rights and of trivializing the ICJ
decision by not following up in the SC. Mr. Donovan commented that
since the Iranians did nothing in response to the previous SC resolution,
he anticipated no public question about why we were not going to the
SC again in this case. Mr. Claytor said he would prefer to stand on
the ICJ decision; we could be worse off if we went to the SC. All agreed
that we should not introduce a SC resolution at this time. (S)
Agree.8
Introduce a SC resolution based on the ICJ decision.
6. Iranian Claims to the ICJ. Mr. Cutler pointed out that we could
suggest the ICJ as a proper forum for Iran to present claims against
the U.S. Mr. Saunders noted that the problem was not the lack of a
forum—it was Iranian unwillingness to take advantage of the forums
available to them. Mr. Owen, the Legal Advisor of the State Depart-
ment, noted that he opposed encouraging use of the ICJ for such claims.
If the Iranians decide to use the ICJ, we could only accept. However,
there is always the chance that we would lose a case charging us
with illegal interference in Iran’s internal affairs. This could set an
unfortunate precedent and could even involve massive reparation judg-
ments. All agreed that this was not something we should suggest to
the Iranians at this point. (S)
Agree.9
Other.
At
that
point
the
meeting
was
reduced
to
the
restricted
membership.
7. Diplomatic Strategy. Mr. Christopher summarized the results of
our recent contacts as indicating that “All roads lead to the Parliament.”
We now have the most active acknowledged channel we have had
through the Swiss. Ambassador Lang meets with Bani-Sadr and Ghot-
bzadeh, but both of them say nothing will happen until the Majlis
convenes. That will probably be around the end of July. We are trying
to analyze the composition of the Majlis, but it is likely that any decision
will come as a result of internal dynamics, not because of what we can
do from the outside. The Iranians have to sort out their own power
struggle, including the choice of a Prime Minister, before they can
address the hostage question. Even if a decision is taken, it will probably
have to go back to Khomeini. The formula they are considering is for
the Majlis formally to empower the government to work out the prob-
lem, rather than the Majlis itself working out the details. Most of the
8 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin.
9 Carter approved this option with a checkmark and initialed “J” in the right margin.
