March–August 1953 The Royalist, pro-Zahedi, movement of August 19th contained a large element of spontaneity and there seemed to have been a genuine reaction of shock and dismay on the part of the Tehran populace when the Shah left Iran for Iraq. Prime Minister Zahedi and Chief of Staff designate, General Batmangalich, themselves manned tanks during the early stages of the events on August 19th in an effort to rally the people and army to the Shah’s cause. The Shah intends to leave Rome shortly and proceed to Tehran. Depending upon events, and instructions from the Zahedi government, the Shah may stop off in Baghdad enroute to Tehran so that a more appropriate and impressive entrance can be arranged. The opportunistic but at least outwardly loyal Mossadeq supporter, Abol Ghassem Amini, acting Minister of Court, who was arrested by Mossadeq during the events of August 14th, is believed to have thrown some support to the Royalist cause from the strong Amini family who controlled certain key points of command in the Iranian army. The strong and influential Qashqai tribe, led by four paramount chieftains, who have remained loyal to Mossadeq and who have been closely allied with the above-mentioned Amini family, can still be considered in opposition to the Shah, but indications are they will take no paramilitary action to endanger Iran’s security for the time being. 292. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the Station in Iran1 Washington, August 20, 1953. DIR 16474. 1. CIA officials are joined by the appropriate divisional and branch officers in extending commendation and congratulations to all Tehran Station personnel. Kermit Roosevelt both in HQS and on scene of action has distinguished himself and served US Govt and CIA well. We respect the Tehran group for their great stauchness in the face of difficulties and temporary discouragement. We are proud of the Tehran Station personnel who have all to varying degrees contributed 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret; Priority. [text not declassified] Transcribed specifically for the Foreign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer exists. See “Sources” chapter. No time of transmission appears on the source text.
