3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
135
Fishing
The President then raised the issue of Soviet fishing boats. He said
that he had tried to wait before acting, and at first only citations were
issued. Now it was necessary to enforce the law. He asked the Soviet
government’s help in stopping these violations.
The Ambassador said that the first incident happened when he was
out of the country. But the instructions given by the Soviet government
to the fishing boat captains had been to obey the law and the agreement
the Soviet Union had with the United States. Two ships had been
seized.9 Maybe they were in violation, maybe not—he did not know,
though his consul in Boston would report. One of the boats is a refriger-
ator ship—and is not large—he hoped that it could be let go.
The President said he had no authority to release any boats. The
issue was with the courts, and it would not be proper for him to inter-
fere. He had some latitude when they were at sea, but not after they had
been seized.
The Ambassador said he understood. The State Department had
raised this yesterday. They were ready to pay (?). He could assure the
President there would be no excuses, and that they would fulfill their
obligations. He was concerned, however, about all the unfriendly talk
in the United States.
The President suggested that the Soviet government put out a state-
ment, indicating what the instructions to the captains had been. This
might help.
The Ambassador said why not? He would ask. Secretary Vance
added that a third boat had been seized. Dr. Brzezinski added that these
were being treated on an individual basis; it was not part of any con-
flict, and this had been told to the press.
SOVIET COMMENTS
The President introduced the subject of commentary in the Soviet
press. He indicated that in the first month of his Administration, the So-
viet press had been reticent about personal attacks against him. That
had changed, and he wanted to raise it—though these attacks did not
hurt him. He was careful not to say anything about Brezhnev that was
not complimentary. If their earlier attitude had changed, he wanted to
help restore it, and create an atmosphere here of a desire for friendship
with the Soviet Union.
9 In an April 4 memorandum to Brzezinski and Aaron, Odom provided information
on Soviet fishing violations, specifically related to the Sovrenennyi, which had been
boarded by the U.S. Coast Guard. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Country File, Box 78, USSR: 4–5/77)
