1979  725
163.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, November 8, 1979
SUBJECT
U.S. and USSR Capabilities to Project Power
(S) A recent net assessment addressed US and Soviet abilities to 
project military power and examined related means such as friendship 
treaties, aid, advisors and proxies which have been used to achieve 
strategic objectives beyond national borders. The utility of this com-
parative study to me was primarily in three areas: defining the growth 
in Soviet intervention capabilities, showing that US capabilities need 
broad reexamination, and suggesting some specific approaches that 
might be fruitful.
(S) Early in this Administration we recognized a competitive 
Soviet strategy of jockeying for position while avoiding undue risks, 
especially of directly confronting the US. We identified several features 
of Soviet style including:
—Choosing areas where the US is inhibited from responding.
—Seeking invitations by a government or faction.
—Providing equipment rapidly to clients.
—Using proxies.
—Cementing relationships by continuing arms aid, building mili-
tary facilities and concluding treaties of friendship.
(S) The net assessment highlighted another development which 
has been overshadowed so far by more obvious Soviet activities. We are 
seeing a big shift in Soviet thinking about, and capabilities to project, 
military power into areas distant from the USSR. For example,
—Training manuals have appeared containing material on previ-
ous Russian or Soviet use of military forces beyond Soviet borders.
—Capabilities have been developed that allow them to project and 
support forces at a distance—­e.g., a new class of amphibious assault 
ships, several classes of cruisers, V/STOL carriers, large underway 
replenishment ships, etc.2
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Ermarth, Box 4, Middle East/Persian Gulf: 9/79–1/80. Secret. Carter initialed the upper 
right corner of the memorandum. In a November 30 memorandum entitled “U.S. and 
USSR Capabilities to Project Power,” Brzezinski wrote Brown: “Attached is a copy of 
your memorandum to the President of November 8 on the above subject, together with 
the President’s comments and notations.” (Ibid.)
2 Carter drew a checkmark in the right margin next to this paragraph.
