January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1093 These options lay out a comprehensive and long-term program of modernization, but they have the defect of no advanced aircraft deliveries for several years. OMB concedes that if you are to choose, they would prefer raising FY 81 FMS $200 million rather than lift the ceiling on cash flow payments significantly. Jim McIntyre also raises other issues which must be put in perspective: —Diverting F–16s and M–60s from U.S. forces; this is essential for any acceleration of deliveries and DOD believes the relatively small quantities involved are manageable. —The program increases proposed by Harold are not supported by any threat analysis, and are unnecessary given the peace treaty with Israel; the external threat comes from Libya, which has powerful and modern forces, but this misses the point that Egypt is the major military power in the Middle East that we must count on for all our security interests. It is the key to implementation of both the Camp David Accords and the Carter Doctrine for the Perisan Gulf. Far more than the facilities in Kenya, Somalia or Oman, we will be dependent on Egypt for facilities (the air base at Wadi Kena, prepositioned stocks for RDF, etc.). We need a stable Egypt with strong links to the U.S. and that means engaging in a long-term military supply relationship. This, in turn, means we must be prepared over time to replace the Soviet equipment that is wearing out. —We should hold up on aircraft delivery acceleration because the F–16 has engine problems, and the F–X might be a better long-term solution; the quantities of F–16s to be delivered soon are small enough that DOD believes the present engine shortage will not be significant. Waiting for the F–X means no advanced aircraft for at least five years since that plane is barely on paper. —Any increased funding or improved financing arrangements will lead to greater pressure for Israeli increases; I believe it will give the Israelis another talking point, but I doubt it will change any votes. More important would be the impact on the Pakistanis. Finally, there is the issue of the F–15. After reviewing the options, I strongly doubt the Egyptians will want them because they would have to wait four years to get them. But by merely offering them, we might assuage a growing symbolic discrepancy that is adversely affecting our relationship with Egypt. However, the situation is complicated by the fact that Mubarak was misled by the diffident response of Javits and Church, both of whom now firmly oppose offering the F–15. I suggest we inform the Egyptians that we are prepared to consider supplying the F–15s provided we and they can work together to develop sufficient political support in the Congress. In this connection, we would also make clear the long delay in F–15 delivery. The option we would
