398  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
of renunciation of force against China’s Taiwan. Chinese Government, 
circumstances permitting, would seek liberation of Taiwan by peaceful 
means. However, the question falls within framework of China’s sover­
eignty and internal affairs and cannot be made subject of present talks.
9. Wang closed his prepared comments with statement that ques­
tion of America’s withdrawal from Taiwan area should be discussed 
and that he would like to hear my views on this question.
10. In reply I stated that before commenting on his statement I must 
first bring to his attention my government’s dissatisfaction with his 
government’s continued delay in implementing agreed announcement 
with respect to remaining 19 Americans in prison. I stated that so far as 
my government had been able to ascertain, no American in prison had 
even been permitted to communicate with or see UK Charge in Peking 
or any other British diplomatic or consular representative. I stated that 
there could be no doubt that these Americans desired to return.
11. I continued that futhermore almost five weeks had passed since 
announcement was issued and that I had hoped he would have some 
information for me today. However, thus far government has not taken 
appropriate measures mentioned in agreed announcement which 
would permit these 19 Americans to exercise expeditiously their right to 
return. This right was expressly set forth in the agreed announcement.
12. I said that in discussing this question at previous meetings, 
Wang had continued to mention his government’s request for a list 
of all Americans in US and had continued to mention supposed time 
it would take for the many Chinese in the US to return to his coun­
try. I said he had also referred to the 47 Americans in his country who 
had not applied for exit permits. In this connection, I pointed out that 
agreed scope of our discussions on this point and agreed announce­
ment concerned only persons who desired to return.
13. I stated that I raised these points again in order to indicate to 
Wang reasons why my government feared his government was evad­
ing rather than implementing the provisions of the agreed announce­
ment. I declared that it should be evident that my government was 
bound to take an increasingly serious view of his government’s failure 
to implement provisions of agreed announcement with respect to these 
19 Americans if this failure should be further protracted.
14. I continued with what I described as my preliminary comments 
on Wang’s statement at opening of meeting, pointing out that I desired 
to study his statement carefully and reply in greater detail later.
15. I pointed out that, as I had emphasized at last meeting, my pro­
posal was not couched in terms of charges against Wang’s government, 
but was made in a most earnest desire of contributing a suggestion con­
structive to course of talks. I said that Wang’s statement pointed up 
fact known to both of us that views of Wang’s government and mine
