1430  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
369.	 Telegram 1969 to London1
Washington, August 20, 1958, 9:22 p.m.
1969. Please deliver immediately to Prime Minister Macmillan the 
following message from the President:
QUOTE August 20, 1958. Dear Harold:
This cable replies to your first message, the one referring to certain 
technical matters. Foster is just now leaving for New York and during 
the trip will give to Selwyn his conclusions on the political side of the 
matter for immediate cabling to you. His cable will quote our statement 
as it has been revised, including such important points as timing.
My personal comment about the political side is merely that the 
week’s experience at the General Assembly clearly shows that much 
of the world opinion is shifting, if not toward the Soviets, at least away 
from the West because of our alleged intransigence about all aspects of 
nuclear testing and so on. I feel that the publication of the report of the 
technical experts at Geneva may mark an opportunity for us to regain 
some of this world opinion. If we are to do so, I think we cannot wait 
for some weeks or days during which time Russian propaganda would 
make it appear that we are being forced into a position that finally 
might become untenable.
Now with respect to the two questions of reduction of weight and 
invulnerability, under the law I am permitted to convey to you any 
information needed so long as that information will not endanger our 
security. The law requires that I make a certification to this effect. Since 
our joint purpose is to make certain that the weapons we both man­
ufacture are for use by the free world in our common defense, there 
will be no difficulty in my making the necessary certificate for this type 
of exchange. I understand that British and American technicians are 
having their first meeting on next Wednesday morning, at which time 
there will be some agreement as to the kinds of information in which 
both sides wish to delve. Out of that meeting will come to me further 
suggestions as to the certificates that I need to make.
Incidentally, we do not see how we could establish and stand by 
a limit of 25 kilos for bomb testing. The findings of tests are not suffi­
ciently exact to make this a feasible condition.
I think this gives you the technical assurance you need.
1 Source: Conveys message from Eisenhower to Macmillan on providing technical 
information and political necessity of making statement on cessation of nuclear testing. 
Secret; Presidential Handling. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/8–2058.
