504 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI whether you are prepared to make an all out push including a veto threat if necessary. Nunn would likely be content with a program that focused on long-­term R&D, bypassing the near-­term deployment option. Warner may believe we are spending too much on near-­term technologies. Nevertheless, as you were told at Livermore,2 Brilliant Pebbles accounts for only about three percent of the SDI budget, despite its high profile. The overall balance is about 50–50 near term and long term. Troop Levels in Europe. Soviet agreement to your 195,000 manpower initiative in Central Europe should have strengthened Congressional support for maintaining this level, but there will be calls to reduce further as the Soviets inevitably pull out and German unification proceeds. While you will want to hear Nunn and Warner’s views on how Congress will treat our military presence in Europe, you should emphasize that their support is essential and that we cannot now go lower without severe damage to the Alliance, the future of Germany, and our relations with our strongest allies. Other Defense Budget Issues. You may want to discuss briefly the overall level of the defense budget of $295 billion. The interest in the “peace dividend” seems limited at present to the press and those in Congress who want to shift even more funds into social programs, but there is widespread consensus that the budget will be cut, perhaps substantially. You can point out that the real peace dividends are in both peace itself and the potential for democratically elected governments in Eastern Europe. Nunn knows that there has been a reduction in defense spending every year since 1985—­to take a bigger cut now may force hard-­to-­reverse steps before we fully understand the new strategic environment. Nunn and Warner can give insight on how to handle Congressional calls for substantial additional cuts. III. PARTICIPANTS List at Tab B.3 IV. PRESS PLAN White House photographer only. V. SEQUENCE Informal discussions.4 2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Bush received a briefing on Brilliant Pebbles at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratories on February 7. No minutes were found. 3 Not attached. 4 An unknown hand wrote “memo to President only” at the bottom of the memorandum beside a printed list of attachments: Tab A, “Points to be made,” and Tab B, “Participants List.” Neither was attached.
