1090  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
261.	 Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, August 15, 1960
SUBJECT
Conversation with Mr. Gates on the preparation of the NSTL and SIOP, 15 Aug 60
1. I asked for an audience with Mr. Gates at 1345 on Monday.
2. I told Mr. Gates that I had heard enough rumors in regard to my 
attitude and the Navy’s attitude to warrant explaining directly to him 
what my attitude was so that there would be no doubt whatever in his 
mind. In addition to the rumors, there was a smear campaign started 
against Burke and against the Navy which was as yet in the generat­
ing stage. Nothing serious had come up yet. They were just laying the 
groundwork. This was evident in the papers over the weekend. The 
papers by themselves would not have caused me any concern but I was 
warned by one of my friends in the newspaper business who called up 
and asked what was the campaign going on against Burke. What had 
I done? What was I so uncooperative about? Why was not I a team­
player? He thought I was a teamplayer. I told him I did not know what 
it was all about whereupon he said I just wanted to let you know there 
are stories that are being spread which you should know about.
3. I told Mr. Gates that because of these stories I wanted him to 
know directly that although I did not agree one damned bit with his 
decision and the President’s support of his decision, the decision was 
made and I and the Navy would support it. I told him that he should 
know that from his past experience and that I was disconcerted first—
when General Twining was talking to the President and stated that the 
only reason this thing might not work would be that the Navy would 
not want to make it work. As he would remember, I replied that if this 
plan were put into effect and it failed, it would not fail because the 
Navy would not try to make it work but because some other group did 
or because the system itself was wrong. Also I was concerned when I 
had heard rumors that Mr. Gates had made statements and I think he 
had made them to me too, that he expected to bear reverberations from 
the Navy on this, that he expected to be crucified by the Navy, and 
other similar things. I said he ought to know better than that. The Navy 
was not going to do any such thing, although naturally there would be 
great disappointments and there would be some comment but there 
was not going to be any general attack on Mr. Gates.
1 Source: Record of a meeting between Burke and Gates on preparation of NSTL 
and SIOP. Top Secret; Hold Closely; No Distribution. 3 pp. Naval Historical Center, Burke 
Papers, NSTL/SIOP Briefing.
