Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI support a US CTB initiative, careful consultations would be required to reassure them as to the constancy of our purposes. There is a special problem with NATO allies who regard our theater nuclear capability as a major deterrent against Soviet aggression in Europe. We have assured the allies that we intend not only to maintain but to upgrade and modernize this capability unless mutual reduction of forces with the Soviet Union are negotiated. Allied concern has been with war-fighting capability as it affects deterrence, but we believe they would be willing to forego modernization in a CTB context. In fact, while the Allied interest in maintaining a large and viable stockpile remains high, there has been some concern over technological improvements that could be viewed as increasing the likelihood of using these weapons on Allied territory. While theater force modernization is not an issue with our Allies in the Far East, there is still some concern resulting from the Vietnam debacle that the US may lose interest in the region. Thus they would be sensitive to any implication that the US might be less willing and less able to carry out its security commitments. Steps would have to be taken to assure all our allies that we could maintain a credible nuclear deterrent posture under CTB conditions. F. Non-Proliferation The objective of preventing the proliferation of nuclear explosive capabilities has been identified as a major focus of US foreign and national security policy. A CTB is widely perceived as an important step towards this objective. A prohibition on nuclear testing would impose a significant constraint on the development of a nuclear weapons capability for those states adhering to the measure, even though the possibility exists for technically advanced states to obtain a relatively crude nuclear weapons capability without testing. In addition, a CTB is seen by non-nuclear weapon states as a key step by the nuclear powers required to balance the self-denying obligations other countries accepted in the Non-Proliferation Treaty. It is doubtful that states apparently intent on keeping the nuclear explosives option open (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, Taiwan, South Korea, and Pakistan) would, at least at present, be prepared to join a CTB, but the political costs to them of a decision to go nuclear would be increased. On the other hand, a number of states that have not adhered to the Non-Proliferation Treaty but have gone on record as supporting a CTB, might well decide to join. Examples are South Africa, Spain, Turkey, Chile, Algeria, Indonesia, and Egypt. Even in the case of India, an early cessation of US and Soviet testing might persuade them to defer further testing. The conclusion of a CTB can be expected to improve international perceptions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and raise the barriers to
