1050 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III Agenda Item #1 PRM 33. The PRC is asked to note the conclu- (Tab B) sions of the study,5 and to direct the follow-on actions resulting from the study. Agenda Item #2 UNCSTD. The PRC is asked to review and com- (Tab B) ment on the programs and initiatives that have been proposed for presentation and discussion at UNCSTD. Agenda Item #3 Presidential Directive. The PRC is requested to (Tab B) approve a directive which would direct USG technical agencies to devote increased attention to enhancing the international benefits from their technical programs. Agenda Item #4 Funding of USG International S&T Activities. (Tab B) The PRC is asked to direct the completion of a study on funding procedures for PRC review by February 1, 1980. Agenda Item #1 PRM 33—S&T for Developing Countries (Agenda Item #1, Tabs B & C)6 State’s inability to bring the PRM 33 study to a close has been a source of quiet embarrassment, as many within the Executive Branch, Congress, and the public have awaited PRC consideration of the PRM findings for a clearer understanding of Administration policy. Although its usefulness has diminished somewhat, there are several residual action items to be dispensed. The PRC is asked to: (1) simply note, the conclusions (pages 2 & 3 of Tab C), and (2) to direct three recommended follow-on actions resulting from the study. Although the actions appear to be minor, they could provoke considerable disagreement between OMB and State over the actual conclusions of the study. OMB has contended that the PRM 33 was not conclusive, because many of the recommendations were not substantiated with adequate analysis; with strongest disagreement on specific “policy, (Tab J for Summary of PRM 33)7 directions” (pages 3–6, Tab C). Recommended Action. The PRC is asked to note the conclusions of the PRM. The PRC should avoid getting bogged-down in a dispute on 5 The August 8, 1978, study prepared in response to PRM 33 is in the Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 47, PRM/NSC–33 (1). 6 Tab C, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Agenda Item #1, PRM–33—Science and Technology for Developing Countries: Conclusions and Action Plan.” 7 Tab J, attached but not printed, is an “Action Summary” of the study prepared in response to PRM 33.
