3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
442
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
140.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, August 17, 1978, 3:30 p.m.
SUBJECT
Soviet Jewry and Related Events
PARTICIPANTS
Eugene Gold, Chairman, National Conference on Soviet Jewry (NCSJ)
Jerry Goodman, Executive Director, NCSJ
Marina Wallach, Washington Representative, NCSJ
Rabbi Alexander Schindler, President, Union of American Jewish Organizations
Yehuda Hellman, Executive Director, Conference of Presidents
Charlotte Jacobson, Vice President, Zionist Organization of America
Jacqueline Levine, Vice Chairman, American Jewish Congress
Joseph Smukler, Vice Chairman, NCSJ
Sol Goldstein, Officer, NSCJ
Mr. Levine, Conservative Movement
The Secretary
Dr. Marshall Shulman, Special Adviser to the Secretary for Soviet Affairs
Edward Sanders, Senior Advisor
William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary, EUR
Robert W. Farrand, EUR/SOV (Bilateral) (Notetaker)
Gold expressed thanks for the opportunity to meet with the Secre-
tary and for his frank and open comments on earlier occasions. Gold
said he and his colleagues felt comfortable talking to the Secretary
about what was happening to Jews in the Soviet Union. He noted that
there seemed to be a marked increase recently in the signs of pressure
being exerted by the Soviets on their Jewish citizenry. The internal situ-
ation was being exacerbated, Gold said, by pointed reports of Jewish
criminal activity in the Soviet press. The media play was having its in-
evitable effect on the Soviet populace. Anti-Semitism in the USSR
seemed definitely on the rise with the seeds already planted in fertile
soil.
From Gold’s and his colleagues’ vantage point, the rumors of
anti-Semitic activity in the USSR were spreading rapidly and the pic-
ture seemed to be “crystallizing” in an ugly way. For example, Gold
said the day may not be far distant when the Soviets move to shut
down emigration of Jewish persons altogether.
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the
Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109,
Box 2, Memorandums of Conversation, 1978. Confidential. Drafted by Robert W. Farrand
(EUR/SOV) on August 18; cleared by Luers, Shulman, Shinn, and Ed Sanders (S); ap-
proved by Frank Wisner (S/S) on September 28. The meeting took place in Vance’s con-
ference room at the Department of State.
