1132  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Minister Porras said that he had told Cuban Foreign Minister 
[illegible in the original] last year that [illegible in the original] were 
mention of [illegible in the original], Fidel Castro himself [illegible in 
the original] at the Buenos Aires economic conference5 that the United 
States offer a bribe amounting to 35 billion dollars to Latin America.
Minister Porras said that the United States, aside from economic 
matters, should pay attention to cultural relations with Latin America. 
He said that Latin American students were ignorant of the United States, 
and that the students were a factor of importance, due to the influence 
they exercised over the workers. In Peruvian universities, the students 
now were sons of carpenters, chauffeurs, and cooks, and that they felt a 
strong social resentment of the wealthy, the powerful, and the oligarchs.
In spite of this, the students were malleable, and could be influenced 
by scholarships for study in the United States and by the presence of 
American students in Peruvian universities. He said that American stu-
dents in Peruvian universities had always been welcomed by the local 
students, and had never had to listen to anti-American attacks. A cultural 
policy of this kind would, in his opinion, bring good results. Minister 
Porras said that many students thought of the United States only in 
terms of American oil companies and other American concerns that they 
believed were exploiting Peru’s resources, and that they were not aware 
of the technical and cultural progress achieved in the United States.
Minister Porras said that with regard to Cuba, he would like to use 
a metaphor dealing with bulls. There was a custom in the bullring that 
if a bull refused to cooperate by fighting, and was too difficult to herd 
out of the ring, a group of cows would be sent into the ring, and the 
bull would then docilely follow them into the pen. He said that Latin 
America was expected to play the part of these cows.
Minister Porras said that he believed that the best way to handle the 
problem was to have informal corridor meetings between four or five 
Latin American countries and Cuba. (He mentioned Mexico, Colombia 
and Venezuela, as countries which, presumably with Peru, should 
participate.) In these meetings the latter country would be asked if it 
really meant to break with the OAS and therefore with the other Latin 
American countries. Cuba should be asked to state what it would be 
willing to accept. He said that he was aware that Cuba was probably 
going to say some monstrous things during the Seventh Meeting, but 
that he felt that it was imperative to keep [illegible in the original] the 
OAS, or run the risk of serious social consequences in Latin America.
5 Reference is to the Meeting of the Special Committee of the Council of the 
Organization of American States To Study Formulation of New Measures of Economic 
Development (Committee of 21) at Buenos Aires, April 27-May 8, 1959.
