242 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II While most of the discussion to date concerning human rights and the IFI’s has focused on particular loans and votes, it is also important to develop a long-term approach whereby we seek an overall reduction in IFI lending to countries that consistently violate human rights, excepting loans for the needy. Our policy in this regard should parallel our bilateral aid policy (see pg. 20, para. I).12 Support from the other industrialized democracies for our efforts to use our voice and vote in the IFI’s to promote human rights has been minimal to date: only Canada and Sweden have indicated some support. A number of leading LDCs—including Egypt and India—have questioned the legality of U.S. actions on human rights in the IFI’s. The articles of all the IFI’s contain a provision not different in substance from the following language in the World Bank’s acticles: “The Bank, its officers and employees should not interfere in the political affairs of any member, nor shall they be influenced in their decisions by the political character of . . . (the recipient government). Only economic considerations shall be relevant to their decisions . . .” (Art. 10, Sec. 10). The Legal Adviser of the State Department believes that the prohibition against interference in the “political” affairs of members may be interpreted validly as not applicable to the consideration of human rights factors, particularly group one rights, which are more fundamental than “political” matters and therefore not within the scope of that term. The injunction to weigh only economic considerations in making decisions can in many, if not most, cases be satisfied by relating the human rights situation in a country to economic issues. For example, welfare and other social concerns are, broadly speaking, economic as well as human rights considerations. It is only fair to state, however, that other IFI members may very well resist this line of reasoning. Some may argue that our negative vote or abstention on human rights grounds raises serious questions of compatibility with an IFI charter. Others may be encouraged to condition their participation on what we would consider to be “political” grounds, citing our action as a precedent. For example, the Arab countries might raise matters concerning the Palestinians or the allegations they have made elsewhere concerning Israel’s human rights practices in the occupied territories. We should consider whether or not it would be possible and in our interest to seek amendments to the charters to include human rights considerations. Our interest in promoting human rights will be best served by adherence to the following guidelines: 12 Presumable reference to the last paragraph in section III(B)2. above.
