With reference to the diversion limits, I may state that the investigations made by the War Department showed that those prescribed were the least consistent with due regard to the health of the large population affected by the matter. The material reduction in flow through the Sanitary Canal in 1925, when it averaged about 8,250 cubic feet per second, caused by low lake levels, developed dangerous sanitary conditions, and has conclusively shown that reduction below the amount named in the permit, cannot safely be required until the sewage treatment plants in the course of construction by the city, are further advanced. The authorizing of an instantaneous maximum not to exceed 11,000 cubic feet per second was due to the fact that at times the flood discharge of the Chicago River is as high as 10,000 cubic feet per second and that the flow through the canal should then be large enough to produce a slope characteristic of a flood of that volume. Otherwise, the sewage carried by the river will be swept into the lake and pollute the city water supply. The supply is not filtered, and such pollution would be so extensive that it could not be counteracted by chemical treatment. The permit issued by the Secretary of War provides for the installation of controlling works to prevent such flood discharges into the lake but the execution of the complete program required by the permit will be very costly, and it is felt that the installation of sewage disposal plants should have first attention in order sooner to reduce diversion. For these reasons, the paragraph of the permit relating to the controlling works does not require the installation of these works until 1929. Preliminary investigations concerning the installation have been made and it is expected that detailed plans will be prepared during the ensuing year. No difficulty in the completion of these works prior to the expiration of the permit is anticipated. In connection with the question of progress made toward the reduction of diversion, I may state that the permit of March 3, 1925, assigned supervision of the program for installing sewage treatment works to the District Engineer at Chicago. He has recently reported that the progress made by the city in carrying out the program is satisfactory. It is understood that the schedule of expenditures adopted for this purpose by Chicago is as follows:
