550 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement back on any of these objectives could lead to dispute. The leaders of the armed forces, for example, would not willingly accept either a sub­ stantial cut in the military budget or reduced investment for indus­ tries of military significance. The Party apparatus itself, influenced by the lower ranks where there is direct contact with popular pressures, would be reluctant to sacrifice prospective gains in living standards. Failure to achieve satisfactory rates of growth could produce resistance to further outlays in foreign aid or bring into question Khrushchev’s economic reorganization. 39. There are likewise some purely political issues which may have divisive effects. The Soviet ruling groups would be reluctant to see a return to the systematic use of terror. The question of the control of the secret police is of widespread concern and would become paramount in case Khrushchev’s mastery were ever placed in doubt. There must be some in positions of influence who are concerned with what seems to them the downgrading of Soviet authority in the Bloc, as represented by toleration of the Gomulka regime in Poland and the increasing weight of China in ideological and policy matters. There may be others who question Khrushchev’s policy of alliance with “national liberation movements” in underdeveloped areas on the ground that such a policy increases the danger of war arising from clashes with Western interests, and involves support of bourgeois movements which cannot be used to promote Communism. 40. Khrushchev’s late arrival at supreme power (he is now 64) will make the prospect of a new succession struggle a lively, if seldom discussed, factor in inner Party maneuverings. As he grows older it will be difficult to separate policy issues like those discussed above from the succession question. Thus major tensions will probably con­ tinue to be present within the Soviet body politic despite the stabili­ zation of power at the top, and these will from time to time affect the face which Soviet policy presents to the outside world. Attitudes in Soviet Society 41. The post-Stalin leadership set out to effect a basic improvement in the attitude of the Soviet people toward the regime. The relaxation of police terror and the greater attention to living standards served this end. The greatest material gains so far have been made by the peas­ antry, but a continuing improvement of urban standards over the next few years, particularly in housing, is also promised. In terms of its standing with the population as a whole, the regime is probably stron­ ger now than it was five years ago. We believe that the measures which have produced this improvement will be continued. 42. Soviet society continues nevertheless to be marked by substan­ tial areas of discontent. There exists, and will probably continue to exist,
