108  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
MR. ALLEN DULLES
1. Each year, as you know, the Planning Board undertakes to 
review our Basic National Security Policy. Last winter’s review, based 
on a series of discussion papers, extended from February into May; 
our current Basic Policy (NSC 5707/8) having been finally adopted on 
June 3, 1957. Whereas it is not proposed, this year to undertake such an 
arduous review procedure the Planning Board has already spent five 
meetings in ground work for the annual review.
2. This work has been based upon the new “Estimate of the World 
Situation”, produced by the Intelligence Community on February 26, 
1958. We consider this National Intelligence Estimate most significant 
and serious; and the Director of Central Intelligence deserves great 
credit for the superior job done. Each Council Member will find its 
contents necessary background information to the basic policy review 
before us. I personally feel that it is a part of my duty to assure that so 
basic an intelligence appraisal is studied by the Council Members.
3. The Planning Board’s consideration of this Estimate has been stim­
ulated by a novel procedure. During the last two weeks, we have asked 
men outside of Government, who have very broad experience and high 
intelligence, to read the Estimate and sit down for an afternoon of discus­
sion with the Planning Board on major problems affecting our national 
security. These men included General Gruenther, former Assistant 
Secretary Bowie, former Under Secretary of the Army Bendetsen, former 
High Commissioner McCloy, and former Chairman of the CEA Arthur 
Burns.
4. I am going to ask Mr. Dulles first to express in his own words 
what he considers the most significant changes between this Estimate 
and the “Estimate of the World Situation” made last year, and also to 
call attention to any other significant part of the Estimate that occurs 
to him.
MR. DULLES
5. The Planning Board has developed, in the course of its consid­
eration of the Estimate during the last month, a great many significant 
points. On the blue sheets which are before you we have picked out 
five of these points for discussion today. I will read each of these points, 
and ask for comments. It will be of great help to the Planning Board 
in drafting the revision of our existing Basic National Security Policy 
(which we hope to be able to present to you about May 1st) to have the 
benefit of your views on the current World Estimate, whether or not 
they coincide with it.
cc:	
Messrs. Lay
	
Gleason
	
Smith
