506
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
“public relations advantage” by refusing to accept the draft treaty. “Is-
rael,” Sadat stated, “is asking for concessions in Egypt unparalleled by
any other state;” Egypt, he felt, had “given Israel everything.” Simi-
larly, Sadat countered Byrd’s argument that reopening negotiations on
treaty language posed “danger” by stating that “he would prefer to see
the text unravel than accept a treaty which heavily damaged his posi-
tion or President Carter.” As currently drafted, the treaty for Sadat was
“against the aspirations of the Egyptian people” and he could not agree
to it. The Embassy transmitted a full summary of this meeting in tele-
gram 25977 from Cairo, November 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780492–1036) Analyzing the meeting later on
November 29, U.S. Ambassador to Egypt Hermann F. Eilts observed
that he had “never” seen Sadat “as emotional or upset as he was
today.” “Sadat,” Eilts continued, “is clearly disturbed about what he
considers as unfair pressure on him to accede to our request” to agree
to the treaty. To explain Sadat’s resistance, Eilts proposed eight expla-
nations: realization of Egyptian “isolation” following Baghdad, the
“vacillating” Saudi role, “total distrust” of Begin, a “conviction” that
the Israelis “ have no intention of moving expeditiously on West Bank/
Gaza” and intend to “interpret Camp David Framework as requiring
no more than Begin[‘s] self-rule plan,” “annoyance” at “unhelpful
statements,” annoyance at settlement issues, “frustration” that the
United States “does not really understand his problems in the Arab
World,” and annoyance that the United States “seems to consider him
to be line of least resistance whenever Israelis take hard stance.” (Tele-
gram 25978 from Cairo, November 29; National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, D780492–1029)
The following day, November 30, Byrd met with Israeli Prime
Minister Menachem Begin for 90 minutes in Jerusalem. He conveyed to
Begin Sadat’s reservations with the draft treaty text, especially his ob-
jection to Articles IV and VI. Prefacing his remarks by stating that he
understood Begin’s domestic political situation, Byrd emphasized the
need for Egypt and Israel to “avoid public statements that poisoned
[the] atmosphere” and continue their dialogue. “The U.S. could not ac-
cept a take it or leave it attitude on the part of either side.” Byrd empha-
sized that “there must be a target date for elections and there must be a
resolution to the West Bank/Gaza problem.” In response, Begin stated
that the Israeli Cabinet had rejected the idea of a timetable for elections
“because Israel did not have the power to make that come to pass itself,
and because it presented a ready-made excuse for Egypt to abrogate the
treaty.” Begin, however, agreed with Byrd’s suggestion that the re-
maining differences between Egypt and Israel could be resolved by
“reasonable men.” In a separate meeting with Byrd, November 30, Is-
raeli Minister for Foreign Affairs Moshe Dayan (who was “clearly dis-
comfited” by the idea of reopening text negotiations according to the
