296  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
3. As I informed him at our last meeting, Indian Ambassador was 
that day discussing with Department carrying out in US responsibilities 
of GOI set forth in our agreed announcement. Those discussions were 
quickly and successfully concluded and Ambassador informed Depart­
ment that Embassy of India was immediately undertaking to discharge 
its functions in this regard.
4. I had given him foregoing information as further evidence that 
my government was faithfully carrying out obligations it assumed in 
issuing agreed announcement. As I had told him repeatedly, and as 
agreed announcement confirmed, all Chinese in US who desired to 
leave were free to do so. Furthermore my government promptly took all 
necessary action so that GOI might undertake in US, at earliest possible 
date, functions provided for under agreed announcement. My govern­
ment was taking every possible action faithfully and expeditiously to 
fulfill obligations assumed under agreed announcement.
5. On other hand, I had only very limited information as to extent 
his government was fulfilling obligations which it had assumed under 
agreed announcement. In first place, although my government acted 
immediately to permit GOI undertake in US its responsibilities under 
agreed announcement, I did not have any information whether Gov­
ernment of the UK was yet able to carry out its responsibilities in his 
country. I hoped he could give me definite information in this regard.
6. I said I was also disturbed by fact that at our last meeting he did 
not give me any additional information concerning further appropriate 
measures being taken by his government so that 19 Americans still in 
jail could expeditiously exercise their right to return. Principal reason 
that it took us so long to formulate and issue agreed announcement was 
not only due to fact that his government refused release all Americans 
detained in his country, but also because he had refused even to state 
how long it would take before all Americans could be released. However, 
he had said that if we could agree on and issue agreed announcement, 
it would not only be possible to release a number of Americans imme­
diately, but that this would also facilitate release of the others. He had 
assured me that his government would act promptly to complete review 
of these additional cases. We had agreed on word “expeditiously” in 
agreed announcement, Chinese equivalent of which he explained meant 
“very quickly.” Although I had not been satisfied with lack of an express 
statement on when all Americans would be allowed to leave his country, 
I finally accepted his assurances that time would not be long.
7. Nearly two weeks had now passed since issuing of agreed 
announcement. Of twenty-­two people on whom he had told me action 
was being completed to permit their departure, nine had come out, and 
we looked forward to early arrival of the others. However, with respect 
to 19 others I have still heard nothing. I was beginning to be concerned
