Special Session on Disarmament
1169
haustive catalogue of disarmament procedures and warned that if the
SSOD were to base its work on this document, the conference would be
unable to reach conclusions. The US (Sloss) shared this opinion, but
saw some encouraging signs of pragmatism, resulting probably from
Yugoslav influence. The Netherlands (Bruyns) cited a covering memo5
which indicated that the draft was intended to assist the Non-Aligned
in preparing their replies to the UNSYG and not to limit their scope.
The FRG (Ruth), referring to its recent consultations with the Yugo-
slavs, viewed the Non-Aligned as open to consultation with the West,
but Belgium (Onkelinx) warned that the Non-Aligned might be more
receptive to Soviet initiatives than Western ones and that an alliance be-
tween the East and the Non-Aligned might easily arise at the SSOD.
6. The UK (Edmonds) said first PrepCon had gone as well as could
be expected and noted that handling of disarmament issues at Fall
UNGA would have considerable impact on the SSOD, perhaps dis-
tracting interest from PrepComs.
7. Canada (Hammond) said his government believed SSOD’s
success or failure would depend heavily on content of final document
of the session, and degree of consensus it had gained. For this reason
Canada was proposing in its reply to SYG the establishment of a
drafting subcommittee at the May meeting to begin work immediately
on the final document. France (Mistral) questioned whether the
PrepCon’s mandate included such activities and other Delegations (US,
UK) pointed out disadvantages of drafting too early, as this might lead
to debate over language rather than content and interfere with national
re-examinations of arms control issues in preparation for the SSOD. A
UK proposal that allies begin work on a Western preliminary draft for
use at an appropriate future time, perhaps the 3rd PrepCon, found
wide support. Delegations also agreed that the scope of the final docu-
ment, which all recognized as inevitable, be neither too general nor too
specific and that Western collaborative effort would be necessary to en-
sure the production of a suitable text.
8. The FRG (Ruth) stressed the need for the intensification of allied
consultations in preparation for the SSOD. A UK suggestion for further
discussion of the Non-Aligned paper (para 5) and of Canadian pro-
posal for a drafting subcommittee (para 6) was widely supported. The
Netherlands indicated that such discussion might appropriately be
held first in the PolAds. The chair (Pabsch) stated that he would pass on
in his report to the NAC the consensus of the meeting calling for a spe-
cial meeting of the PolAds in the second half of May devoted to these
issues.
Perez
5 Not found.
