102  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
a. A nationally conducted program, using all available commu­
nications media, and working through all agencies of the Federal 
Government (the Agricultural Extension Service, etc.) is proposed. In 
addition to general information on nuclear effects, the program would 
urge that citizens provide themselves with fallout shelters; would pro­
vide wide dissemination of information and methods by which private 
citizens may provide in their homes fallout-­protection for themselves 
and their families (1) by adapting existing cellars or other structures or 
(2) by incorporation of family shelter in new residential construction; 
and would publicize the Government’s own program of incorporation 
of shelters in public buildings, prototype construction, etc.
-----$6 Millions (annually)
b. Working primarily through adult education programs of the 
States, provide courses in “Problems of Living in the Nuclear Age.” 
These would be designed to reach at least one person in every family 
in America. Generalized courses would be accompanied by personal­
ized technical advice in planning fallout construction for those who 
wish it.
-----$3.5 Millions (first year)
-----$13 Millions (annually thereafter)
c. On a pilot area basis, find and support local leadership in neigh­
borhood groups. Leadership would be provided with sufficient profes­
sional and other support to organize a community shelter effort. This 
program is regarded as a complement to the research program in that 
it would yield data on the extent to which local participation can be 
stimulated by this means. It is also regarded as a complement to the 
intensive pilot study program of five representative cities.
-----$3 Millions (first year)
-----$6 Millions (annually thereafter)
$Millions
4. Elements of a Base for Rapid Acceleration
$1.5 (annually)
The measures proposed above are designed to promote shelter 
construction without extensive financial participation by the Federal 
Government. The Committee recognizes, however, the possibility that 
these measures may be ineffective and that the Government might 
later wish to initiate a shelter program on an accelerated basis. Many 
of the other recommended measures will assist in preparing a base for 
rapid expansion, but in addition it is believed that specific attention 
should be given to the preparation of a “shelf” of plans and informa­
tion which might save months of delay in an emergency.
Specific items proposed are:
(1) Identification of materials, equipment and manpower
-----$1 Million (annually)
