528  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
— President Bush wants to use the momentum we have generated 
and move boldly to build on our achievements.
— This means focusing not just on numbers but on measures that 
can truly enhance strategic stability. There are two specific ways to do 
this:
— The first is to eliminate mobile MIRVed ICBMs—­now, before 
both sides have so much invested in these systems that their elimina-
tion will be very difficult.2
— The second is to eliminate, over a longer period of time, the 
remaining land-­based MIRVs—­namely those in silos.3
— I will outline these concepts briefly and would like to discuss 
them in more detail at the Ministerial, including whether we can begin 
to make these stabilizing improvements in the current negotiations. But 
let me emphasize that we do not want to do anything to delay initialing 
START at the Washington Summit.4
— We think a ban on mobile MIRVs could be incorporated into 
START without delay. The US is prepared to cancel the rail-­garrison 
system in exchange for the elimination of your mobile SS–24. I know 
you have several SS–24 trains deployed, but the US also has a devel-
oped system, a budget to deploy it rapidly, and the political ability to 
proceed if necessary.5
— We are also prepared to eliminate silo-­based MIRVs over a lon-
ger period of time, although we recognize that this proposal would 
require extensive negotiations. But if the two sides are able to go down 
this deMIRVing path, it would be possible to side-­step remaining 
differences about constraints on heavy ICBMs in the current START 
negotiations.
— If you see merit in an approach along these lines, we should 
work the details at the Washington Ministerial at the end of which 
President Bush and President Gorbachev could announce an agree-
ment to ban mobile MIRVs in START, to initial the START agreement 
at the Washington Summit, and to immediately turn to the longer-­term 
goal of eliminating land-­based MIRVs.
— On the other hand, if you cannot agree to a ban on mobile MIRVs 
in the current START agreement, perhaps the two sides could announce 
at the April Ministerial that we would begin talks, immediately after the 
2 Bush placed a checkmark to the left of this point and underlined: “eliminate 
mobile MIRVed ICBMs—­now.”
3 Bush placed a checkmark to the left of this point.
4 Bush placed a checkmark to the left of this point.
5 Bush placed two checkmarks to the left of this point and underlined the first 
instance of “SS–24.”
