Chapter 5, May–June 1990  755
are ready to give a pledge not to give it the capability to operate at 
intercontinental distances. We can consider a reference to refueling. “In 
any manner” would appear to cover all possibilities, therefore it would 
appear that a reference to refueling would be redundant. With regard to 
naval aircraft, this can be discussed in the context of naval forces.
Bartholomew: Don’t import the problem of naval Backfire from 
CFE into the START declaration. You haven’t addressed the problem of 
omission of naval aircraft. This allows you to change air force Backfire 
to naval Backfire, as you have for hundreds of other aircraft. This is 
hilarious. Both range capability and number are important to us.
If you want naval force reductions, you are not helping your cause 
here. This is not much of a cause, and you are not helping it. Why don’t 
we resubordinate the F–16s in Europe to the Navy? In fact, we can move 
the same number of B–52s to our Navy as there are naval Backfire in the 
Soviet Union. How do I answer this problem when I get hit with it?
Karpov: Allow me to say the problem of naval armaments has 
been on the agenda for a long time. We have long proposed naval 
negotiations. The US opposes this. As you proposed, naval aircraft are 
not covered by the mandate of CFE. More specifically, we are ready to 
make a pledge not to give the TU–22M intercontinental capability in 
any manner. We are ready to pledge not to increase the number above a 
limit, but we cannot include naval aircraft, these are not on the agenda 
of CFE. If you are ready to begin negotiations on naval aircraft, we are 
ready to begin today.
Bartholomew: SLCMs are naval armaments, SLBMs are naval 
armaments, what you are saying is contrary to your mission on the eve 
of the summit, which is finding solutions to problems.
Karpov: We are proposing to find a mutually acceptable solution. 
You say it is no good. If we take the same attitude, we will not make 
progress on anything. We have proposed a solution, and are saying we 
are ready to allay your concerns.
Bartholomew: You must know such a crass attempt to use such a 
sensitive issue as Backfire to leverage naval armaments talks cannot 
succeed, and can only hurt other efforts. And you have no word on 
other issues?
Karpov: If we do not arrive at any solution here, that would not be 
a disaster for the summit.
Bartholomew: Take another look at the draft declaration.4 We gave 
you a considered effort to find a solution. You have not responded on 
the fatal flaw—­that any aircraft can be omitted by calling it naval. This 
issue has to be resolved.
4 Not found.
