606 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII passing the countries of Eastern Europe, including Yugoslavia, rather than those elsewhere such as North Vietnam, North Korea, and Cuba. 5. The key point of the Brezhnev Doctrine in terms of its presentday [garble—relevance?] to Afghanistan is the reference to “socialist country”. No Soviet official has ever argued that Afghanistan has been a “socialist country” (or, for that matter, ever experienced “a capitalist order”), or is presently calling on the “socialist commonwealth”, as was done in the case of Czechoslovakia, to react to Afghanistan. Before the April 1978 revolution which overthrew Daoud, Afghanistan was seen as essentially feudal, and after the revolution as embarking on the path of “socialist orientation”. Soviet ideologists make a sharp distinction between “socialist countries” and those bearing the label of “socialist orientation”: The Deputy Chief of the Central Committee’s International Department, Ul’yanovskiy, writing in the authoritative CPSU theoretical journal Kommunist last July, defined the latter group of countries as “those, not yet being socialist, (but) which reject capitalism as a system, carry out fundamental social changes facilitating and hastening their possible transition to socialism.” Among the Third World countries assigned by the Soviets to this category besides Afghanistan (which Ul’yanovskiy last July noted had “recently joined them”) are Algeria, Benin, Burma, Guinea, PDRY, Congo (Brazzaville), Syria, Tanzania, Angola, Madagascar, Mozambique, Ethiopia, and Jamaica. Candidate Politburo member Demichev, in discussing the international situation in his February 1 election speech, alluded to both kinds of Soviet allies, stating that “the fraternal countries of socialism, (and) the developing countries which have adopted a socialist orientation, are proceeding (forward) shoulder to shoulder along with us.” 6. If Afghanistan does not fit neatly into the Brezhnev Doctrine as it is usually understood, then is there some doctrine-in-the-making in which it does fit, as some Western observers are speculating? Are there statements by Soviet leaders or ideologists since the Afghanistan invasion which put the Soviet action in a Marxist-Leninist framework of more general applicability? Obviously, here arises a dilemma for the Soviets. Domestically, and for Communist parties abroad, there exists a need to provide some transcending ideological rationalization for the Soviet action in Afghanistan, just as Brezhnev felt compelled to provide some rationalization at the PZPR Congress in November 1968 following the Czech invasion. Since the entire Soviet system derives its legitimacy from Marxism-Leninism, the millions of Party faithful who serve as props for that system have to be served up some such interpretation of events such as Afghanistan. The danger in the absence of such an interpretation is further ideological erosion. 7. At the same time, the very interpretation which the leadership provides can only further heighten anxieties abroad, raising a dilemma.
