210
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
exceptions. Content of agreed understanding was described by partici-
pants on both sides at various times during the discussions in varying
details and nuances and therefore posts should await receipt of defini-
tive version.
4. Earlier versions of the communique´, though not the final one in-
cluded an EC sentence emphasizing that no exceptions should be made
to initial tariff offers. Discussion of exceptions revolved around con-
tinued EC Commission statements that they would seek to avoid any
exceptions and the US noting that some exceptions beyond those man-
dated by US law would no doubt be necessary.7
Hinton
7 In an October 6 memorandum to Blumenthal, Solomon and Bergsten wrote: “The
touted US–EEC Agreement on Tariffs covers up a major discrepancy. The Committee has
agreed only to cut by 26% over five years, whereas Strauss envisages a 44% cut over a
longer period. The EC has made no commitment to cut after the first five years. In addi-
tion, there has been no agreement on exceptions. Hence there is less progress than meets
the eye.” (Carter Library, Anthony Solomon Collection, 1977–1980, Chronological File,
Box 2, 10/1/77–10/17/77)
62.
Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of
Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1
Washington, September 27, 1977
SUBJECT
Upcoming Report on the Steel Industry from the Council on Wage and Price
Stability (CWPS)
This memo supplements our phone conversation on Tuesday
afternoon.2
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles
L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [7]. No classification marking. A stamped nota-
tion reads: “The President has seen,” and Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Charlie—If
report is accurate, let criticism come. J.C.”
2 Carter did not speak to Schultze by telephone on Tuesday, September 20, or
Tuesday, September 27. Carter and Schultze did speak by telephone on Monday, Sep-
tember 26 from 11:33 until 11:35 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s
Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation was found.
