408  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
94.	
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National 
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, October 6, 1978
SUBJECT
War Mobilization Exercise; NIFTY NUGGET
I want to call your attention to a crisis management contingency 
exercise which begins full play next week and which should prove 
instructive about our capabilities to mobilize for general war.
NIFTY NUGGET is the largest mobilization exercise held since 
World War II. It includes all military services and 27 civilian agencies, 
boards, and commissions. The Joint Chiefs of Staff and most of the prin-
cipals of the agencies are participating in key decisions at some time 
during the four-­month scenario which is largely compressed in the 
period October 10–30.
The level of activity varies from simple staff reviews of mobiliza-
tion plans to extensive measures in the case of the services and some 
departments. The Army is calling a small number of personnel to active 
duty from every reserve unit planned for deployment in the first thirty 
days. The Air Force and Navy are contacting all reserves by mail or 
telephone to ascertain their location and availability. The Selective Ser-
vice System has been preparing for the exercise since June because 110 
days are required for it. As an example of civil agency play, HEW will 
be tasked to receive American civilians and dependents in a simulated 
evacuation from Europe.
A number of decisions by you are assumed in the early period of 
play. The scenario has you directing industrial preparedness measures, 
activating the Selective Service System, and asking Congress to approve 
military induction before the outbreak of hostilities. Later, a number 
of NSC/SCC decisions are required for allocating military resources 
among theaters of operations.
The purpose of the exercise is to determine the adequacy of existing 
plans, systems, and procedures. Interrelationships among OSD, JCS, 
unified and specified commands, the military services, and civil agen-
cies will be evaluated. NIFTY NUGGET will be conducted with real 
world data collected prior to the exercise and played against require-
ments in current war plans to determine limitations and shortfalls in 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Defense/Security, 
Russell, Box 113, Mobilization Scenarios: 7/76–10/78. Confidential. Carter initialed the 
upper right corner of the memorandum. An unknown hand wrote beneath Carter’s ini-
tials: “return to Stebbins.”
