282
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
McHenry is somewhat more optimistic than his West European coun-
terparts, and we will not know just where we stand until consultations
are well under way. The situation could be made much worse if Cuba
gets a SC seat. All agreed that we should redouble our efforts in opposi-
tion to Cuban election, stressing that a vote for Cuba is a vote for
Iran.7 (S)
2. Public Posture. Today is Unity Day. Is there something more we
should do or say? Jody Powell noted that the joint communiqué with
the British will come out today.8 If it is perceived that we cannot get full
British cooperation on voluntary steps with Prime Minister Thatcher
in Washington, the credibility of allied support will collapse. There is
generally a sense of relaxation in the U.S. public and in world opinion,
some of which has been generated by our own statements reflecting
optimism. The SCC discussed a possible statement by the Vice President
or Jody Powell which would focus on the renewed Iranian calls for
trials. We could state that trials would be regarded as a grave provoca-
tion for which Iran would bear full responsibility. A firm restatement
of our previous policy might be desirable at this point. Jody Powell
will coordinate with State about the wording, timing and location of
such a statement. State cautioned that a Swiss report indicates that
Khomeini has already agreed that there will be no trials, despite what
is being said publicly. Our statement should be carefully worded to
avoid disrupting that.9 (S)
3. Trials. Lloyd Cutler will convene a small group to examine the
question of how we can tread the line between protecting the legal
rights of the hostages while not legitimizing Iranian trials. The SCC
noted the President’s comment that it is important to lend legitimacy
to any trial of the hostages.10 (C)
Political-Military Issues:
[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
3. Strategy. Dr. Brzezinski noted that [less than 1 line not declassified]
we may not be able to get Chapter VII sanctions in the UN. Are we on
the right path? As time passes, our posture might appear increasingly
flabby. We need to ask if we may be inoculating the Iranians against
our pressure at every stage, and they might be adjusting to it as they
go. We did jolt them at one point by indicating flatly that severe
7 Carter approved this item with a checkmark.
8 For text of the December 18 White House statement on Thatcher’s visit, see Public
Papers: Carter, 1979, Book II, pp. 2267–2268.
9 The statement was issued on December 18. See ibid., pp. 2268–2269.
10 Carter inserted and double underlined the word “not” between “important” and
“to lend.”
