First Responses • to discourage unofficial Americans, businessmen, and others from packing up and running, • to accuse the Soviets of what we know—or suspect—they are doing, and expose their tawdry record toward Islam, • to get our story across in every way possible—by increasing outlets and expanding resources, • by showing the kind of determination and strength that will enable our friends to help us assert ourselves. (U) Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, November 27, 1979 1. UN Security Council Meeting on Iranian Situation: After consultations throughout the day which resulted in an agreed scenario,2 the UN Security Council met this afternoon to hear statements by Secretary General Waldheim and the President of the Council (Palacios of Bolivia). Characterizing the conflict between Iran and the US as a grave threat to international peace and security, Waldheim said the US was deeply concerned with the seizure of the Embassy and the detention of diplomatic personnel “in violation of relevant international conventions.” He noted that Iran seeks the redress of perceived injustices and abuses of human rights by the previous regime. Waldheim said it would not be appropriate for him to make detailed proposals at this time, but that he was certain the parties want to see an end to the present situation. He appealed for maximum restraint and avoidance of any actions which could “further inflame the situation.” The Council President then read an agreed statement in which he noted Waldheim’s letter of November 25 calling for an urgent Council 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14. Secret. Carter wrote “Cy, J” in the upper right corner of the memorandum. 2 A draft of the agreed-upon scenario contained the following five points: (1) that deliberations before the Security Council would begin November 27; (2) that simultaneously all U.S. personnel would be permitted to leave; (3) that the Secretary-General would establish an international commission to investigate allegations of human rights violations in Iran; (4) that the United States would recognize the rights of the Iranian Government to assert in U.S. courts its claims to assets frozen by the United States; and (5) that both Iran and the United States agree to abide by international diplomatic norms. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 30, Iran
