Human Rights human rights improvements.14 In the case of Argentina, our concern was communicated by the Secretary of Treasury at the IBD annual meeting.15 No final decision by the Argentine government in this matter has yet taken place. In several other instances, demarches have been made to indicate that we are considering human rights factors as we evaluate IFI loans in keeping with the President’s stated intention of using our voice and vote in the IFI’s to promote human rights. In the case of Paraguay, the demarche produced a promise on the part of that government to respond favorably to the IAHRC request to visit Paraguay. The formal invitation, however, has not yet been offered. Other instances in which general demarches were made include Malawi and the Philippines. Other demarches are in process for Indonesia, Guatemala and Romania. These actions have given substance to the Administration’s human rights policy in the IFIs and thereby improved the chances for the success of our legislative strategy. However, continuing evidence on this policy is clearly necessary if the legislative strategy is ultimately to be successful. 5. Security Assistance As noted, the Arms Export Control Board is now in operation with D/HA participation and initial efforts to define policy guidelines are underway. In relation to our effort and in conjunction with the PRM, a summary statement will be available June 7. In addition, D/HA, in fulfilling its legislative requirements, has continued to advise on arms transfers to countries with human rights problems. The reports now being prepared for each country also will discuss ways in which security assistance programs can be modified in order to help implement our human rights policy. 6. Cooperation with the Congress H has been actively engaged in security assistance, State Department authorization, IFI activities, and economic assistance legislation. In addition H has worked closely with other bureaus and the White House in pressing for the consideration of the Genocide treaty. The Deputy Secretary opened the Senate ratification hearings on the
