184  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
40.	
Presidential Directive/NSC–241
Washington, November 16, 1977
TO
The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Attorney General
The Secretary of Commerce
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Director, Office of Management and Budget
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy
The Administrator, General Services Administration
The Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs and Policy
SUBJECT
Telecommunications Protection Policy (S)
1. The President has reviewed the results of the NSC Special Coor-
dination Committee’s consideration of the PRM/NSC–22 study and 
has reached the following conclusions.2 It is the President’s intention 
that this directive establish a national policy to guide the conduct of 
USG activities in and related to security of telecommunications.
2. The National Telecommunications Protection Policy shall consist 
of the following major elements:
a. Government classified information relating to national defense 
and foreign relations shall be transmitted only by secure means.
b. Unclassified information transmitted by and between Govern-
ment agencies and contractors that would be useful to an adversary 
should be protected.
c. Non-­governmental information that would be useful to an 
adversary shall be identified and the private sector informed of the 
problem and encouraged to take appropriate protective measures.
d. While the private conversations of U.S. citizens do not appear 
to be the targets of foreign intercept activity at this time, this judgment 
should be kept under close and continuous review and the American 
people informed of any change in this conclusion. As a precautionary 
measure, the responsible Agencies should work with the FCC and the 
common carriers to adopt system capabilities which protect the privacy 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski 
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 83, Communications: 8–12/77. Top Secret; Sensitive.
2 For PRM/NSC–22, see Document 8.
