1154
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
the Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment3 at this time since that would be
impossible with the present Congress and politically unwise. This Op-
tion B needs fine tuning from the Interdepartmental Group; what we
should do in the coming months is to warm up our relationship with
Argentina. Perhaps in 1981 we will be able to have an initiative on the
military side, including training at least.
Hodges said he was encouraged by Christopher’s summation, for
the trends in human rights are important. The Commerce Department
also supports Option B.
Aaron said that we needed a specific program to improve our rela-
tions. The options as stated in the paper are too static. Our goals should
be first, to maintain a nuclear relationship that will result in Argentine
accession to the Tlatelolco Treaty; secondly, a commercial policy that
makes clear that we want the hydroelectric contract and will pursue it;
third, there is no possibility of changing the military legislation now;
fourth, there is a major OAS vote coming up and how we react will be a
signal to them. We should relate that to the policy issues. Overall, we
should have a tone that rests somewhere between Options B and C,
leaving out for the time being any change in our military supply policy.
The Inter-departmental Group should set up an 18-month program
with benchmarks for our progress and for Argentine performance.
At the same time Aaron noted that there is no reason to improve re-
lations dramatically with Argentina now directly after they have stuck
their finger in our eye on the grain issue. We should make clear our irri-
tation with them at this time and then pick up the pieces with a new ad-
ministration when it comes into office. We will not be able to get very
far with Videla. We should take the opportunity of the new adminis-
tration, however, for turning a new page. If we move to improve our
relations with them now we will simply not have the respect of the
Argentinians.
Claytor said that he saw Option C as the desirable goal, less the re-
peal of the Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment which would be impos-
sible. We should do all that we can with the Argentine military to re-
store relations between our two armed services. At the moment we are
driving them to the Soviets. The Soviets are our greatest global problem
and we are simply letting small things interfere with our dealing with
this problem.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to non-proliferation.]
3 The Humphrey-Kennedy Amendment to the 1976 Foreign Assistance Act prohib-
ited the supply of U.S. military equipment to Argentina and Chile after October 1, 1978.
