September 18–December 16, 1978
229
—I would welcome any suggestions Your Majesty may have with
respect to my forthcoming talks with the Saudi leadership. I would also
appreciate your thoughts about my forthcoming meeting with Presi-
dent Assad. We recognize that Jordan cannot totally ignore Syrian
views and, while we do not expect to convince Syria at this stage to
support the Camp David agreements, we will do all we can to maintain
our dialogue with Syria and to persuade it to keep an open mind.
—Finally, I would be happy to explain any of the specific parts of
the Camp David framework which Your Majesty may wish—in partic-
ular the paragraphs dealing with the West Bank/Gaza problem and the
Palestinian role. In this connection, I would welcome Your Majesty’s
judgment about ways in which moderate Palestinians, in particular
Palestinian leaders in the West Bank and Gaza, might be brought to see
the opportunities which the Camp David agreements offer to them.
III
Secretary Vance continued: Let me now go through the specific
questions you asked. (NOTE: The sequence below, in which the Secre-
tary repeated the King’s questions and responded, does not correspond
exactly with the sequence in which the King posed them.)
One. Jordan’s role in maintaining security and whose security?
Security is not for the inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza. The
document provides for the establishment of a strong local police force.
There is an unwritten understanding that the local police will be re-
sponsible for internal security. They could discharge this function
without assistance from others with the exception of certain situations
when they might need some additional assistance. Therefore, there will
need to be drawn up procedures covering the roles of the police and
other security forces in the document setting up the self-governing
authority.
Two. The question of Israeli withdrawal of armed forces to speci-
fied locations.
According to Israel, they have approximately 10,000 troops on the
West Bank, comprising three brigades plus other forces. In a tentative
and unfinalized figure, they would withdraw roughly 4,000 of their
troops to Israel and the remaining forces would be deployed to loca-
tions away from population centers so as not to interfere with the daily
activities of the inhabitants. We were shown maps on their locations.
There would also be retained two or three installations including
“black boxes” of technological instruments to give early warning.
There would be a total of 12 to 15 military installations containing some
with only 15 or 20 people. All would be laid out very promptly with
their precise locations designated. It should be emphasized that this is
