1955 331 these Americans who desired return. I hoped at next meeting he could give me definite answers on these suggestions. I believed it could be done quickly and need not involve our assistants. I added if he had any specific questions or suggestions regarding US implementation agreed announcement I certainly would be glad consider them. I hoped his suggestions would be concrete and specific, as mine had been. 25. I said I found it difficult understand his position regarding dis­ cussion of higher level meeting. I could not see how higher level meeting in itself was practical matter between our governments. Both our gov­ ernments had agreed to have the two of us meet here as representatives of our respective governments to discuss “practical matters” as second part our talks. It seemed to me his suggestion meant that we had decided, even before we had discussed these questions, that it was not possible for us to make progress and therefore higher level meeting must be called. I did not see why we needed to be so pessimistic. I had faith and hope when I came, and I hoped he had same, that two of us as Ambassadors representing our governments would be able to make progress these two questions. I still had such hope and would earnestly strive best my abil­ ity realize that hope. Question higher level meeting could arise only after our talks here had been concluded. My government not prepared now to discuss or agree to what would happen after our meetings here had been completed. Therefore we did not agree higher level meeting was suitable subject discussion item two. 26. I said I frankly puzzled by his statement on my suggestion we should include renunciation of force as a subject for discussion. I had not made demands on his government and I had framed subject for discussion in just as neutral terms as I could. I simply wanted call attention fact subject framed in somewhat different manner than he implied in his statement. I said I expected have more to say this sub­ ject at next meeting. Similarly, I had tried to frame subject of account­ ing for US personnel in as neutral a manner as I could. What I had in mind was entirely separate from what we had discussed under agenda item one. I would be prepared at our next meeting to discuss it with him in detail. 27. Wang said he agreed to continue discussion these subjects at next meeting. He said this did not mean he agreed to inclusion these two subjects under agenda item two and he thought order for discussion of subjects still open and no definite arrangement made. 28. I agreed and suggested meeting Wednesday, October 5. 29. In discussion over press release Wang suggested statement eliminating all mention implementation agreed announcement and saying simply we discussed agenda item two. When I said it would be more appropriate use same announcement used last time, he countered
