334 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement taken into your country for it is definitely known from prisoners who were subsequently returned that such movements did take place. Fur­ thermore, there have been cases of Americans, not known to my gov­ ernment to be in your country, and later revealed by your government to be held there. 6. My purpose in reviewing all of these facts is not to engage in controversy with you over them but only to point out that the author­ ities in my country and the families of these men have a sound basis for believing that at least some of these persons have been in territory under your control outside of Korea. 7. I therefore, am giving you a list of the names of these persons with the request that your government conduct a thorough investiga­ tion to determine whether any of them are in your country or whether your government is in the possession of any information whatever con­ cerning any of the persons listed. 8. I am not unmindful of the fact that early in these talks you gave me a list of various categories of Americans in your country, but it is possible that some persons on this list may be considered by your authorities to be in a different category or they may otherwise have information with regard to them. 9. I am also giving you a list of the names of the 11 Naval and Coast Guard personnel lost off Swatow whom we discussed last year in the hope that since that time your authorities may have obtained some information with regard to these men. 10. I do not ask that you give me any reply with regard to this mat­ ter today but only that in due course you inform me of the results of your government’s investigation. Gowen 252. Telegram 798 from Geneva1 Geneva, September 28, 1955, 11 p.m. 798. From Johnson. 1. One of questions we face for next meeting is whether by that time there have been any releases of remaining 19 Americans and what we do 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–2855. Secret; Limited Distribution.
