World Hunger and Food Policy 815 The World Food Conference was convened by the United Nations in response to the harmful effects of the world grain shortage of 1973–74. This article reviews the status of the institutions set up as a result of the Conference and finds that limited progress is being made toward Conference goals. The World Food Council functions as a forum for an international dialogue on food and agriculture, although it is generally recognized that the Council’s limited authority is incommensurate with its responsibility for overseeing food policy and the implementation of international food programs. Negotiations continue on a new International Wheat Agreement, though at a slower pace than the developing countries would like. The OPECand OECD-funded International Fund for Agricultural Development went into operation in December 1977, but it is expected to disburse only a relatively insignificant amount of money in its first year. The key finding of this study, then, is one of modest progress amid continuing problems in international efforts to cope with global food needs. Despite these problems, however, a joint effort to meet global food needs will probably be one of the few instances of productive cooperation between LDCs and the OECD states. This record of perceptible progress could serve as an incentive to keep the North-South dialogue going, even if, as now seems likely, the general tone of North-South relations becomes more strained during the coming year. The World Food Council The World Food Council, the food policy oversight and evaluation body for all agencies affiliated with the UN, was established in 1975 on the recommendation of the World Food Conference. After a slow start, in which ministerial sessions became mired in bloc politicking, the Council issued a comprehensive food policy statement in 1977.2 Both the developing and the industrialized countries consider this document, the Manila Communique´, to be a good compromise on issues of food production, security, aid, and trade. The Manila Communique´ recommends a commitment by the developed countries to provide $8.3 billion in agriculture production aid annually. This is the amount of external assistance that the Council Secretariat estimates is needed to achieve a 4 percent rate of growth in food production in developing countries. Traditional and potential new food aid donors are requested to increase their food aid commitment to ensure that a minimum annual level of 10 million tons in cereals is available for delivery in 1977–79. The Communique´ recommends establishing an international system of nationally held grain reserves. It calls on all countries, particularly those that are developed, to stabilize, 2 See Document 221.
