3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 274 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI PNG Exchange: The Secretary noted that Dobrynin has preferred not to accept our offer to show him the film on the Avdyunin case,3 expressing instead a desire to talk privately about our mutual understanding on how such cases are handled. Dobrynin said he understood from Vasev that the movie made it clear that the episode was set up for the purpose of making the movie, that the questions asked were leading and insinuating and that, in short, there was no doubt in their minds that this entrapment was arranged in retaliation against the Moscow cases. The Secretary said there was no question in our minds about the man’s guilt, that the film was merely confirmatory of what he had been doing. Shulman added details in support of this point. (Although Dobrynin had earlier expressed a desire to talk over the “rules of the game,” he now fenced and asked if the Secretary or Shulman had anything to suggest, showing reluctance to initiate discussion.) After a further repetition of the contradictory views of the Avdyunin case, it was agreed by both Dobrynin and the Secretary that the matter should be “cooled down.” It was also agreed that it would be desirable to avoid publicity, although Dobrynin protested that the US sometimes engaged in one-sided publicity. He warned that this would create a temptation to Moscow to publicize matters that had previously been handled with restraint. Ponomarev Group: The Secretary expressed sadness over the episode in Los Angeles in which a member of the group had been splattered with salad thrown by a demonstrator.4 He added that additional security would be provided at subsequent stops. Dobrynin expressed appreciation for the Secretary’s sentiments, which he said he would transmit to Ponomarev when he saw him in New York February 1. In general, Dobrynin said, the trip had been successful. Middle East: The Secretary said that he would give Dobrynin a report on the results of the Sadat visit during the coming weekend. He said, in response to questions, that the Political Committee was considering resumption of its activities, with Atherton serving as a gobetween, that the main issue involved concerned Palestinian repre- 3 See footnote 4, Document 73. 4 Boris Ponomarev, Candidate Member of the Politburo of the CPSU and Secretary of the Central Committee, met with Vance on January 26. Ponomarev headed the Supreme Soviet Delegation that visited the United States. The two memoranda of conversation are in Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 8, Supreme Soviet Visit, January 22–February 2, 1978, and Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 10, Vance EXDIS MemCons, 1978.
