prescribe the terms and time of the payment to be made by the nation “which may
remain in possession of the provinces of Tacna and Arica.”
The Arbitrator decides that no part of the Peruvian Province of Tarata is included in the
territory covered by the provisions of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon; that the territory
to which Article 3 relates is exclusively that of the Peruvian provinces of Tacna and
Arica as they stood on October 20, 1883; and that the northern boundary of that part of
the territory covered by Article 3 which was within the Peruvian Province of Tacna is
the River Sama.
THE SOUTHERN BOUNDARY—CHILCAYA
The southern boundary of the territory covered by Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon is
stated therein to be “the ravine and River Camarones.”
In this relation, it should be noted that Article 2 of the treaty provided for the cession
by Peru to Chile in perpetuity of “the territory of the littoral province of Tarapaca, the
boundaries of which are, on the north the ravine and River Camarones.”
It thus appears that by both these articles the boundary between the Peruvian Province
of Tarapaca, ceded absolutely to Chile, and of the territory of the Peruvian provinces of
Tacna and Arica to be continued, as stated, in the possession of Chile, is given simply
as “the ravine and the River Camarones.” There appears to be no dispute as to this
boundary between the mouth of the river. Camarones at the Pacific Ocean and
Arapunta, the junction of the two principal tributaries, the Ajatama coming in from the
northeast and the Caritaya coming in from the southeast. Chile contends that the
Ajatama is the true continuation of the Camarones and claims the line of the Ajatama to
the point where it is joined by the Rio Blanco and from that point draws a line to the
Bolivian frontier which is based largely upon what Chile asserts to have been the legal
or traditional boundary line between the territories of the Peruvian provinces of Arica
and Tarapaca. This is in accord with a Chilean decree of May 4, 1904. Chile, however,
asks that an expert commission be appointed by the Arbitrator to fix the line.
Peru expresses her intention of abiding by the decision which the Arbitrator may
consider to be appropriate and equitable, but is understood to claim the river Caritaya
as the true boundary from Arepunta to its source, apparently maintaining that that
source intersects with the Bolivian frontier.
Between these two lines lie the valuable borax deposits of Chilcaya, over which there
has been a serious controversy between rival private claimants. This dispute may have
been influential in bringing about the delimitation decree made by Chile in 1904. Much
of the evidence introduced in this record consists of reports and opinions which were
pertinent to the controversy between private litigants. In the litigation, it was held in
1904, by the Chilean court in Arica that the plaintiffs, claimants of the borate mines of
