1184  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
16. Emergency Employment of Military Resources in Civil Defense. The 
execution of essential military tasks is the primary mission of the mil­
itary forces. Forces not required in the execution of or capable of exe­
cuting essential military missions during and immediately following 
the initial attack should be prepared to assist civil authorities in main­
taining law and order and in other essential civilian tasks when civilian 
capability is inadequate. Additionally, elements of the retaliatory forces 
and air defense forces should be prepared to assist in the civil defense 
role when no longer required for their primary role.
Research and Development
17. A vigorous research and development program should be 
maintained in order to improve the continental defense system and to 
counter improving Soviet technological capabilities for attack. Of par­
ticular importance are the following (without indication of priority):
a. Early warning capability against enemy aircraft and missiles, 
by radar and other techniques; and the rapid dissemination of such 
warning.
b. Reliable conversion of warning information into prompt deci­
sions and responses.
c. Effective defenses against ICBM’s, submarine-­launched ballistic 
missiles, very high-­ and very low-­altitude aircraft attacks, and aircraft-­
launched stand-­off missiles.
d. Reduction of vulnerability to electronic countermeasures.
e. Improved anti-­submarine capabilities, to include detection, sur­
veillance, identification and destruction.
f. The detection, surveillance, identification, and destruction of sat­
ellites and space vehicles.8
g. The rapid detection and identification of biological warfare 
agents.
Civilian Functions
18. Continuity of Essential Wartime Functions of the Federal 
Government.9 Plans and relocation facilities needed to ensure the conti­
nuity of essential wartime functions of the Federal Government should 
be completed and maintained in a state of operational readiness at the 
earliest time practicable.
a. Plans should provide a ready and certain system of attack warn­
ing, reaction and decision-­making, with adequate communications and 
provision for conducting emergency operations.
8 Tests involving the destruction of a satellite or space vehicle shall be made only 
with the specific approval of the President. [Footnote is in the original.]
9 Studies having a bearing on this subject are in preparation by OCDM and by the 
Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (see NSC Actions Nos. 
2300–­d and –­f and 2247–­b). This paragraph will be reviewed by the National Security 
Council following submission of the OCDM study. [Footnote is in the original.]
