MY DEAR WHIGHAM: I understand that Mr. Lamont is expected here sometime in July and, if it would suit his convenience, I should propose to convene a meeting of the Consortium Council at this office for Monday, July 28. As soon as we have agreed the date of the meeting with Lamont I should advise the other groups and invite them to give me as early notice as possible of any items they desire to place on the agenda.

I may take this opportunity of reminding you that the Consortium Agreement, which was for a period of five years, will expire in October, 1925. It may be expedient, therefore, at our meeting to consider in advance what step, if any, should be taken to provide for its renewal. It might take the form, for instance, of a resolution for its renewal without any limit of time, subject to the right of any Group to withdraw on giving six or twelve months’ notice. I have taken advantage of the return from China of Major Nathan, C. M. G., who has recently been appointed Chairman of the British and Chinese Corporation, and of the presence of Mayers, to ask them to formulate what in their view constitutes the chief difficulties in the way of industrial progress in China. I enclose an advance copy of the memorandum which they have prepared. With the permission of my colleagues on the Council I should propose to ask these gentlemen to be present at our meeting in July for the purpose of answering any questions which the Council may wish to put to them. Their proposals, which, it will be noted, involve the elimination of Residuary Participation, are intended to secure greater individual freedom of action on the part of the Peking Representatives of the Consortium. I reserve the expression of any opinion on the merits of the proposals until their authors have had an opportunity of explaining them to the Council. As soon as the date of the meeting is fixed I propose to communicate a copy of the Memorandum to each of the other Groups who will, no doubt, wish to discuss this very important matter with their respective Governments.
