Human Rights tween our actions in the IFIs and specific human rights developments in other countries. More basically, we have generally tried to avoid linking particular actions on our part—in the IFIs or in any other context—to particular human rights improvements in the recipient country. This kind of quid pro quo approach to human rights, while it has a superficial appeal, would in our judgment tend to permit and perhaps even encourage other countries to engage in cosmetic human rights changes designed to fetch a particular response from us. If, for example, we made it plain to a country that we would support IFI loans if a substantial number of political prisoners were released, it is possible that the country would detain prisoners for the purpose of subsequently releasing them in order to satisfy the condition we had laid down. This type of manipulation is an inherent risk of a quid pro quo approach. This is not to say, however, that because we have resisted the notion of trading specific actions on our part for specific human rights improvements elsewhere, any particular actions on our part can fairly be characterized as ineffective. It is necessary to consider all the steps we have taken to promote human rights. We think it is clear that the totality of our actions—including our actions in the IFIs—has increased the costs of repression and helped to create an atmosphere in which human rights progress is more likely to occur. Our actions have brought about a very substantial increase in world awareness of human rights issues. This new consciousness not only helps curb existing human rights abuses; it also acts as a deterrent to new violations. While it is not possible to say that any particular step we have taken has led to any particular result, it is probably the case that if we appeared to be reluctant to bring human rights considerations to bear in a prominent context—such as the IFIs—we would call into serious question the depth of our human rights commitment. Thus, if we are going to continue to be effective in raising human rights consciousness and nurturing an atmosphere in which human rights progress is more likely to occur, it is important that we continue to bring human rights considerations to bear in a conscientious, coherent way on all of our bilateral and multilateral assistance programs. Even though no one-to-one relationship can be shown between our actions in the IFIs and specific human rights developments, it is useful to consider developments in each country as to which we have taken some IFI-related actions on human rights grounds. A countryby-country synopsis is included in Appendix A.11 While improvements 11 Appendix A, “Synopsis of IFI-Related Human Rights Actions by Country,” is attached but not printed.
