174  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
15. To illustrate point, Wang said release airmen excellent exam­
ple. Last year someone proposed that Chinese specify definite time 
when airmen might be released. Longest sentence was Col. Arnold’s 
of ten years. Impossible for Chinese last year to specify time required 
airmen’s release. Only after airmen had proven good conduct and 
talks at Ambassadorial level agreed upon, then Chinese advanced 
time airmen’s release in accordance their own juridical procedures. 
He said they had indicated Chinese would review remaining cases 
Americans and permit their return as soon as possible. Impossible 
for him to give in any more beyond this limit. He would not say any­
thing which his government could not do. If he promised anything, 
his government would live up to it without question.
16. In reply I asked Wang if he would disagree my statement very 
important we each understand what we were agreeing to and that we 
not agree to words which have different meaning to our two govern­
ments. I was very disappointed no change in position of Wang evident 
to enable us arrive at clear understanding what we meant by words we 
were using.
17. Wang agreed clear understanding essential or agreement would 
be empty. He said arrangement designed to resolve problem return our 
respective nationals and it had been made clear his side would promptly 
inform us on results review as soon as agreement reached and his gov­
ernment would adopt measures review other cases as soon as possible. 
He was sure if this arrangement were made known to American public 
it would be clear that question was settled.
18. I replied if this arrangement were made public American 
people would expect Americans return from China mainland “very 
quickly” as he had phrased it, but Chinese idea and my government’s 
idea concerning “very quickly” were quite different. Result this mis­
understanding would be expectations of American Government and 
people would not be realized and this would lead to increasing mis­
understanding and deterioration of relations rather than improve­
ment that we both hoped for.
19. Wang said improvement or deterioration depended on action 
by both sides not one and if I insisted on definite period of time he was 
afraid we could not reach agreement.
20. I then made statement in which I said I understood from him 
that as reviews cases Americans completed and cases settled the Ameri­
cans would be able promptly to return. In August 11 meeting he had told 
me reviews completed on some cases involving Americans and it was 
my understanding their cases had been settled. That was two weeks ago 
and none of these Americans had been able to depart. If I understood his 
position it was that these Americans would not be able to depart until 
we had reached agreement here. I found this fact very hard to reconcile 
with my understanding Americans were able to depart upon settlement
