Human Rights 381 A further deterioration in our relations with Brazil over the issue of human rights could detract from our ability to deal effectively with that country on many important issues (including continuing nuclear discussions). The Brazilian Government has recently asked us for confirmation that we do not intend to submit a human rights report because security assistance will be terminated.16 Our reply should address whether a report will be required because of any other program, i.e., OPIC. If a policy decision were made to defer the submission of a human rights report on Brazil and the four other “OPIC only” countries, Congress might nevertheless specifically request such a report concerning any of them. It would, of course, be very difficult and probably counterproductive to resist a specific Congressional request for a report on any country. In this regard, a request made under section 502B(c) of the FAA would have to be honored within thirty days or we would have to suspend all security assistance in the pipeline (including licensed exports under commercial contracts). Bureau Views HA, L and H favor including reports on the OPIC only countries. These bureaus believe submission of the reports is the action most clearly consistent with current law, and will avoid a potentially damaging dispute with Congress (especially in seeking a favorable outcome on the pending OPIC authorization bill). L further points out that submission of a report would remove an impediment to other forms of continued U.S.-Brazilian cooperation, including FMS cash sales of spare parts, which the Brazilians desire but which they cannot now request without openly acquiescing in a human rights report on Brazil. Once a report had been submitted, Brazil could decide what, if any, U.S. assistance it wished to request and we could decide on an appropriate response based on the merits of any proposed transaction. (A question has also arisen as to whether failure to file a human rights report would bar Brazil from purchasing military equipment 16 See footnote 4, Document 91. In telegram 10185 from Brasilia, December 13, 1977, the Embassy noted that the Brazilian Foreign Ministry’s Department of the Americas had requested written confirmation from the Carter administration that a human rights report on Brazil would not be submitted to Congress. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770464–0332) In telegram 10534 from Brasilia, December 27, the Embassy repeated the request for written confirmation, noting “further delay in responding to Itamaraty’s [common reference to the Foreign Ministry; Itamaraty is the palace that houses the Ministry] request may indicate to the GOB that the USG is still debating the consequences of a human rights report on Brazil, and that we will not honor their specific request not to be considered for security assistance.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770482–0263)
