1979  707
would be that they would be investing further in vulnerable silo-­based 
missiles. (U)
Admiral Turner noted that with this step we are entering the world 
of mobile ICBM’s, [less than 1 line not declassified] The President countered 
that it was his understanding that the system being proposed would be 
verifiable given provisions costing a tiny fraction of the overall cost of 
the system. Harold Brown added that the verification provisions embod-
ied in the system add no more than $3 to $4 billion to the overall system 
cost. He then noted that while Admiral Turner’s point was a good one, 
he derived a different conclusion. Specifically, the inevitable vulnera-
bility of fixed silo based systems implies a need to go mobile. But if 
mobile strategic missiles are going to be introduced, we should set the 
standard for verification of such systems. The President noted that we 
have committed ourselves to making mobiles verifiable. He noted his 
letter to Brezhnev on this subject, and Brezhnev’s reply.3 (S)
The President then said he accepts this basing mode but requires 
that any declaration concerning its costs, verifiability, or ability to cope 
with expanded Soviet threats must be reviewed by the involved agen-
cies and approved by him personally. He said that they must all agree 
on a single position on each of these issues, and that Harold should take 
the lead in developing each position. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski said that we need background material for explain-
ing this decision, including appropriate Q&As, by Friday. The President 
noted that we probably can’t explore the cost question by Friday,4 but 
should develop tentative positions on the issues as rapidly as possi-
ble. Dr. Brzezinski noted that, in view of the closeness of the Summit 
with Brezhnev, we really need to have this material in hand by COB 
Thursday, September 6. Admiral Turner remarked that the group really 
didn’t have major differences bearing on the appropriateness of pro-
ceeding with this basing system. Dr. Brzezinski said that we will have 
an announcement worked out by Friday. The President stated that he 
would make the announcement, and suggested that it be done at the 
Pentagon. (C)
3 Reference is to Carter’s March 4, 1977, letter to Brezhnev in which Carter called 
for “the rapid conclusion of a formal agreement between us on those issues on which 
both of us seem predisposed to agree,” and included among those issues: “c) provisions 
for mutually satisfactory verification” and “j) elimination of mobile intercontinental bal-
listic missiles.” (Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 13) In his 
March 15 response, Brezhnev stated: “The issue of mobile launchers for ballisitc missiles 
of intercontinental range naturally should find its solution in the agreement in question. 
Earlier we proposed to agree that over the period that agreement remains in force the 
sides should refrain from deploying land-­based mobile ICBM launchers.” (Foreign Rela-
tions, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 14)
4 September 7.
