Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 647 The rest of the cases in Category IV either involve NATO countries or raise significant problems if they are deferred. In addition to the British and Dutch cases, we have: Saudi Arabia—Improved HAWK Program ($1.1 billion) This case is a commercial contract for the expansion of the Saudi I–HAWK air defense system and represents the largest segment of a package. Most of this package consists of commercial contracts, licensed by State Department’s Munitions Control, and requiring Congressional notification because of dollar value. There is a small portion of the package that is an FMS case. Because of its size ($8 million), Congressional notification is not required. However, we intend to report this portion to Congress, as supplementary information to the Munitions Control notification. The contract for this deal was signed last June and the equipment is now ready to ship.14 It will attract Congressional criticism. The case has already been discussed informally with some Congressmen and staff. Although they understand that it was initiated during the last administration and that our ability to make adjustments is limited, they look to the administration to review the matter. Delay will subject the contractor to late delivery penalties. Iran—TOW Missiles Launcher Kits ($40 million) The previous Administration approved a proposal to permit Iran to assemble TOW anti-tank missile launchers. A $40 million contract was signed by the US company in January 1976 and a license was issued to ship $9 million in equipment the first year. The current export license request involves the second shipment of the contract and is valued at approximately $12 million. The purpose of this system is to improve Iran’s defense capability against the large force of Soviet-supplied tanks concentrated in Iraq. Deferral would involved disruption of an on-going assembly line.15 Singapore—Armored Personnel Carriers ($40 million) The previous Administration approved the sale to Singapore of 246 armored personnel carriers (APC) and related vehicles. The contract was signed in March 1976 and deliveries are scheduled to begin in April. These vehicles will be used to modernize Singapore’s Army by replacing the existing fleet of Cadillac Gage Commando vehicles. We previously provided Singapore with 220 14 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “?” 15 In the last sentence of this paragraph, Carter lined through the “d” in “involved.” His written comment in the right-hand margin is illegible.
