228 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II tion, as well as other relevant factors, in other countries and of the possibilities for action. This effort is presently underway at both the Department of State and posts abroad. While certain specific objectives are already apparent—such as an end to the state of siege in Chile, the release of the Myongdong defendants in Korea,4 majority rule in Rhodesia, increased emigration of minorities from Eastern Europe—others will only emerge after additional analysis. The pursuit of certain human rights objectives, such as majority rule in Rhodesia and implementation of the Helsinki Final Act, will also serve to enhance political and other policy goals. E. Recognizing the Costs of a Human Rights Policy and Relation to Other Foreign Policy Objectives. As the promotion of human rights becomes one of our basic foreign policy tenets, we are faced with the task of relating human rights policy to our other major foreign policy concerns. It has been, and will continue to be, a difficult task. For we are adding an emphasis on human rights to an already wide range of policy goals, many of which, in the nature of things, come into conflict with one another at times. Day by day, country by country, human rights considerations are being weighed against other foreign policy objectives, such as the maintenance of NATO strength and solidarity, strategic arms limitation, peacekeeping in the Middle East, control of nuclear proliferation, and normalization of relations with the PRC, Vietnam and Cuba. While there is no necessary inconsistency among these objectives, they will, on occasion, compete for primacy. Resolution of the conflict between or among them will depend on the facts of the situation at hand, which should be addressed with openness and candor. There will clearly be instances in which efforts to achieve our human rights goals will have to be modified, delayed or curtailed in deference to other important objectives. But by the same token, making human rights a principal goal of our foreign policy means that promotion of human rights will not be viewed as a lesser objective. Even when other objectives outweigh human rights, our policies will be implemented in a manner that promotes human rights to the extent possible. 4 Reference is to 13 Catholic priests and dissidents detained by the South Korean Government in order to head off anti-government protests. The announcement of their detention was made on March 1 during Mass at the Myongdong Cathedral in Seoul. (“South Korea Detains 13 Catholic Priests, Dissidents in Crackdown,” The Los Angeles Times, March 2, 1977, p. B–7) The Department of State issued a press release on December 31 indicating that the ROK Government had released all but one of the Myongdong prisoners. The remaining prisoner—former Presidential candidate Kim Dae-jung—had been moved to a hospital for medical treatment. (Department of State Bulletin, January 1978, p. 39)
