September 18–December 16, 1978
303
personally studied. Ambassador Atherton might go over these ques-
tions with the Egyptians and the President would do the same with the
Israelis. Then he would respond to King Hussein. He wanted to en-
courage the King. He also said that the Saudis appeared to be taking a
somewhat constructive role and were not an obstacle at present. If the
Saudis see the United States working actively in the West Bank and
Gaza, this should help. We do not intend to go over our answers with
either Egypt or Israel, but we will discuss the questions that King Hus-
sein has posed.
Minister Boutros Ghali then explained recent developments in
Egyptian thinking. He had personally spent twelve hours explaining
the Camp David agreements in Parliament. There were many questions
reflecting a fear that Egypt might become isolated in the Arab world.
There was criticism of the idea of a bilateral, separate peace with Israel.
Many deputies pointed to the fact that the Egyptian constitution starts
by referring to Egypt as part of the Arab world. He was asked about the
correlation between the two Framework Agreements. After the first
Agreement is achieved, what pressure would be left on Israel to carry
out the West Bank and Gaza agreements? Why had the letters on the
settlements not been received? Many felt that Jerusalem was important.
The most difficult question of all was that of the correlation between
the two peace agreements. There must be some synchronization of
steps.
Boutros Ghali said that President Sadat had spoken of parallel
movement in the two agreements when he was in Morocco. He spoke
of a de facto link. If Egypt is to obtain some advantages in Sinai, the Pal-
estinians in the West Bank and Gaza should also gain some advantages.
If the treaty is signed between Israel and Egypt, then the military gov-
ernment in the West Bank and Gaza should also end. Otherwise Egypt
will be isolated. There was some concern expressed in Egypt about
what would happen to the two billion dollars that Egypt receives from
Saudi Arabia.
Egypt’s prestige is also at stake. There were more than seventy
questions raised in Parliament, some of which were minor, but many of
which were serious. Opposition came from the government’s own part,
not just the left and the right. There is a fear of isolation. Even in Mo-
rocco, and with the close ties between Egypt and Morocco, there was
criticism of the idea of a separate peace. This comes back to the need for
some correlation between the Sinai talks and the West Bank and Gaza.
There should be some clarification of the settlements question before a
treaty is concluded. We need some gentlemen’s agreement with Israel.
If everyone agrees that Egypt should be helped to play a leadership role
in the region on behalf of moderation, then practical advantages for the
Palestinians are important.
