Options Identified
257
—lack of full control over important sub-centers of power such as
the students occupying the US Embassy and the ethnic and tribal
minorities in Azerbaijan, Kurdistan, Khuzistan, and Baluchistan.
The hostage crisis was originally a welcome opportunity for the
regime to reassert its strengths in the face of mounting weaknesses.
As it is developing, the crisis may actually have demonstrated a weak-
ness, i.e., inability to control the hostages’ captors.
Thus, Khomeini’s government is in a period of crucial testing. The
situation is not out of control, but the trend is clearly in that direction.
The Islamic Government and Its Tasks
How much is accomplished over the next 6 to 12 months toward
building institutions for the Islamic republic will determine its longev-
ity. If little or nothing is accomplished, the relative strength of the
opposition forces will be greatly increased.
A significant amount has already been accomplished. The adoption
of the constitution in the referendum sets the institutional shape of the
Islamic republic. Elections for president and parliament will be held
soon. Clerics and their allies will be the chief victors.
But what the new government’s policies will be is not much clearer
now than when Khomeini first proposed an Islamic republic. In theory,
the regime seeks the elimination of Western cultural and social “domi-
nance” and its replacement by Islamic values. Khomeini has been par-
ticularly interested in dismantling the Western-inspired legal appara-
tus. In general, though, the government must undertake a major effort
before its policies will be fully defined.
Two other tasks require urgent attention. One is the economy. We
know little about what an Islamic economy would be. Iran’s leaders
have suggested that all relationships which are not “beneficial” will
be eliminated, without defining that key word. It will certainly involve
a realignment of all international contacts, with a strong emphasis on
self-dependence. The regime probably will curtail consumer imports
and may be prepared to embark on fairly radical land and agricultural
reform programs. Oil income will, of course, continue to be the essential
ingredient to make the economy run.
Even though economic policies may not be clear, the problems are.
The food supply in the coming months is uncertain, unemployment is
growing, and business and relevant government activity are stagnant.
From what can be inferred from government policy, it appears unlikely
that these difficulties will be improved soon. Prolonged failure to make
progress in the economic realm would spur discontent with the regime.
The other area where government action is needed is the reassertion
of central authority over and the depoliticizing of ethnic and tribal
minorities. Historically, Iran has always had strong centers of decentral-
