846  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
In semi-­mobile operations mode, the number of communications 
packages would be reduced to 2–4 per potential successor. These pack-
ages, while not fully mobile, would be moveable and would permit 
some limited communications while on the move. The successor could 
move at random between sites using designated vehicles or aircraft.
—Designated Unprepared Sites. Again, sites should be located in 
such buildings as motels, schools, armories or small federal, civil, or 
military installations.
In the stationary operating mode, a site would be activated at ran-
dom by dispersing communications and support packages to the site. 
Successors and their support team would then be dispatched to the 
activated site in designated vehicles or aircraft.
In the semi-­mobile operating mode between 2 to 4 semi-­mobile 
support groups, communications and support packages per successor 
would move at random between sites. Teams would have limited com-
munications while on the move (in designated support vehicles).
—Fully Mobile Operations. Ground-­mobile operation can be 
achieved by having the successor joint a fully-­equipped caravan in a 
relatively low-­risk area with little possibility for exposure to fall-­out. 
Three caravans per successor were used in the analysis. The teams 
relied on fuel and food caches in the area; nevertheless, their endurance 
would be limited. (Other full mobile deployment modes have been 
evaluated in previous analyses. Alternates such as submarines, fully 
airborne and shipborne operations were excluded for reasons of cost, 
limited communications and reduced endurance.)
Evaluation
The five basing modes were then evaluated on the basis of the fol-
lowing parameters:
—Survivability, which depends on the threat (Soviet weapons 
availability, yield, and accuracy); the enemy’s intelligence capability to 
detect and acquire an evading successor; U.S. protective measures con-
sisting of hardening; and the extent of location uncertainty which can 
be introduced through secrecy, proliferation of sites, or mobility.
—Endurance characteristics, requiring the deployment modes to 
be able to operate essentially self-­contained and be able to endure for 
30 days during trans-­attack. Endurance depends on the availability of 
essential life support, electric power, and fuel.
—Operability, which is the ability to perform the required func-
tions. (The more mobile a ground-­based system, the greater its poten-
tial for operability degradation.)
—Costs.
