1978 493 • Cancel the Roland surface-­to-­air missile program (an international project), the advanced scout helicopter program, and ¼-­ton, 2½-­ton, and 5-­ton truck procurement, and buy 83 fewer UH–60 Blackhawk helicopters. • In the Marine Corps, eliminate the XM–1 tank program, modernization of LVT–7 amphibious tractors, helicopter reliability improvements, and procurement of laser designators for precision guidance. • In tactical air, eliminate one USAF wing, all three Navy carrier-­ based ELINT squadrons, all five USAF Special Operations squadrons, and half of the Marine Reserve A–4 squadrons. • Cancel procurement of the GBU–15 electro-­optical glide bomb, new Navy carrier-­based cargo aircraft needed to replace obsolete C–1s, and cut the combined A–10 and F–16 production rate by 15%. • End all V/STOL programs, including both the Navy’s exploratory program and the Marines’ AV–8B. • End development of the EF–111A, the Air Force’s only radar jamming aircraft. • End several advanced radar and reconnaissance programs. • In naval forces, retire 42 ships early (thus prolonging instead of reversing the decrease in size of the fleet), and cut ready Marine amphibious lift to less than a Division/Wing team (i.e., 85%). (A dozen years ago Soviet lift was 6% of ours; it is 18% today; it would be 40% of ours by 1986 at this level.) • Fund 3 fewer ships, do not modernize the missiles on our nuclear cruisers, cut P–3 procurement from 12 to 10, and do not buy anti-­ship Tomahawk. • End 5 major naval R&D programs (Captor, advanced lightweight torpedo, replacement for the P–3, the ASMD missile, and SIRCS). • In mobility forces, end the KC–10 program, modernize only 60% (vs. all) of the C–141 fleet, and cut our overall strategic airlift capability (e.g., by 17% for a deployment to Iran). • In R&D, cut real growth rates from 10% to 7% in basic research, and from 5% to 3% in exploratory development, through FY 81, with no real growth in later years. • In C3, eliminate CINCLANT, CINCPAC, and USCINCEUR airborne command posts, cancel the digital data link for AWACS, and defer 6 AWACS from FY 81/2 to the end of the NATO buy, have only four E–4Bs rather than 6, cancel the over-­the-­horizon radar project, slip the IOC of Navstar GPS by 2 years, and the IOC of the Clipper Bow radar ocean surveillance satellite by 3 years. Though the roughly 4% reduction in funding from the basic to the decremented level may seem modest in comparison with the obvious
