Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1980
797
convey to the public several broad themes, which show clearly the con-
trast between you and Reagan. The war/peace theme is the obvious
one, but in the discussion of foreign affairs you may want to relate any
specific comments to two or three broader themes, contrasting your
foreign policy with Reagan’s. By emphasizing such broader themes, the
public will get a better sense of your statesmanship, in contrast to
Reagan’s sloganeering. To the extent possible, every comment on for-
eign policy should reflect the themes discussed more fully below.
The distinctive quality of your foreign policy is that it combines re-
spect for morality with the recognition of the importance of power in
world affairs. When you assumed office in 1977, you set yourself two
central tasks:
1. To improve America’s political position in the world, over-
coming the isolation in which America found itself after eight years of
Republican rule and fifteen years of the Vietnam war;
2. To improve America’s strategic position, after eight years of Re-
publican neglect of our strategic needs and some fifteen years of a sus-
tained Soviet defense effort.
As a consequence, you have succeeded in greatly improving our
relations with the Third World, in identifying America through your
human rights policy with the basic aspirations of our time (and this is
why you have a right to be optimistic in your historical vision), and your
various concrete policy successes reflect this progress (Panama, Zim-
babwe, Camp David, China, etc.). It is important that in your comments
you emphasize this theme, noting that Reagan’s administration would
be likely to produce again America’s global isolation.
At the same time, you have not neglected the dimension of power.
Here you have pursued a sophisticated policy of emphasizing arms
control with a long-term effort to improve our overall defense posture
(NATO modernization, RDF, MX, Trident, PD–59). Moreover, the nor-
malization of relations with China has also contributed to an improved
strategic situation for the United States. By moving forward with
SALT, you have held out the possibility of a greatly reduced or even
contained arms race, and that too enhances our security.
In effect, your foreign policy has been responsive to the fact that
we live in an age of complexity, and that the President has to make
careful and mature judgments, weighing carefully a variety of trade-
offs while avoiding simplistic slogans. You have done this throughout
by stressing the proposition that on the one hand America must positively
identify itself with global change (and thus also improve its own political posi-
tion in the world) and on the other hand remain strong, both through its
system of alliances as well as its own defense effort.
