486
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
170.
Article in the National Intelligence Daily1
[article number not declassified]
Washington, January 17, 1980
SITUATION REPORTS
USSR-AFGHANISTAN
Three weeks after the Soviet intervention, insurgent activity remains on
about the same level as before the invasion. ([classification marking and code-
word not declassified])
The rebels continue to cut vital lines of communication by felling
trees, seizing bridges, and opening floodgates on mountain streams.
They also are setting up ambush positions to prevent the movement of
troops and supplies. Army units cannot move along the main highways
without armored or air escort. In addition to harassing troop convoys,
the insurgents are disrupting the flow of food and fuel from the country-
side to the cities, activity that could bring serious winter shortages
unless the Soviets undertake a major resupply effort. ([classification
marking and codeword not declassified])
The Soviets evidently have no active plans to pursue rebel forces,
but appear satisfied with reacting to flash points of insurgent activity
and maintaining control of the key cities—Kabul, Jalalabad, Qandahar,
Herat, and Mazar-e-Sharif. Opening of the major roads may require a
substantial commitment of additional ground and air support forces
to push the insurgents back into remote mountainous regions. ([classifi-
cation marking not declassified])
Military Movements
A Soviet airborne artillery regiment, which had been at Kokayty
airfield for the past two weeks, is no longer there and may have moved
into Afghanistan. [2 lines, classification marking, and codeword not
declassified]
Soviet forces are being airlifted into Ghowr Province to break a
rebel siege at Shahrak. The situation in the province is critical, and
Afghan units have been unable to move without air support. ([classifica-
tion marking and codeword not declassified])
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 81B00401R: Subject Files of the Presidential Briefing Coordinator for DCI (1977–
81), Box 8, Afghanistan Crisis—January 1980, NIDs. Top Secret; [codeword and handling
restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed is a map of Afghanistan. The full
version of this National Intelligence Daily was not filed with this collection. The article
printed here was found in this form.
