treatment. Furthermore, the Albanian Government is ready to
show all kinds of facilities to the installation of American capital
in Albania, as well as to accord concessions to American
concerns”.
The Department is aware of the difficulties which have been encountered in
our efforts to insure most-favored-nation treatment for American
corporations in Albania in spite of the fact that certain ones were invited by
the Albanian Government to submit offers for the development of the
petroleum resources of the country. On several occasions the representatives
of those corporations have been on the point of withdrawing from the field
but on each occasion the Albanian Government has urged them to remain.
…
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
The terms of the notes above referred to, reinforced by the declarations
made by the United States on March 2, 1923,13 in support of the principle
of the “open door”, and accepted by the Albanian Government without
demur, would seem to afford the United States a sufficient basis for
carrying on the relations between the two countries until a more propitious
moment should arrive. In order that the Government of Albania might have
no shadow of excuse on account of frequent changes of Ministry, lack of
organization, inexperience or otherwise, for not giving due weight to the
claims of the United States in their negotiation of treaties with the other
Powers, I ventured to address a note to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
under date of April 17, 1924, (a copy of which is herewith enclosed)
wherein was quoted that portion of his predecessor’s note of June 25, 1922,
relative to most-favored-nation treatment.14 I took this precaution after the
present incumbent, Ilias Bey Vrioni, had expressed to me the opinion that
“no one” had a right to see the text of a treaty until it had been ratified by
the legislative body.
The enclosed copy of the Albano-Italian Treaty of Commerce and
Navigation,15 with accompanying protocol and supplementary declarations
