1604  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
I stated that we did not look with favor on the plan because it 
would inevitably bring up the issue of the number of inspections with 
the Soviets unquestionably proposing a very low number, and with our 
side suggesting a number adequate for reasonable safeguard assur­
ances. I further stated that because of the possibilities of “decoupling 
effects” together with the general inadequacies of the Geneva system, 
for reasons explained by Dr. Killian, the number of on-­site inspections 
would necessarily have to be very high to satisfy us. I pointed out that 
the original Geneva report indicated over one hundred unidentifiable 
events, later data revised this to about one thousand, and the “decou­
pling” might raise the figure much higher. Additionally, it seemed to 
me that an argument over the number of inspections might place us in 
a bad posture in public opinion.
Lloyd then discussed the possibilities of agreeing to suspension of 
atmospheric shots only with a very simple and “veto-­proof” detection 
system coupled with a decision to study the underground and high 
altitude problems for a time, and come to an agreement in these areas 
when technology is further advanced. I supported this idea stating 
that I felt Macmillan’s suggestion to me at the conclusion of Saturday’s 
meeting, that such a proposal might be withheld until the Summit 
Conference, was an appealing idea. Lloyd said that he had proposed 
to Macmillan that the Geneva negotiators draft a memorandum set­
ting forth the areas of agreement and the areas of disagreement (the 
veto being the most important one) and refer the disagreements to the 
Summit Conference because the Geneva negotiators could not come to 
agreement. Lloyd left me with the impression he would press for this as 
a desirable procedure to be followed.
I then asked Lloyd to clarify remarks he made Saturday after­
noon concerning the “threshold”. He stated that the British felt that 
we were negotiating a complete suspension and in doing so recognized 
the detection system would not be absolute and that tests in the very low 
yields could not be detected but, nevertheless, they would be suspended 
under the agreement. Lloyd stated that it was his impression and con­
viction that if the Soviets on April 13 decide they will accept our pro­
posal then we would be foreclosed from any underground testing for 
the duration of the treaty. He thought that we could not now bring 
up the “threshold.” I stated his remarks on Saturday had led me to 
the conclusion that he felt this way, but that it did not represent our 
viewpoint as we felt the threshold problem was still to be discussed 
and concluded.
I think this represents a very important difference of viewpoint 
between the United States and the British which should be resolved 
promptly.
