Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Secretary Vance: They would be there to be helpful. President Carter: We still think that this could be a useful idea. Prime Minister Begin: This is not my idea. Egypt has nothing to do with Gaza. President Carter: They will be part of the negotiations. Prime Minister Begin: We can discuss Dayan’s idea. If we deal only with Gaza, and if Egypt drops all interests in the question of autonomy in Judea and Samaria, then we can consider this. President Carter: You talk of Egypt intervening in Judea and Samaria, but we agreed at Camp David that Sadat would negotiate if Jordan did not join the talks. This was discussed by us. You never objected to Sadat representing Arab interests. Prime Minister Begin: I never agreed. I only said Israel was ready to negotiate with Egypt alone, if Jordan does not join. This was to show our good faith. President Carter: I agree. What is the difference? Prime Minister Begin: We did not agree that Egypt will replace Jordan. Egypt cannot make peace for Jordan. President Carter: When Sadat sent a letter23 concerning the Arab role, you made no objection. Sadat is not trying to intervene in the West Bank. He is trying to help in the negotiations. Prime Minister Begin: This is a genuine misunderstanding. I have not given any commitment. President Carter: You have a right to object. Secretary Vance: We never suggested that the self-governing authority could declare independence. Prime Minister Begin: You should write that it is an administrative council. Secretary Vance: That can be added. Ambassador Evron: In one draft, the words administrative and council were included, and then they were dropped. Secretary Vance: This is not a big problem. Mr. Rosenne: The Prime Minister objects to dropping administrative council, and he objects to the reference to full autonomy for the selfgoverning authority. Camp David talks about full autonomy only for the inhabitants. The self-governing authority does not have autonomy. Secretary Vance: What is the difference? Mr. Rosenne: We should refer to the administrative council and the goal of autonomy for the inhabitants. The powers of the administrative 23 See Document 57.
