National Security Policy  975
thrown off military dictatorship in favor of regimes based on middle 
class support or, in a few cases such as Cuba, on “the street.” Between 
these two, a number of nations in the Far East, South Asia, and Middle 
East continue to depend heavily on military leadership and influence.
67. Basically, the test of political organization in the eyes of the 
newer nations is more and more the pragmatic one of whether it 
appears able to meet their problems of modernization, economic 
growth, and attaining national power. While democracy as a political 
theory has wide appeal in terms of its satisfaction of individual aspi­
rations, its appeal is also wrapped up with the image of power and 
material progress provided by the major Western democracies. On the 
other side the appeal of communism rests increasingly, at least among 
leadership groups, on the appearance it presents of a form of organiza­
tion able to produce rapid progress under conditions similar to those 
of the underdeveloped countries, as demonstrated in practice by the 
USSR and Communist China. In general, the traditions of underde­
veloped countries and the scope of the problems they confront incline 
these nations toward the use of state action. The most frequent result in 
practice will probably continue to be a mixture of native traditions with 
elements of both systems.
68. Communism has succeeded in some cases in identifying itself 
with nationalist and anticolonial movements and thus gained strength, 
particularly in the early stages of new regimes. Local Communists and 
the international Communist movement will in many areas continue 
to be able to attract adherents among the frustrated and dissatisfied. 
However, as Communist strength grows, it tends to arouse resistance 
among leaders who fear the threat to their own power. The chances of 
Communist or Communist-­dominated governments coming to power 
will be greatest where strong local Communist groups operate in con­
ditions of serious political, economic, and social instability and disloca­
tion. Such conditions are likely to be widespread in the underdeveloped 
areas for the foreseeable future.
Local Conflicts
69. There are a great many friction points scattered throughout the 
world that could produce local conflicts, international or internal, pre­
cipitated only secondarily, if at all, by the East-­West struggle. The Arab-­
Israel situation appears the most deep-­seated and serious of these; the 
situation in the Caribbean and Iraq may be even more explosive in the 
short term. Other possibilities in coming years are Cyprus, Ethiopia-­
Somalia, Indonesia-West New Guinea, the Pakistan-­Afghan tribal 
areas, and many local situations in Africa and the Arab States.
70. Yet there are factors tending to keep local conflicts from expand­
ing beyond manageable bounds. In most of these cases the forces
