1126  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
Attachment
Letter from Robertson to Bunker2
Washington, August 2, 1956
Dear Ellsworth:
You will recall that by the terms of the Agreed Announcement 
issued at Geneva on September 10 by the American and Chinese 
­Communist Ambassadors (Tab A), the Chinese Communists were com­
mitted to take measures to enable American nationals expeditiously 
to exercise their right to return to this country. After nearly eleven 
months, the Chinese Communists still hold eleven American nationals 
in ­Chinese prisons in violation of this commitment.
The Chinese Communists in the course of the Geneva talks, have 
offered various pretexts for violation of their pledge. Some time after 
the Agreed Announcement was issued, they raised for the first time 
the matter of Chinese prisoners who are serving terms in American 
penitentiaries. These Chinese criminals were not mentioned by the 
Chinese Communists in the course of the negotiations leading up to 
the Agreed Announcement. In our view the Agreed Announcement 
did not apply to them. However, in view of the belated attempt of the 
Chinese ­Communists to cite the imprisonment of these criminals as an 
excuse for their non-­performance of their obligations under the Agreed 
Announcement, the U.S. Government decided that it would afford the 
Chinese criminals an opportunity to avail themselves of the provisions 
of the Agreed Announcement if they so desired. A comprehensive 
survey was made by the Immigration and Naturalization Service of 
the entire prison population, Federal and state, of the United States. 
On June 13, the prisoners were informed by a circular letter that they 
would be given an opportunity to make a choice between obtaining 
a discharge from prison for the purpose of proceeding to mainland 
China, or to Taiwan, and remaining in jail until the completion of their 
sentences. A copy of the letter to the prisoners is attached as Tab B.
The United States decision was responsive to the strong and 
repeated representations of the Chinese Communists. However, the 
Chinese Communists have now abruptly informed us at Geneva that 
our release offer is a device to embarrass them and is not bona fide. They 
allege that the prisoners have been “screened”. They have requested 
the Indian Government, which represents the Chinese Communists in 
matters pertaining to the Agreed Announcement, not to interview the 
prisoners and to have nothing to do with our proposal.
2 Confidential. Drafted by McConaughy.
