World Hunger and Food Policy
659
oping countries cause sharp disagreements over how their demands
should be dealt with.
Should a period of chronic food scarcity ultimately occur, it would
bring considerably more formidable and dangerous threats. Antipathy
between rich and poor nations would intensify and the international
economic order would be subjected to tremendous stress as food-
deficient countries of varying economic power struggled to increase
their export earnings in order to pay for agricultural imports. If spi-
raling prices were to force more and more nations out of the bidding for
available supplies, there would be mounting pressure for the replace-
ment of market distribution by some sort of internationally run “equi-
table” system of allocation.
Should anxiety over feeding expanding populations give way to
desperation, the world might have to contend with international dis-
ruption caused by attempts at climate control, intensified conflict
among nations, foraging populations, and perhaps even with nuclear
or terrorist blackmail. The US—and perhaps other major food pro-
ducers—might be the focus of an intense international struggle over
food, in which it would stand to attract the enmity of others no matter
how its agricultural resources were allocated.
E. Population-Related Disruption and Conflict
Food uncertainty is only one of a number of US interests that will
be affected by population growth. As population pressures increase,
there inevitably will be strains on existing political, economic, and so-
cial structures at the local, national, and international levels, and thus
some impact upon politics within and among nations. But racial, reli-
gious, and cultural animosities, regional differences, irredentism, eco-
nomic disparities, and a host of other sources of conflict between
peoples and nations are almost always intertwined with demographic
factors. Population growth will thus be part of a complex dynamic
in
which
causative
and
contributory
factors
are
likely
to
be
indistinguishable.
In any case, whether population problems help precipitate socio-
political upheaval will depend only partly on the intensity of the pres-
sures population growth generates. Ability to deal with these pressures
will be crucial, and this will hinge on the availability of resources and
on the political will and managerial skill in particular countries.
Over the mid-to-long term, apathy and despair probably will pre-
vail in some nations where resources and administrative talent are
woefully inadequate to cope with population growth. But educated
young city dwellers whose expectations will tend to exceed available
opportunities are likely to be key destabilizing forces in many coun-
tries. Intense political turmoil and social disintegration could occur in
