Guatemala 653 could be carried to a point which would be contrary to U.S. policy interests in the area. (Paras. 23, 27, 29) DISCUSSION Recent Background3 9. The government of President Castillo Armas (1954–1957) arrested the trend toward Communist control of Guatemala and drove the remnant of the Guatemalan Communist Party (PGT) into exile or underground. In general, Castillo pursued a middle-­of-­the-­road policy, subscribing to the doctrines of the Revolution of 1944, but substantially moderating the application of the labor and agrarian reforms of Arévalo and Arbenz. Relying primarily on the support of the armed forces, Castillo firmly controlled the political life of the country. Through control of the electoral process, he created a dominant pro-­government party, the National Democratic Movement (MDN). 10. The assassination of Castillo, in July 1957, ended this period of relative stability and moderation. In compliance with the constitution, the first presidential designate took over on an interim basis and scheduled a presidential election for October. Two parties emerged to contest this election with the MDN. One of these was Redención, the reactivated personal political vehicle of General Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes. The general, having run for the presidency against Arbenz in 1950, had considered himself the proper alternative to Arbenz and had resented Castillo as an interloper. Another was the newly formed Revolutionary Party (PR), composed of labor, agrarian, and intellectual elements which had regarded the Castillo regime as reactionary.4 The MDN interim government excluded the PR from presenting a candidate, on the ground that it was communistic, whereupon the PR threw its support to Ydígoras. When the government declared the MDN candidate to have been elected, Ydígoras charged fraud and, with PR and Communist assistance, brought out the mob. A military junta thereupon ousted the first presidential designate and installed the second presidential designate after which the Congress annulled the election of the MDN candidate. 11. A second election, in which the PR was allowed to participate, was held in January 1958. Ydígoras received 39 percent of the vote, the MDN candidate, José Luis Cruz Salazar, 28 percent, and the PR candidate, Mario Méndez Montenegro, 27 percent. No candidate having 3 For a brief summation of the general background and of significant political developments, 1944–1954, see the Appendix (p. 8). [Footnote in the source text; the Appendix is not printed.] 4 The PR is not identical with either the PRG or the PAR, former leftist parties which flourished under the Arbenz regime, although it includes former members of these parties. [Footnote in the source text.]
