National Security Policy  1189
Port Security18
33. Measures should be taken (a) to protect U.S. ports and vessels 
therein against sabotage, espionage, and other subversive activities; (b) 
to supervise and where appropriate deny entry of vessels; and (c) to 
provide appropriate safeguards relative to the presence in U.S. ports of 
Sino-­Soviet Bloc vessels. Insofar as feasible, having due regard for legal 
procedures and rights, subversives should be excluded from vessels 
and waterfront facilities.19
18 Certain measures under this heading are supplemental to those contained under 
the previous heading, “Internal Security”. [Footnote is in the original.]
19 Experience has shown that only a very small percentage of the persons believed 
to be subversives can be excluded under procedures acceptable to the courts. [Footnote 
is in the original.]
281.	 Briefing Note for December 20 NSC Meeting1
Washington, December 19, 1960
SUBJECT 
U.S. Policy on Continental Defense (NSC 5802/1; NSC 5802)
1. The Council had before it a draft statement of revised U.S. Policy 
on Continental Defense (NSC 6022) which has been proposed by the 
NSC Planning Board in accordance with [illegible in the original]. In 
preparing this proposed policy revision the PB had the benefit of discus­
sion which took place in the Council recently, when consideration was 
given to a preliminary Discussion Paper in which the PB had identified 
certain questions relating to basic concepts of Continental Defense.
2. The present statement of Continental Defense Policy (NSC 
5802/1) was adopted by the Council and approved by the President in 
February, 1958. The policy review has taken into account two factors 
which have a particular bearing on the formulation of policy objectives 
in the area of Continental Defense: First, is the significantly increasing 
ballistic missile capability which our Intelligence Estimates attribute to 
the Soviet Union during the period of the 1950’s; and second, the limited 
prospects of the United States’ for the development and deployment of 
an adequate anti-ballistic missile system during the same period.
1 Source: Continental defense policy. Top Secret. 5 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman 
File, NSC Records.
