First Responses
175
68.
Memorandum From Director of Central Intelligence Turner
to President Carter
Washington, November 28, 1979
[Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material,
Office File, Box 73, Presidential Advisory File, Middle East Box 6
11/79–2/80. Secret; Sensitive. 5 pages not declassified.]
69.
Briefing Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Secretary of State Vance1
Washington, November 28, 1979
Iran; Proposals for Tightening the
Financial Noose; Thursday’s SCC Meeting
The SCC will discuss ten options for broadening and toughening
our financial actions against Iran. A brief evaluation of each of these
proposals is attached at Tab A.2
The meeting will probably focus on the fourth, fifth and sixth
options, which Bob Carswell and Tony Solomon believe would be most
effective in increasing the pressure on the Iranians. These three options
are basically a more detailed restatement of option 2, which would in
effect extend the freeze to other major countries. The impact of these
would ultimately be something like a de facto embargo on export to
Iran from all major countries.
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, Box 23. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Cooper and
Milam. Cleared by Precht.
2 Tab A was not attached but is in Department of State, Official Files of [P] David
D. Newsom, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Iran Update Nov 1979. For
the options, see the attachment to Document 70. The Department of the Treasury informed
a November 28 interagency meeting that it would back Options 4, 5, and 6 as putting
the most pressure on Iran. As related by Ernst of the Office of Economic Research, CIA,
these three options required the “active support” of the central banks of major allies
and such support was “extremely unlikely at the present time.” Ernst continued: “We
do not believe that the ayatollah would change his position because of these measures
which in any event would be viewed as extensions of US aggression.” The options,
however, would disrupt Iranian international trade and finance. (Central Intelligence
Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81M00919R: Executive Registry
Subject Files (1976–1979), Box 14, Folder 11: C–372 Iran)
