1100
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
come a source of conflict. He urged us to be very cautious about this
provision as currently phrased.
350.
Editorial Note
In his September 9, 1980, Evening Report, Secretary of State Ed-
mund Muskie reported to President Jimmy Carter on the status of the
Global Negotiations issue at the Eleventh Special Session of the UN
General Assembly, which was then underway in New York. Noting
that the talks were “deadlocked” over the issue of procedure, Muskie
reported that Donald McHenry, the U.S. Representative to the United
Nations, was “continuing to try for the key changes in the text we be-
lieve are necessary to better protect the integrity and independence of
the specialized agencies, but he has found no new flexibility in the de-
veloping countries’ position. We have also contacted France, Germany,
and the UK, all of whom support our position. Their views, however,
are not clearly reflected in the negotiations, since the European Com-
munity Commission and Luxembourg negotiate on behalf of all EC
members. The general atmosphere of the Special Session remains busi-
nesslike, but could deteriorate sharply if the deadlock persists.” Carter
initialed Muskie’s memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 23, Evening Reports
(State): 9/80)
In a September 11 memorandum to Muskie, Under Secretary of
State for Economic Affairs Richard Cooper relayed a report from
McHenry that UN Secretary General Kurt Waldheim wanted to tele-
phone Muskie “to urge greater flexibility by the U.S. in the current ne-
gotiations over procedures to govern the Global Negotiations. Little
progress has been made since I spoke to you on Monday [September 8]
although a lot of discussion has taken place.” Cooper noted that the
U.S. delegation was “close to being isolated in our opposition to the
Chairman’s text,” which had been “modified in a few respects, espe-
cially to ensure the rule of consensus;” the United Kingdom and the
Federal Republic of Germany were also “holding firm” in their opposi-
tion. Meanwhile, Cooper continued, “[t]he French are weakening and
are likely to accept a slightly modified version of the Chairman’s text,
although as far as we are aware they have not caved yet.” Cooper ad-
vised instructing McHenry “that our approach is governed by two
principles, that those principles are not protected by the slightly modi-
fied Chairman’s text, and therefore that we should continue our oppo-
