106  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
88.	
Letter from McConaughy to Johnson1
Washington, August 15, 1955
Dear Alexis:
Doug Forman left this morning for Geneva. I believe he will be 
able to give you a useful fill-­in on the thinking here and the general 
background of the decisions which have been taken. We took special 
pains to bring him in on meetings with both the Secretary and Mr. Rob­
ertson so he has the feel of their approach to the various problems.
Walter Robertson left at noon yesterday for a two weeks rest and 
sick leave at Meadow Farm and at Richmond. He wants us to keep him 
closely informed of any major developments, either favorable or unfa­
vorable, this notwithstanding the fact that he is supposed to dismiss 
official cares while he is away. He saw your 457 and 458 just before he 
left on Sunday, and could not have been more emphatic in his reaction 
that we should not give up our main trading points in return for half 
a loaf or less. He felt that to do so would mean throwing in the sponge 
when we may have come close to the point of agreement on all the 
Americans. His view was generally shared by all who were working on 
the matter including the Secretary. Still a lot of thought went into the 
preparation of our 495.
Enclosed is an excerpt from a report we have received from Air­
man Benjamin in regard to Snoddy and Schwartz the pilots of the 
Downey-Fecteau plane mentioned in my last letter:
“1. In a debriefing of the 11 airmen in Hong Kong and Tokyo, Air­
man Benjamin stated that he and Fecteau had become close friends 
during the period between 7 to 28 December 1954 when the airmen 
and Downey and Fecteau were held in the same cells. Airman Benja­
min said that Fecteau had stated the following in regard to Snoddy and 
Schwartz, the pilots of the plane:
‘On the second pass the Chinese Communist guns opened up 
with incendiaries, the aircraft was hit and crashed… The plane was not 
badly smashed. I ran from the plane and feel badly that I did not check 
on the pilots. Several minutes later I heard shots and was captured. I 
was led down a trail stained with blood. Possibly the pilots are alive.’
Benjamin himself said that he thought he had seen the pilots in a 
group of prisoners and believed they were still alive.”
I do not believe that you can usefully exploit this information in 
your current talks. Let us know if you think differently.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Printed from an unsigned copy.
