Afghanistan 197 good and, at least, did no harm. However, this conclusion would ignore the impact on US-Soviet relations and on US credibility in general. If the Soviets were not planning to use those forces in Afghanistan, they probably view our actions as yet another propaganda campaign and not as a serious initiative. Further, having raised the possibility of Soviet action with our friends, we have risked being accused of “crying wolf” or, worse, of being clearly aware of “the Soviet threat” without doing anything about it. With both our friends and the Soviets, we cannot raise the spectre of Soviet intervention too often without having our statements discounted. In our consideration of the Afghan problem, we have had a sliding definition of “Soviet intervention.” —In the beginning, we simply talked about “Soviet military intervention”; however, with a $275 million military assistance program in process and 3,000 or more advisors in the country, this has already occurred. —Subsequently, we talked about “the introduction of Soviet combat units”; however, with the introduction in June 1979 of a security force of 400 Soviet troops at Bagram airbase, this has already occurred. —Lately, we have talked about “large scale Soviet intervention”; however, with an earlier report of 3,600 Soviet military personnel in Kabul and a more recent report of 500–1,000 Soviet advisors arriving at two Afghan armored divisions nearby, this may also have occurred or be in progress. Unless we are treated to a spectacular show of Soviet airborne units being airlifted en masse into Afghanistan, we may not know that large scale transfers of personnel have occurred. The Intelligence Community readily admits that it cannot monitor incremental increases and might not know of the existence of a large Soviet force until it was already in place. Should this occur, the parallel with the situation in Cuba would become obvious. In response to a belated US discovery of a large concentration of Soviet forces, the Soviets would say that their personnel were simply advisors, not different in “kind or purpose” from those we had previously noted. It would then again be our word against theirs that the situation had changed. An inter-agency working group has recently decided that “prevention of large scale Soviet intervention” is our primary goal in Afghanistan.4 Since we have no definition of “large scale” and have difficulties in monitoring Soviet activity, we may not know with any precision 4 Not further identified.
