590  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
155. Capabilities for long-­range attack. Present Soviet capabilities for 
attack on the continental US are limited by the relatively small num­
bers of operational heavy bombers, the requirement to stage most 
bombers through forward bases in the Arctic, and the lack of a sub­
stantial inflight refueling capability. Nevertheless; by employing their 
entire heavy bomber force, many of their medium bombers, and their 
small submarine-­launched missile capability, the Soviets could mount 
large-­scale initial nuclear attacks against retaliatory strengths and 
other war-­making capabilities in North America. The actual weight of 
attack launched against the US would depend upon the Soviet judg­
ment as to the optimum combination of surprise and weight of attack 
against all areas where US and Allied nuclear retaliatory capabilities 
and other essential targets are located. Against those Western capabil­
ities deployed on the periphery of the Bloc, the Soviets could employ 
medium bombers, light bombers, and ballistic missiles with ranges up 
to 700 and probably 1,100 n.m. Bombs and air-­to-­surface missiles could 
be employed against Western naval forces possessing nuclear strike 
capabilities. All Western targets of importance in North America and 
overseas, as well as major naval operating areas, are within range of 
one or more of the Soviet weapon systems described above, although 
most of the Soviet bombers would have to be dispatched on one-­way 
missions to reach targets in the continental US.
156. Soviet long-­range striking capabilities will increase markedly 
as the stockpile of nuclear weapons grows, improved bombers are intro­
duced, the readiness and proficiency of the bomber force increases, and 
especially as the Soviet capability to deliver nuclear weapons by guided 
missiles expands.20 The USSR will rely increasingly upon missiles as 
long-­range delivery systems as the period advances. While Soviet plan­
ners almost certainly recognize that ballistic missiles can impose max­
imum surprise and difficulty of interception, they probably consider 
that for some years the accuracy and payload capacity of such mis­
siles will be inferior to those of manned aircraft of comparable ranges. 
We therefore believe that through the period of this estimate, Soviet 
long-­range striking capabilities will lie primarily in a mixed force of 
manned bombers (probably equipped increasingly with air-­to-­surface 
missiles) and ballistic missiles. The Soviets may consider that ballis­
tic missiles can best be employed to neutralize Western retaliatory and 
other capabilities temporarily in an initial blow, relying upon bomb­
ers for follow-­up attacks of maximum weight. In any event, effective 
Soviet employment of long-­range striking capabilities against Western 
20 The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, does not 
concur in this sentence. See his footnote to paragraph 22 of The Summary. [Footnote is 
in the original.]
