1955 277 31. I said I particularly wanted specific information on the health and welfare of Americans not yet released. 32. Wang said he had nothing new to tell me. Reporting on the condition of Americans in China was related to information on Chi­ nese in US on which he had received no information. He said he would appreciate it if I could provide this information, and first of all provide a list of their names and addresses. If I would give him information on Chinese nationals then he would also give me information on Ameri­ cans in China. 33. I asked what nationals he wanted information about. As far as I knew no Chinese nationals in the US were in jail. 34. Wang snapped that he wanted information on all his nationals in the US including their names and addresses. 35. I asked if I understood him to say that his government was unwilling to give us information on the health and welfare of Ameri­ cans in jail for which his government had a special responsibility and whose names I had given him. I considered this very important. At last meeting I had asked him how the Americans in jail who did not have access usual forms of communication would be informed of agreed announcement. I understood from him they would be informed by persons reading and translating newspapers for them if they did not understand Chinese language. Was he able to assure me this had been done? 36. Wang replied this was an internal matter of concern to his gov­ ernment. He had already told me what was done and what he said still holds. He added that health conditions of prisoners had already been discussed during the talks between consular representatives. Also he had informed me regarding implementation of agreed announcement and notifying persons concerned and he would not repeat his remarks. He hoped I would give him my opinion on the two items he had put forward under agenda item two. 37. I said our first order of buiness was the return of nationals and that I still considered it so. I had attempted fully, frankly and immedi­ ately inform him what we had done to implement agreed announce­ ment. Only by its implementation could we completely dispose of first order of business we came here to discuss. I had hoped he could give me information on implementation as he did at last meeting. I was dis­ appointed he had not given further information to me today. As he was unable to do so, I said I wished refer briefly to that portion his state­ ment at last meeting and his public statement regarding talks at higher level. I then read from prepared statement as follows: 38. A. “I simply want to say my government considers this to be a procedural rather than a substantive matter. Therefore, it considers that it cannot be properly included as a ‘practical matter at issue between
