1458  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
usual protests at the negotiating table. Alex’s transfer provides us with 
such an opportunity.
I think we should anticipate the possibility that the Chinese 
Communists, having read the New York Times article of December 1, 
will have foreseen that Alex will say his farewells at the Thursday meet­
ing and will have prepared their positions in advance to meet various 
contingencies. Thus they may have already decided that they will not 
consent to continue discussions at a lower level and will be prepared 
to explain their position to the press immediately after the meeting. 
While it is possible that they might even take this pretext to end the 
talks entirely, my feeling is (as indicated above) that they are more 
likely to stress their willingness to continue the talks but only at the 
Ambassadorial level. I think we should be prepared for such a contin­
gency as this and have our reasons for designating me rather than an 
Ambassador ready to give the press.
Another contingency for which to prepare a press explanation is 
the one mentioned in paragraph three of the reference telegram. Under 
these circumstances we would have to explain to the press why no date 
was set for the next meeting, since absence of this information would 
inevitably lead to speculation that the talks had been broken off.
In case the talks do continue without interruption, I wonder 
whether I can carry them on effectively without assistance. Since I have 
seen no indication that the Department is contemplating providing 
me with an “advisor”, I take it that you do not feel that at the present 
pace of the talks there is need for one. Certainly at the tempo of last 
month’s meeting I think I could manage on my own but there would 
be no assurance that the meetings would continue at such a low key. 
Alex has apparently felt on the basis of his long experience that it was 
essential to have an advisor.
One final item: Am I correct in assuming that paragraph three of 
the reference telegram simply means that the Consulate General in 
Geneva will act as a postbox for me and that it is not contemplated that 
I will be staying on at Geneva?
I am sending a copy of this letter to Geneva so that I can discuss 
it with Alex and get his reactions, and in case you wish to cable your 
reactions to it there.
Sincerely yours,
Edwin W. Martin
First Secretary of Embassy
