1258 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX we are working from that; and (2) the price charged for any oil supplied to Israel must be full replacement cost; it cannot contain any hidden subsidy. My Recommendation: We stay with the basic position contained in the May 1 memorandum (attached) with one change: increasing the requirement for short-term, indirect purchases from two-thirds to three-quarters. Our negotiators would have to seek additional instructions before changing this position. The position has the following main provisions: When there is no physical shortage of oil available to Israel, the Agreement could be activated, subject to the concurrence of each of the governments at the time, if Israel: (1) is paying for all its imported oil an average price higher than the average cost of the most expensive 10% of crude oil imported into the United States ($38.61 per barrel in March) and; (2) has to buy at least three-quarters of its oil through short-term, indirect purchases. As to the matter of the price of oil that we would provide if the Agreement were activated: (1) if the U.S. provides foreign oil to Israel, we would charge our acquisition cost plus any handling charges; and (2) if the U.S. provides domestic oil to Israel, the price charged would be acquisition cost or the replacement cost whichever is higher. Replacement cost means the actual cost to U.S. refiners of replacing oil sold to Israel; if this cannot be precisely determined, replacement cost will be considered to be equivalent to the average cost to U.S. refiners of the most expensive 10% of crude oil imported into the United States. This is a sound, tough negotiating position. We may have to authorize adjustments in the future, but I recommend that we not do so in advance. I recommend, and Charles Duncan concurs, that we send a team to Israel in June, to proceed on the basis described above.4 4 Carter initialed his approval of the recommendation. Also attached but not printed is an update on Israel’s oil supply situation.
