1194
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
the Egyptian model was submitted. Ambassador Linowitz was there at
the Accadia (Hotel), where Israel stated the categories and prepared a
listing. Israel worked and Egypt rejected it. There was no agreement on
details, but on one point—with U.S. help—in technical planning. This is
a meaningful agreement. This understanding could be the umbrella for
many subjects. Israel said shared; Egypt said coordinated. They need to
agree on two levels: planning and implementation. They have not
agreed yet, even on the agreed list. The Israeli approach consists of
three categories . . . there is understanding on many functions, a re-
markable number. Ambassador Linowitz remembers. It was done ad
referendum.
Prime Minister Begin said: thank you.
The President asked Ambassador Linowitz to explain the difference
between the Israeli and Egyptian positions.
Ambassador Linowitz said that Egypt did not like the Israeli presen-
tation. It told the Self-Governing Authority how to run itself. There was
a number of asterisks on the transferred powers, which Egypt said took
away too much. This was the heart of the Egyptian intemperate rejec-
tion. The Egyptian proposal rests on an assumption: there should be
three areas—legislative, executive, and judicial. This went beyond
Camp David. Israel—showing admirable restraint—did not reject the
Egyptian model, but merely said that it was “totally unacceptable!”
Minister Burg asked to speak one sentence. Israel said that the areas
to be transferred were quite a lot: more than for municipalities.
The President agreed.
Minister Burg said it was the majority of powers.
Minister Kubersky said that when Israel made its presentation, they
said that it did not have to be taken per se. They took into account the
care needed when negotiating. Therefore, there are many asterisks.
Ambassador Leonard said 45.
Professor Lapidot said: 48!
Minister Kubersky said that the asterisks are not part of the Bible.
Many are for negotiations, and were put in automatically.
The President said they had done so! In addition to “security,” they
had not defined what else they would retain.
Ambassador Linowitz said that there are three additional areas: in-
ternational commerce, security, foreign affairs, and settlements.
(A pause in the conversation followed).
Prime Minister Begin said that his impression is that the U.S. would
like Israel’s answer to tell the Egyptians. They (the Israeli delegation)
would like the U.S. reply to their paper. Or they could remain in Wash-
