National Security Policy 459 living standards are being sought in an effort to stimulate higher labor productivity, to generate some active support among the Soviet popu­ lation, and to remove the stigma of poverty from Communism in order to increase its attractiveness at home and abroad. 46. Accompanying this modification of Stalin’s rigid priorities is a recognition that many of his economic methods—­reliance more upon coercion than on incentives, extreme centralization of administration, resistance to innovation—­are ill-­suited to the current requirements of the Soviet economy. Thus his successors have exhibited more concern with material incentives and more readiness to experiment, exempli­ fied in such ventures as the New Lands and corn programs in agricul­ ture and the administrative reorganization in industry. These sweeping moves have been accompanied by a large number of lesser innovations, all designed to modernize an economy which, despite its rapid growth, was still being managed by methods developed during prewar years. Khrushchev has been the chief sponsor of these changes, and his pres­ ent ascendancy suggests that, apart from such basic matters as state ownership and central planning, all of the institutional features and managerial practices of the Soviet economy are subject to critical review. 47. Both these tendencies—­to modify the system of priorities and to revise the economic structure itself—­are exemplified in the policy decisions of the last 12 months. First, when production results during 1956 indicated that the very high growth rates of the five-­year plan were threatened by a failure to build enough new industrial capacity, the Soviet leaders refrained from the traditional response of cutting into the consumer sector for extra resources to meet the targets in heavy industry. Instead, they accepted the necessity of at least a temporary slowdown in industrial growth, meanwhile increasing allocations to agriculture and housing. Second, Khrushchev seized upon the defects of the ministerial structure as responsible for the difficulties expe­ rienced in 1956 and embarked upon a radical reorganization as the means of regaining the tempo of industrial advance. 48. During the next five years, it is almost certain that various ambitious programs for defense, industrial growth, and popular wel­ fare will turn out to be incompatible. In these circumstances, we believe that the overall defense program would not be significantly curtailed. But the investment resources needed in industry to make acceptable progress towards overtaking American industry might conflict with the requirements of defense officials for expanded military expendi­ tures. Furthermore, Khrushchev’s sweeping pledges to improve con­ sumer welfare, made in a bid for popular support in the aftermath of the Satellite crisis and during the Presidium struggle, commit him to achieving a palpable increase in consumption. Well before they reach their targets, however, his agricultural and housing programs will
