instrument communicated to the French Government, which shall at once
notify such deposit to all Powers which are signatories of or accede to the
Convention.
“The instruments of accession shall remain deposited in the archives of the
French Government.”
Omit “whether members of the League or not.”
ARTICLE 31
“Disputes between the Parties relating to the interpretation or application of
this Convention shall, if they cannot be settled by direct negotiation, be
referred for decision to the Permanent Court of International Justice. In case
either or both of the Parties to such a dispute should not be parties to the
Protocol of Signature of the Permanent Court of International Justice, the
dispute shall be referred, at the choice of the Parties, either to the Permanent
Court of International Justice or to a court of arbitration.”
It might be well to insert after “Justice” the following: “to the Hague Tribunal.”
ARTICLE 32
“The present Convention will not come into force until it has been ratified by
twelve Powers, among whom shall be the following: Belgium, the United
States of America, France, Great Britain, Italy, Japan and Russia.
“The date of its coming into force shall be the … day after the receipt by the
French Government of the twelfth ratification. Thereafter, the present
Convention will take effect in the case of each Party … days after the receipt
of its ratification or accession.”
The important point to be considered in connection with Article 32 is that a sufficient
number of arms producing States should be included among the Powers whose
ratification is necessary before the Convention enters into full force and effect. Further,
it should be noted that if any of the participating or adhering powers have not been
recognized by the United States the Department might desire to consider whether a
reservation at the time of signature would be necessary to safeguard its position.
ARTICLE 33
“The present Convention may be denounced by any Party thereto after the
expiration of ten years from the date when it came into force in respect of
that Party. Denunciation shall be effected by notification in writing addressed
