Mr. Hughes stated that he had invited Messrs. Velarde, Olaya and Gracie to his office to
consider the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru signed in Lima March 24,
1922, in respect to which observations of a friendly nature had been made to the
Peruvian Government by the Brazilian Government. Mr. Hughes stated that the three
Governments concerned had requested his good offices in the settlement of this
question and, after carefully considering the matter, he desired to suggest as a solution
of the difficulty the following:
First. The withdrawal by the Government of Brazil of its observations
regarding the boundary treaty between Colombia and Peru;
Second. The ratification by Colombia and Peru of the above mentioned
boundary treaty;
Third. The signing of a convention between Brazil and Colombia by which
the boundary between those countries would be agreed to on the Apaporis-
Tabatinga line, Brazil agreeing to establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia
freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers common to both
countries.
Mr. Gracie then stated that he was authorized by his Government to accept the friendly
suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made and that in consequence he was
instructed by his Government to inform the Peruvian Ambassador that Brazil
withdraws its observations regarding the Colombian-Peruvian treaty above mentioned
on the understanding that Peru will make as a condition in settling its boundary
question with Colombia, the recognition of the Apaporis-Tabatinga line as described by
the Treaty of 1851 and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east
of that line. Mr. Gracie added that should Colombia agree to recognize the above
mentioned Apaporis-Tabatinga line Brazil was ready to agree in the same convention to
establish in perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the River
Amazon and other rivers common to both countries.
Doctor Olaya then stated that he had instructions from his Government to accept the
friendly suggestion just made by the Secretary of State. Doctor Olaya added that he
was authorized to state that on the condition that the treaty of March 24, 1922, between
Colombia and Peru, should be ratified by both Governments the Government of
Colombia would agree to conclude immediately thereafter a treaty with Brazil
recognizing as the frontier between the two countries the village of Tabatinga, and from
that place to the north the direct line until it meets the River Yapurá at its junction with
the Apaporis, and in consequence Brazilian dominion over the territory to the east of
that line, it being understood that Brazil in the same treaty will agree to establish in
perpetuity in favor of Colombia freedom of navigation on the Amazon and other rivers
common to both countries.
