Covert and Overt Operations side. While we have indications of where some of them might be, we still cannot be sure where they are at any given moment since we suspect they may be moved around periodically.23 Public Affairs Strategy It will be crucial for the Administration to enlist the support of the American people for its strategy. I believe that it will be possible to mount an effective defense of this strategy in the weeks to come, but we need an agreed and consistent position that will be used by all members of your administration who speak about it publicly. It will be important to stress that our overriding objective in dealing with Iran remains the release of the hostages while protecting this nation’s honor. There is a new situation in Iran (formation of a new government, death of the Shah, release of Queen, establishment of the parliament, end of Ramadan) which should be analyzed and explained by Administration spokesmen. It should then be possible for us to outline in general terms our strategy for pursuing the matter without holding out false hopes for an early resolution—and without identifying ourselves with family and Congressional initiatives which depend for their success on remaining independent of us. The problem in dealing with the Iranian authorities and terrorists should also be frankly stated. The rescue attempt has, I believe, made it less likely that you will be criticized for not taking further military action to try to free the hostages. If you are criticized for failing to take strong enough measures to obtain the hostages’ release, I believe that we are in a strong position to challenge the detractors of our policy to come up with alternatives that will produce safe and early release of the hostages. We can emphasize that our purpose is the return of the hostages with honor. We will not act in irresponsible ways. Any attempt to use this issue for partisan advantage would be irresponsible. I believe that you will continue to enjoy the private and public support of the hostage families if you adopt the strategy that I outlined. Recommendation: That you approve the strategy outlined above as the framework within which we will work in the weeks ahead with the understanding that we will continue to refine each of the steps on a contingency basis and as we begin to hear responses to our approaches.24 23 In the left margin beside this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Keep up PR re hostage abuse & lack of accountability for them.” 24 Carter approved the strategy with a checkmark and wrote at the bottom of the page: “Put this now into action. Give me a plan—step-by-step with dates, for implementation.”
