3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1979 511 however, with three US scientists present. [handling restriction not declassified] The regime’s attitude toward various Protestant groups appears to be somewhat ambiguous. The All-Union Council of Evangelical Christian Baptists was given permission to import 25,000 Russian Bibles; the last time a Soviet government permitted a significant influx of Bibles was in 1947 when 10,000 copies were imported. On the other hand, Soviet media continue to inveigh against “Bible smugglers”, terming them “paid agents of Western intelligence.” [handling restriction not declassified] There are several reports of harassment and persecution of unregistered Pentecostal congregations in Belorussia and the Ukraine. A religious activist from a town near Moscow received a year in prison for organizing a seminar on the “defense of rights of believers in the USSR.” In the Kirgiz SSR two citizens were each sentenced to three years in a labor camp for conducting a children’s Sunday school. An 84-year old member of the Seventh Day Adventists was slated to go on trial this month in Tashkent for illegal religious activity—he wrote an eight volume treatise condemning the “dictatorship of state atheism.” The spectrum of dissent seems to be broadening once again. In October, an independent “trade union” surfaced in Moscow. Calling itself the Free Inter-Professional Union of Workers, the group focuses on genuine worker grievances. Reports indicate that the organization lacks internal cohesion and is plagued by diverse interests. On those rare occasions in the past when dissidents have tried to organize Soviet workers Moscow has reacted quickly and sternly. Several members of this group already have been arrested and one of its leaders has been confined to a state psychiatric hospital, but it has not yet been disbanded. [handling restriction not declassified] On another front, a new journal called Metropol appeared this month. The avowed intention of its publishers is “literary excellence” rather than political debate. The first issue, however contained articles critical of Soviet literary restrictions. [handling restriction not declassified] Other forms of protest simmer along. Last August Crimean Tartars sent two petitions to Brezhnev requesting permission to return from Central Asia to their ancestral homeland. The government, as usual, made no direct response; one report claims authorities in the Crimea have bulldozed the houses of illegal returnees and deliberately stirred up local antipathy toward the Tartars. At Leningrad University, the “Left Opposition” was broken up in October—for the second time. A student leader was charged with anti-Soviet agitation and two other members of the group were charged with “hooliganism.” Students at other Soviet institutions for the moment are quiescent. [handling restriction not declassified]
