Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 423 negotiations by one or another move on ALCMs, and therefore whether we should try to resolve the ALCM issue in isolation, or as part of a tradeoff involving other START controversies. Following is an assessment of how our interests are engaged in each of the key ALCM issues. Counting Rules We currently plan to deploy 10 to 12 ALCMs on each of 95 B–52Hs for a force of 950 to 1140 deployed ALCMs. These loadings roughly correspond to the counting rules we have proposed in START, i.e., current plans would require little, if any, “discounting.” We therefore could readily agree with the Soviets on a counting rule approach that permitted such an ALCM deployment and that fully accommodated current plans to deploy non-ALCM bombers within START limits. At issue is (a) how large a potential future increase in ALCMs and/ or penetrating bombers we want to protect, and (b) how much we think the Soviets would pay to put a cap on the future size of our bomber/ ALCM force. (A table which illustrates the relationship between actual and START-­accountable ALCM loadings is attached to the issue paper at Tab 1.) Deep discounts become more attractive to us to the extent we need to increase operational ALCM loadings on B–52s to offset curtailment of the B–2 program. ALCM attributions below 10 per heavy bomber become more attractive to the extent that we want to convert some B–1s to ALCM carriers in addition to the B–52Hs. Moving from our “attribution approach” in the direction of the Soviet “as equipped” position would require decisions about how to verify such a limit, even if the agreed measures were little more than a fig leaf. Agreeing to some maximum ALCM loading would pose a similar requirement. Distinguishability As a matter of principle, we want to exempt conventional ALCMs from START limits (the INF example to the contrary notwithstanding). Two recent “sense of the Congress” resolutions have made the same point and, in doing so, have put down clear markers for the ratification debate. As a practical matter, we know of no firm plans for future conventional ALCMs (i.e., beyond paper designs) that would be limited by START, although there evidently are conceptual studies for several black conventional missiles in the 600–1500 km range. Once again, the issue turns in large measure on what kinds of future options we want to protect in a START treaty whose duration could be 15 years or longer. A satisfactory resolution of the distinguishability issue should give us some flexibility on the range issue (see below). That is, if conventional ALCMs per se are outside START limits, we do not need a very
