March 27–December 31, 1979 973 —Syria. (We might use a special U.S. envoy such as Phil Habib.) —Saudi Arabia. (We would use John West primarily and the Saudi Ambassador here, but we might want to send an envoy to Riyadh also.) —Jordan. (Hussein has shown a great deal of interest and has a working relationship with Arafat.) —The Vatican. (We will discuss Lebanon during the Pope’s visit and encourage him to call for a moratorium on violence. Ambassador Wagner would remain in close touch.) —France. (Through normal diplomatic channels in Paris, Washington, and Beirut. It is probably the key European actor.) —Kuwait. (We would work closely with the useful Kuwaiti Ambassador to the UN. Kuwait, with the Saudis, has a watching brief on behalf of the Arabs.) —UNIFIL Troop Contributor Governments. (We would work particularly closely with the French, Dutch, Norwegians, and Irish.) —UK. (We stay in close touch with the British on all Middle Eastern matters.) The Soviets should be briefed at some stage, since they will become aware of the details of the initiatives in any case. A briefing may reduce the chances of Soviet mischief-making. We will wish to ensure, however, that they do not become engaged in the process, since this could hurt the chances of gaining Israel’s cooperation and also hurt general Middle East peace negotiations. 3. A Focal Point for the Negotiations. In order to make everyone feel that this initiative is not just “more of the same,” we believe there may be a need to create some new forum, either to promote negotiations or to formalize the understandings reached. We do not envision a conventional conference with all interested parties coming to the same room because that would quickly degenerate into a stalemate. We have concluded that perhaps the formation of a “Consultative Group” in Lebanon might provide a sense of new dynamism while allowing us the flexibility to engage in separate negotiations with the parties until agreement on the proposal has been pretty well worked out. Specifically, it seems to us that a group in Beirut consisting of the following would serve this purpose: —The Lebanese Prime Minister, the UN representative, the Papal Nuncio, and the Ambassadors of the U.S., France, Saudi Arabia, The Netherlands, the UK, and perhaps Italy. Early on, after we have talked with the UN Secretariat, we may wish to set up a consultative mechanism in New York. We have in mind a small group (but not a formal “contact group” as in the Namibia case) which could meet periodically. Membership might include: the UN Secretariat, US, UK, France, a representative of the UNIFIL troop contributors (Norway and Netherlands) and a representative of the Arab group.
