National Security Policy  489
less extensive but indicates about 50 produced. On this basis, about 50 
BISONs and 40 BEARs would have been available for operational units 
as of 1 July. If this is in fact the case, both BISON and BEAR production 
have fallen short of our estimate of last year.
136. Beyond this point of good evidence, however, there is an area 
of considerable uncertainty, particularly with regard to the BISON pro­
gram. There is some evidence suggesting that as many as 90 BISONs 
may have been in operational units as of mid-1957. This would mean 
that the rate of BISON production has increased considerably since late 
1956, and that an additional unknown aircraft plant has entered the 
BISON program, although we have almost no evidence to support this. 
It is similarly possible that BEAR production could have increased to 
an extent sufficient to provide about 60 in operational units, though 
we also lack good evidence. Indeed, there is evidence that additional 
plants estimated to be capable of producing heavy bombers are either 
continuing in the BADGER program or are preparing to produce trans­
port or tanker aircraft.
137. If recent heavy bomber production has in fact been as low as 
the preponderance of evidence indicates, a partial explanation may 
lie in the field of technical problems. For example, it is possible that 
larger-­scale production has been delayed pending the availability of 
higher-­thrust engines or other developments expected to improve 
performance characteristics. But we would believe it more likely that 
Soviet planners have deliberately decided on a relatively modest heavy 
bomber program. In our view, such a Soviet decision would probably 
have been based on such judgments as the unlikelihood of general war 
during the next few years, the great expense of a large-­scale heavy 
bomber program, the existence of a reliable jet medium bomber force 
with one-­way intercontinental capabilities for interim use in emergency, 
and the expectation that new and improved intercontinental delivery 
systems will become available in a few years. On the other hand, if 
heavy bomber production has reached the higher levels mentioned in 
paragraph 136, it would indicate greater Soviet emphasis on the heavy 
bomber weapon system for intercontinental attack.
138. We have noted statements of Khrushchev stressing his view of 
the declining importance of manned fighter and bomber aircraft as con­
trasted with guided missiles. If these views had been contained solely 
in statements beamed to the outside world they could be dismissed as 
mere propaganda. It is hard, however, to interpret their inclusion in the 
Soviet press, with the resulting advertisement to the Russian people, 
unless they were intended to prepare the Russian people for some de-­
emphasis on the heavy bomber, or to cover up delays in production
