constituting the large offensive type. It was our insistence upon this type of cruiser, which they claimed they eventually wished to eliminate, that compelled them to demand such high tonnage levels as were imputed to them. In conclusion, we were closely interrogated as to our reasons for mentioning this type of cruiser and they warned us that the result of our suggestions would either be to give the United States an absolute supremacy in offensive cruisers or compel the British to abandon construction of the small defensive type, which in view of the Empire’s needs were in their opinion essential. They held that the reduction of the offensive power of fleets was the basic object of the parley; and minimized the importance of reduction of total tonnages as not going to fundamentals. Total tonnage thesis, they said, would only inspire each country to construct the greatest number of maximum-sized ships and increase fleet offensive power. It is my desire in the foregoing to outline the views of the British and give them in the tone in which they were rendered. The wisest course to pursue, I thought, was to give the British the floor, and in answer to their questions as to the need of 10,000-ton cruisers, Admiral Jones merely emphasized the view of the United States Navy, with which you are entirely conversant. As a compromise and to satisfy the necessity of the British for a great number of cruisers, Admiral Field launched the idea of limiting only cruisers under the age of 20 years and permitting the retention of all cruisers exceeding 20 years. We dispersed without a solution having been reached, but decided that we should all review the entire question with great care. The meeting lasted an hour and a half, towards the end of which the atmosphere had brightened considerably and Bridgeman on leaving remarked in a friendly way that our general attitude was clear to him and only time was needed to solve matters. His demeanor, which throughout had been good-natured, formed a marked contrast to Cecil’s. On Friday, the executive committee will meet to hear the report of the technical committee outlining tentative agreements reached in reference to
