794
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
323.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, February 17, 1977
SUBJECT
Nuclear Proliferation
This is a quick response to your request of February 16 regarding
possible U.S. initiatives designed to develop “international restraints”
in order to slow nuclear proliferation.2 As you know, we have a PRM in
process to develop “options for formal and informal international coor-
dination of incentives, controls and sanctions throughout the nuclear
fuel cycle in order to limit nuclear proliferation.” The PRM response
will be submitted by February 28th.
The following list of possible U.S. actions does not therefore at-
tempt to provide a thorough analysis of each, but rather sets forth some
of the major options being considered in the PRM. Many of these op-
tions entail considerable sacrifices on the part of other nations which
originally adopted the once-conventional U.S. wisdom regarding long-
range energy plans. We will now be asking them to reconsider these
plans at considerable cost in dollars or national pride or both. Accord-
ingly, there are certain domestic actions which may have to be taken to
make any or all of the above steps credible or saleable to other nations.
First, we should try to demonstrate that we no longer view the
breeder reactor (at least in its current design) as the centerpiece of our
energy strategy by sending an unequivocal signal that we are not pro-
ceeding with its commercialization—specifically with the Clinch River
demonstration project. Secondly, we might even have to consider sus-
pending completion of the Barnwell reprocessing plant3 until we have
completed our own thorough investigation of all possible alternatives
to reprocessing.4
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 60, PRC
007, 3/16/77, Nuclear Proliferation. Confidential. Sent for information. Carter initialed
the upper right-hand corner of the memorandum and the margin beside each paragraph
after “Preliminary options” with a “C”.
2 Not found.
3 A private-sector company began construction of a commercial nuclear repro-
cessing plant in Barnwell, SC in 1970.
4 In the right-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “ok but not cancel
outright.”
