Chapter 2, January–June 1989  257
of a near-­term Soviet defense is by pursuing an effective SDI program 
and a fully supportive Defense and Space position.
(S) Additionally, we should point out that alternatives to our cur-
rent position of making explicit our freedom to deploy would give up 
what we clearly achieved at the Washington Summit. The freedom to 
deploy without further reference to the ABM Treaty was an element 
in the quid pro quo agreed at the Washington Summit. We would be 
profligate in the extreme if we were to discard hard-­fought concessions 
from the Soviet Union. Given the President’s stated position on the 
objectives of the SDI, we must establish our right to deploy strategic 
defenses without further reference to the ABM Treaty. Thus, we should 
reaffirm our current position.
Fundamental Limits
(S) With regard to the fundamental limits issues in dispute, OSD 
supports Option 1 with regard to heavy ICBMs, and would continue 
U.S. negotiating pressure on the 3,000–3300 ICBM warhead sublimit. 
OSD believes that our fundamental START objectives of enhancing sta-
bility requires above all that we seek reductions in those elements of the 
Soviet strategic force that threaten a first strike.
(S) The fact that the Soviet Union is prepared to devote almost one-­
third of the ballistic missile warheads allowed under START to their 
heavy ICBMs, a force that has no significant second-strike capability 
but unmatched first-­strike potential, is disturbing. START should not 
allow this, and should ban heavy ICBMs. At a minimum, START must 
prohibit heavy ICBM modernization. Changing our position to allow 
Soviet modernization of their heavy ICBMs would greatly reduce the 
survivability of our ICBM force.
(S) For the foreseeable future Soviet heavy ICBMs will constitute the 
only significant threat to our ICBM silos. The [2½ lines not declassified] If 
flight testing and modernization are prohibited, U.S. silo survivability 
will increase. If heavy ICBMs are banned and rapidly eliminated, the sur-
vivability of our silos will substantially increase. There is no dispute over 
these facts in the intelligence community.
Non-Deployed Missiles
(S) With regard to the limitation of non-­deployed missiles (NDMs), 
OSD supports Option 1. OSD also supports Option 1 with regard to 
destruction of missiles from dismantled launchers. OSD notes that the 
NIEs on Soviet strategic forces have long recognized the existence and 
significance of a Soviet ICBM refire potential. It could be more significant 
under START. Furthermore, the use of soft-­site launchers as a breakout 
mechanism will be facilitated if large highly fractionated ICBMs are not 
numerically limited. Absent NDM limits, the agreed START reductions 
themselves would add about 650 large MIRVed NDMs to the Soviet
