358  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Burt expressed his appreciation for the Soviet move, noting that 
it reflected Nazarkin’s personal efforts to move the negotiations for-
ward. He recognized that, in adopting the U.S. approach as a general 
rule, the two sides would have to determine its applicability in spe-
cific cases. Agreement on the unit of account would achieve more than 
many would think. On the U.S. side, it would help obtain wide support 
during the ratification process. And limiting both missiles and launch-
ers would be a real step forward in arms control. Burt next turned to 
short-­time-­of-­flight (STOF) SLBMs, and called on Mr. Brooks to outline 
the U.S. approach.
Brooks noted that in Geneva the U.S. side discussed three ways to 
achieve short time of flight—­depressed trajectory, shaped trajectory, 
and reducing range. One of the Soviet counterproposals focused on 
ensuring range would not be reduced by requiring ballistic missile 
submarines to remain beyond a certain minimum distance from the 
shores of the other Party. This revealed a difference of approach. The 
U.S. did not seek to reduce the threat of surprise attack by altering cur-
rent practices because such an attempt would be both unverifiable and 
operationally unacceptable to both sides. Instead, it sought to restrain 
the ability to develop future capabilities for surprise attack by mutual 
restraint in the testing of STOF SLBMs. While limitations on subma-
rine operations would reduce survivability and thus lessen stability, 
foreswearing development of STOF SLBMs—­which neither side had 
so far chosen purposefully to develop—­was inherently stabilizing. 
Operational restrictions such as stand-­off zones could easily be violated 
in hours or days, and thus did nothing to inhibit acquisition of a STOF 
capability. It would be unwise and unacceptable to attempt restrictions 
on submarine operations.
Nazarkin asked whether the 15-­minute limitation would apply to 
submarines in such a way that they would not be able to approach a 
coast at a distance related to the flight time of a missile.
Brooks said no. The U.S. was trying to limit flight testing of new 
missiles and certification of older missiles to fly at reduced ranges or 
flight times.
Burt added that, if neither side developed such a capability, it 
would be very difficult, if not impossible, to carry out attacks using 
STOF, including near the coast of the other side.
Brooks said the U.S. was trying to prevent future problems, not to 
address current problems.
Nazarkin, after consulting with Soviet experts, provided a draw-
ing4 illustrating depressed, shaped, and short-­range trajectories and 
asked how each would be treated under the U.S. proposal.
4 Not found.
