Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks
635
the proposed sale and the military department handling the contract.
Policy explanations are not among the items required by the law and
usually are given only selectively and informally.
5. Controlling Promotion of Arms Sales. We are planning to publish
shortly in the Federal Register a notice of a proposed regulation which
would require State Department approval before an arms manufac-
turer may undertake efforts to promote the sale of major military hard-
ware overseas. Such a regulation should inhibit efforts by private firms
to create appetites for arms in foreign governments.
PLANNING IN PROGRESS
In the context of the PRM which you have ordered we are exam-
ining ways of bringing tighter control over US arms exports and en-
couraging multilateral restraints on the arms trade. Here are some of
the ideas under consideration in both areas:
A. Control Over US Arms Exports
(1) We need to increase the flow of early information about pro-
posed sales to all interested agencies and to regularize the criteria for
evaluating all major FMS cases. We want to assure that arms control
and human rights considerations receive proper early attention on each
proposed transaction.
(2) We need to develop better control at the critical points leading
to formal arms transfer decisions. Too often decisions are “created” by
the activities of arms salesmen, the excesses of some zealous military
advisory personnel, and the appetites of foreign leaders, combined
with inertia on the part of the Executive in bringing policy consider-
ations to bear at an early stage.
(3) Sales of high technology, sensitive weapons, co-production
projects and equipment requiring large numbers of supporting Amer-
ican technicians should receive a more rigorous screening than has
been the case in the past.
(4) It is essential to develop good working relations with Congress
on these issues, over the longer term, to avoid arbitrary efforts at con-
trol, such as moratoria and dollar ceilings. Such approaches tend to ap-
pear punitive and could severely harm other US foreign policy interests
in some countries or regions.4
(5) We need to take action promptly to establish an interagency
mechanism to coordinate security assistance and arms export control
activities and to bring the expertise of all concerned agencies to bear on
the basic policy decisions.
4 In the left-hand margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote “We might meet w/
key Congress leaders before final decision.”
