Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX Soviet Union. Many continue to believe that in the end the Soviets will not countenance the Polish challenge to Communist ideology and control. The longer Lech Walesa and his colleagues maintain their power, the greater the Polish example will influence Hungary. 6. US-Hungarian relations—The return of the Crown of St. Stephen in January 1978 paved the way for a steady expansion of US-Hungarian relations. The 1978 Trade Agreement, extension of MFN, the Cultural Agreement and a steady exchange of high level visitors have resulted in a significant increase in bilateral contacts across the board. The Hungarians have responded to our own policy of differentiation in Eastern Europe following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. With the exception of the postponement of a parliamentary delegation’s visit to the US in February, the bilateral agenda has been almost completely carried out to mutual advantage. The Embassy has been able to expand contacts significantly in the Hungarian community and we have begun exploring new areas of cooperation such as increased military contacts, energy development and narcotics control. The Hungarians worry about the possibility of continued stalemate or further deteriorations in US-Soviet relations. This is compounded by the tenseness created by the fluidity of the Polish situation. Nevertheless, Hungarians continue to emphasize their desire to see the bilateral agenda expand and contacts with the U.S. increase. The future, barring a catastrophic East- West confrontation such as Soviet intervention in Poland, two areas deserve the attention of the new administration: —High-level visits: Over a year ago the Hungarians noted the possibility of a Kadar visit to the U.S. We have had recent indications that the Hungarians will soon raise the question again.3 Depending on the circumstances, a Kadar visit could serve not only to promote bilateral relations with Hungary but also to demonstrate our interest in Eastern Europe as a whole. They would also be pleased to have President Reagan visit Hungary if he were to make at least one other stop in the Bloc. —Improve economic relations: Trade between the U.S. and Hungary now totals about $250 million per year (with a U.S. trade surplus). The Hungarians hope that bilateral trade will surpass $500 million by 1985, bringing the U.S. from its current eighth position among Hunga-
