March 1952–February 1953
261
82.
Editorial Note
Elections to the 17th Majlis took place throughout the spring and
into the summer of 1952, and the new Majlis convened formally on
April 27, 1952. On July 14, Prime Minister Mosadeq submitted a new
Cabinet to the Shah based on the elected membership of the 17th Majlis
up to that point. Mosadeq included in this submission a claim for con-
trol over the War Ministry, which the Shah refused. As a result, Mo-
sadeq resigned his post as Prime Minister and, on July 17, was replaced
by Qavam.
83.
Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,
Central Intelligence Agency1
Staff Memorandum No. 247
Washington, July 1, 1952.
SUBJECT
An Evaluation of the Significance of the National Front Movement in Iran
1. Since Mossadeq and the National Front came to power in Iran a
little more than a year ago, there has been considerable difference of
opinion among Near Eastern specialists concerning the National Front
movement and its relationship to the basic social changes that are
taking place in Iran. That such social changes are occurring is generally
recognized. Their most important aspect is that a third social group,
composed primarily of urban dwellers, is emerging between the tradi-
tional ruling aristocracy and the mass of peasants. The members of this
group—as a result of increased education, a broader understanding of
political, social and economic problems, greater contact with the West,
and the competitive propaganda of foreign powers—are becoming in-
creasingly aware of their ability to influence events, and their exploita-
tion by political leaders has transformed them into a significant polit-
ical force. While they are also becoming dimly aware of the fact that
their position in society and their prospects for a higher standard of life
are not immutable, they continue to attribute their difficulties almost
exclusively to foreign influence.
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79T00937A, Box 2, Folder 1,
Staff Memoranda—1952, Substantive. Secret; Security Information.
