1030 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 210. Telegram From the Delegation to the Nuclear and Space Talks in Geneva to the Department of State1 Geneva, May 6, 1991, 1850Z 5200. Subject: START: Waiting for CFE 1. Secret—Entire Text. 2. The first two weeks of round XV have been mixed. It is clear that the Soviets accomplished much more than we did during the break. As you know, Obukhov arrived with compromise proposals on the new types definition, the 40-­percent rule and size criteria. We are eagerly awaiting Washington’s reactions to these. In the working groups, the Soviets have also been active in a constructive way. They have backed up their claim that they worked hard during the break by accepting a number of U.S. proposals outright and offering compromises on others. 3. On the U.S. side, the transition from Burt to Brooks has been smooth and the Brooks-Obhukov-Nazarkin triangle is operating well. I personally have had no contact with Obukhov thus far, so I cannot judge his mood. He has been slowed by a broken leg (tennis, not START). We do not know how long he will stay in Geneva, but I believe his presence here is a rough barometer of Soviet seriousness. 4. We understand, of course, how much CFE has hurt START and that the big START issues are not likely to receive serious consideration until the CFE problems are resolved. However, the failure of Washington to deal in a timely fashion with even quite straightforward RFGs on non-­ major issues is difficult to understand. As a result, the U.S. del has had very little to offer—­an unfortunate fact which has been duly noted by the Soviets. In some case, (launcher type rule, cooperative measures), we have not even been able to accept Soviet acceptance of U.S. positions. It is our understanding—­and we got a report to the effect that Baker and Bessmertnykh agreed on this at Kislovodsk—­that there would be a push on START as soon as CFE is settled. It is important that we not allow this scenario to be undermined by a failure to keep moving forward on the second-­and third-­order issues as we wait for CFE. I continue to believe we can finish here in 4–6 weeks after the “go” button is pushed, but only if there are no major retrograde developments in the meantime. 5. There have been a number of indications that the Soviets continue to take seriously the joint commitment to sign the treaty at a summit “in the first half of this year.” Perhaps more important are the hints that, if this does not happen, financial and political considerations will cause a reevaluation in Moscow of the future of the negotiations. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, D910434–0545. Secret; Priority.
