Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978
507
These events are the final result of long and serious negotiations
begun by President Nixon in 1972, and continued under the leadership
of President Ford. The results bear witness to the steady, determined,
bipartisan effort of our own country to build a world in which peace
will be the goal and the responsibility of all nations.
The normalization of relations between the United States and
China has no other purpose than this: the advancement of peace. It is in
this spirit, at this season of peace, that I take special pride in sharing
this good news with you tonight.
Thank you very much.
105.
Editorial Note
On December 15, 1978, following his address to the nation re-
garding the normalization of relations with China (see Document 104),
President Jimmy Carter spoke to reporters assembled in the White
House Briefing Room. The President began his remarks by under-
scoring the historical importance of the announcement:
“It’s something that I and my two predecessors have sought
avidly. We have maintained our own United States position firmly, and
only since the last few weeks has there been an increasing demonstra-
tion to us that Premier Hua and Vice Premier Teng have been ready to
normalize relations. I think the interests of Taiwan have been ade-
quately protected. One of the briefers will explain the details to you.”
The President then noted that he had spoken with Japanese Prime
Minister Ohira and that the administration had also notified Taiwanese
leaders and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin. He continued:
“My own assessment is that this will be well received in almost
every nation of the world, perhaps all of them, because it will add to
stability. And the Soviets and others know full well, because of our
own private explanations to them, not just recently but in months gone
by, that we have no desire whatsoever to use our new relationships
with China to the disadvantage of the Soviets or anyone else. We be-
lieve this will enhance stability and not cause instability in Asia and the
rest of the world.
“I’m very pleased with it. And I obviously have to give a major
part of the credit to President Nixon and to President Ford, who laid
the groundwork for this successful negotiation. And most of the
premises that were spelled out in the Shanghai Communique´ 6 years
ago or more have been implemented now.
