1956  805
501.	 Letter 32 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 32
Washington, February 24, 1956
Dear Alex:
The guidance situation won’t be quite as bad here during the 
month of March as you surmised it might be when you wrote your 
letter of February 16. While the Secretary and Robertson will be away 
most of the month, Phleger will be here. He is not making any part of 
the trip to the Middle and Far East with the Secretary. Of course Bill 
Sebald and I will be on the job here. The Department of course will con­
tinue to be the central clearing house for your instructions. However 
it will be a good idea to keep both the Secretary and Robertson cur­
rently informed on any important developments. You should use your 
judgment as to which messages you will repeat for the information of 
the Secretary and Robertson. We will repeat the guidance telegram to 
them, and any others which we feel they should know about. We will 
also repeat as we consider necessary telegrams or extracts of telegrams 
from you which you have not repeated. We understand that ordinarily 
they will wire any comments they may have to the Department. If they 
should wire you direct they will repeat the messages to the Depart­
ment. In this way we should have good coordination although at some 
additional expense. You will of course not be necessary to repeat the 
full reports of the meetings to either of the travelers. We will try to keep 
the traffic on the Geneva talks at a minimum both for reasons of econ­
omy and because their time will be so fully occupied. The schedules of 
both are enclosed.
2. We have had some tentative second thoughts on the subject 
of  Chinese prisoners in U.S. jails. When the Secretary got back from 
his vacation he expressed the thought that maybe we could get some 
dividends out of offering to deport some Chinese dope traffickers and 
murderers to Mainland China at Chinese Communist expense. It was 
his thought that it would be good riddance, would impose a burden on 
the Chinese Communists, take some wind out of their propaganda sails, 
and maybe improve the prospects of our imprisoned citizens. Of course 
it was understood that deportability under our laws would have to be 
established first, and presumably the prisoners would have to express 
a desire to return to the Mainland. We are making some very cautious 
and tentative efforts to explore the situation further. We are asking 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Top Secret; 
Official–Informal.
