Human Rights
117
terest but directly conflicts with what other witnesses are saying. For
example, during testimony on economic assistance to Korea and the
Philippines, Holbrooke said that cuts in the program “would not lead to
an improvement in the human rights situation”, implying that such an
approach was “self-defeating”.17 This was just after Vance had testified
in support of military assistance cuts, on the grounds that they would
cause an improvement.18
No one is in a leadership position on this issue. Derian is not in a
position to do so, either bureaucratically or personally. Perhaps Chris-
topher is, but I have some doubts. Most important, no one has taken
any steps to recruit the potential supporters in Congress—particularly
Fraser, who has just published a good piece on this issue in Foreign
Policy (Tab B)19—note the last paragraph. It could be enormously
helpful for you to ask him to come in, and to begin to establish a close
working relationship with him. He is a thoughtful and intelligent man
who has been involved in this issue for years. He would be more
effective in making the Administration’s case in the House than ten
lobbyists.
IV. Broader Issues
At this time my judgment is that the Administration’s policy on
human rights amounts to: “the President is deeply committed to pro-
moting human rights wherever possible”—and nothing more. There is
no agreed conception of how human rights fits into the fabric of foreign
policy, its trade-off value vis-a`-vis other issues (economic cooperation,
national security, etc.), no idea of how to present and defend a policy
that is not 100% moralistic (in fact there appear to be some who favor a
totally pure policy). Nor is there a strategy for stopping the Congres-
sional bandwagon or breaking up the ultra-left/far-right coalition that
was responsible for our defeat in the House. It is important to note that
it was conservatives who want no foreign aid who gave the Harkin lan-
guage the necessary votes.
Beyond a recognition of his deep personal commitment, there is
also considerable uncertainty both within the Administration and
among his supporters in Congress over what the President really
wants. He has taken several different positions. For example, at a recent
17 Holbrooke, then Assistant Secretary-designate for East Asian and Pacific Affairs,
testified before the Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the House Committee
on International Relations on March 10. Holbrooke’s prepared statement is printed in De-
partment of State Bulletin, April 4, 1977, pp. 322–326.
18 Presumable reference to Vance’s February 24 testimony before the Subcommittee
on Foreign Operations of the Senate Appropriations Committee; see footnote 9 above.
19 Not found attached. Presumable reference to Donald Fraser, “Freedom and For-
eign Policy,” Foreign Policy, Number 26 (Spring 1977), pp. 140–156.
