688 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement asked whether the policy described by Mr. Leggett was a permanent one, and Mr. Leggett again assured him that it was temporary. He added that all requests for arms from Caribbean countries would continue to be studied by the Department on a case-­by-­case basis. The Ambassador asked whether, in view of the foregoing, it would be inopportune for a team from Guatemala to come here at this time to inspect the places. Mr. Leggett said that under the circumstances it would seem desirable to postpone the visit of the team. The Ambassador said he would inform his Government accordingly. Mr. King then raised the request of Guatemala for a number of jeeps and military trucks for the Guatemalan Armed Forces.4 He said this request, which had only been received by the Department towards the end of March, was now under active study, and that it was hoped favorable action would be taken soon. The Ambassador expressed his gratification and his hope that Guatemala would be able to obtain these vehicles at an early date. 4 The Guatemalan request was not found in Department of State files. GT–18. Memorandum from the Director of the Office of Central American and Panamanian Affairs (Stewart) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1 Washington, June 12, 1959 SUBJECT Consultation with Ambassador Mallory. During his consultation in Washington,2 Ambassador Mallory’s discussions of the problems that he faces in Guatemala will probably center on three or four general themes: 1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63 D 146, “Ambassador Lester J. Mallory: Guatemala, 1959.” Secret. This memorandum, drafted by Gorrell, bears the following notation by Rubottom: “A very good paper.” 2 Mallory was in Washington for consultations, June 16–29, 1959. For these consultations, he wrote a 16-­page situation report, June 12, in which he reviewed events in Guatemala and requested guidance on whether or not to help Ydígoras stay in office. The covering memorandum bears Rubottom’s notation: “An excellent paper. Read during meeting 6/16.” ARA/OAP Files, Lot 61 D 473, “Guatemala”) No memorandum of conversation on Mallory’s June 16th meeting with Rubottom was found, but see Document GT–19 for a report by Mallory on the meeting.
