580  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
accomplish even more. Perhaps our efforts of 1907 can now be dupli-
cated in the economic sector. Both El Salvador and Honduras urgently 
need to integrate their economies—­this is not a capricious whim. El 
Salvador has a burgeoning population and practically no territory in 
which to expand, whereas Honduras has a vast area with a very small 
population; El Salvador has no Atlantic coast and Honduras has no 
developed areas on the Pacific; they are already joining their transpor-
tation routes and it would be easy to make their currencies convertible.
The President assured the visitors that they could count on the 
sympathetic attention of the United States to their problems, as well as 
our cooperation in every feasible way. President Lemus acknowledged 
that they had just seen practical evidence of this cooperation with the 
presence of Messrs, Frank and Turkel. He said also that, prior to his 
departure from San Salvador, President Villeda Morales of Honduras 
had empowered him to convey to the President Honduras’ hope that 
the U.S. would support the efforts to forge ahead with the integration 
program on an urgent basis.
The President suggested that it would also be helpful if every-­
body in the United States, irrespective of condition of health, would 
drink twelve cups of Sanka a day rather than just one or two cups of 
coffee. President Lemus acknowledged that this kind of help would 
also be appreciated.
President Lemus said that his colleagues would be discussing 
specific problems with their opposite numbers in the United States 
Government, but that he had needed to know the President’s own 
views.
With respect to communism, the President said that he assumed 
that the Salvadoran President shared his concern over its growth and 
inquired about Communist activities in Central America. President 
Lemus declared that communism was a world-­wide problem which 
they could not escape completely. Communism grows largely because 
of underdevelopment and low living standards, as well as the lack of 
sufficient education to discern between the facts and the propaganda 
put out by the Communists, such as that of placing the blame for all the 
world’s problems on the United States. This is not the case, of course. 
The Salvadoran President referred to his OAS speech of yesterday and 
the fact that the Communists are moving into intellectual groups, as 
well as economically impoverished groups, thus complicating the prob-
lem even more, since the poor and uneducated are greatly impressed 
when their superiors echo the Communist line. Greater effort must be 
made to solve economic problems, such as the opportunity offered by 
economic integration, to prevent the Communists from capitalizing on 
their efforts to move into these groups not heretofore penetrated by 
them.
