893.00/6260: Telegram [Document 582] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, June 13, 1925—3 p.m. [Received June 13—9 a.m.] 219. The following telegram has been received from the consul general at Hankow: “June 12, noon. Detachments of British sailors defending sailors [British?] Concession fired on mob Chinese coolies about 10:30 p.m. on 11th instant; four Chinese killed, six wounded. At 7:30 p.m. mob rushed southern end of the British bund throwing stones. At 8 o’clock British sailors were landed [as] the general alarm sounded. The mob was driven back and the roads around the Concession picketed and wire entanglements laid. Mob then proceeded to rear Concession and pressed into it forcing back one street the British naval forces unit and volunteers when the firing occurred. All foreign naval and volunteers forces including American guarding Concession, sailors defending boundaries and there is a cordon of Chinese troops beyond the boundaries to ward off rioters. Chinese authorities now control mob and further serious disorders not expected. Coolies had been instigated by student agitators. Commissioner of foreign affairs when first approached by British consul general was apathetic; and the detachment of troops sent tardily by garrison commander looked passively on and [sic] mob otherwise and [sic] shooting could have been avoided. One Japanese killed and five wounded by mob before the shooting occurred. All Japanese property on the back spaces of British Concession totally destroyed. One American gunboat now Hankow and two destroyers due today. These vessels desirable to furnish American quota of the forces required to carry out the defence scheme which as amended recently by the senior naval officer and volunteer commanders with the sanction of the consular body now includes special administrative district. British consul general has requested cruiser to be sent here. Consular body today decided to make strongest representations to the Tupan fixing responsibility for the incident on provincial authorities”. MAYER
