North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
1013
Attachment
Paper Prepared by Thomas Thornton of the National
Security Council Staff3
Washington, undated
NORTH-SOUTH AFFAIRS: THE OUTLOOK
While the impulse of the North-South relationship is political, its
content continues to be economic and is usually defined in terms of the
agenda set forth by the G–77 and in UNCTAD. By its nature, this
agenda is loaded against us—at least in terms of our short and
mid-range ability to respond effectively. The LDCs look to a different
distribution of the world’s resources and power—we find difficulties
here not only because we perceive ourselves to be pretty short of re-
sources at this time but also because we lack a strong base of public and
Congressional support for policies that affect international power rela-
tionships or cost money. Also, many believe that the demands being
put forth by the LDCs make little economic sense.
There are, however, bright spots in the picture. We have improved
our performance in some of the areas of concern to the LDCs. We came
out well on the aid budget this year; we will have a generally reason-
able posture in the next round of Common Fund negotiations; we have
pulled back from a potentially bitter confrontation over the COW
mechanism, and we have been forthcoming in a number of other spe-
cific areas. Movement in these areas, however, has not been sufficient
to offset growing LDC perceptions in the framework of the N/S dia-
logue that the United States has not altered its stance on NIEO issues.
But there are more bright spots when we move away from the
“G–77 agenda” items.
—On the political front, our actions in Southern Africa, the Middle
East and on the Panama Canal have been well received and bought us a
lot of support.
—In bilateral relationships we have made some significant steps
forward, especially in dealing with the emerging middle powers. While
this progress has been mainly in the political/psychological realm, it
has also been economic.
Unfortunately, there is relatively little feed-back among these
realms, except to the extent that the broad atmosphere of trust and con-
fidence generated by the Carter Administration on political issues has
3 Confidential.
