Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1111 11. Brooks said he would provide a paper on a solution to the issue of submarine tunnels and Andersen Air Force Base. The paper would be based on discussions in Washington. Nazarkin said he would study the paper when received. 12. Brooks and Nazarkin agreed on the need for a meeting later that lay on the subject of launcher and canister distinguishability. Brooks said it was important to understand the Soviet position. Nazarkin complained that the Soviet side did not understand the U.S. position. Brooks promised to study Article III, paragraph 6 before the meeting. 13. Nazarkin asked for clarification of Brooks’ current proposal with regard to currency of payment. Brooks said that the U.S. offer to accept hard currency in return for shifting the Asian point of entry to Khabarovsk remained on the table. Since the Soviet side rejected this approach, however, Brooks proposed (a) leaving Ulan Ude as the Asian point of entry, (b) dropping the Soviet paragraph requiring payment in convertible currency, and (c) including in the final plenary reciprocal statements saying that the question of currency of payment would be solved in broader context after treaty signature. Nazarkin said he thought such a solution would work and hoped to have authority to accept it by Monday, July 21. 14. Nazarkin said the Soviet side had problems with the U.S. management regime for retired and former ICBMs and SLBMs. Nazarkin asked if such missiles could not simply be treated as non-deployed missiles. Brooks said that this was, in essence, the U.S. proposal and asked for specific problems. Nazarkin said he was not certain of the exact problems, but promised to provide them to Brooks later in the day. 15. Returning to a discussion held the previous day, Nazarkin asked if Brooks could drop the U.S. proposal for treaty language allowing more than one storage building at a monitored facility. Nazarkin said that, because of bureaucratic considerations in Moscow, gaining approval would be time-consuming. Perhaps the U.S. side could simply make a unilateral statement that it would raise the issue in the joint compliance and inspection commission. Brooks said he would consult with his delegation and return to the subject later that day. 16. Nazarkin said that Deputy Foreign Minister Obukhov, Soviet technical expert Katayev, General Ladygin and Colonel Koltunov would arrive Sunday. Brooks said that, while he was sure such luminaries would be of great assistance, it appeared that what the Soviet side needed was translators. Nazarkin agreed and said he hoped that translators would also arrive. Nazarkin said that he would propose that Obukhov maintain general supervision, but not get involved in the types of details that Brooks and Nazarkin had discussed that day. Brooks said the U.S. side would adapt to any Soviet organization which helped get the job done. 17. Documents exchanged: Draft U.S. statement on SS–N–23 SLBM. Brooks
