956  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
as to have an opportunity to talk with them when they come through 
the United States.
Also at last night’s reception the Prime Minister (Siroky) took 
the initiative in asking about my negotiations here. I did a heavy mis­
sionary job on him saying I was discouraged and pessimistic because 
of the failure of the Chinese to carry out their promise to release the 
­Americans, the increasingly serious adverse effects this was having in 
the United States, and my concern over their unwillingness to renounce 
force in the Taiwan area. He made no counter argument or defense on 
their position, and for whatever it is worth, I believe was somewhat 
impressed with the reasonableness of our position. He commented that 
it was good that we were at least talking and implied the hope that the 
talks would not stop. When I raised the economic negotiations we are 
having with the Czechs in Prague he dismissed them as not really too 
important or difficult and not at all on the same scale of importance 
with our negotiations with the Chinese.
Thanks for your Letter No. 41 as well as for the very interesting 
enclosures.
Incidentally, with regard to the report that you mentioned was 
in the Hong Kong press on registration of families having students 
studying abroad, this report originally appeared in the Ta Kung Pao 
under Canton dateline of March 23 giving the full text of the proc­
lamation by the Kwangtung government (see Hong Kong’s China 
Mainland Press Survey No. 1259 of April 3, page 5). I had assumed 
that you had seen this.
I desire to thank you most sincerely for the arrangement with 
regard to Dave remaining here and the family being sent over. I feel that 
it is the ideal arrangement from every standpoint and I am most happy 
that the Department has been able to work it out. Needless to say, Dave 
is also delighted. I know that you will understand that my somewhat 
sharp note concerning administrative difficulties in my telegram from 
Prague was introduced only with the thought that it would help you in 
shaking loose the administrative end.
I hope that you will be equally successful in getting Ekvall’s sta­
tus extended so that we will not be faced with any last minute crisis 
concerning him. Incidentally, he went to Paris over the weekend and 
saw Gen. Moorman, the Army Attache there, and reports that he is 
completely cooperative. He says Moorman fully appreciates the impor­
tance of his assignment here and says that he will not raise any ques­
tion whatever concerning its extension. However, the initiative and 
additional orders for the extension of his detail must come from the 
­Department of Defense and Moorman can do nothing without authori­
zation from higher authority.
