988
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
302.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, October 18, 1979
SUBJECT
Letter from Begin on Oil Negotiations with Egypt (C)
At last Friday’s breakfast,2 you decided that we should not get in-
volved in mediating on oil prices between Israel and Egypt, in response
to Begin’s request (Tab B).3 (S)
Subsequently, Dayan has come to us with a renewed plea for a
positive response.4 Bob Strauss has suggested—and Cy and I concur—
that we try a middle course that is still designed to keep us at a dis-
tance, without making your response a flat turndown. This would be to
suggest a list of internationally-respected experts in the field, from
which Begin and Sadat could choose one or more to help. Begin would
have the responsibility for selling Sadat on the idea. (S)
This approach would put the ball back in Begin’s court; though we
should be under no illusions about the stakes involved, and the possi-
bility that Begin will come back to us again in an effort to get us to as-
sume responsibility. (S)
At Tab A is a message to Begin. The key element (paragraph 3) was
drafted by Bob Strauss.5 The rest is a State draft. The speechwriters
have cleared. (The cable will include talking points on our skepticism
that this sort of mediation can work.) (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you approve the message to Prime Minister Begin at Tab
A.6 (U)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Office, Presidential Advisory
Board, Box 78, Sensitive X: 10/79. Secret. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner
of the memorandum, Carter initialed “C,” indicating that he saw the document.
2 No memorandum of conversation for this October 12 breakfast meeting has been
found. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the meeting, involving Carter, Mondale,
Vance, Brown, Brzezinski, Jordan, Cutler, and Donovan, took place from 7:30 a.m. to 9:05
a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
3 See Document 300.
4 Not further identified.
5 Brzezinski inserted a handwritten footnote at the end of this sentence that reads:
“I added Vance’s name.”
6 Carter approved the recommendation.
