1956 783 2. The DRF Intelligence Report on the Foreign Ministers’ Conference. This is also an excellent piece of work and except for the following I concur with it. In the abstract and again on page 3 the paper gives the impression that the United States supports the GRC “legal” closure of the main­ land ports. I had always understood, and Dave confirms that it was also his understanding up to the time he left the Department, that we had never taken a position in support of this port closure. In fact it is my recollection that we protested it at the time it was imposed and I do not recall that we have ever withdrawn our protest. In any event I feel certain that Chou would never raise with us the question of GRC ter­ mination of this measure which he would regard as a “domestic”, that is GRC-­PRC matter. He might raise the question of U.S. material aid to the GRC in maintaining this policy and, thus, the U.S. “interference” in a Chinese “domestic” matter. With respect to the general thesis of Section IV, particularly the bot­ tom of page 7 and page 8, it seems to me most unlikely that the ­Chinese Communists would attempt an invasion of Taiwan (as opposed to the Offshore Islands) as a means of coercing the United States into a ­Foreign Ministers’ conference. If the Chicoms had reached the point of being able to mount such an invasion, they would be shooting for the complete elimination of the GRC and the possession of Taiwan. They would certainly not be prepared to suspend any such invasion for a Foreign Ministers’ conference or have any interest in such a conference until the battle had been decided. While not disagreeing with any of the listed motives under ­Section III of the Chinese Communists pressing for a Foreign Ministers’ confer­ ence, it seems that this Section slights a very major element. One of the reasons Chou made his bid for negotiations at Bandung was his appre­ ciation of the strong world and neutralist sentiment for peaceful nego­ tiations and the avoidance of war. On the positive side, the Chicoms want to enlist this sentiment behind their claims and policies. On the negative side, the Chicoms appreciate that it would be politically most unwise for them to initiate military action, even against the Offshores, without first having established the impression that they had exhausted all avenues of peaceful negotiation. By pressing for a Foreign Ministers’ meeting they are able to capitalize on this sentiment whether or not we agree to such a meeting. If we do not agree, they consider they will be able to reinforce their pose of willingness to negotiate being rebuffed by the United States. If we do agree to such a meeting and no “reduction of tensions in the Taiwan area” is accomplished, they will similarly hope to reinforce their pose of “reasonableness” being frustrated by U.S. “unrea­ sonableness”. In each of these situations they will hope to capitalize on the almost general absence of international support for the GRC position
