National Security Policy 55 2. A year ago2 it was clear, as evidenced by the Suez affair, that the Western alliance system was under great strain and that the USSR was making inroads in areas of the world where previously its political assets were minimal. These developments, serious though they were, seemed less grave than they do at present, because the Soviet bloc itself was suffering severe strains. The exposé and repudiation of Stalinist terrorism created unrest in the USSR and in the European satellites, and shocked many Communists in Western countries. The change of regime in Poland and the uprising in Hungary added to Soviet difficulties. The Communist world, in the aggregate, appeared to have weakened. 3. However, during 1957 the Soviet Union regained much of its lost ground. Control was restored in Eastern Europe, and the entire Soviet bloc took on an appearance of more unity and strength, dramatized at the 40th anniversary celebrations in Moscow during November. The USSR’s achievements and its comparatively unruffled emergence from major changes within its leadership have contributed to an air of recov­ ery and self-­confidence. 4. It was not in re-­establishing the equilibrium of the bloc, however, that the USSR made its most formidable gains. The principal develop­ ments of 1957 were the Soviet demonstration of scientific achievement in the field of rocketry, and the extraordinary impact which this demon­ stration made on the world. In underdeveloped and backward coun­ tries, for example, the Soviet accomplishment was widely acclaimed as proof of the intellectual, economic, and military progress which the USSR—­itself so recently an underdeveloped country—­had made. Throughout the world during the year 1957 the prestige of the USSR was enhanced. 5. The prospective Soviet achievement of an ICBM capability has brought into the minds of statesmen and peoples, for the first time, a general sense of US vulnerability to Soviet attack, and consequently a sense that a major change in the world military situation is impending. It is now generally believed that the USSR will, during the next year or two rather than at some time in the distant future, be able to inflict instant and crippling damage on North America, with a consequent deterrent power as effective as that which the US has exercised. The implications of this development are not yet fully understood, but there is some belief—­mixed with hope—­that a general war will be rendered less likely by the mutual capacity of the two great powers to destroy each other. Corollary to this belief in the existence of a condition of mutual deterrence is a strengthened conviction in the free world that, 2 See NIE 100–3–57, Estimate of the World Situation,” 29 January 1957. [Footnote is in the original.]
