International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
73
25.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, April 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Seven Nation Summit
I am transmitting a briefing book that includes:
—Three overall papers that Bob Hormats has prepared (drawing
on work by Dick Cooper, Arthur Burns, and CIA) about the interna-
tional economic setting, the international financial setting, and an over-
view of North-South issues;
—Six briefing papers on individual issues likely to arise at the
Summit: macro-economic policy, financial indebtedness, trade, energy,
North-South relations, and non-proliferation. The first five papers were
prepared by Bob Hormats and the last by Roger Waldman (NSC staff);
all draw on the work of other agencies.
The first step in preparing for the Summit is to ask: What are we
trying to achieve?
In one sense, we are trying to achieve something intangible: a close
personal understanding among the heads of government. This may be
the Summit’s most important result, but it’s not one I can do much
about, so I’ll simply note it and pass on to discuss our substantive
objectives.
You defined these well when you said in answer to a recent press
question about the London Summit: “Our own people are best served
when we . . . have open and free trade, when we have proper concern
about the less developed countries . . . when we have multilateral
lending institutions like the World Bank that can function effectively,
when we have a proper and multilateral approach to solving the
chronic and rapidly deteriorating energy circumstances . . .”2
The main goal of the Summit is to strengthen international institu-
tions for tackling these common problems, and to forge a strong inter-
national consensus about their solutions. Only heads of government
can provide the political impetus required to this end—and thus per-
suade peoples in the industrial world that their governments are coop-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 1, President, Europe, 5/5–10/77: Memos and Cables, 4/29/77–5/4/77. Confidential.
Sent for information. A handwritten notation at the top of the page reads: “DA—FYI.”
2 Carter made these remarks during an April 25 question-and-answer session with
European newspaper journalists in the Oval Office; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States: Jimmy Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 775–783.
