Afghanistan 141 ZB: The Pakistanis are not involved except that the insurgency started in three areas across the frontier from Pakistan. WS: They do not want to get too involved because they are afraid the Russians will step on them. DN: [2 lines not declassified] he protested to the Russians that they were making irresponsible accusations.3 VP: The Russians are getting away with murder and we should not take it. ZB: We have a few modest proposals for assisting the Afghans and the Pakistanis. We will be considering these items in the light of your helpful comments. We are sorry you have to leave now. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] ZB: In view of the Vice President’s comments—which are shared by the President—let us go first to the action proposals for Afghanistan. We have all read Stan’s paper—the proposals all involve either some assistance to the Pakistanis or direct financial aid to the insurgents (read summary of proposals). Let’s consider CIA’s options. We have already spent a lot of time discussing covert assistance to the Afghans. We are aware that a major insurgency is in progress. It is in our national interest that this insurgency continue even if it does not succeed. The question is whether any one of these steps would be helpful. We do not have a national policy that covert activity is to be abandoned. We have a national policy that covert activity should be undertaken when it is warranted. ST: I want to make the point that covert actions will not turn the tide but they could help sustain insurgency there. Whether we are going to overturn the government or not should not be the main question. This program has to be accompanied by a strong policy of support for Pakistan. Unless the Pakistanis feel we are going to live up to the 1959 treaty, they are not going to cooperate with us. Radio broadcasts are totally dependent upon them. We could not do them without their support . . . GB: Why can’t you just bring a ship up and do them from it? ZB: We can do only the smallest amount of support for the guerrillas without cooperation with the Pakistanis. I am concerned if we try to get sites for [less than 1 line not declassified] we have to relate these actions to other things we do—it is almost bound to leak. We are going to have to give a degree of guarantee to the Pakistanis in any case. This issue is really a State Department issue—how far we are willing to go in giving the Pakistanis support for the cooperation they give 3 Not found.
