International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues ticularly those which would directly address developing country needs. Without a clear signal that such initiatives are desired, the technical agencies have been very conservative in their approach. A letter from the IO and OES Assistant Secretaries on December 24 requested AID to help develop one or two possible initiatives for consideration by the new Administration (Tab 1). The reply was non-committal (Tab 2), although subsequently an initiative in the area of community water supply has been developed by AID at the staff level and endorsed by the U.S. Preparatory Committee.5 It is now being submitted to the Acting AID Administrator, but it is of relatively modest proportions, costing approximately $15 million over the next five years. We have identified the following as areas in which significant new initiatives might be constructed: food production; community water supply; and technology transfer. Examples of the types of initiatives which could be developed include: —New bilateral program of loans and technical assistance to LDCs to improve irrigation system operation and related infrastructure development. —Increased support for international research on improvement of erosion control, drainage, flood control and watershed protection in tropical areas. —Regional demonstration program on the application of remote sensing to water management as an extension of the AIDSAT satellite program. —Bilateral and multilateral technical support to LDCs for development of plans and institutions to accelerate provision of safe drinking water to rural populations (this will require pinning down and possibly strengthening AID initiative described in the previous paragraph). If you desire the U.S. to try to develop a higher profile role in the short time available, it will be necessary to enlist AID support. Further, such a decision would require short-term reprogramming of State personnel resources to support the necessary effort, with the possible requirement for an outside consultant. There is an outside possibility that the Conference could become a forum to debate highly politicized North-South issues (such as those involved in the New International Economic Order)6 or such strictly political issues as the Panama Canal. A constructive posture by the developed nations might limit or avoid this possibility. At present, however, our reading suggests that no other developed nation intends to make any commitment to new water programs at the Conference. With the exception of Sweden, and Canada to a limited extent, both the Western and Eastern nations have given the Water Conference relatively low pri- 5 Neither tab is attached.
