International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
593
dorse either conditional MFN or selective safeguards, I strongly recom-
mend that you request that a decision memo go to the President.
202.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, February 27, 1979
SUBJECT
Summit Themes for 1979 and 1980 (U)
1. 1979. Charlie Schultze and I believe that the main theme of the
Tokyo Summit should be structural change. Bonn focused on the
short-term macro-economic policy, partly because that was the best
framework in which to press for the German stimulus we wanted.
What we need from Japan is not a specific short-term action but meas-
ures—opening the Japanese market more to imports, and shifting to re-
liance on domestic demand rather than exports for Japanese growth—
which will take several years to accomplish. A Summit that focused on
long-term structural change would provide a framework for seeking
these Japanese measures. It would also provide a framework for ex-
amining energy and North-South problems which, by their nature, re-
quire long-term solutions. I will propose this theme to the March
meeting of the Summit Preparatory Group in Tokyo, and report back to
you.2 (C)
2. 1980. Gerard Smith and I believe that a major goal at the 1980
Summit should be to conclude an agreement regarding international
ownership and management of certain key elements of the nuclear fuel
cycle: reprocessing, enrichment, spent fuel shortage, and plutonium
storage. Gerry believes that negotiations, in and out of INFCE, may
have progressed far enough to make this feasible. Such an international
approach to nuclear energy would both advance non-proliferation and
meet nuclear energy legitimate needs; it would be a historic move,
comparable to the 1950 agreement between France and Germany to
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File,
Box 64, Summits: 1/78–8/79. Confidential. Sent for information. Both Carter and Brze-
zinski initialed at the top of the page.
2 In the margin adjacent to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “Not a very attractive
theme. Is it too obviously pointed at Japan?”
