344
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
Chancellor Schmidt asked about a natural gas vote in the Senate.
The President replied that a compromise proposal had come out of
the Senate conferences, and was going to the conferees of the House.
Following that there would be a vote. This is the first breakthrough in
months on energy.
Chancellor Schmidt returned to the subject of currency. Their
chances would be great of convincing the market, if there were no limit
on the instruments and the quantities that would be employed. The
smaller the quantities available, the less convincing would be their ef-
fect. They need to make the market believe that enormous quantities of
resources are available, and then they probably won’t have to use them.
The President said that he understood. Perhaps this could be re-
flected in the communique this weekend.
Chancellor Schmidt said that this was a consequence of his meeting
with Mike Blumenthal, recently.
The President said that that was a productive talk. And he said that
we were happy to have had the Finance Minister here. He is looking
forward to having the Chancellor here in May for the NATO Summit.6
But if in the meantime there are any problems, at any time, the Chan-
cellor should send a dispatch or phone him, and they would get it
resolved.
Chancellor Schmidt said he would do so if necessary. He thinks that
on currency questions, SALT, and the neutron bomb, we are having
very close consultations, for which he is personally gratified. These are
very deep consultations.
On the other hand, at the time of the NATO Summit, he would be
going for two days beforehand to the UN Special Session on Disarma-
ment to give a speech. There would be some time in between—perhaps
Saturday the 27th, or Sunday the 28th, or Monday the 29th—if the Pres-
ident thinks it would be worthwhile to have a private chat, he would be
happy to come by, perhaps just to slip into the White House for a talk.
The President said that this was very good, but they should see how
things go. He does not have his schedule with him, but that they could
work it out, if it seemed advisable.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to currency issues.]
6 A NATO Summit took place in Washington May 30–31.
