616
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Arabia. In the case of Egypt, we should substantially increase our pro-
gram, post-treaty, both quantitatively and by extending significant
FMS credits. We should not, however, lend our assistance to force
structure expansion in any of the four countries, and we should in par-
ticular encourage post-treaty force structure reduction in Egypt in ex-
change for our help in modernizing its forces. In Saudi Arabia we
should encourage the development over time of a more professional
army, not based solely on heavy and sophisticated equipment, but
equipped and tailored to the environment and the Saudi capabilities to
absorb. We should recognize that, at least in the case of the Army, the
prospects for real military capability are very limited.
3. We should not encourage at this stage build-up of arms in the
Gulf states. This issue needs further analysis.
4. The most serious threat to security is likely to be internal insta-
bility. We should review in depth our assessment of the political, eco-
nomic and social conditions in Saudi Arabia, Egypt and the Gulf states
to make sure our policies are best designed to minimize the develop-
ment of internal instability in those countries. This is particularly im-
portant in the case of Saudi Arabia, for reasons that are self-evident. It
is also true in Egypt, where former MOD Gamasy told me privately he
is worried about the effects on Army morale and attitudes of an erod-
ing economic position military personnel experience in their personal
lives. Where we have to make a choice we should give priority to eco-
nomic assistance designed to promote internal stability over arms
transfers.
5. We should plan further speeches and statements—by you and
others—built around the themes of my visit. This declaratory policy
will help maintain momentum and credibility. In doing this, we should
recognize that declaratory policy is no substitute for action and, indeed,
can be counterproductive if not matched with concrete implementing
steps.
Harold Brown
