825.506/8: Telegram [Document 405] The Ambassador in Chile (Collier) to the Secretary of State SANTIAGO, August 1, 1927—4 p.m. [Received August 2—3:15 p.m.] 97. My telegram number 64, May 13, 5 p.m. and despatches 1079, May 21st, and 1135, July 16th en route,32 with enclosures to the last. I report that insurance bill, modified and made more drastic, was sent recently to Congress with urgent message requesting immediate passage in form presented. This draft of law limits insurance business in future to nationally organized companies and requires that all reinsurance be effected through the caja of reinsurance. However, it permits foreign companies now doing [business?] in Chile to reorganize as national companies. Minister of Hacienda tells me that the general provision that two-thirds of stock must be owned by citizens or residents of Chile does not apply to last-mentioned case and that existing foreign companies may reorganize and stock may be held by foreigners in the same proportions as at present. Agents for American companies dread requirement of reorganization as national companies because of great powers given to Superintendent of Insurance who may not only fix rates but determine amount of risk that may be carried and dictate with what company reinsurance may be effective. Nevertheless agents of American companies believe that the grant of such powers to Superintendent of Insurance, although apt to be exercised capriciously for the purpose [of] driving foreign insurance out of business, cannot be questioned in principle as violative of international or constitutional right. Proposed legislation does not appear confiscatory unless refusal to allow continuance of a business which has acquired a goodwill value can be so considered. In order to prevent insurance from being written by foreign owners of property located in Chile in foreign companies, the act as now drafted in section 59 imposes tax on such policies equal to half of premium that would be charged by Chilean national companies and imposes very heavy fines in
