402 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III and continuing improvement in both the world and German economy, carrying well beyond 1978 and 1979. (In all of this, it will be well to avoid the term “stimulus”, since Schmidt equates this with short-term “quickie” measures; you might speak, rather, of action to achieve sustained economic growth.) 6. Conclusion. If Schmidt leaves Washington with a clear understanding of the importance that you attach to German action on growth and US action on energy, the chances of his taking the lead in developing a successful Summit are reasonably good.12 The critical point to convey is that a successful Summit will require that all countries shape their policies in ways that contribute to world recovery. We agree with the Chancellor that the Summit should not be the occasion for programmatic decisions (a point on which the Chancellor feels strongly); but it should be the occasion for defining policy directions. A meeting that resulted only in an exchange of views would be widely criticized. 12 In a June 9 memorandum to Carter, Owen discussed two pieces of “evidence that your breakfast with Schmidt was useful,” concluding that it had begun “to look as though our package strategy may pay off.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 24, German Federal Republic: 4–6/78) 132. Decision Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal and Acting Secretary of Commerce Harman to President Carter1 Washington, May 30, 1978 SUBJECT Export Tax Incentive We have been fighting for repeal of the Domestic International Sales Corporation (DISC) on the grounds that it is not cost-effective. 1 Source: Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject File, Box TA–6, TA 3 1/1/78–5/31/78. No classification marking. Sent to Carter under cover of a May 30 memorandum from Blumenthal, who wrote: “We decided at EPG last Thursday [May 25] to have the attached decision memorandum on DISC forwarded immediately, as the Ways and Means Committee is presently marking up the tax bill. It is in keeping with the Export Task Force package to be presented to you on June 15 and has the endorsement of the Task Force’s membership.” (Ibid.) Minutes of the May 25 EPG meeting were not found.
