230 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement b. Allied Capabilities (1) The indigenous forces which we might find it necessary to support in limited military operations will have widely varying capa­ bilities. Some, such as the GRC and ROK forces, have significant capa­ bilities on the ground. Practically all have marked deficiencies in air and naval capabilities. (2) Very few of our allies could or would provide significant forces for limited military operations outside their national territory. Most lack capa­ bility. Some, e.g. Pakistan facing a real or assumed threat from India, would be loath to send substantial forces abroad. The provision of forces by oth­ ers, e.g. France in the Middle East, would be politically disadvantageous. (3) Our allies can provide base and other facilities that will ease and lend flexibility to the application of United States power in limited military operations. c. Political Considerations (1) Failure by the United States to undertake effective limited mil­ itary operations in support of other free nations in situations such as those examined would have seriously adverse consequences through­ out the free world, particularly among our allies, and would encourage the Communists to adopt a more aggressive posture. (2) Anticipation of the need for United States limited military oper­ ations in developing situations and the earliest possible decisions (i) to intervene if necessary and (ii) on the nature and objectives of the inter­ vention are essential. (3) We need the political support of our allies for United States limited military operations. We should also ensure that appropriate regional collective security organizations and their members have some military role, no matter how minor, in such operations in order to maintain the solidarity and raison d’etre of these organizations. (4) Emotional aversion to nuclear weapons is widespread in the free world, particularly among Asians, and our use of these weapons in limited military operations would incur seriously adverse political consequences. 4. We make the following additional observations. a. The study understandably devotes relatively little attention to the deterrent aspects of United States capabilities for limited military operations. Deterrence of local aggression undertaken or inspired by, or serving the interests of, the Communists is a major aim. As the study suggests, timely political action supported by capabilities for limited operations can frequently avert the need for the commitment of United States forces in combat. b. The determinative factors in decisions as to the initiation and conduct of United States limited military operations are political rather than military. In practically all likely situations, it is the political
