Comprehensive Test Ban
603
Some possible Soviet reactions to our proposal are as follows:
—They may not respond at all for some time, or they may respond
negatively.
—They may renew their proposal for two sets of NSS equipment
and the five components.
—They may react positively in principle but have specific ideas re-
garding the features of the joint effort.
In any event, if the Soviets are receptive to the idea of a joint pro-
gram, it will take considerable time to work out its main features, and
we will have time to develop our specific approach in response to So-
viet reactions to our loan offer. If further study of the technology
transfer issue is deemed appropriate, this should provide time for such
a study to be undertaken and to be factored in as we plan our specific
approach. It would be desirable for internal US planning purposes,
however, to proceed to work out the details of our proposal for a joint
NSS test effort as we see it.
C. Issue for Decision
For now, the issue for decision is whether to withdraw our proto-
type NSS loan offer or to let it stand; and if we let it stand, how the Del-
egation should deal with it in the February round. There are three basic
options:
Option 1. Withdraw the NSS prototype loan offer.
—Would reinforce general post-Afghanistan technology transfer
policy.
—Would send a clear signal to the Soviets regarding the negative
consequences for a CTB (and arms control generally) of their invasion
of Afghanistan.
—Would constitute a setback to CTB negotiations, probably pre-
cluding further progress on verification issues for some time. Could
lead to collapse of the negotiations.
—Could precipitate public charges by the Soviets that the US had
undermined the CTB negotiations.
—Could jeopardize long-term US objective of having our equip-
ment used at NSS in the USSR, since Soviets could claim that US refusal
to transfer US equipment left them no alternative but to use their own
equipment.
—Could deny us information from prototype testing that might be
useful in relation to estimating yields of Soviet high yield tests.
Option 2. Let prototype loan offer stand but do not press for Soviet
response.
—Would neither promote progress in the negotiations nor consti-
tute a setback.
—Would facilitate Soviets resisting progress on joint program
pending resolution of other issues such as UK NSS question.
