Hungary
465
153.
Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant
(Jordan) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
RE
RETURN OF THE CROWN TO HUNGARY
I hope that you will review the attached memorandum from Pat
Caddell.2
I have checked around on the support for the return of the Crown
as well as the opposition to it. There is no way to discern scientifically
how Hungarian Americans feel about this issue. But basically, my
feeling is that those who have feelings about it oppose the return of
the Crown overwhelmingly. Former government officials and educated
Hungarians may have a more enlightened view of this matter, but the
average Hungarian American is opposed to this action because the
alleged benefit to the people of Hungary has not been explained and
is difficult to explain. Their reaction to our return of the Crown is emotional
and not an enlightened view. I wish you could have stayed at the meeting
to hear the former Mayor of Budapest describe what the Crown means
to him.3 It was emotional and very touching.
We mislead ourselves to think that the Hungarian-American com-
munity is closely divided on this issue. It is not. If it were, you would
not have had members of Congress and the leaders of all of the Captive
Nation organizations protesting this decision.
It is one thing for us to suffer domestically with a group of people
in pursuit of a major policy that is important to us and the world (the
Mideast, for example). It is quite another for us to suffer politically
for an action that has very little—if any—redeeming features. We are
alienating the Hungarian community in this country in hopes of gaining
1 Source: Carter Library, Chief of Staff Files, Hamilton Jordan’s Confidential Files,
Box 34B, Hungary—Crown of St. Stephen. Personal and Confidential. Carter initialed
the memorandum indicating that he saw it.
2 Dated November 9, attached but not printed. The memorandum is not from Pat
Cadell, but from John Gorman of Cambridge Survey Research and analyzes the effect
of voters from East European backgrounds. A 20-point swing in Carter’s favor, Gorman
wrote, would have given Carter a win in California, Illinois, and New Jersey. A swing
in the other direction would have cost Carter New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and
Wisconsin. The survey concluded that “without the significant support of East European
voters in the 1976 election Jimmy Carter would not have been elected President.” Jordan
also forwarded the attached memorandum to Brzezinski. (Ibid.)
3 See Document 152.
