492
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
revolutionary opportunities created by the present political conditions
in the world, disturbing evidence of present Soviet policy directions.
Military Assistance to Pakistan
Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary Vance commented that the President’s
meeting with Agha Shahi went as well as could be expected.3 Secretary
Brown asked how we will deal with the situation if the Pakistanis insist
they want $1 billion in aid while we only offered $400 million. Secretary
Vance predicted that they will take our $400 million and complain, not
reject our aid.
Dr. Brzezinski asked about the French willingness to sell the Mirage
aircraft to Pakistan. Secretary Vance reported that the French will prob-
ably supply the Mirage. As a next step, it will be discussed at the
Political Directors Meeting in London on January 24th. State will push
France to make a decision by then.
Dr. Brzezinski raised the question of American A–7 aircraft for
Pakistan. It was pointed out that the Pakistanis did not ask for them.
Rather they asked that they be supplied with aircraft sufficient to
protect themselves against the Soviet air threat, implying, of course,
for the need for the US F–16 or the Mirage. The A–7, as Dr. Brzezinski
pointed out, would be very useful in a ground support role along the
Western frontier. Furthermore, because the U.S. has a large number,
nearly 700, it can undoubtedly spare 30 or 40. Secretary Brown agreed
the Pakistanis might be willing to buy some A–7s.
Military Consortium
Dr. Brzezinski asked for Defense’s proposal for a division of labor
among the members of the military consortium. Secretary Brown sub-
mitted a paper showing which countries can produce what categories
of military equipment. The issue of who pays remains to be solved,
he added. Secretary Vance noted that according to Agha Shahi, the
Saudis promised Pakistan $800 million for military purchases over a
year ago but have not yet delivered. We should press the Saudis to
make the promise good.
Concerning Japan, Vance has instructed Phil Habib to ask the Japa-
nese for $400 million for the consortium. They may give less, but Vance
feels we should ask for that much. We will get little from Britain and
France, he continued, but the French should be willing to sell them
aircraft and the British will certainly be willing to sell tanks and tank
guns. Secretary Brown added that the U.S., France, and Germany can
provide anti-tank weapons, much needed for insurgency and defense.
3 See Document 163.
