944  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
NSC–52, it is necessary to achieve quietly a stronger military presence 
in the region by gradual shifts in our military exercise activities and 
basing of U.S. forces in the Southeastern part of the United States and 
its territories in the region which will be perceived by Cuba and the 
Soviet Union as evidence of our determination to limit Soviet and 
Cuban regional influence. (S)
Sharing the Security Burden with Our Allies
Because the Soviet military buildup and the projection of Soviet 
military power have increased our strategic requirements, we must 
make more effort and devise better ways to share the economic and mil-
itary burden with our Allies. We must insist that our European Allies 
undertake the programs and make available the resources needed to 
make up for the reduction in U.S. force commitments caused by our 
effort oriented toward the Persian Gulf. At the same time, certain of our 
Allies, particularly the British, French, and Australians, should contrib-
ute forces to the security framework for the Persian Gulf.3 (S)
Germany, other members of NATO, ANZUS, and Japan should 
contribute non-­military resources such as economic assistance to the 
security framework. Two countries which flank Southwest Asia and 
would be most important recipients of this economic aid—­as well as of 
military aid from selected donors—­would be Turkey and Pakistan. (S)
Our European and regional Allies should provide overflight, 
­transit and staging for U.S. forces moving to Southwest Asia. 
­Procedures should be established to facilitate overflight and refueling 
­clearances. (S)
Arms Control
Arms control negotiations which promise to constrain Soviet 
forces—­strategic and general purpose—­and particularly to limit 
resources that both sides must commit to the strategic competition 
will be pursued vigorously. This latter element of our strategy must 
be exploited to the extent possible for alleviating both the economic 
burdens of defense and for reducing the likelihood of the use of nuclear 
weapons. (S)
Persian Gulf Security Framework
Presidential Directive/NSC–63 elaborates U.S. strategy for the 
­Persian Gulf and Southwest Asia region.4 (C)
Zbigniew Brzezinski
3 Carter drew a checkmark in the left margin next to this paragraph.
4 See footnote 3, Document 221.
