1038 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 318. Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States (Evron) to President Carter1 Washington, December 12, 1979 My dear Mr. President: I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the following message: “Dear Mr. President, I thank you for your letter of December 6, delivered to me by Ambassador Sol Linowitz.2 Your generous words of appreciation are very dear to me. In the course of his visit, Ambassador Linowitz had the opportunity to meet with my colleagues3 and received detailed information on the various aspects of the negotiations relating to the autonomy for the Arab inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District. These negotiations continue apace and we are all hopeful that we shall succeed in overcoming the difficulties and reaching agreement. On January 7, 1980, I am scheduled to travel to Aswan at the invitation of President Sadat for a direct personal exchange of views between us. Meanwhile, here in Jerusalem, Ambassador Linowitz and I held a lengthy private talk which we both concluded was immensely useful and enjoyable. Permit me now, Mr. President, to turn to you with an urgent personal request. As you are aware, Israel has, over the years, been confronted with objective difficulties in the economic domain emanating mainly from 1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel, 4/79–11/81. No classification marking. In the upper right-hand corner of the letter, Carter initialed “C,” indicating that he saw the document. 2 Reference is to a short letter from Carter to Begin, dated December 6, and presented to the Prime Minister by Linowitz on December 11. Linowitz, Carter wrote, “has my complete confidence and will speak to you on my behalf and with full authority. “Now that we are halfway through the period for negotiating full autonomy for the West Bank and Gaza,” Carter continued, “I believe we should look forward, with our Egyptian partners, to demonstrable progress that can be made in the near future. We have set a difficult task for ourselves, but one that is vitally important for the security and future of your nation and for the prospects of a just and lasting peace throughout the region. I am fully committed to support this effort.” Carter concluded: “Your courage and determination to move the peace process forward is a source of inspiration to me. You again demonstrated your commitment in turning back the oil fields on schedule—an act of statesmanship that has not been adequately recognized.” A similar letter was prepared by Carter for Sadat. Both letters are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: President Anwar al-Sadat, 1–12/79) 3 See Document 316.
