1038
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
318.
Letter From the Israeli Ambassador to the United States
(Evron) to President Carter1
Washington, December 12, 1979
My dear Mr. President:
I have been asked by Prime Minister Begin to transmit to you the
following message:
“Dear Mr. President,
I thank you for your letter of December 6, delivered to me by Am-
bassador Sol Linowitz.2 Your generous words of appreciation are very
dear to me.
In the course of his visit, Ambassador Linowitz had the opportu-
nity to meet with my colleagues3 and received detailed information on
the various aspects of the negotiations relating to the autonomy for the
Arab inhabitants of Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District. These negoti-
ations continue apace and we are all hopeful that we shall succeed in
overcoming the difficulties and reaching agreement.
On January 7, 1980, I am scheduled to travel to Aswan at the invita-
tion of President Sadat for a direct personal exchange of views between
us. Meanwhile, here in Jerusalem, Ambassador Linowitz and I held a
lengthy private talk which we both concluded was immensely useful
and enjoyable.
Permit me now, Mr. President, to turn to you with an urgent per-
sonal request.
As you are aware, Israel has, over the years, been confronted with
objective difficulties in the economic domain emanating mainly from
1 Source: Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2,
Israel, 4/79–11/81. No classification marking. In the upper right-hand corner of the
letter, Carter initialed “C,” indicating that he saw the document.
2 Reference is to a short letter from Carter to Begin, dated December 6, and pre-
sented to the Prime Minister by Linowitz on December 11. Linowitz, Carter wrote, “has
my complete confidence and will speak to you on my behalf and with full authority.
“Now that we are halfway through the period for negotiating full autonomy for the West
Bank and Gaza,” Carter continued, “I believe we should look forward, with our Egyptian
partners, to demonstrable progress that can be made in the near future. We have set a dif-
ficult task for ourselves, but one that is vitally important for the security and future of
your nation and for the prospects of a just and lasting peace throughout the region. I am
fully committed to support this effort.” Carter concluded: “Your courage and determina-
tion to move the peace process forward is a source of inspiration to me. You again dem-
onstrated your commitment in turning back the oil fields on schedule—an act of states-
manship that has not been adequately recognized.” A similar letter was prepared by
Carter for Sadat. Both letters are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezin-
ski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 5, Egypt: Presi-
dent Anwar al-Sadat, 1–12/79)
3 See Document 316.
