official intention to repudiate that war-time debt—the publication of a balance sheet, listing the obligations of the French Republic, that absolutely omits the debt to America or the debt to Great Britain incurred during the time of the war—and I do not believe that the United States Senate ought to take an adjournment after the publication of that balance sheet without some voice being raised in protest against it. I make no threats. I do not believe that anyone in the Senate desires to make any threats. I know that I speak wholly out of friendship for France, but with an acute realization of the fact that American taxpayers are paying every day a debt that France owes. France must be told by her friends that her inaction in this matter throughout the past 5 years has puzzled those of us who look toward her most affectionately, and she should be told that this publication of last week has alarmed her friends and alarmed them very gravely. France must be made to see—and when I speak of France I speak of her because this publication comes from the French ministry, although what I say applies as well to the other countries that are still in the same position—that her present course can result only in a chilling of that affection that she has found to exist here in America throughout the past decades. It can have only that result, Mr. President, and she must be told it by her friends, and she must be told that each day of delay in achieving a refunding of that debt makes it more difficult to grant her leniency in terms of payment. Her taxpayers deserve consideration. Their sufferings must be remembered, and the terms of payment must take into account the difficulties of payment on her part, but each day that she waits makes that more difficult of achievement. And, finally, she must be told by her friends that future French loans in America would be made impossible by a repudiation of the existing debt.” 3) In reply to an inquiry from one of the correspondents at the morning press conference yesterday, I pointed out, not for quotation, that “What Mr. Clémentel had said was not an official communication to this Government; that it had not been communicated to this Government directly or indirectly. So far as its communications to us were concerned the French Government had never suggested that it repudiated its obligations or asked for their cancellation. On the contrary the French Government had always stated to us that it expected to pay although it had stated its difficulties in arranging for payment and that it would like to have easy terms. Only recently the French Ambassador had stated that France did not ask for a cancellation of its debt and when the French Commission was here some time ago, headed by Mr. Parmentier, while they were not ready to make a funding proposition they did not ask that the debt should be cancelled or repudiate its obligations. So it is my understanding that France acknowledges
