Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 365 50. Memorandum of Conversation1 Jackson Hole, Wyoming, September 22, 1989, 5–7 p.m. MEETING U.S.-Soviet Ministerial Working Group on Arms Control PLACE Moose I room, Jackson Lake Lodge, Jackson Hole, Wyoming Ambassador Bartholomew welcomed Karpov and his colleagues, indicated that he planned first to address START and D&S and then move on to other subjects, and offered the floor to Karpov. Ambassador Karpov said that leading off with START and D&S was fine and that the Soviet delegation would use “simultaneous whispering” interpretation for the non-English speakers. Bartholomew proceeded by outlining U.S. views on D&S. He noted that U.S. goals remained unchanged. We were committed to protecting our right to ABM research, development and testing as required, which are permitted by the ABM Treaty. We would continue to explore effective strategic defenses in order to be in a position to make an informed decision on deployment—­and to deploy effective strategic defenses when they are ready. It thus remained essential for a D&S agreement not to foreclose future possibilities or to contain limits on SDI beyond those of the ABM Treaty. Moreover, a START Treaty should not be held hostage to reaching agreement on D&S. Bartholomew said the U.S. noted with interest President Gorbachev’s references in his letter2 to D&S as well as comments provided by Minister Shevardnadze. With respect to the idea of dropping the non-­withdrawal period, we of course had no objection as this was a Soviet proposal. We assumed there were no preconditions for this move. With respect to the proposal for defining specifically what can be done within the framework of the ABM Treaty, this sounded like a renewal of the Soviet “list” proposal of 1987, which we believed was more restrictive than the ABM Treaty and presented major verification problems. U.S. initiatives for clarifying what could be done under the ABM Treaty—­on notification of testing in space and on not objecting to each other’s space-­based sensors—­did not have these drawbacks. The Soviet side should work with these initiatives. Bartholomew said he wanted to check his understanding of what he had heard from the Soviet side on START-ABM linkage. According 1 Source: Department of State, Verification, Compliance and Implementation, Subject Files, 1983–2005, Lot 06D436, Wyoming Ministerial, Sept. 18–23, 1989. Secret. The meeting took place in the Moose I room of the Jackson Lake Lodge. 2 See Document 49.
