traffic within a zone not exceeding ten miles (15 kilometres) wide on either side of its customs frontier, or to the treatment which is accorded by the United States to the commerce of Cuba under the provisions of the Commercial Convention concluded by the United States and Cuba on December 11, 1902, or any other commercial convention which hereafter may be concluded by the United States with Cuba, or to the commerce of the United States with any of its dependencies and the Panama Canal Zone under existing or future laws.” Comparing this revised draft with the draft proposed by the Department on pages 5, 6, and 7 of Instruction No. 566 of April 2, it will be noted that the clause in the third line of paragraph 2, to wit, “or bases of such duties or charges” is objected to on the ground that it does not appear in the text of the German or Hungarian treaties, and that its meaning is obscure. The words “nor shall any such duties, charges, conditions or prohibitions on importations be made effective retroactively on imports already cleared through the customs or on goods declared for entry into consumption in the country” are of course also new, and not found in the German or Hungarian treaties. There was no objection, however, to adding the words “nor shall any such duties, charges, conditions or prohibitions on importations be made effective retroactively”. There was a willingness to accept all of the new language proposed, provided there be added the words: “but it is understood that prohibitions on importations existing at the time the imports are cleared through the customs may nevertheless be applied”. The Austrian difficulty is this. The negotiators are quite willing to agree that duties, charges, conditions and prohibitions shall not be retroactive, but they say certain import prohibitions cannot be applied until after importation. For example, obscene reading matter would, under the Austrian customs system, encounter little or no difficulty on entry, although an import prohibition exists against it, but it would subsequently very likely be confiscated by the police. A film might be imported without difficulty— customs officials could not judge of its character—but it could not be exposed until it had received the approval of the censors. Therefore some language is desired to save the right of making such import prohibitions in force at the time of entry effective after the goods have been cleared through the customs. The language here proposed is my own, incorporating
