Guatemala 687 equipment. He said that in the matter of the two Bailey bridges, which had been pending since January, it was hoped that an early and favorable response to this request would be forthcoming. The Ambassador was informed that the Department understood that the two bridges would cost in the neighborhood of $120,000. Mr. King then raised the recent request of Guatemala for the use, on a loan basis, of a large sea-­going dredge,3 said to be in the possession of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in the Panama Canal Zone. Mr. King said this was a rather unusual request and it would be necessary to ascertain from the Department of Defense whether the United States Army Corps of Engineers had such a dredge available, where it was located, and whether it was feasible to move it by sea to Guatemala. The Ambassador said the Guatemalan Government would assume all expenses of moving the dredge to Guatemala, and returning it to the United States Army. Mr. King said the Department hoped to have further information in this connection for the Ambassador shortly. Mr. Leggett said he wished to raise another request of Guatemala which the Ambassador had not discussed with Assistant Secretary Rubottom on April 1. This was for six B–26 surplus bombers, Mr. Leggett reviewed the present tense situation existing in almost all Caribbean countries, and said that the United States, in the interest of relieving this tension, was not, at the present time, authorizing the shipment of certain combat equipment to the area. He said that the B–26s were considered in this category. Mr. Leggett emphasized that withholding approval of shipments of airplanes and certain other military equipment was merely a temporary measure dictated by the present situation in the Caribbean, and that it was hoped it would be possible at an early date to authorize resumption of shipments of military equipment legitimately needed. He said the Department felt it would not be helpful to relieving tension in the area if planes and other equipment were made available to the Caribbean countries at this time from United States sources, and that the United States chief interest in this matter was contributing to restoration of calm in the area. The Ambassador indicated that he appreciated the Department’s view regarding this matter, and inquired whether this policy applied to other countries as well as to Guatemala. Mr. Leggett said that it did, and that it in fact would normally apply to all countries in an area of tension. The Ambassador asked whether suspension of approval of sale of the B–26’s applied also to a number of training planes that Guatemala had requested. Mr. King said that he understood what had held up the training planes was that the Guatemalan Government had found that the prices asked by the Defense Department were too high. The Ambassador 3 Guatemalan request was not found in the Department of State files.
