492
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.3 As you
know, the genocide convention was also adopted by the United Na-
tions General Assembly 30 years ago this week, 1 day before the adop-
tion of the Universal Declaration. It was the world’s affirmation that the
lesson of the Holocaust would never be forgotten, but unhappily, geno-
cide is not peculiar to any one historical era.
Eighty-three other nations have ratified the genocide convention.
The United States, despite the support of every President since 1948,
has not. In international meetings at the United Nations and elsewhere,
when I meet with foreign leaders, we are often asked why. We do not
have an acceptable answer.
I urge the United States Senate to observe this anniversary in the
only appropriate way, by ratifying the genocide convention at the ear-
liest possible date.
This action must be the first step toward the ratification of other
human rights instruments, including those I signed a year ago.4 Many
of the religious and human rights groups represented here have under-
taken a campaign of public education on behalf of these covenants. I
commend and appreciate your efforts.
Refugees are the living, homeless casualties of one very important
failure on the part of the world to live by the principles of peace and
human rights. To help these refugees is a simple human duty. As
Americans, as a people made up largely of the descendants of refugees,
we feel that duty with special keenness.
Our country will do its utmost to ease the plight of stranded ref-
ugees from Indochina and from Lebanon and of released political pris-
oners from Cuba and from elsewhere. I hope that we will always stand
ready to welcome more than our fair share of those who flee their
homelands because of racial, religious, or political oppression.
The effectiveness of our human rights policy is now an established
fact. It has contributed to an atmosphere of change—sometimes dis-
turbing—but which has encouraged progress in many ways and in
many places. In some countries, political prisoners have been released
by the hundreds, even thousands. In others, the brutality of repression
has been lessened. In still others there’s a movement toward demo-
cratic institutions or the rule of law when these movements were not
previously detectable.
To those who doubt the wisdom of our dedication, I say this: Ask
the victims. Ask the exiles. Ask the governments which continue to
practice repression. Whether in Cambodia or Chile, in Uganda or South
3 See footnote 7, Document 9.
4 See footnote 9, Document 9.
