520 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV The Soviets’ heavy dependence on silo-­based ICBMs would make them especially mindful of the survivability of these weapons. —The top two graphs show the increasing vulnerability of US Minuteman silos caused by Soviet deployment of accurate MIRVed ICBMs. For these calculations, we use a severe damage criterion, which we assume is the conceptual equivalent of what a prudent Soviet planner would use in evaluating his own capability. —The top right-­hand graph shows that if the Soviets elect to employ and can successfully execute two-­on-­one targeting tactics to compound the probability of destroying US silos, the number of Minuteman silos which would be expected to escape severe damage from a Soviet strike would be about 200 in 1980–81. This number would decrease to fewer than 100 in the mid-1980s and afterward. —The bottom two graphs, on the other hand, show that the ongoing Soviet silo-­hardening program largely offsets the improvements the United States has made and plans to make in the hard-­target potential of its current types of ICBMs. Some 500 to 700 Soviet silos would survive attacks by currently programed types of US ICBMs during the period. The number of RVs in surviving Soviet silos, not shown on the chart, would in fact increase as the Soviets deploy more MIRVs. —With respect to the graphs on Soviet silo survivability, it should be noted that our estimates of Soviet silo hardness are subject to considerable uncertainty. Further, we have no basis for estimating total system hardness, which is the criterion the Soviets would use. The continued testing of silo hardness, and a current program to modify even their newest silos and launch control centers, indicate that the Soviets are still seeking to improve their ICBM system survivability. 9. Charts 4 and 5 display trends in the destructive potential of intercontinental striking forces remaining after hypothetical counterforce attacks by the ICBMs of one side on the other.7 This is another simplified measure of some of the factors relevant to strategic capabilities, to perceptions about them, and to deterrence. (For a divergent view about the utility of this type of measure, see paragraph 13.) The calculations assume that the attacking side employs only ICBMs and strikes only at the retaliatory forces and bases of the other side. Clearly these are arbitrary limitations which neither side would likely follow in practice, although bombers and SLBMs are less useful than ICBMs for first-­ strike counterforce attacks against fast-­reaction enemy forces. Using these assumptions, we make subtractions of two kinds from prelaunch potentials in order to show what we call residual forces. —For the attacking side, residual forces are those ICBMs not used in the hypothetical counterforce attack plus all those SLBMs and bomber weapons that could be generated. Thus, for the attacker, the residuals are those forces available for other missions, either at the time of the first strike or later. 7 Charts 4 and 5 are attached but not printed.
