1979  519
of intercontinental striking forces.5 For purposes of measurement and 
comparison, we assume in each case that every online weapon in the 
intercontinental forces of both sides is to be used for one or the other of 
two generic applications: lethal area potential assumes exclusive use of 
all weapons to destroy soft area targets; hard-­target potential assumes 
exclusive use to destroy hard point targets. For a common base of com-
parison, the damage criterion for soft targets is set at a level sufficient to 
destroy a reinforced concrete building, while for hard targets it is set at 
a level sufficient to destroy a representative hard missile silo.
—It should be noted that the graphs in chart 2 display rough mea-
sures of prelaunch potential against notional targets of purely nominal 
hardness. They do not reflect real-­world economic or military target 
sets, targeting plans, or operational attributes of weapon systems which 
would affect their utility in intercontinental warfare.
—The left-­hand graph shows that the USSR’s program to deploy 
MIRV warheads of relatively high yield will cause its lead in lethal area 
potential to increase. The absolute potentials of both sides are very 
large, however. Even at the stringent damage criterion chosen, the total 
US lethal area potential today is [3 lines not declassified]
—The right-­hand graph shows that the USSR’s program to deploy 
MIRVed ICBMs with improved accuracies and relatively high yield 
warheads will cause Soviet hard-­target potential to match and slightly 
surpass that of the United States beginning in about 1980. At that time 
each side will have the theoretical potential to destroy [less than one line 
not declassified] hard targets. These theoretical potentials will more than 
double by 1988. During this period, there will be many more hardened 
targets in the USSR than in the United States: in the USSR, some 1,400 
to 1,600 hard ICBM silos and launch control centers plus hundreds of 
bunkers of varying lesser hardnesses; in the United States, some 1,100 
to 1,200 hard silos and launch control centers but only a small number 
of other hardened facilities. It should be noted that most of the Soviet 
capability is in ICBMs with flight times of about 30 minutes, whereas 
a large portion of the US capability is in weapons carried by bombers 
with flight times on the order of 10 hours.
8. Chart 3 illustrates the countersilo capabilities of Soviet ICBMs, 
which make up that portion of the Soviet force best suited to a first 
strike against fast-­reaction opposing forces.6 This consideration would 
be of particular importance to the Soviets’ assessments of the capabil-
ities of their intercontinental offensive forces, because their military 
doctrine stresses countermilitary targeting to contribute to damage-­
limiting objectives. The chart also illustrates the vulnerability of Soviet 
ICBM silos to a first strike by US ICBMs of programed types (that is, 
excluding M–X or a system with comparable hard-­target capabilities). 
5 Chart 2 is attached but not printed.
6 Chart 3 is attached but not printed.
