196
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
put in a “working hypothesis”, or some form of words. We could use
French help in keeping to the October and November dates.
On orderly arrangements, the word “orderly” has a history. “Or-
derly marketing” (used by the U.S.) sounds good, but it really means
quotas. The word, therefore, causes some concern; and it should not be
seen as leading to protectionism. Safeguards are needed—we need
them, too—as in textiles, steel, shoes (the Prime Minister said “ship-
building”)—where all countries have some concerns. Therefore, we
should go forward with the MTN timetable, so that there can be some
significant cuts, no doubt with some exceptions, while negotiating min-
imal safeguards to protect against undue social consequences of too
rapid growth. If the MTN calendar slips, it would be unfortunate. That
would encourage protectionism in the U.S.—people will say we want
our own measures to deal with the problem.
The President asked what political pressures are on Barre as the
election approaches—for greater stimulation and more jobs? Are they
significant?
The Prime Minister said that the election process had been going on
since last October. He used to say there were no such pressures. They
pursued cautious policies, while sustaining economic activity. They
tried and succeeded in preventing a recession. But it is not possible to
protect the franc, improve the balance of payments, and stimulate the
economy vigorously. At the end of August, they contributed to growth
(i.e. stimulus). If this can be consolidated, then next year’s growth
could be 4–4.5%. Investment is going well for big and medium-sized
firms. Ambassador Strauss will be in Paris next week, and he will see
him. France is not against the good evolution of the MTN. They are not
sure that the ambitious calendar can be fully respected—this could be
the fault of other governments, too. They must consider proposals—
and are not clear on them. It is important to discuss these issues
efficiently.
For the other, he did not use the form “orderly market agree-
ments”, since here this means cartels. The form implies orderly growth,
and collective rules in international trade. It is not a definite idea. We
need to discuss problems and do it by sectors. Textiles would have one
arrangement; shipbuilding another. But they should be discussed to
avoid difficulties: this is the meaning of the concept. But if these
problems are not discussed, then the United States and other countries
will move to protectionism under the pressure of public opinion.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to economic policy.]
