5. On the other hand, the Bureau of the Census is undoubtedly in
a position to collect and publish statistics with as great efficiency
as the statistical office of any other government. Therefore, while
too frequent collection of statistics should be opposed as
unnecessary and uneconomical, argument [agreement?] should be
given if there is unanimous insistence on quarterly publication by
the other governments.
6. Every effort should be made to restrict the required statistics to
those of the production of combined articles. An effort to collect
statistics of the production of component parts of many of the
articles listed in the categories of the Arms Traffic Convention
would entail an excessive amount of labor. If the inclusion of
component parts is insisted upon, an effort should be made to
enumerate such parts, and to include in this enumeration only the
most important parts, essential to the use of the completed article
for military purposes. For example, regarding fire control
equipment, it might with justice be pointed out that statistics of
the production of lenses suitable therefor might be sufficient,
without requiring statistics of the other component parts.
[Enclosure 3]
Memorandum on Methods of Supplying Needs for Military Equipment
1. The position of the United States in regard to dependence upon
private manufacture for the supply of its wartime needs in arms,
ammunition, and implements of war is different from that of any
other great Power. The United States is the only great nation
which does not maintain Government arsenals in time of peace
for the supply of its wartime needs in arms, ammunition and
implements of war. While the United States maintains six so-
called arsenals, these plants are in reality little more than
experimental laboratories. Under the most favorable conditions
they can be expanded to an extent which will furnish only a small
percentage of our wartime requirements in arms, ammunition, and
implements of war. During the World War, Government arsenals
as such furnished less than 9% of our munitions requirements.
