North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
985
priations for this purpose because it would be inconsistent with the
Congressional desire to control the uses of aid funds.
On most matters now involved in the North/South dialogue, the
G–77 have set the agenda. True, by its nature it covers most of the
topics of interest to both sides, but we can and should seize the initia-
tive in certain respects. Illicit payments is one area where we have done
so. The emphasis on basic human needs in foreign aid is another. We
could reinforce this latter initiative by setting concrete objectives—e.g.,
in the areas of disease eradication, clean water, food production—for
the year 2000. Moreover, we could be much more aggressive than we
have been concerning the trade barriers imposed by advanced devel-
oping countries, in comparison with which all the industrial countries
are paragons of free trade.
Henry Owen’s counterparts in the other Summit countries have
been told that you will raise North/South issues at the Summit. Most of
those countries have positions roughly similar to ours, although there
are often important differences in detail. They also have problems on
their home front, and one thing we all need to do is to improve do-
mestic consciousness of the importance of North/South relations.
If you have the time, I would recommend that you meet with your
senior advisers concerned with North/South issues sometime before
the Summit, perhaps on July 10, to discuss these issues and for you to
provide guidance to us on where you would like to lay the most
emphasis.
311.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, July 12, 1978
SUBJECT
North-South Issues at the Summit
1. In the attached memo (Tab A) Dick Cooper reports to you about
his talks in Jamaica with Prime Minister Manley and other Jamaican
officials.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 14, President, Germany, 7/13–17/78: Cables and Memos, 7/7–24/78. Confidential.
Sent for information. A handwritten notation indicates that Hunter and Erb had copies.
