Eastern Europe Region 131 pressing worker demands,” further discrediting government-sanctioned labor unions. The Polish regime’s policy toward the emerging groups, the Embassy wrote, “is still being formulated—painfully. The government must, of course, consider that from the Soviet viewpoint, such organizations are not only dangerous but virtually intolerable.” (Telegram 7483 from Warsaw, July 31; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800366–0451) By mid-August, the economic and political situation in Poland had deteriorated further. On August 12 the Embassy reported that, among the effects of the ongoing labor unrest were “a review of what the role of the trade unions should be; a drop in [First Secretary of the Polish United Worker’s Party Edward] Gierek’s stature; increasing resort by workers to job actions to defend their standard of living thereby causing pressures to mount within the Party for a tougher policy toward the working class; and emerging differences of opinion among the leadership.” (Telegram 7960 from Warsaw, August 12; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800388–0471) Strikes in Gdansk and Szczecin began on August 14 and 18, respectively. The workers formed strike committees and issued lists of demands, including, for the first time, the demand that workers be allowed to form trade unions independent of government control. By August 24, Gierek tried to appease protestors by firing several high-ranking members of the government and Party apparatus, including Polish Prime Minster Edward Babiuch and Party ideologue Jerzy Lukazewicz. The Embassy reported on August 24: “These personnel changes are the most significant and sudden since 1970.” Although Gierek survived, his prestige suffered, the Embassy reported. Concerning the strike committees in Gdansk and Szczecin, the Embassy concluded: “Their solidarity seems too strong just now to be affected by Party promises of free elections of trade union representatives on the shop floor. We anticipate they will have further tough negotiations with the Jagielski commission but believe that they will find the commission more flexible than before.” (Telegram 8427 from Warsaw, August 24; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800404–0720) Concerns about developments in Poland prompted the White House to send a message to British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, West German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, and other close allies on August 27. In his message to Thatcher, sent directly from the White House to the Cabinet Office, Carter wrote: “what is going on in Poland could precipitate far-reaching consequences for East-West relations, and even for the future of the Soviet Bloc itself.” “The best outcome,” Carter continued, “would involve accommodation between the authorities and the Polish people, without violence. Such an accommodation could well transform the
