68  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
18.	
Memorandum of Conversation1
Moscow, May 11, 1989, 8:30–9:35 a.m.
The Secretary’s May 10–11 Visit to Moscow:  
Third Small-Group Meeting with Shevardnadze
SUBJECTS
Arms Control: START (continued), Nuclear Testing, Chemical Weapons, Ballistic 
Missile Proliferation, CFE/CSBMs, Military Glasnost, Strategic CBMs.
PARTICIPANTS
1 Source: Department of State, Executive Secretariat, S/S-IRM Records, Lot 93D187, 
Secretary James A. Baker III’s Classified Papers, JAB Papers May 1989. Secret; Nodis. 
Drafted by Vershbow; cleared by Ridgway, Bartholomew, Ross, Zoellick, and Burt. The 
meeting took place in the MFA Guest House. The full memorandum of conversation is 
scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, 
and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. Following the meeting, Baker met with 
Gorbachev and Shevardnadze in the Kremlin alone with their interpreters from 10–10:55 
a.m. The memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in ibid.
U.S.
James A. Baker III, Secretary of State
Jack F. Matlock, U.S. Ambassador to 
the USSR
Robert Gates, Deputy National 
­Security Advisor to President
Reginald Bartholomew, Under 
Secretary of State, T
Robert Zoellick, Counselor, 
Department of State
Rozanne L. Ridgway, Assistant 
Secretary of State, EUR
Margaret D. Tutwiler, Assistant 
Secretary of State, PA
Richard Burt, Head of Delegation, 
Nuclear and Space Talks
Alexander Vershbow, Director, EUR/
SOV (notetaker)
William Hopkins, Peter Afanasenko 
interpreters
USSR
Eduard A. Shevardnadze, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs
Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, 1st 
Deputy Foreign Minister
Viktor Karpov, Deputy Foreign 
Minister
Yuriy V. Dubinin, USSR Ambassador 
to the U.S.
Sergey Tarasenko, Special Assistant to 
the Minister
Aleksey A. Obukhov, Head, USA 
Administration, MFA
Georgiy Mamedov, Deputy 
Director, USA Administration 
(notetaker)
Yevgeniy Gusarev, USA 
Administration (notetaker)
Pavel Palazhchenko, interpreter
[Omitted here are discussions not related to START.]
Shevardnadze said he would like now to continue the work begun 
the previous day on disarmament issues. He had until 9:30, at which 
time he would have to leave for the Kremlin in order to arrive ahead 
of the Secretary for his meeting with Gorbachev. It would not likely be 
possible to cover every arms control subject in detail, but he asked that 
the Secretary raise whatever items he believed most important.
