Chapter 4, February–April 1990 443 Scowcroft: On the substantive issue, it’s really mostly for the mobiles. Baker: I think you tackle the political problem by limits. Scowcroft: It’s no one issue that’s going to offend the conservatives but you need to get some kind of a tally because the cumulative effect of a number of these could prove to be a concern. Sununu: Do you simply count them if they are assembled and not count them if not? Judge Webster: We can’t find them. Powell: It’s like ALCMs. We need to count platforms, count by type. Baker: So what is the number of non-­deployed missiles? Cheney: There is no rational basis for deciding. Lehman: There is really no difference on the numbers. There is a consensus around 300 or so missiles and about 1650 on RVs. The Vice President: You may have some concerns on the left on verification. Webster: The best bet on getting a handle on non-­deployed missiles is keeping track of how many missiles they produce. Scowcroft: We’re okay on that. Now let’s turn to data denial. The Soviets seem finally ready to resolve this. They’ve wanted no telemetry encryption on cruise missiles and now they’ve fallen off that position. The President: We want no telemetry encryption on ballistic missiles, they want none on cruise missiles. Scowcroft: Now that the Soviets are on board, we have some cruise missiles where we want to keep the telemetry encrypted. Baker: We’re really wrapped around the axle. Powell: I think this has been resolved. Lehman: There’s one last issue on encapsulation. The PCC is meeting on that today.2 Powell: The Soviets are having trouble reading the data stream that’s available. Scowcroft: Why help them? Powell: We offered information so they could tell what we are testing. Scowcroft: I think this has been worked out. Baker: Let’s let Lehman and company solve this one. 2 The Record of Decision for the February 1 meeting of the Arms Control Policy Coordinating Committee is in the George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security Council, Richard A. Davis Files, Subject Files, Arms Control PCC [1].
