Afghanistan
33
14.
Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the
Department of State1
Moscow, May 6, 1978, 1447Z
10030. Subject: Soviet Perspective of Afghan Coup.
Summary: Soviet reaction to Afghan coup has been cautious but
increasingly positive. It is extremely hazardous to predict Moscow’s
future policies toward Afghanistan as a result of the coup. Much will
depend on such unknowns as Soviet assessment of (A) the internal
Afghan political situation and (B) Indian sensitivities about “outside”
threats to Delhi’s efforts to “regionalize” and “normalize” inter-state
relations in South Asia. Based on past experience, we believe the Soviets
will work to help insure the survivability of the new regime and, in
the longer run, its consolidation of power. At the same time, Soviets
will be alert to broader strategic/regional considerations (e.g., relations
with India) and need to weigh these in assessing how far they should
go in assisting the Kabul regime. In the end, the durability of the
new pro-Soviet government in Afghanistan will depend chiefly on
indigenous factors and not primarily on the Soviet Union. End
summary.
1. The public Soviet reaction to the Afghan coup has been cautious,
primarily limited to straight news items, but increasingly positive in
tone. The caution is undoubtedly based on a Soviet intention to deflate
widespread suspicions that Moscow instigated, had prior knowledge
of or directly participated in the coup, and may also reflect genuine
Soviet uncertainty about the new regime. The Soviet press on May 5
gave special prominence to Taraki’s condemnation of allegations in
the international press that “foreign interference” contributed to the
success of the coup. We expect to see progressively more favorable
coverage of the Afghan coup in the Soviet press, with emphasis on
foreign and domestic support for the Afghan regime and the enhanced
prospects for social-economic progress produced by the “revolution”.
2. Moscow of course can only be pleased by the sudden seizure of
power in Afghanistan by men who have long been avowedly “socialist”
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Program
Files for Soviet-Asia Relations, 1960–1978, Lot 90D320, Afghanistan, January–June 1978.
Confidential; Priority. Sent for information Priority to Kabul. Also sent for information
to New Delhi, Islamabad, Tehran, Colombo, Dacca, Kathmandu, Karachi, Lahore, USLO
Peking, Hong Kong, Ankara, Jidda, USUN, USNATO, Geneva for the U.S. SALT delega-
tion, and CINCPAC for POLAD.
