Human Rights 109 A reversal by the President on this issue would be harmful in his relationships on the Hill; the delay may already have been costly. On the substance, I am setting forth below a point-by-point rebuttal of Lipshutz’s arguments (using his paragraph numbers and letters). 1. Lipshutz suggests that opposition to Harkin might “undermine much of our credibility in our espousal of human rights as a fundamental cornerstone of our foreign policy.” This is erroneous because the reason for opposing Harkin is not that the Administration should moderate its position on human rights, but rather that the Harkin Amendment will prove weak and ineffective and thus will impede the Administration’s efforts to promote human rights.4 Lipshutz observes that a recent Brzezinski memorandum5 casts aspersion not only on the Harkin Amendment, but also on the Badillo, Humphrey, and Reuss Amendments, and deduces from this that Brzezinski would have us “give only lip service and diplomatic efforts” to human rights. Whatever Brzezinski’s position may have been, it was made quite clear in your memo to the President of April 15 that we enthusiastically favor the Humphrey language and also favor the second section of the Badillo Amendment6 (requiring the Secretaries of State and Treasury to initiate international consultations) (Tab 3).7 Thus, we are proposing far more than “lip service.” 2. (a) Lipshutz states that the Harkin Amendment permits us to retain a “clear definition of what constitutes a consistent pattern of deprivation of human rights.” To the extent that a “clear definition” is feasible, the Humphrey Amendment affords the same opportunity.8 2. (b) Lipshutz argues that the Harkin Amendment does not really tie our hands because it will be possible for us, before voting against a loan application, to ascertain through an established and fair procedure, the facts pertaining to human rights charges against a prospective borrower. This view rests on an unduly optimistic assumption about the speed and certainty with which facts may be gathered and deterheart is with the Harkin amendment because I want to do everything I can to assure a maximum amount of human rights commitment around the world. But I think that to give us the authority within the lending institutions to use our best judgment and to negotiate for an easing off of human rights restraints before a loan is made is the best approach to it.” (Department of State Bulletin, May 9, 1977, pp. 458–459) 4 Vance underlined this sentence and placed a vertical line in the margin. 5 See Document 33. 6 Vance underlined a portion of the sentence beginning with the word “we” and ending with the word “Amendment.” 7 Attached; printed as Document 35. 8 Vance underlined the second clause of this sentence.
