5. It appears, however, practically impossible to separate this problem from larger
considerations which would be brought into action in any case of this sort if the
American forces were either to remain inactive or to retire in the course of an attack
possibly directed ostensibly and at first against the British or any other nationality, but,
when thoroughly analyzed found to spring from motives in which we and other nations
would be implicated to only a lesser degree. Such action would be particularly lacking
in courtesy in cases where the lives and property of Americans were in danger of
attack. In a case of that sort it would in fact be practically impossible to give adequate
protection to American nationals without taking our part in a united plan for defense.
6. Further than the obvious precaution of withholding our naval forces from foreign
concessions in which the interests of Americans are not implicated, I acknowledge that
no way presents itself by which we can differentiate our own interests from those of
other nations, so as to avoid our possible implication as participants in defending any
foreign concession where American nationals may have become established. We have
considered the possibility of a withdrawal of Americans at any time when an attack
threatened, but aside from the regrettable effect that this would have on the feeling of
the foreigners and on the possibility of cooperation with other foreign nations whose
interests in China are in substance of the same nature as our own, I cannot help
thinking that such a withdrawal at a moment of crisis would in itself have a tendency
toward encouraging and bringing about separating hostile action on the part of the
Chinese, which would finally involve us, beyond doubt, no less than it would the nation
first attacked. Though, for the time being, the agitation against the position of
foreigners in China is concentrated principally against Japanese and British, it should
be remembered that such a distinction is, in great measure, a matter of tactics on the
part of the leaders in the agitation; and we should also not forget that to those inspiring
the attack its purpose would be perhaps not directly but none the less actually in
opposition to American interests and will be a benefit to China. It is especially the case
in Canton, which is in great measure under Soviet influence at present, that the
motivating force is antagonistic to the “imperialistic and capitalistic” powers and
opposed to the entire political and economic system of which the United States forms
as large a part as does Great Britain.
7. Hence I am unable to avoid the conclusion that in Canton and other treaty ports
where a crisis of like nature might occur, it would be preferable for the United States
naval forces to remain in order to protect American citizens and their interests and, with
that in view, it would be advisable for them to be authorized to unite in such defense
measures as the commander in his discretion may deem necessary to accomplish that
end after mediation appears no longer possible.
8. The commander of the South China Patrol has presented this same question of policy
to the commander in chief and I am sending him a copy of this telegram.
