1474 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement now be made all the more difficult by the fact that the Soviets appeared to be taking a new look at their position. Mr. Murray assured the Secretary of his cooperation. He said he would not “speak out” when he disagreed, but would express his view­ point privately to Senator Gore. He said he had long favored stopping the testing of large weapons, but thought it essential to continue mak­ ing small yield tests. He thought we could satisfy everyone’s needs, the scientists and military together, by underground tests. The Secretary pointed out that we needed not only weapons but public good will and the support of our allies as well. He thought therefore that the main question would be one of tactics at the Geneva conference to insure that the blame for any breakdown was laid to the Soviets. We should not ourselves appear militaristic. The Secretary said that if we could work it out without jeopardy to our foreign relations, he would favor small underground testing. He said he did not think the conference would be a success; that the Soviets would continue testing and therefore we would then resume our own testing. JFD 390. Telegram Supnu 45 From Geneva1 Geneva, November 11, 1958, noon Supnu 45. Following summary appraisal first ten days nuclear weapons test conference. 1. Soviet position. Soviet delegation after quickly coming terms on minor points such as private rather than public sessions, and use of “discontinuance” in conference title, immediately assumed rigid position on agenda. Soviet position on agenda has remained consistent that first act of conference be “conclusion” agreement on “cessation” weapons tests. This p.m. informal meeting three delegations proved inconclusive in changing Soviet position. Soviets have indicated wish continue informal discussions on agenda. In spite of Soviet delegation rigidity on agenda Soviet position in meetings has not been one of complete avoidance substance. They have, of course, focused on their own draft treaty, but from time to time have engaged brief discussions on controls. Soviet challenge to U.S. 1 Source: Summary of first 10 days of nuclear test conference. Confidential; Priority. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/11–1158.
