3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
158
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Indian Ocean negotiations as not very promising, because the United
States, in his view, did not seem prepared to make any substantive
movement. “It appeared to us that in the case of the Indian Ocean, the
US only wished to ratify the status quo.” Movement on MBFR negotia-
tions could be a useful step, he said, but again the US was too con-
cerned with building up Germany to respond to the fact that the Soviet
Union had “indicated its willingness to accept the Western first-phase
proposal.”
I asked whether some measures of cooperation on global and
North-South relations could be possible. He said that it was his per-
sonal view that in Moscow this would be regarded as an effort to create
minor diversions from the main business of SALT.
We discussed a number of other possible measures to improve re-
lations, one of which seemed to have some tentative enthusiasm behind
it—an exchange of interviews by the President with a Soviet newsman,
and by Brezhnev with an American newsman—which he thought
might help to dispel current misapprehensions on both sides.
The most important measure, he emphasized again at the conclu-
sion of our conversation, was to have a period of quiescence in the rela-
tionship for the next month or two.
37.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the Soviet Union1
Washington, July 9, 1977, 0050Z
159579. For the Ambassador: White House for Brzezinski. Subject:
Comments on Brezhnev’s Health, and Questions for Ambassador
Toon. Ref: (A) Moscow 9621.2
1. We very much appreciate the detail of ref report. Brezhnev was
apparently in better form during your visit than on any previously re-
ported visit over the past 4 months. The overall pattern remains one of
ups and downs, although recent reporting strongly suggests a signifi-
cant net decline during 1977. There have been more profound and fre-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File,
State Department Out, Box 107, 7/77. Secret; Sensitive; Priority; Nodis; Noforn. Sent for
information Priority to the White House for Brzezinski.
2 Telegram 9621 from Moscow, July 5, is in the National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P840081–2339.
