1456 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement according to developments at meeting. In view of New York Times December 1 Washington story Department “contemplating” my trans­ fer to Bangkok have received inquiries on future meetings with Wang from press representatives at Geneva and must expect flat inquiries after December 12 meeting even if question hedged or avoided in for­ mal announcement of next meeting. Therefore, while I would have preferred further postpone news my departure from Prague, under cir­ cumstances believe it preferable for news Martin designation frankly be announced following December 12 meeting and matter be inter­ preted in context and manner our choosing by statement subsequently to be made by Department rather than permitting it leak out in piece­ meal and probably distorted form. In reply to press inquiries following meeting would informally confirm I expected transfer from Prague but had no firm information on new assignment. Any additional informa­ tion would have to come from Washington. If Wang does not accept Martin designation, asks time to receive instruction or otherwise no agreement is reached between us I will attempt obtain his agreement to simple statement that announcement concerning next meeting will subsequently be made or unilaterally make such announcement myself giving no information to press on expectation my transfer from here or our proposal for Martin’s designation. However, in this event must anticipate considerable press speculation. Johnson 848. Letter from Martin to Clough1 London, December 6, 1957 Dear Ralph: It was with mild surprise that I received Deptel 4085 yesterday. While I was aware that Alex was being transferred, I had assumed that the Department would be arranging for some other Mission Chief in the area to carry on with the Geneva talks. I am, of course, flattered that the Department should repose enough confidence in me to designate me to continue them after Alex’s departure. However, I am somewhat dubi­ ous about the Chinese Communist willingness to carry on negotiations 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Confidential; Official–­Informal. A copy was sent to Johnson at Geneva.
