National Security Policy  447
5. The Soviets will almost certainly intensify their efforts to woo 
the underdeveloped countries, particularly in Asia and Africa, in 
order to estrange them from the West and to lay the groundwork for 
growing Soviet influence. The USSR has the economic resources for 
considerably expanding its “trade and aid” campaign, while its exten­
sive stocks of obsolescent arms will permit it to capitalize further on 
the desires of many underdeveloped countries to strengthen them­
selves vis-­a-­vis their neighbors.
6. The USSR clearly regards the chief immediate opportunities for 
expanding its influence to lie in the Middle East. It is shrewdly support­
ing Arab nationalism against the West and thereby attempting to avoid 
the appearance of seeking undue political influence of its own. It is also 
conscious of the extent to which vital Western interests are involved 
in the area, and of the risks which would arise from a direct test of 
strength between the great powers themselves. Nevertheless, its longer 
run aims are to eliminate Western military power and political influ­
ence from the area; to attain a position from which to control Middle 
East oil, and ultimately to dominate the area.
7. During the next few years the chief Soviet objective in Western 
Europe will be to weaken and divide the NATO powers and above all to 
induce a withdrawal of US military strength. To this end the USSR will 
continue to promote some form of European security treaty to replace 
both NATO and the Warsaw Pact. But the USSR will almost certainly 
remain adamant on German reunification on any terms except its own, 
however much this may limit its maneuverability in Western Europe.
8. As a means of forwarding their peaceful co-­existence policy 
and of advancing their efforts to neutralize US nuclear striking power, 
the Soviets will seek on the whole to give the appearance of a flexible 
and constructive attitude on disarmament. They probably desire some 
form of simple, “first-­stage” agreement with minimum inspection and 
control but we remain convinced that they will reject comprehensive 
inspection and controls.
Trends in Soviet Relations with Other Communist States
9. The USSR’s reluctant acceptance of a degree of Polish auton­
omy and of Yugoslavia’s special position, as well as its recognition of 
Communist China’s stature and role within the Bloc, indicates a con­
tinuing belief that some greater flexibility in Soviet relations with other 
Communist states is both necessary and desirable in order to preserve 
and strengthen the Bloc. However, mindful of last year’s developments 
in Poland and Hungary, the USSR now seems determined to go slow in 
any further evolution of its relationships with the European Satellites, 
and above all to avoid any repetition of the Hungarian or even Polish 
experiences. It would almost certainly revert to repressive policies in
