Afghanistan
825
We probably have more complete reporting about insurgent
strength in Konarha province than in any other part of the country. Even
so, the information available does not permit us to estimate insurgent
strength there more precisely than several thousand.
[1 line not declassified] there are as many as several hundred thou-
sand insurgents in the country. [5½ lines not declassified]
[less than 1 line not declassified] put the number of insurgents in
“main groupings” at about 28,000. [1 line not declassified] had uncon-
firmed reports of a similar number in the Kabul area alone. [less than
1 line not declassified] reported the destruction of the main insurgent
groups in Badakshan, Baghlan, Qonduz, Nangarhar, Ghazni, Qanda-
har, Helmand, Herat, and Bamian provinces, and may no longer include
still active insurgents there in the strength estimated for the main
groupings. Soviet pressure has broken some of the larger groups into
smaller bands, but these might actually be more effective in guerrilla
warfare.
Other methods of estimating insurgent strength are equally unsatis-
factory. We do not know the number of insurgent bands nor the average
size of a band. Some groups are well over 1,000, others less than 100,
and almost nothing is known about most. Assuming, however, that
there are around 200 insurgent groups, and that the average size of
each is about 300—groups of this size appear to be fairly typical—
there would be on the order of 60,000 insurgents.
Estimates of insurgent strength also depend on the definition of
an insurgent. At any given time few of the insurgent bands are at their
greatest possible strength, and in large areas of the country potential
insurgents have no Soviets to fight. Although there might be about
50,000 men opposing the Soviets at any one time, this strength could
double if the Soviets were to conduct simultaneous military operations
throughout the country. The number of men who have participated at
one time or another in fighting against the Soviets or Afghan Commu-
nists during the past two years may be several times greater.
Estimating insurgent casualties is also difficult. Afghan military
claims are clearly exaggerated, [less than 1 line not declassified] deal with
only a few engagements, and even [less than 1 line not declassified] are
suspect. Those based on body counts are probably no more valid than
US reports from Vietnam, [2 lines not declassified]. The Soviet Ambassa-
dor in Kabul told other ambassadors that 25,000 “counterrevolutionar-
ies” have been eliminated since the invasion. Our extrapolations from
[1 line not declassified] indicate that casualties have been on the order
of 20,000, but the reports may inflate insurgent losses. [2 lines not
declassified] forces in Afghanistan to go out on the battlefield and actu-
ally count bodies. Civilian casualties probably have been higher,
although not 200,000 as one exile spokesman has charged.
