730
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
spect for human rights as well as respect for the independence of
nations.
In promoting that prospect for a future of peace, we will stay on
the steady course to which we’ve been committed now for the last 3½
years. We pursue five major objectives; first, to enhance not only eco-
nomic but also political solidarity among the industrialized demo-
cracies; second, to establish a genuinely cooperative relationship with
the nations of the Third World; third, to persevere in our efforts for
peace in the Middle East and in other troubled areas of the world;
fourth, to defend our strategic interests, especially those which are now
threatened in Southwest Asia; and fifth, to advance arms control, espe-
cially through agreed strategic arms limitations with the Soviet Union,
and to maintain along with this a firm and a balanced relationship with
the Soviets.
Our first objective, solidarity with our allies, is the touchstone of
our foreign policy. Without such solidarity, the world economy and in-
ternational politics may well degenerate into disorder. This is why
we’ve led the North Atlantic Alliance in its program to upgrade its con-
ventional forces. And last winter, in an historic decision, NATO agreed
to strengthen its nuclear missiles in Europe in order to respond to a
very disturbing Soviet missile buildup there.4
Next month the seven leading industrial democracies will hold a
summit meeting in Venice.5 I look forward to being there with the other
six leaders of our most important allies. It’s our collective intention not
only to make the summit another milestone for global economic coop-
eration but also to advance our political and our strategic solidarity.
Second, we will persevere in our efforts to widen the scope of our
cooperation with the newly awakened nations of the Third World. By
the end of this century, 85 percent of the world’s population will be
living in Latin America, Asia, and Africa. In the last several years,
through the Panama Canal treaties, through our commitment to ma-
jority rule in Africa, and through normalization of relationships with
China, we have vastly improved the relationship of the United States
with these regions. We can be proud of our accomplishments in
building strong new bridges to the developing world.
The United States respects the desire of the developing nations for
genuine nonalignment, and we respect the nonaligned movement as
the expression of that desire. Nations which value their own independ-
ence are already resisting efforts to subvert the nonaligned movement
and make it a tool of Soviet foreign policy. Last year’s meeting in Ha-
4 See footnote 3, Document 131.
5 See footnote 6, Document 145.
