680
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
ican scouted the possibility of failure adding when pressed, that the
Shah should go to Baghdad. The Shah said that is why he came to
Baghdad when the plan miscarried. Now he needs information and ad-
vice upon his next move. He said that he thought that he should not (re-
peat not) stay here more than a few days, but would then go to Europe
and he hoped eventually to America. He added he would be looking
for work shortly as he has a large family and very small means outside
of Iran. I tried to boost his morale by saying that I hoped that soon he
would return to reign over his people for whom he has done so much,
but he replied that Mosadeq is absolutely mad and insanely jealous,
like a tiger who springs upon any living thing that it sees moving above
him. Shah believes Mosadeq thinks he can form a partnership with the
Tudeh Party and then outwit it, but in so doing Mosadeq will become
the Dr. Benes2 of Iran.3
Berry
2 Czechoslovak President, 1935–1938 and 1945–1948.
3 In a memorandum dated August 18, Under Secretary Smith summarized this tele-
gram for the President and forwarded it to him as an attachment. He commented that
“the attached message is self-explanatory and will give you the Iranian situation in a nut-
shell. The move failed because of three days of delay and vacillation by the Iranian gen-
erals concerned, during which time Mosadeq apparently found out all that was hap-
pening. Actually it was a counter-coup, as the Shah acted within his constitutional power
in signing the firman replacing Mosadeq. The old boy wouldn’t accept this and arrested
the messenger and everybody else involved that he could get his hands on. We now have
to take a whole new look at the Iranian situation and probably have to snuggle up to Mo-
sadeq if we’re going to save anything there. I daresay this means a little added difficulty
with the British.” (Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. X, Iran, 1951–1954, p. 748; Document
346)
272.
Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency [text not
declassified]1
Washington, August 17, 1953.
DIR 16090. 1. Reference your priority message of 17 August.2 In
view extra sensitivity this matter we have been requested by State to
convey [1½ lines not declassified].
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. Transcribed specifically for the For-
eign Relations series from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency that no longer
exists. See “Sources” chapter. Omissions are in the transcribed text.
2 The reference is presumably to [text not declassified].
