The Arbitrator is of the opinion that so far as the negotiations for the special protocol
are concerned neither Party can be charged with bad faith and that there is no ground
for the conclusion that Chile’s, action in respect to these negotiations has resulted in the
abrogation of the second and third paragraphs of Article 3 of the Treaty of Ancon or
absolved Peru from the obligation to proceed to their fulfillment.
CHILEAN ADMINISTRATION IN TACNA AND ARICA
It follows from what has been said that the provisions in question of the Treaty of
Ancon must be regarded as still in effect unless the course of Chile in the
administration of Tacna and Arica has been of such a character as to frustrate the
purposes of these provisions and hence to deprive them of force.
Article 3 provided that the described territory of the Provinces of Tacna and Arica
should “continue in the possession of Chile subject to Chilean laws and authority
during a period of ten years” and that “after the expiration of that term” (the Peruvian
translation of the text has been set forth above) there should be a plebiscite to decide
whether the territory “is to remain definitely under the dominion and sovereignty of
Chile or is to continue to constitute a part of Peru.” There has been a long and serious
controversy between the Parties (1) as to the nature of the authority thus conceded to
Chile, and (2) as to the status of the territory after the expiration of the ten-year period.
Chile has maintained that she had full dominion and sovereignty subject to termination
by an adverse plebiscite held under the treaty, and that pending the holding of the
plebiscite this sovereignty continued. Peru has insisted that the territory remained under
the sovereignty of Peru; that Chile was only a possessor with administrative authority
for ten years and that at the end of that period Chile’s authority ceased.
(1) It is unnecessary to discuss the arguments on the question of sovereignty.
It is sufficient for the purposes of the Arbitrator to take the express words of
the treaty. Under the first paragraph of Article 3, the territory was to be in
Chile’s possession and “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” This
provision is without express qualification. There is no condition set forth as
to either laws or authority, that is, as to the character of laws or the extent of
authority. “Laws and authority” clearly embrace the full legislative, executive
and judicial power. The Arbitrator has no privilege to limit the power thus
conferred by the treaty. If any limit is to be found it must be in the terms of
the treaty itself; that is, in the provision for a plebiscite. It may be implied
that the exercise by Chile of legislative, executive and judicial power should
not go to the extent of frustrating the provision for a plebiscite. Further than
this, it is not possible to go without derogation of the authority which the
Parties agreed that Chile should have. The question whether the
administration of the territory was wise or unwise, beneficial or the reverse,
was not submitted by the treaty to any review and is not reviewable by the
