FRANK B. KELLOGG

[Enclosure—Translation] The French Ambassador (Jusserand) to the Secretary of State47 WASHINGTON, May 26, 1924. MR. SECRETARY OF STATE: I had the honor to draw Your Excellency’s attention in my note of February 11, 1922,48 to the objectionable features of the activities of a representative of the Treasury Department, Mr. F. W. McReynolds, who conducted in France financial inquiries and would inspect the books of business firms. In a communication dated March 2348 of the same year, Your Excellency was pleased to let me know that Mr. McReynolds had been asked to stop his work and that this procedure would be discontinued. In spite of this further inquiries have been made in France by representatives of the United States Tariff Commission, Messrs. Ernster, Hermes and Simpson in particular, and my Government found itself constrained to bring to the notice of the American Embassy at Paris in a note dated September 19, 1923,48 the objectionable features of inquiries conducted apart from the official channels by officials whose mission was not even made known to the French Government. The representatives of the Treasury Department are nevertheless carrying on their inquiries and even would, as they did before, claim the right to examine the accounts of our commercial firms. In compliance with instructions just received from my Government and referring to the previous correspondence on the same subject, I have the honor to draw Your Excellency’s attention to the difficulties which such proceedings are likely to arouse. Not to enforce our laws on our own territory is impossible. Now, with a view to protecting the merchants and avoiding any possible disclosure which in some cases might bring ruin upon him, the law of France only permits of books being examined in judicial and revenue cases. And so the French Government cannot possibly grant to foreign officials powers that it cannot itself claim. Be pleased [etc.] JUSSERAND 45 The note was signed by the French Ambassador.
