924 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 10. And while the Yugoslavs ponder Soviets motives they will also recognize that with Tito’s death their leadership role in NAM, already sharply challenged by Castro as a Soviet surrogate, will be instantly diminished. If they suffered any illusions before Afghanistan and while Tito was still alive that NAM could be an effective bulwark against Soviet pressures, they will soon have to conclude that this is no longer so much the case. 11. And finally, Tito’s death comes at a time of substantial economic disquiet which will not soon diminish. Terms of trade in 1979 were worse than for many years and will not improve much this year; an inflation rate of some 30 percent will not be brought to more acceptable levels for sometime to come; and devolution to the republics of substantial economic powers means that the central government probably cannot move rapidly—and perhaps not effectively—to correct the deterioration. Yet act it must, and soon, or 1980 will be even worse than 1979 and the eventual cure more painful. The government knows this; the question is whether it will have the courage and clout to pursue the corrective actions begun late last year and early in 1980. In fact, the best early test of the post-Tito collective leadership will be how effectively it moves to take stiff economic measures at a time of transition and possible external pressures. 12. In sum, there will be no collapse. The transition will be smooth and with a minimum of turbulence. But there will be substantial if hidden tension, and a lack of self-confidence that will diminish as and if the government is able to cope. Those who govern will be sensitive, nervous, and tough in the extreme—at least at first. They will know, and they will be right, that how well they do in the first six months after Tito’s death will have a substantial impact on the future viability and permanence of the collective leadership concept. 13. In these circumstances the opportunities for the USG are enormous. The Carter administration has spent some three years preparing for this moment. Our political relations are at least as good as they have ever been; our international differences, while still substantial, have been greatly reduced, both in scope and decibel level; and we have become an important and valued economic partner. If we act with wisdom, understanding, and restraint over the course of the critical next six months the pay-off for both our countries can be substantial. What the Yugoslavs need now is reassurance that they do not stand alone. They need to be shown that we, with the West following our lead, stand ready to help where we can and take risks on their behalf when we must. 14. Milovan Djilas believes that post-Tito Yugoslavia will, inevitably, reshape its political and economic institutions in ways we in the West will find appealing. I share the hope, but am less confident of
