Chapter 2, January–June 1989 175 to stability from unaccounted mobile ICBM launchers is less if such launchers contain a single warhead rather than ten. If MIRVd mobiles were banned, we might also want to add a limit on MIRVd silo-­based ICBMs to constrain the incentive to shift ICBM forces from survivable mobiles to vulnerable silos. This approach is discussed further in the NSR 14 paper on New Initiatives. Two augmentations of such a ban might improve its effectiveness. First, we could seek a ban on all rail mobile systems, thus preventing the Soviets from developing a single-RV rail-­mobile ICBM and maintaining a rail-­mobile infrastructure. Rail-­mobile ICBMs have characteristics that make them inherently more difficult to monitor than other strategic weapons, including road-­mobile ICBMs. Monitoring the Soviets’ SS–24 rail-­mobile ICBM is more challenging than monitoring the SS–25 road-­mobile system because augmentation of the deployed force with nondeployed missiles and launchers appears easier for rail-­ mobile systems than for road-­mobile systems. Additional details are attached. A second possible augmentation of a MIRVd mobile ban would be to ban or limit silo-­based SS–24s (and by implication silo-­based Peacekeeper) to limit breakout by eliminating the existing rail-­mobile infrastructure, assuming the Soviets do not develop another rail-­mobile ICBM. On the other hand, rail-­mobile launchers are difficult to detect, and the fact that the Soviets have already tested a MIRV mobile reduces their breakout time. If the Soviets were allowed to retain silo based SS–24s, they could use the associated nondeployed missiles (or even the silo based SS–24s if they wished to make them more survivable) in a breakout scenario with covertly maintained SS–24 launchers or legal launchers for a single-RV rail-­mobile system. Finally, such a ban would eliminate the U.S. Peacekeeper, the world’s most capable ballistic missile, with serious impact on U.S. targeting and damage goals. Congressional reaction must also be considered. The President’s ICBM modernization decision, in addition to its other benefits, offers something to supporters of both missiles. The consensus we are seeking to build could unravel if rail-­mobile Peacekeeper were seen only as a bargaining chip. In addition, many believe that a START Treaty which allows mobile ICBMs will prove unratifiable in the absence of at least a well-­funded U.S. mobile ICBM program, if not actual deployment. Thus if MIRVd mobiles were banned and the U.S. road-­ mobile program were geared to the late 1990s there could be ratification difficulties. Finally, a MIRV ban would delay U.S. introduction of a mobile ICBM by five years, giving the Soviets an additional several years of monopoly. In addition, such a ban would significantly increase the cost of mobile ICBM deployment. Attached to this paper are possible costs
