Chapter 2, January–June 1989  175
to stability from unaccounted mobile ICBM launchers is less if such 
launchers contain a single warhead rather than ten. If MIRVd mobiles 
were banned, we might also want to add a limit on MIRVd silo-­based 
ICBMs to constrain the incentive to shift ICBM forces from survivable 
mobiles to vulnerable silos. This approach is discussed further in the 
NSR 14 paper on New Initiatives.
Two augmentations of such a ban might improve its effectiveness. 
First, we could seek a ban on all rail mobile systems, thus preventing 
the Soviets from developing a single-RV rail-­mobile ICBM and main-
taining a rail-­mobile infrastructure. Rail-­mobile ICBMs have character-
istics that make them inherently more difficult to monitor than other 
strategic weapons, including road-­mobile ICBMs. Monitoring the 
Soviets’ SS–24 rail-­mobile ICBM is more challenging than monitoring 
the SS–25 road-­mobile system because augmentation of the deployed 
force with nondeployed missiles and launchers appears easier for rail-­
mobile systems than for road-­mobile systems. Additional details are 
attached.
A second possible augmentation of a MIRVd mobile ban would 
be to ban or limit silo-­based SS–24s (and by implication silo-­based 
Peacekeeper) to limit breakout by eliminating the existing rail-­mobile 
infrastructure, assuming the Soviets do not develop another rail-­mobile 
ICBM. On the other hand, rail-­mobile launchers are difficult to detect, 
and the fact that the Soviets have already tested a MIRV mobile reduces 
their breakout time. If the Soviets were allowed to retain silo based 
SS–24s, they could use the associated nondeployed missiles (or even 
the silo based SS–24s if they wished to make them more survivable) in 
a breakout scenario with covertly maintained SS–24 launchers or legal 
launchers for a single-RV rail-­mobile system. Finally, such a ban would 
eliminate the U.S. Peacekeeper, the world’s most capable ballistic mis-
sile, with serious impact on U.S. targeting and damage goals.
Congressional reaction must also be considered. The President’s 
ICBM modernization decision, in addition to its other benefits, offers 
something to supporters of both missiles. The consensus we are seek-
ing to build could unravel if rail-­mobile Peacekeeper were seen only 
as a bargaining chip. In addition, many believe that a START Treaty 
which allows mobile ICBMs will prove unratifiable in the absence 
of at least a well-­funded U.S. mobile ICBM program, if not actual 
deployment. Thus if MIRVd mobiles were banned and the U.S. road-­
mobile program were geared to the late 1990s there could be ratifica-
tion difficulties.
Finally, a MIRV ban would delay U.S. introduction of a mobile 
ICBM by five years, giving the Soviets an additional several years of 
monopoly. In addition, such a ban would significantly increase the cost 
of mobile ICBM deployment. Attached to this paper are possible costs
