Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX David Aaron asked what this will do for them. They see that we are putting them on the spot over Lebanon. If they say no, they see problems. If they say yes, this is the slippery slope to the PLO. We need a plan, if they say no, not to leave this problem at their doorstep. We can’t let this effort come to grief in Jerusalem. We need a plan for Begin that will not crowd the Israelis. Ambassador Strauss said that if we go to the Israelis, we must have in our options one that we know they can accept—e.g., to do what they are now doing. We need an option they will accept. Secretary Vance said we could lay out why they should be involved. He is not sure; this could put them on the spot. Ambassador Strauss asked what he meant. Secretary Vance said he meant on the autonomy talks. Ambassador Strauss said that we did this before. It was bad. We need a little forthrightness, with an option the Israelis can say yes to, even if we don’t like it. Secretary Vance said he has the idea of dealing with this in small pieces—e.g., Tyre. Can we devise steps? Ambassador Habib said that if the cease-fire is maintained, it could be done. If not, the PLO will not let Tyre be neutralized. Secretary Vance suggested acceptance of the cease-fire as ok, even if fragile. Then on to the next piece. How can it be put together? Ambassador Habib said that once Lebanon is there (Tyre) it would be hard to change. The PLO will have to agree to lots before we get to that point. Secretary Vance said that it is at least a piece. Ambassador Strauss said we should go back to premises. It is given that, for the PLO, there is nothing in it for them that we will give. With regard to Israel, there is damn little in it for the PLO to warrant their getting in, to crunch on a deal. Therefore there is nothing in the plan for the Israelis. Therefore how do we get them in? First, we could give them something; but we can’t. Second, there is world opinion—this is the only thing. It is something positive, with low costs, and is a positive step towards peace in the world. This needs a bit of escalation of publicity. The only thing we have is that this is something positive for Israel, with low risks, and assurances of what we will not do. Then it reaches the launch pad, with political security and support here. Dr. Brzezinski asked how this would be done. Ambassador Strauss said we should say to Begin: you won’t do anything on the autonomy talks or on settlements—for good reasons, etc. But Israel must take a positive step for world opinion. Therefore, here Israel can be on the side of the angels. The problem is in being crowded into dealing with the PLO. We would publicly say we would not do
