of the matter could be covered by the clause, “the proceeds of these
surtaxes shall be employed for such purposes and subject to such conditions
as this Conference may determine.” Dr. Yen said that the Chinese
Delegation could not go beyond the plain terms of the treaty. He contended
that there was no occasion to provide a protective measure, but Colonel
Peel and Mr. Strawn dissented from this view, the latter because he wanted
to make certain that the militarists could not seize the funds. A prolonged
discussion ensued covering this paragraph and numerous amendments were
offered, but no definite decision was reached. The insistence of Dr. Yen that
the wording of the Washington Treaty should be followed and that no
reference to “custodian banks” should be made in the last paragraph made it
impossible to agree upon a resolution (see pages 30, 31 and 32 for texts of
Chinese and American resolutions relative to levying the Washington
surtaxes).
Sub-Committee to Draft a Resolution on the Levying of Interim Surtaxes,
Second Meeting, February 24, 1926.
At the second meeting of the Sub-Committee appointed by Committee II to
draft a resolution on the levying of the interim surtaxes, Dr. Yen, the
chairman, submitted an amended draft of a resolution designed to effectuate
the Washington Treaty. (See page 34 of Minutes of February 24, 1926). Dr.
Yen said that the amended draft was based largely on the one previously
submitted by the American Delegation. The first and second paragraphs
followed exactly the words of the American resolution, but the third
paragraph was altered so as to bring in the sum of ninety million dollars in
the preface. Mr. Strawn immediately protested this wording and said that he
saw no necessity for inserting the figure and suggested that it be omitted.
Mr. Hioki offered an amendment designed to obviate the necessity of
inserting a specific amount in the resolution and Colonel Peel said that none
of the foreign members of the subcommittee wished to commit themselves
in the preamble to anything in the new treaty. Dr. Yen persisted in his effort
to prevail on the foreign Delegates to consent to the naming of $90,000,000
as the sum which was to be raised and the foreign Delegates, in turn, as
strongly opposed any such commitment. Mr. Oudendijk attempted to
conciliate the differences and suggested that the words, “with a view to
meeting the amounts required for the various purposes which are being
