1254  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
as an example, who with some organization would be able to make a 
real contribution to United States-Venezuelan relations. He suggested 
that this group for example might be able to help select and find pro-
fessors in the United States or other public figures who might come to 
Venezuela on visits for study or speaking purposes. The President said 
that he would speak to the Minister of Education7 about this and sug-
gest that he work with the Embassy on the idea. Betancourt said that it 
would be more productive to develop a program of this kind with the 
Minister of Education rather than attempt to do it with the University 
authorities.
With reference to petroleum restrictions the President made it clear 
that he was informed but not excited about the obligatory program. 
He recognized the cutbacks in production which have taken place in 
the United States and he recognized also the importance of explaining 
correctly to the Venezuelan people what the true situation of the petro-
leum market is. He spoke of the extreme importance to Venezuela of 
having a stable market for petroleum and of not having to experience 
a sharp drop in price. At the same time he said of course it is essential 
for Venezuela that its overall income from petroleum not be sharply 
reduced. There was at no time a suggestion that Venezuela would pro-
test the mandatory program but the President obviously trusts that the 
United States will administer the program in such a way as to avoid 
any unnecessary hardship on Venezuela. He said that he will work 
with the Minister of Mines to accomplish a good understanding by the 
Venezuelan people of this situation and he also said that he will tell 
the Minister to draft a note for delivery to the United States contain-
ing Venezuelan reaction and ideas concerning the restriction program.8 
President Betancourt said that his Government has no intention of con-
fusing the trade agreement negotiations with the oil restrictions; he said 
that in his opinion these are two entirely different things.
President Betancourt spoke of the problem of military expendi-
tures and said that he is anxious to accomplish a number of things for 
the Armed Forces that will represent an expenditure additional to the 
regular budget. He made clear that what he has in mind is not an expen-
diture to improve the lot of the officers, and he made reference to the 
Circulo Militar when he said that the Venezuelan people already think 
that the military fare very well, but that he would like to improve some 
of the barracks for the soldiers, to move a transport unit now located 
7 Rafael Pizani.
8 The Venezuelan Government did not vigorously protest the mandatory restric-
tions program. However, in a memorandum dated April 24, 1959, the Government of 
Venezuela did protest to the U.S. Government about the proposed modifications of the 
mandatory imports program which would exempt Canadian and Mexican petroleum 
imports. (ARA Files, Lot 61 D 318, “Oil-U.S. Legislation”)
