North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
977
(1) Improved market access for LDC exports. LDCs want all bar-
riers to their trade removed; US believes that improved market access is
desirable but at times we must adopt measures to prevent disruptions
of US domestic market and allow industry to adjust.
(2) Special and differential treatment (S&D). LDCs want preferen-
tial access to DC markets; US agrees this is useful means of facilitating
LDC trade but that eventually preferential treatment should be phased
out.
(3) Reciprocity. US expects LDCs to make contributions by July 15
to Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) which are consistent with
their development needs; LDCs are reluctant to make contributions
until July 15 when other offers may be judged.
II. Resource Transfers
Consensus exists that economic development is in interest of all
countries and that it will be expedited by a net transfer to LDCs of eco-
nomic resources. At issue on official aid are:
(1) Volume—Will US and other DCs accept target of transferring
0.7 percent of GNP annually to LDCs in the form of official develop-
ment assistance (ODA)? Presently US ODA is about .23 percent of
GNP.
(2) Quality—Can quality of US assistance be improved?
(3) Automaticity—Will US agree to provide resource transfers au-
tomatically, irrespective of annual OMB budget process, Congressional
procedures, or concern for efficient and effective use of the funds?
(4) Conditionality—Will US alter concern that aid be specifically
targeted to meet needs of poor in LDCs, by providing direct budget
and BOP support rather than project loans and grants?
III. Commodity Trade
Trade in commodities has been important issue in North/South
dialogue since Seventh Special Session of UNGA and subsequent adop-
tion of UNCTAD’s Integrated Program for Commodities.2 Major issues
are:
Document 307.] Such an outline is attached, indicating what we believe to be the areas of
agreement and disagreement. It was drawn from the papers presented to the Govern-
ment of Jamaica by Dick Cooper.” Carter wrote in the margin adjacent to Vance’s com-
ment: “Retained.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject
File, Box 19, Evening Reports (State): 6/78) Brzezinski returned the paper to Vance under
cover of a July 8 memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Ma-
terial, Subject File, Box 19, Evening Reports (State): 7/78)
2 Adopted on May 30, 1976, in UNCTAD Resolution 93(IV).
