Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 263. Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to President Carter1 Washington, March 6, 1977 SUBJECT Congressional Notification of Pending Conventional Arms Transfer Cases In my memorandum of February 8,2 I reported that we had several billion dollars worth of pending Foreign Military Sales cases which we inherited from the previous Administration, as well as requests pending for Munitions Control export licenses to fulfill signed commercial contracts. Both require notification to Congress pursuant to Section 36 of the Arms Export Control Act of 1976. Zbig has suggested to you3 that we not send any of these cases to Congress prior to your decisions on the PRM–12 response on arms transfer policy. I do not agree that we should delay on all of these cases, and am recommending an alternative method of proceeding. Discussion We transfer defense articles and services through several channels. The largest volume is through government-to-government agreements under Foreign Military Sales (FMS) procedures. Straight commercial transactions must be licensed by the State Department’s Office of Munitions Control at the time the goods or services are ready for export. The process through which major FMS and commercial cases are reported to Congress is described at Attachment 2.4 We are now holding for Congressional notification 49 FMS and commercial cases totalling approximately $5 billion in defense goods and services. Ideally, the decision to send these cases to Congress should await the completion of our arms transfer policy review under PRM/NSC–12, as suggested by Zbig Brzezinski in his memorandum to you of February 23 but deferral of all cases raises some serious problems. —Almost all of these cases are non-controversial and raise no serious policy problems for us. —Our contacts with Congressmen strongly indicate that Congress is ready to accept most of the cases without debate. The main problem 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues,
