Bolivia 165 18, to inform him of the levels U.S. economic aid in FY 1959, pursuant to ICATO 156.3 The President was accompanied by Walter Guevara Arze, newly appointed Minister of Government and Acting Minister for Foreign Affairs, and the Ambassador by an Embassy officer. On the previous day, at the suggestion of IMF representatives, the GOB had decided to suspend dollar sales by the Central Bank preparatory to reworking the Stabilization Program. The Ambassador said he was authorized to state that $17 million would be available for Special Assistance, plus a reserve of $6 million as and if required in the opinion of the U.S. Government as a result of “actual implementation” of the agreement to be reached between the GOB and the IMF on terms the continuation of the Stabilization Program. Although the conversation was in Spanish, Minister Guevara repeated “actual implementation” in both language interpolating the comment that this $6 million was “conditional”, and President Siles declared that he understood the phrase clearly. The Ambassador added that he believed Technical Assistance would continue at about the current level above $3 million. Both the President and Guevara expressed their pleasure at the inclusive total of $26 million. The Ambassador said also that DLF would be prepared to consider loan applications within available funds and on the basis of well prepared projects. He noted that although the possibility of DLF loans had been known to the GOB for several months, only two applications, those of Carlos Peña4 and the Gasser Brothers,5 had been submitted so far. In reply to Guevara’s question as to whether the DLF would consider both state and private projects, the Ambassador said that during his recent visit to Washington he had found interest in the possibility of a project to improve La Paz’ El Alto Airport, which would be a state undertaking. He again emphasized the advisability of speed and thoroughness in submitting loan applications. Guevara said that at this point he would like to give the Ambassador his frank opinion, admittedly formed only two days after his return to La Paz, of the Stabilization Program. The Program, he declared, had failed, because it had erroneously concentrated on stabilization instead of production. Instead of conceiving of stabilization as the first step and of production as the second, stabilization and production should have been given parallel emphasis. The great effort and courage with which 3 Not found in Department of State files. 4 Reference is to the loan application by the owner of a food processing plant, Fabrica de Conservas of Cochabamba, for purposes of expansion and modernization of facilities. 5 Reference is to the loan application of the owners of a sugar mill, Compania Azucarera La Belgica of Santa Cruz, for purposes of modernization and improving effi-
