International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1045 III. Proposed Initiatives—For Comment In addition to commenting on the general concept of the described International Health initiative, the Departments and agencies are asked to provide comments on each of the attached draft papers.9 9 Attached but not printed are six undated draft papers on the topics of expanding U.S. involvement with the health-related activities of international organizations, encouraging private sector involvement to complement international health programs, providing for the analysis of international health needs, international health manpower, Presidential priorities in prevention of blindness and improvement in potable water supplies, and coordination of U.S. Government activities in world health. 310. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State1 New York, April 8, 1978, 0057Z 1305. Subject: 27th Commission on the Status of Women, March 20 to April 5—Final Report.2 Summary. There follows a delegation evaluation of the results and achievements of the 27th session of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW). This is in addition to a more detailed report which will be submitted.3 The Commission session began and ended with controversial issues—election of the chairman and a resolution on apartheid—but nevertheless managed to devote a large portion of its time and energy to constructive work. The US and other Western delegations worked closely with Latin, African and Asian delegations on key issues concerning the preparations for the proposed 1980 World Conference, the future of the Commission, and in putting the emphasis on 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780151–0824. Limited Official Use. Repeated to the Mission in Geneva. 2 The 27th session of the Commission on the Status of Women took place at UN Headquarters March 20–April 5. The U.S. delegation consisted of Horbal, Barbara Good, Votaw, Galey, Arvonne Fraser, Leet, Lois Matteson (USUN), and Perman. The United Nations established the Commission as a functional commission of the UN Economic and Social Council in June 1946. (E/RES/2/11) 3 Presumable reference to an August 30 memorandum for the record prepared by Horbal and Good and entitled “UN Status of Women Activities Update.” (National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of International Organization Affairs/CU/UNESCO General Subject Files on UN Matters: Lot 81D337, Box 5, Women Affairs; Decade for Women) Horbal and Good summarized both the March 20–April 5 CSW and spring ECOSOC sessions.
