Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I were outlined in the SALT II treaty, as I firmly intend to do, is to advance the stability on which genuine peace can be built.” The President then surveyed the steps his administration had taken to uphold U.S. strategic interests in several geographic regions and to support democratization, independence, and development in other nations. In his concluding remarks, he returned to the theme of American strength: “We do not maintain our power in order to seize power from others. Our goal is to strengthen our own freedom and the freedom of others, to advance the dignity of the individual and the right of all people to justice, to a good life, and to a future secure from tyranny. In choosing our course in the world, America’s strength must be used to serve America’s values. “The choices ahead are every bit as demanding as the ones we’ve already made. Facing them takes a clear understanding of where we are and where we want to go as a nation. Responding to dangers that might menace our future security also will measure America’s common sense and courage, just as previous history has measured America’s common sense and courage. “I’ve known America’s courage by seeing it tested. I’ve seen it in the men who went to Iran to attempt so valiantly in an isolated desert to rescue their fellow Americans who are still held hostage there. I saw it in the families of the men who died in that effort, and I’ve seen it in the families with whom I’ve met as frequently as possible of the citizens who are still held captive in Iran. What a nation we are to produce such men and women. All Americans are thankful to them. “And finally let me say that our country also has the courage to reject the easy illusions of something for nothing, the fantasy goals of strength without sacrifice, the irresponsible advocacy of shortcut economics and quick-fix defense policy. There are no magic answers. Easy solutions are very difficult to find. Courage, sometimes quiet courage, unpublicized courage, is the most to be appreciated. “I see this kind of courage in you, as veterans who have served and sacrificed already, but who still work continuously for the sake of service, not for recognition or reward. Your example strengthens my faith in our Nation and in the future of our Nation. With your help and with your courage and with your common sense, I know America will continue to be a nation of unmatched strength, a nation that faces the world as it is today and works with realism to bring to the world of the future freedom, peace, and justice.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pages 1549–1556) Documentation on PD/NSC–59 “Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy,” issued July 25, is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IV, National Security Policy.
