1060 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI appeal to him for a deal. The U.S. proposals for a deal is the subject of this NSC meeting. Simply to insist that Gorbachev accept the current U.S. positions on these issues as his ticket to a summit is almost certainly self-defeating. At the same time, these are important issues to the United States and we cannot accept the Soviet positions simply in the interest of wrapping up the treaty. The approach outlined in your letter would present a new U.S. proposal on data denial that gives the Soviets more latitude than our earlier position, and move toward the Soviet position on the new types definition while holding firm on missile downloading. This, in effect, has us moving on two of the three most stubborn issues, while protecting our security concerns and defining a treaty that is clearly in our interest. The positions we are proposing are designed to elicit either Soviet acceptance or, more likely, a substantive Soviet counter-offer. This should give us an early indication of whether or not signing a treaty within the next few weeks will be possible. If you approve the letter after hearing out the Council members, we envisage Jim meeting with Bessmertnykh in Geneva this weekend to deliver the letter and tell him that if Gorbachev responds positively, you will immediately send a U.S. team led by Reggie Bartholomew and Arnie Kanter to work with the Soviets to complete START. Their goal would be to reach agreement on all issues by the end of the month, leaving sufficient time for the negotiating delegation to complete text details, conform the treaty, and print it in time for a late July summit in Moscow. III. PARTICIPANTS See Tab C.3 IV. PRESS PLAN White House Photographer only. V. SEQUENCE You should open the meeting with a few remarks on the importance of moving ahead with START with solid, defensible positions. I will then outline the approach in the proposed letter and the major elements of the U.S. proposal. 3 Not attached.
