National Security Policy  567
expanded the scope of its activities to include greater coordination 
and exchange in research and development activities. CEMA member-­
nations are assigned major research, development, and production 
responsibilities for the entire Soviet Bloc in specified fields.
83. The USSR has become progressively less dependent on Western 
research and development. Nevertheless, the Soviet leaders have 
adopted a policy of acknowledging foreign achievement and encour­
aging maximum use of foreign experience. The USSR presently has 
an outstanding program for collection and dissemination of scientific 
and technical information. The All-Union Institute of Scientific and 
Technical Information of the Academy of Sciences publishes and circu­
lates extensive abstracts of foreign journals and, at least in high priority 
fields, Soviet scientists have access to the full range of scientific research 
published throughout the world. Evidence of Soviet work on such new 
methods as machine translation, data searching, and data process­
ing suggests that Soviet information handling facilities probably will 
improve during this period.
84. The Soviets have evidently profited from espionage in a few 
key fields. However, on an over-­all basis the performance of Soviet 
science—­especially the number of original concepts and discoveries—­
reinforces our belief that the aggregate contribution of espionage to 
Soviet scientific progress has been far less important than the USSR’s 
own achievements.
85. The USSR is clearly anxious to take advantage of the possibil­
ities in international scientific exchange. Soviet participation in inter­
national scientific meetings and conferences has increased markedly 
during the last year, primarily in connection with the International 
Geophysical Year (IGY), but involving other scientific fields as well. 
The Soviet IGY program has been well-­executed and comparable to the 
US program in scope. For the most part, the Soviets probably will live 
up to their agreements to exchange IGY information, but are likely to 
withhold the results of related investigations outside the formal IGY 
program. They are believed to have withheld considerable data derived 
from their earth satellites. The USSR probably will continue its active 
participation in the various international committees and organizations 
which are planning to extend programs begun under the IGY.
Soviet Capabilities in Major Scientific Fields
86. The USSR’s achievements during the last year, including earth 
satellite launchings, weapons development, and the magnitude of its 
efforts in the IGY program, provide impressive evidence of the present 
high level of Soviet scientific capability. Animated by a spirit of intense 
competition with the US, Soviet scientists have made striking progress 
over the last year in many areas of fundamental and applied research.
