3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
80
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
cifics, when Gromyko spoke of a small piece of land, he was referring to
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. What the relationship of such a state
would be with neighboring Arab states, particularly Jordan, was some-
thing the Palestinians and the Arab states themselves could decide. It
could perhaps take the form of close-knit economic ties, perhaps even
economic ties with Israel.
Now on the matter of Palestinian participation in the Geneva con-
ference to settle this problem. What form that participation should take
should be decided by the Arabs themselves. Whom else could we ask
about that? President Amin, perhaps? He knew, of course, that the US
had cordial relations with Amin, but the Palestinians themselves
would have to decide this issue. Perhaps the Arabs would decide to go
to Geneva in one single delegation including Palestinians. Why should
we, the Soviet Union or the United States, object to this? The Soviet po-
sition on this matter was anything but rigid.
Finally, Gromyko wanted to repeat again that if necessary, polit-
ical guarantees should be provided for the independent, sovereign ex-
istence and development of all states in the Middle East. The Soviet
Union was prepared to affix its signature to a solemn document to that
effect, along with the signature of the United States. Perhaps other
major powers, such as France or Britain, might want to join in pro-
viding guarantees if they shared the same goal of peace and fairness. Of
course, it goes without saying that the result of such a radical settle-
ment must be a cessation (Gromyko repeated “cessation”) of the state
of war, as Israel itself had insisted all along. After that, let anyone try to
open fire in that region. It would be sufficient for either of us to just wag
a finger to put a stop to it.
There were other issues in the Middle East that required discus-
sion. Gromyko would prefer to leave these for the future. Notable
among them was the question of timing and organizing the Geneva
Conference. Now Gromyko would like to hear from the Secretary
whether or not the new Carter Administration was prepared to act in
concert and coordination with the Soviet Union, to implement in prac-
tice the statements already made by President Carter and by the Secre-
tary. Major international issues cannot be resolved without the active
participation of the Soviet Union and the United States. Gromyko re-
garded that as an axiom.
The Secretary said that he welcomed the opportunity to talk about
the Middle East, because he believed that this was one of the three or
four most important issues facing us today. He believed that the danger
to peace in this region, but also to world peace, was very great indeed
because of the lack of a just and lasting settlement to the conflict there.
He also believed that we, the United States and Soviet Union, as
co-chairmen of the Geneva Conference, had the solemn obligation to
