March 1952–February 1953
375
ANNEX
Covert Activities
The opening paragraph of the Annex summarizes the main paper
and therefore includes the major points which have already been dis-
cussed. Sub-paragraph (d) is particularly in question in NEA, although,
so far as it relates to liaison and collaboration [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied] it would obviously be very difficult to attempt such liaison in the
absence of basic agreement on policies.
3. Suggestions for Covert Activity
In general, NEA has no objection to the points raised in this section
of the British annex, except that for the reasons stated previously it
would seem most unwise to allow “leakage” to reach the Russians indi-
cating that the United States [less than 1 line not declassified] were pre-
pared to “write off Persia”.5 This could easily set in movement events
which would far out-weigh the dubious advantage to be gained from
the impact of such “leakage” upon Mosadeq’s policies.
4. Since officers of NEA are not fully aware of the type of covert ac-
tivity presently carried on in Iran, they are not in a position to decide
whether any of these activities could be interpreted as “support to ele-
ments likely to provoke anarchy”. This is a point we should clarify with
CIA.
5. NEA holds the view that the tribes of Iran should be stirred to
activity by the United States and the United Kingdom only after a
Tudeh coup, but without waiting for a general war, on the ground that
if the Tudeh were given time to consolidate it could eliminate the tribes
as a factor in the picture.6 Another point which is pertinent to section 5
concerns the United States Consulate at Isfahan where there is no CIA
representative, a lack which could be made up if it is found desirable.
[5½ lines not declassified]
5(b) Big Bluff
NEA holds considerable reservation regarding the advisability of
the “big bluff”, not only for the reasons listed in the British paper but
also because planning along this line leads logically to a conclusion that
there is a solution to the Iranian problem in dividing Iran territorially
between a Russian and a Western camp. This is a particularly dan-
gerous basis for planning in view of both British and American reluc-
tance, if not unwillingness, to accept military responsibility for the
area.7
5 In the left margin next to this sentence is a handwritten note that reads: “I agree.”
6 In the left margin next to this sentence is a handwritten note that reads: “Yes.”
7 In the left margin next to this paragraph is a handwritten note that reads: “Big
Bluff should not be played.”
