914  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
out the problem of the U.S.-operated dairy. Mr. Roderick recalled that 
Ambassador Arias had acknowledged last week that Panamanians, 
with few exceptions, were not yet in condition to sell milk that met U.S. 
standards. They seemed to think that, with technical assistance, and 
with the passing of time, this problem could be overcome.
Mr. Dillon raised the question of housing for the Panamanian 
employees of the Canal Zone and how to finance such projects. The 
Development Loan Fund might find that such financing would con-
flict with its lending policies. He inquired why the Panama Canal 
Company could not finance the housing out of its own profits and have 
the employees reimburse the cost of the housing to the company itself. 
Mr. Waugh agreed that this was a wise proposal for middle-­class hous-
ing but doubted that the Canal Zone should undertake to finance very 
low-­cost housing for the lowest paid workers. Mr. Dillon thought that 
the financing of 1000 houses at an approximate cost of $5 thousand 
each or a total project of $5 million (as earlier mentioned by Secretary 
Brucker) would not set a precedent that would create difficulties for us 
elsewhere in the world, if the Canal Company itself were to finance the 
project. The President asked about those who would still be living in 
sub-­standard housing. It was generally agreed that 1000 houses would 
not solve the problem but that it would be a big step forward.
The President declared that these problems with Panamanians 
vitally affect our foreign relations. They are not just a master of “good 
business”. He said that the Department of the Army and the State 
Department would have to coordinate more closely in dealing with the 
Panamanians, since our differences with that country kept coming to 
his attention.
Mr. Rubottom referred to the recent discussions with the Panamanian 
Ambassador, who had stated quite frankly that Panama considered the 
Canal to be its greatest asset. He recalled Ambassador Arias’s farewell 
speech of three years ago when he had remarked that it was “easier to get 
the United States to sign an agreement than to live up to its terms.” He 
had publicly criticised Assistant Secretary Roderick by name on the same 
occasion. It was clear that the Panamanians intended to do one of two 
things, or possibly both: (1) carry their case to the International Court 
of Justice, and (2) keep up the pressure on the United States in public 
forums such as the Santiago meeting and the United Nations, or press for 
renegotiation of existing treaties.
Mr. Rubottom said that the United States should go as far as possi-
ble to live up to the spirit of the Treaty in order to be able to respond to 
Panamanian accusations and that it also should do as much as possi-
ble to help the Panamanians develop their economy outside the Canal 
Zone. He referred to the fact that Ambassador Arias would be paying 
a farewell call on the President in a few minutes and suggested that the
