354 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Brown rebuttaled, “haven’t we already done so by talking to the Russians about including civil defense in SALT III?” Keeny said yes, but for this change to be effective, there must be public debate. Tirana said it would cause less stir to accept the latest modified Defense statement than to create debate by submitting two statements for a Presidential choice. Brown said he would include both. He also agreed with State to include a reference to “dual-­use” in both the internal and declaratory statements. Dr. Brzezinski said that is a good idea. Jayne asked if all civil defense has “dual-­use”? General Smith said perhaps we could say “can have” “dual-­use.” Brown then turned to the continuity of government issue. Brown, Brzezinski, Mitchell, Christopher, and others agreed that the paper was inadequate for choosing a program to improve the present continuity of government posture. Brown agreed that the paper convinces him that the present fixed posture is not enough. He then explained the kinds of analysis that might help resolve a choice of how to enhance it. Keeny, Mitchell, and others commented that indeed they agreed with Brown. Brown then said we agree on the following things: 1. We need continuity of government. 2. The fixed site program is insufficient. 3. We need cost studies on how to improve the program. Mitchell admitted that his paper was only an exploration. Brown said that the paper convinced him it is not foolish to improve “continuity of government.” Mitchell and Tirana then discussed how to get the study funds for an outside analysis. Brzezinski insisted that we must decide what kind of study should be done, although Brown believed that was not for the PRC to decide. Dr. Brzezinski said we should have a working group look into what kind of analysis is needed and then commission it. Tirana offered to fund a study in the 1978 time period with DCPA funds. Christopher then raised a question about what program option had been chosen at the last PRC.4 Did it involve buying a one-­year surge capability or a one to two-­week surge capability? Tirana and Smith believed that one to two weeks was the conclusion. 4 See Tab A, Document 73.
