Negotiating Channels
359
group of amateurs, I am convinced that the team will succeed, if we
will—
—Give the team leader the resources, responsibility and authority
to get the job done.
—Give the team a clear mission, without a list of restrictions, that
effectively limit or freeze the plan.
—Give the leader on the ground the freedom to alter the plan,
based on actual conditions, since the situation is changing daily, or
even hourly.
—Get the team into position quickly.
—Resist the temptation to over-control the team from Washington.
Some senior people are overreacting to the possibility of failure.
Guessing at the odds of success is meaningless, except to make other
senior people comfortable enough to approve the mission. Preparation,
positioning, judgement, timing, execution and good luck will determine
the outcome.
For those who require an indication of the probabilities of success—
there is only one way to get a meaningful forecast. Talk with the team
leaders who will be going in on the ground. No one is more sensitive
about success than the men who are going to be shot at. If they believe
the mission plan is sound, and if they are free to use good judgement
in executing it, that is the best advance indication we can have.
The organization weaknesses we discussed in our first meeting
still remain. Everyone working on this project should report to one
person. Departmental jealousies, arguments over roles and missions,
turf disputes, etc. should be dealt with firmly. A large part of the total
effort on this project is still wasted in these nonproductive areas. This
is inexcusable when you consider that fifty lives, plus the lives of the
rescue team members, are at stake.
The United States has completed its peaceful efforts to free the
hostages through the U.N., World Court, Waldheim visit, and interme-
diaries from other countries, all without success. The Russians have
taken Afghanistan, further destabilizing the Middle East. Today, Kho-
meini announced that he is going into seclusion for fifteen days. If he
isolates himself from contact with the students at the compound, this
introduces a number of new variables for consideration.
The probabilities of using the rescue team are increasing, and yet
a team is not in place in Tehran, or in a nearby country. In contrast,
we put a team into Tehran in twelve days after first consideration, and
kept it hidden for thirty-five days.
The real test of advice on a mission involving possible loss of
human life is—are the advisers willing to go on the mission? I will
repeat the offer I made five days after the hostages were taken—“If
our government feels it should not field a rescue team, because of the
