Chapter 6, June–December 1990 825 some new possibilities. Similarly, on monitoring, we have new ideas on a system of monitoring that is linked to our decision to stop production on rail and mobile missiles. We’re doing this because we don’t see you deploying any such missiles. If you were to start deploying any such missiles, we might change our position. Baker: What would you do about the ones you’ve have already deployed? Shevardnadze: On those, we’ll negotiate. For the time being we’re not discussing their destruction. But in the framework of the talks, we’ll have to discuss mobile missiles. And I’d like you to look at our new proposals, because I think we have some interesting ideas. We’ll hold our discussion on CFE for when you’d want to discuss it. [Omitted here are discussions not related to START.] 151. Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft)1 Washington, August 3, 1990 SUBJECT Rick Burt’s Memorandum On The Prospects of Completing START This Year Rick Burt has written you a 7-­page memorandum (attached) which details his concern that we will not be able to complete START in 1990. He has compiled a list of over 100 issues to be resolved in the 150 days that remain this year. In addition, the process of resolving many of these issues will reveal other differences that must be added to the list. Although his bottom line is very pessimistic from our perspective, his main point is valid: both we and the Soviets must change our approach to the negotiations if we are to finish the treaty this year. Rick singles out the following problems: – The Soviets are taking excessively long to respond to U.S. proposals and are often putting forward unhelpful positions. 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, USSR Chronological Files, START Files, OA/ID 91122–007, Soviet Power Collapse in Eastern Europe—Strategic Arms Control (August 1990). Secret. Sent for information. Sent through Gordon. A stamped notation indicates Scowcroft saw the memorandum. Scowcroft initialed the top of the memorandum.
