International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
175
capital and local ownership. The United States is not necessarily worse
off as a result of such intervention than it would be in the absence of
foreign investment, but it is very likely worse off with foreign interven-
tion than without it.
Interests of Other Governments
Cooperation of other governments in pursuing a GATT for Invest-
ment would depend on the specific contents of our proposal and the
force with which we pursued our objective. Our case should be based
on the general proposition that unregulated competition among gov-
ernments in the investment area is just as detrimental as it would be
with respect to trade, and on the proposition that we will no longer pas-
sively accept the interventionist policies of other nations. No explicit
threats would be necessary, but we would have to make it clear that we
are ready to take measures such as regulating the outflow of invest-
ment and technology in accordance with our national interests.6
Substance of Negotiations
The various possibilities for topics which could be included in the
GATT for Investment fall into three general categories: investor protec-
tion, government intervention, and regulation of MNE activities. The
specific topics include the following:
1. Investor Protection
—A judicial remedies convention could be negotiated which
would be designed to ensure that goods produced from expropriated
mines and factories can be judicially seized if shipped to the markets of
the signatory countries.
—We can strengthen the International Center for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes or other similar panels.
—We would face the question of to what extent and in what form
we should press for inclusion of the principles of national and most fa-
vored nation treatment and treatment according to the minimum
standards of international law. These are sticking points particularly
with the IDCs [LDCs?], who argue that only local remedies should be
available to a foreign investor.
—Consideration could be given to several possible approaches for
establishing investment insurance on a multilateral basis, but the his-
tory of negotiations on such proposals does not give grounds for
optimism.
6 An unknown hand placed checkmarks adjacent to the second and third sentences
of this paragraph and wrote “Necessary?” at the end of the paragraph.
