Non-Proliferation 893 347. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 22, 1977 SUBJECT Reply to Giscard President Giscard has sent you (at Tab B)2 a letter on proliferation. (It is not really a personal letter but rather one prepared by the bureaucracy.) In the letter, he asserts that a misunderstanding occurred regarding the objectives of the nuclear experts meeting in Paris on June 8–9.3 He says he thought it was supposed to study the feasibility of the fuel cycle study; we and everyone else thought that issue was settled and used the Experts’ Meeting to draft terms of reference for the study. Giscard’s letter suggests that the French now are going back on what appeared at the Summit to be a commitment to participate in our proposed international fuel cycle evaluation. He expresses his belief that the experts should meet again to undertake the preliminary study commissioned in London. Attached at Tab A4 is a proposed response to President Giscard that urges the French to get back on board with respect to the evaluation, while making some accommodation for the apparent “misunderstanding.” It also takes advantage of Giscard’s opening to you to raise our two key issues with the French: —Adoption of full scope safeguards: We have made startling progress in the past two months on full scope safeguards: the Canadians already practice them unilaterally; the British, Germans and Soviets have stated clear support for them as joint supplier policy. The only remaining barrier to their formal adoption at the fall London Suppliers meeting is France. —The Pakistani deal: We want to take this opportunity again to bring up the Pakistan issue with Giscard. A complimentary reference to Giscard’s efforts to delay deliveries to Pakistan and mention of the potentially positive effect on Pakistan of the attitude of the new Indian 1 Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Box 12, France: 1977. Confidential. Sent for action. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum. 2 The Giscard letter was not attached but is available in telegram 147101 to Paris, June 23. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850056-2578) 3 Not found. 4 Tab A was not attached. Carter’s response is available in telegram 147101 to Paris. (Ibid.)
