Romania 699 Soviet Army and special KGB combat units were airlifted to Kabul on December 25. Soviet ground troops crossed the Afghan border on December 27. The invasion, ostensibly at the request of the Afghan Government, resulted in the assassination of Afghan President Hafizullah Amin, and the installation of a new regime led by Babrak Karmal. Writing in his diary on December 28, Carter noted that he was “determined to make this action as politically costly [to the Soviets] as possible. I sent messages to our allies, key nonaligned leaders, plus all the Muslim countries—urging them to speak out strongly against the Soviet action.” Carter added: “I also sent on the Hot Line the sharpest message I have ever sent to Brezhnev, telling him that the invasion of Afghanistan would seriously and adversely affect the relationship between our two countries.” (Carter, White House Diary, December 28, 1979, page 382) Over the next few months the President recalled the U.S. Ambassador from Moscow, asked the Senate to suspend consideration of the SALT II Treaty, imposed a embargo on new grain sales and transfers of technology to the Soviet Union, announced the U.S. boycott of the 1980 Olympics in Moscow, and increased the Defense budget request to Congress. In telegram 333360 to multiple posts, December 28, the Department requested that a Presidential message be delivered to each head of state concerning the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Embassy in Bucharest, the telegram instructed, was to stress that Soviet actions were in direct “violation of the sovereignty of an independent country” and that they were in “direct conflict with Romania’s strong commitment to the right of all nations to full independence, sovereignty, and non-intervention in internal affairs.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–1258) On December 29, during the New Year’s reception for the Diplomatic Corps, Ceausescu told U.S. Chargé d’Affairs a.i. Herbert Kaiser that Romania would “do whatever it can to help resolve peacefully the Afghan problem and to obtain the withdrawal of Soviet troops.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840131–2293) On December 31, Carter sent a letter to Ceausescu detailing the decision taken at the December 12–14 NATO Ministerial meeting in Brussels, including the reasons behind the decision to modernize long-range theater nuclear forces. The letter also thanked Ceausescu for his government’s involvement in attempts to release the hostages in Iran. In a handwritten postscript, Carter added “I am sure you share our deep concern about the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Please keep me informed on your views regarding this matter.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceausescu, 1/79–6/80) The text of the letter was delivered by the Embassy on January 2 to the Ministry of Foreign
