970  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
– We understand that you are trying to resolve the download-
ing issue and OSD-JCS differences are holding things up. We need a 
definitive answer soon on this, since some crucial portions of treaty 
text are involved. The best solution would be to ban downloading, 
especially if we are not going to allow the SS–N–18 problem to be 
settled via downloading.
– We had tentatively decided to drop the idea of a specific list of 
facilities subject to mandatory suspect-­site inspection, while retaining 
the concept in the treaty. I gather, however, that there is renewed interest 
in the subject in Washington and there finally exist lists of which Soviet 
facilities we want and which U.S. facilities we can offer. Agreement on 
this will not be easy.
– We were also about to drop the exemption for dry deck shelter 
submarines, which seemed a bad idea from the beginning. Now the 
Soviets seem willing to allow this in exchange for a one-­time exemption 
for two Soviet subs in overhaul. This still seems like a bad idea to me 
and an unnecessary complication in the treaty.
– Global Positioning Satellite—­the Soviets refuse to allow use of 
GPS during RV inspections. Our latest idea is to require very good 
maps plus numbers on silos visible to both NTM and inspectors.
– The deal on sub tunnels is just about completed.
– I think the B–2 issue is back to where we were in Houston. 
However, the Soviets are not satisfied with our explanations regarding 
the B–1 bulkhead. Be prepared to deal with this next week.
– There is some progress on ALCM distinguishability, but it is 
far from settled. JCS is still hung up on their theological position that 
non-­nuclear ALCMs are not limited by the treaty, and therefore all ref-
erences to such systems must be done with mirrors. Logic favors the 
Soviets on this one. If the sides are to distinguish between long-­range 
nuclear ALCMs and long-­range non-­nuclear ALCM, there should be 
straightforward exhibitions and listing of relevant characteristics.
– Agreed statements, letters to be exchanged and issues kicked to 
the JCIC continue to multiply at what seems to me an alarming rate. 
I suppose this is inevitable as we approach the end.
What Next?
7. My judgment is that it is still barely possible to finish the treaty 
in time for a February summit. You know the prospects for a summit 
better than we, but they seem from here to be fading fast. If it is indeed 
postponed, the proper course will be to press on and complete as much 
work as we can on the treaty in an orderly way and have it ready when 
conditions permit it to be signed. This may sound naive, but, if we have 
a good meeting in Washington next week, we are close enough and 
the remaining issues technical enough that much could be done qui-
etly here without a lot of attention from high levels, if both capitals so 
directed. A delay of one or two months would not hurt us (and would 
probably be secretly welcomed by the delegations). A longer delay, 
however, could have unpredictable consequences.
Burt
