Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX a joint board headed by the Prime Minister. We should drop all of our work on this board. We can guarantee your investors what is needed. We can have feasibility studies. On the other question, do your best to get an agreement. Vance has heard Prime Minister Khalil. From my side, you have full authority to reach an agreement. You know the situation here and there. You join us as a full partner for years to come. You have my authority to do what can be done. If Israel refuses, that is a new situation. But let us be identical. Secretary Vance: The Prime Minister has given me a note7 on unilateral actions. We’ll raise this. President Carter: Let us review the contents of the note. We’ll try. Prime Minister Khalil: I have the greatest esteem for you, and as you know, I spent many years in the United States. I want U.S.-Egyptian relations to be close. I am a staunch defender of peace on a solid basis that can be defended. President Carter: I’ll never forget this. Prime Minister Khalil: I cherish your idealism. President Carter: Your contribution at Camp David gave us an education [on] the issues that made this possible. When you came, there were bad prospects. I need a Prime Minister Khalil to run my government for me. Minister Sayeh: If you’ll allow me, I’ll be brief. Due to certain elements, our economy is growing at about nine percent annually. After 1967, we fell to zero. Due to the open-door policy of President Sadat and due to the economic help of the United States, the economy is improving. We now have democracy and the rule of law. There are no confiscations or expropriations. Private investors have confidence, as do foreign investors. All is working well. If I may add, we are with the IMF on economic reform. The IMF always wants higher prices. With all this, these need to be done in a non-traditional way. We are one and one-half million housing units short. We now only have 80,000 new units being built. We won’t catch up. This is causing big problems. We can’t have an open or a closed door if we have a poor telephone system. We always have problems of sewage and water supply. We are beginning to work on rural electrification which is very important. The public sector is very poor and needs to be renewed, but we have 10–15 billion Egyptian people tied up in it. It needs help. We need a nontraditional approach. Your one billion dollars helps, but we need massive help. I sense that you want to use American investment. I am ready for it. Coca Cola is already moving. The boycott has ended. Peace, and 7 A copy of Khalil’s note has not been found.
