Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX US-Soviet Relations The President then reviewed US relations with the Soviet Union, noting progress has been made. He expressed the hope that Secretary Vance’s visit to Moscow this month and Foreign Minister Gromyko’s later visit to Washington will lead to a summit meeting with Mr. Brezhnev. Many past differences have been resolved in the SALT talks but others remain, which we hope can be dealt with soon. In addition, progress has been made on agreements to ban the testing of all nuclear devices, limit the buildup of military forces in the Indian Ocean, prevent the destruction of each other’s satellites, and control conventional arms sales. The Soviets have negotiated in good faith, and we are pleased with the progress thus far. One important problem in US-Soviet relations is the Soviet intrusion into Angola and Ethiopia by means of Cuban soldiers. Soviet actions in Africa have roused suspicion of Soviet intentions, thus difficulties in the minds of Congress and the American People. We hope the USSR will not become involved in Eritrea, but we will not permit these differences to interfere with the SALT negotiations. We look forward to Brezhnev’s visit here. No date has been set thus far since the Soviet leader probably wants to be certain that an agreement will be ready for signature. We hope this will not be delayed. President Ceausescu said that he welcomed progress toward the solution of problems between the US and the USSR, and the conclusion of a SALT agreement will have a favorable influence on international affairs. Other problems remain, however, which cannot be solved by the superpowers alone. Relations between the US and the USSR must not be achieved at the expense of other states, large or small. Problems in the area of nuclear weapons, and in conventional weapons as well, are not a matter for the US and USSR alone, though they have the largest arms stockpiles. Other countries and groups of countries (including the People’s Republic of China) are also increasing their weapons and must therefore play a greater role in disarmament. The President expressed the desire to discuss China, preparations for the Madrid meeting, the Korean question and the Pacific at subsequent meetings. He appreciated the discussions. Copies of the President’s book Why Not the Best and a book of satellite photographs were given to President Ceausescu, who expressed thanks.
