Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II mined. In any event, application of Harkin would require us to develop a “black list” which would have many undesirable overtones.9 2. (c) Lipshutz also argues that the “needy people”10 exception in the Harkin Amendment provides adequate flexibility, but it seems clear that the process of interpreting and applying that exception on a case by case basis would be difficult and time-consuming11 and would be likely to lead to erratic results. For example, would money for completion of a factory producing construction materials (undertaken perhaps with prior IFI loans) come within the exception? Similarly, Lipshutz’s argument that Harkin does not rule out bilateral agreements or “Congressional-Presidential action” as to “important” matters suggests that Lipshutz himself sees the need to avoid the Harkin strait-jacket. 3. Lipshutz next selects a number of excerpts from the draft Treasury memo that was attached under Tab 4 of your memo of April 1512 and argues that they represent “opinions” rather than “facts.” It should be noted that the Treasury memo was only a draft prepared hurriedly the day before your memo to the President and your memo did not vouch for all of the Treasury arguments. Nevertheless, I will comment briefly on Lipshutz’s points, in case the President raises them. a. Lipshutz claims some inconsistency between arguing, on the one hand, that most loans will be approved over our veto and that “no” votes will eliminate negotiating flexibility and, on the other hand, that using our “voice and vote” for human rights as provided by the Humphrey language is, according to Brzezinski, “a major bargaining chip.” Perhaps Mr. Lipshutz sees some inconsistency between these arguments, but I certainly do not. b. The Treasury paper contained a statement that most donor and recipient nations would view automatic “no” votes on human rights grounds as inconsistent with the IFI charter requirements that lending decisions should be made only on the basis of economic considerations. Lipshutz attacks this as proving too much, in that it would also prevent us from even using our voice and vote for human rights. It is not clear where the argument leaves Mr. Lipshutz since if in fact human rights considerations may not be taken into account, then it would avail us nothing to have the Harkin Amendment on the books. 9 Vance underlined the remainder of the sentence beginning with the word “application” and ending with the word “overtones.” 10 Vance underlined the phrase “needy people.” 11 Vance underlined the portion of the sentence beginning with the word “seems” and ending with the phrase “time-consuming.”
