938 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III developing countries (Group of 77) as a whole, the Common Fund and debt, are uncertain. Debt issues will be the focus of the ministerial-level session of the Trade and Development Board of UNCTAD next month (March 6–10). The only other agenda topic relates to development and financial problems, including debt, of the least developed countries (LLDCs). The G–77 views the meeting as an opportunity to secure commitments from the developed countries for increased resource transfers, and in particular will be pressing for generalized debt relief on official debt owed by low-income LDCs. The pressure for generalized relief comes predominately from the few LDCs (India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh) that stand to benefit the most, although for a number of others (particularly African LDCs) the issue has developed political importance. Last week in Washington, UNCTAD Secretary General Gamani Corea spoke with U.S. officials.11 His presentation represented a move away from the original G–77 position. He said that a procedural solution could be devised to handle proposals on debt relief mechanisms. However, on the issue of debt relief or alternative measures to transfer resources, he felt that something needed to be done. He allowed, though, that each creditor country could, on a case by case basis, decide on how such relief would be provided.12 Corea emphasized that he could not guarantee that the G–77 would accept his position. Differences between the developed countries (Group B) and the G–77 remain broad and substantive. The G–77 will almost certainly raise the discussion in the new Overview Mechanism in the United Nations,13 and probably at UNCTAD V in May 1979. (See Annex A on the debt issue in North/South relations.) 11 Telegram 48583 to all OECD capitals, February 24, reported on Corea’s February 14–15 visit to Washington. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780088–0849) In his February 16 Evening Report to Carter, Vance discussed his February 14 meeting with Corea and Cooper’s February 15 meeting with Corea. Vance noted that the developed and developing countries differed over “the call of the developing countries for a ‘second window’ to finance measures to improve commodity export earnings. Dick warned that if the Common Fund took on the aura of a new aid institution, as it would under this approach, Congress would not support any type of Common Fund. We urged Corea to concentrate on the main function of the Fund—financial support for commodity price stabilization agreements.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 19, Evening Reports (State): 2/78) 12 In his February 16 Evening Report to Carter, Vance noted that, according to Corea, the LDCs had “narrowed their demands and now seek relief of the debt burden of the poorest countries. Corea suggested retroactive adjustment of the terms of past official debt to conform with current aid terms.” Cooper countered that “adjustment of terms of all past loans to a group of countries would be a form of aid, and basic needs and human rights are important US aid allocation criteria;” as such, “each country should be considered separately and on its merits.” (Ibid.) 13 UN General Assembly Resolution 32/174, December 19, 1977, established a Committee of the Whole to oversee North-South economic negotiations.
