Negotiating Channels
393
thinks that with Armao out of the way no one at the Shah’s party will
complain about the bills and other financial issues. Armao said the
Shah told Noriega that he could not do without Armao. Noriega then
dropped the issue, according to Armao.
8. Armao’s other complaints included the following:
—the hotel bills for the security personnel are inflated and these
personnel are charging various luxuries to the Shah’s account;
—a large number of expensive items (such as silver flatware) have
been ordered for the house, without consultation with Armao or the
Shah, and the bills have been presented to Armao;
—the hotel bill has included a charge of $10,000 for two small
“shacks” on the property where the Shah is staying (Gabriel Lewis
property), even though these structures have no apparent connection
with the hotel;
—Armao’s access to the Shah has been impeded.
9. Bill Jackson said that in addition to these annoying “local prob-
lems” on Contadora, there was the more troubling issue of whether
Torrijos intended to extradite the Shah.
10. Lloyd said that as to the “local problems” it would make sense
for the Shah to raise them with Torrijos or President Royo, since his
relations with them, according to Armao, are excellent.
11. Armao interjected that the local problems seem to have gotten
very much better in recent days after he had brought some of his
complaints to the attention of General Torrijos’ doctor (whom Torrijos
had made available to the Shah for medical consultation). Moreover,
Armao went on, now that he has left Panama and intends to stay in
New York for some weeks, he thinks the friction with Noriega and his
personnel will diminish considerably.
12. On the issue of extradition, Lloyd stated that we do not see
any risk of Torrijos allowing extradition to occur. Not only is it not
legally possible, in view of the absence of an Extradition Treaty between
Panama and Iran, but it would be contrary to the assurances we
received before the Shah left for Panama. Lloyd noted that President
Carter had recently said publicly that he would not permit the extradi-
tion of the Shah. Armao conceded that Royo had told the Shah that
Panama would deal with the Iranian extradition request in accordance
with Panamanian legal procedures, and would then deny the request.
13. The larger problem, Armao said, is that “we simply cannot
trust Torrijos”. Jackson said he agreed, that the situation was “insecure”
and that “somehow there has got to be another place” Armao com-
plained that of the 80 security personnel assigned to the Shah, the
overwhelming majority are blacks who are not literate. Lloyd noted
that our original understanding was that the Panamanians would pro-
