308 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II security assistance countries will be submitted to Congress by January 31, 1978. Posts in recipient countries are required to inform host governments of new reporting requirement and/or to remind them of previous requirements. End summary. 2. On August 3, 1977, the President signed the “International Development and Food Assistance Act of 1977.”2 Section 111 of this act extensively revises Section 116 of 1961 Foreign Assistance act. Section 116 now reads as follows: Quote Sec. 116. Human rights. (A) No assistance may be provided under this part to the government of any country which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights, including torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, prolonged detention without charges, or other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, and the security of person, unless such assistance will directly benefit the needy people in such country. (B) In determining whether this standard is being met with regard to funds allocated under this part, the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate or the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives may require the administrator primarily responsible for administering Part I of this act to submit in writing information demonstrating that such assistance will directly benefit the needy people in such country, together with a detailed explanation of the assistance to be provided (including the dollar amounts of such assistance) and an explanation of how such assistance will directly benefit the needy people in such country. If either Committee or either House of Congress disagrees with the administrator’s justification it may initiate action to terminate assistance to any country by a concurrent resolution under Section 617 of this act. (C) In determining whether or not a government falls within the provisions of Subsection (A) and in formulating development assistance programs under this part, the administrator shall consider, in consultation with the Coordinator for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs—1) the extent of cooperation of such government in permitting an unimpeded investigation of alleged violations of internationally recognized human rights by appropriate international organizations, including the International Committee of the Red Cross, or groups or persons acting under the authority of the United Nations or of the Organization of American States; and 2) specific actions which have been taken by the President or the Congress relating to multilateral or secu- 2 See footnote 2, Document 86.
