March–August 1953
745
Mr. Wisner: Were any of the suggestions that we sent through to
you in one rather long cable4 just about the day before you left—we
hoped that you would receive it before your last conference there with
the Shah and Zahedi—accepted, or was it simply fortuitous that some
of these things were done anyway? These had to do with various meas-
ures such as the disposition of Mossadeq.
Mr. Roosevelt: Oh, yes. Well, those, as you probably recognized
when you sent them, were already things that we were trying to do.
Mr. Wisner: Yes.
Mr. Roosevelt: The disposition of Mossadeq was a debated subject
when I left. The Shah discussed it with Henderson.5 He discussed it
with me a little bit, but I didn’t really feel that it was up to me to get into
it too much. This was my final interview with the Shah on Saturday,
and I had certain points that I wanted to get across, and I didn’t want to
discuss a whole lot of things that really weren’t part of my operation.
Mr. Wisner: We appreciated that when we said it.
Mr. Roosevelt: I did say that I thought it was wise not to make a
martyr out of Mossadeq, and the Shah agreed, but I think the Shah still
at that time had the intention of having the public trial. Now I felt that
Henderson could talk him out of that if it is the opinion of the United
States Government that he should be talked out of it, but I would tell
you one thing: I would be more inclined to trust his judgment and
Zahedi’s about it than I would ours. I mean they know the psychology
of the situation, and certainly from here we can’t tell it. Maybe Hen-
derson [less than 1 line not declassified] out there can tell it, but I will tell
you back here you certainly can’t, and the one thing that I did say to the
Shah on the subject of trials was that I thought Riahi should be exe-
cuted, and the Shah said, “Well, why particularly?” He said, “he may
not have known he was acting against a firman of mine.” I said that he
certainly damn well did know and that he had said to General McClure
that even if he did know that it was your firman, Mossadeq was on the
side of the people, and his loyalty was to the people, and I said, “He
seems to have made a slight miscalculation, but I don’t think that ex-
cuses him for having committed treason,” and the Shah said that he
didn’t either. In fact, the Shah got rather a nasty glint in his eye at that
stage of the game. Riahi, you know, was the guy who wrecked us in the
first attempt. If it hadn’t of been for him there wouldn’t be any trouble
at all. So he and I think it is important for the morale of the Army that
4 Not found.
5 Telegram 489 from Tehran, August 26, records a conversation between the Shah
and Henderson in which the fate of Mosadeq was discussed. The Shah gave expression to
his concern that Mosadeq not be made a martyr. Henderson’s reply was to say “that if
Mosadeq should be brought to public trial he might be able with his histrionic ability to
make it appear that his accusers rather than he were being tried.” (National Archives, RG
59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.00/8–2653)
