Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
45
signing ceremony in Finland, the Russians have all but ignored their
pledge—and the Ford Administration has looked the other way.
Similarly, the American government has failed to make serious ef-
forts to get the Russians to permit greater numbers of people to emi-
grate freely to the countries of their choice, and I commend those
Members of Congress and others who have demonstrated a strong per-
sonal concern and commitment to that goal.
Despite our deep desire for successful negotiation on strategic
arms and nuclear proliferation, we cannot pass over in silence the dep-
rivation of human rights in the Soviet Union. The list of Soviet pris-
oners is long, and includes both Christians and Jews. I will speak only
of two: Vladimir Bukovsky and Vladimir Slepak. Bukovsky, a young
scientist, has been imprisoned most of the last 13 years for criticisms of
the Soviet regime. Slepak, a radio engineer in Moscow, applied for an
exit visa for Israel in April of 1970. The visa was denied and, since 1972,
he has been denied the right to hold a job.
I ask why such people must be deprived of their basic rights, a year
after Helsinki. And if I become President, the fate of men like Bukovsky
and Slepak will be very much on my mind as I negotiate with the Soviet
Union.
Liberty is curtailed in non-Communist countries, too, of course.
There are many cases of political persecution in Chile and reports of
brutal torture that are too well documented to be disbelieved.
There are those regimes, such as South Korea, which openly vio-
late human rights, although they themselves are under threat from
Communist regimes which represent an even greater level of repression.
Even in such cases, however, we should not condone repression or
the denial of freedom. On the contrary, we should use our influence to
increase freedom in those countries that depend on us for their very
survival.
Denials of human rights occur in many places and many ways. In
Ireland, for example, violence has bred more violence, and caused un-
told human suffering which brings sorrow to the entire civilized world.
I do not say to you that these are simple issues.
I do not say that we can remake the world in our own image. I rec-
ognize the limits on our power, and I do not wish to see us swing from
one extreme of cynical manipulation to the other extreme of moralistic
zeal, which can be just as dangerous.
But the present administration has been so obsessed with balance
of power politics that it has often ignored basic American values and a
proper concern for human rights. The leaders of this administration
have rationalized that there is little room for morality in foreign affairs,
and that we must put self-interest above principle.
