1955 457 “influential forces” in US alleged to be seeking to prolong cold war tensions. Peiping international broadcasts on Taiwan revived emphasis on Chou En-­lai formula for “peaceful liberation” with Tibet again cited as example. TA KUNG PAO October 25 cited Chou statements of May 13 and July 30 regarding talks with “responsible local authorities” on Tai­ wan. NCNA October 26 explained that such negotiations would be of nature of negotiations between “central and local government” and methods should be chosen by “Chinese people themselves.” Portuguese plans to celebrate 400th anniversary of rule in Macau provoked bitter propaganda blast from Peiping. People’s Daily Octo­ ber 26 issued stern warning to effect that “Macau is Chinese territory and Chinese people have right to demand its recovery.” Stated that Chi­ nese people would “not long tolerate” Portuguese occupation. Mass rally held Canton October 27 marked by speeches demanding cessation of “provocations” by Portuguese Government and accusing Portuguese authorities in Macau of “sheltering” Nationalist agents and collaborat­ ing with US and Taiwan in effort “sabotage” ChiCom regime. Added however that “Chinese people” favored settlement Macau question by “peaceful means.” Other highlights week were Peiping’s overtures to Philippines and Italy in line with recent effort “normalize” relations with non-­ Communist countries and isolate US. According to Manila press Chou En-­lai held interview with Filipino correspondents October 23 at which he asserted Taiwan’s liberation “inevitable” and urged that Philippine Government conclude treaty of non-­aggression with Peiping based on Chou-­Nehru Five Principles and Bandung Ten Prin­ ciples. ChiCom press October 25 stated that time was now ripe for establishment of diplomatic relations with Italy and suggested that negotiations for same be tied to discussions for extension of trade and cultural relations. NCNA commentary on Japan accused Hatoyama government of protracting talks with USSR and of adopting “passive attitude” on subject of normalizing relations with north Korea. NCNA commentary on Diem government referendum views it as US plot to undermine Geneva agreements and turn south Vietnam into separate state. Hoover
