years. It is, with trifling changes, the Resolution on the Interchange of
Professors and Students, adopted by the Fourth Pan American Conference
meeting in Buenos Aires in 1910.27
VII. Diplomatic Agents. This project is drafted in accordance with modern
theory and modern practice. Its theory is that the immunities of diplomatic
agents exist solely for the purpose of facilitating and regularizing the
official contacts between States. It rejects in toto the outworn and
unacceptable theory of extraterritoriality.
In addition, it embodies, it is believed, the accepted practice of the United
States and of the other American Republics. The Commission was
unanimous that there should be but two classes of permanent chiefs of
mission: the Minister Plenipotentiary and the Chargé d’Affaires. The
Commission felt that in the Americas, the State, and not an official of the
State, should be represented, and that therefore the Ambassador,
representing the President, and having personal access to the President of
another Republic not enjoyed as of right by the Minister Plenipotentiary,
was inconsistent with the democratic conditions of the New World.
Unwilling to change the law and practice in this respect, the Commission
unanimously adopted a recommendation to this effect, in the form of a voeu
to the forthcoming Sixth Conference of the Americas, to meet in Habana.
Article 24, which deals with specific immunities, contains in clause 3 a
somewhat novel suggestion, designed to meet novel but not altogether
unfamiliar conditions—freedom from customs duties on objects intended
for the diplomat’s personal use and that of his family, in a sum total limited
by the Government of the State to which he is accredited. The basis of this
admirable project was No. 22 of the Pan American Union, which, in turn,
with sundry provisions taken from American practice, was based upon
various resolutions of the Institute of International Law. It is believed that
the ultimate form of the present project is superior to any and all of its
predecessors.
VIII. Consuls. This project is believed to be of unusual merit. As in the case
of the project concerning diplomatic agents, that on Consuls is based upon
the resolutions of the Institute of International Law and upon modern theory
