266 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement that even the U.S. lending agencies frequently seemed to demand more of sound responsible governments than they did of irresponsible governments which did not have the courage nor will power to take steps to put their own houses in order. While he didn’t mention any specific countries, he implied that both the United States and the international lending agencies should have sufficient confidence in responsible governments, such as his own, so as not to insist on tying then up with strings which were frequently tighter than those applied to more irresponsible governments. Comment: While the President specifically said that he was not complaining of Chile’s treatment by the IMF, information reaching the Embassy from other sources close to the government suggests that in fact the government, or at least some of its high officials, may be chafing somewhat under some of the restrictions placed upon it by the IMF. The Secretary stated that he was very appreciative of the opportunity to converse with the President and to hear some of his views. The Secretary continued that both during the negotiations for the credits and in the arrangements leading up to the Meeting of Foreign Ministers, Chile’s Ambassador in Washington, Mr. Walter Muller, had gained the respect of all the people in the State Department and the other U.S. government agencies and he wished to assure the President that Chile was extremely well represented in Washington and also that the U.S. Ambassador in Chile had his entire confidence. The President replied that he had known and worked with Ambassador Muller for many years and that it was because of his confidence in him and respect for his judgment that he had asked him to undertake the important mission in Washington. In closing, the President asked Secretary Herter to convey his sincerest greeting and best wishes to President Eisenhower and expressed once more his pleasure at having had the opportunity to welcome Secretary Herter to Chile and to talk with him.
