752 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX who have committed terrorist activities. In this connection, I will note with satisfaction that the TWA hijacking case has been successfully prosecuted.5 Prior to my arrival in Belgrade, Admiral Holloway will have just concluded a visit to Yugoslavia for talks in the framework of our limited military cooperation and exchanges with the Yugoslavs.6 While stating your priority policy of reducing the level of international arms sales, I will inform the Yugoslavs that we are prepared to continue US- Yugoslav military exchanges and consultations, and to consider some of Yugoslavia’s proposals for military equipment purchases. Of importance, the visit to Belgrade should give me the opportunity to talk to some of the government’s upcoming leaders, people we can expect to have increased dealings with in coming years. I will plan to focus my discussions on international issues on the Belgrade CSCE meeting, the Middle East, and our African policy. I believe that if I am candid with Tito about the nature of my talks with Vorster,7 this may well produce a positive ripple effect in terms of Yugoslav consultations with other members of the non-aligned movement on our African policy.8 With your agreement I will base the agenda for my talks with Tito on the issues outlined above.9 I am attaching at Tab A proposed letters for your signature to President Eanes, King Juan Carlos, Chancellor Kreisky, Prime Minister Vorster and President Tito. With your approval I will plan to present the letters during my talks with each of these leaders.10 5 On September 10, 1976, Croatian nationalists hijacked a TWA flight from New York to Chicago and diverted it to Paris. The hijackers released the hostages on September 12, after discussions in Paris with U.S. officials. (“TWA Hijackers Allow Hostages to Leave Plane,” The Washington Post, September 12, 1976, p. A1) On May 5, four of the hijackers were found guilty of air piracy and conspiracy. (“Croat Nationalists Guilty in Hijacking,” Chicago Tribune, May 6, 1977, p. 7) 6 Admiral James Holloway, Chief of Naval Operations, visited Yugoslavia May 14– 16 for discussions with Yugoslav military leaders. In telegram 4634 from Athens, May 18, Holloway described his visit to Yugoslavia as “warm and cordial,” marked by consistent expressions by the Yugoslav military leadership of their desire for closer relations with the United States. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770176–0808) 7 Mondale met with South African Prime Minister Balthazar Johannes “John” Vorster in Vienna May 19–20 for talks on Rhodesia. 8 Carter wrote in the margin of this paragraph: “OK—I don’t know whether Tito is a racist—He may be.” 9 Carter approved the recommendation. 10 Carter approved the recommendation.
