Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I charged with “intervening” in the internal affairs of another sovereign state. But much more often, the response is a real effort to join issue on the merits. Frequently, there is candid acknowledgment of the validity of our interest—an interest rooted in solemn international agreements that make the way a government treats its own citizens a matter of legitimate international concern. Just as frequently there is disagreement over the degree and the causes of the problem. It is often asserted, for example, that terrorism justifies repression. But usually these differences in perspective are overtaken by a consideration of possible improvements. By consideration, for example, of whether: • Those held without trial, often incommunicado and for lengthy periods, can soon be released or at least charged and tried; • The return to civilian rule can proceed on schedule; or • Those responsible for mistreating prisoners will be prosecuted. Sometimes we achieve explicit understandings on such issues. More commonly there is an implicit recognition of the need for improvement and for further consultations as the situation evolves. Either way, the raising of the issue has profound significance. Rather than being conveniently ignored, human rights abuses are brought to the center of the diplomatic interchange. There, they must be addressed. I believe the almost geometric increase in world awareness of human rights issues is perhaps the major accomplishment of our human rights diplomacy. This new consciousness not only helps curb existing human rights abuses, it also acts as a deterrent to new violations. Symbolic Acts. The words of human rights diplomacy can effectively be joined with symbolic acts. For example, trips to other countries by our senior officials and official invitations to the leaders of other nations to visit the United States can be used to advance our human rights objectives. Such visits can mark our recognition that a country has an outstanding human rights record or provide the opportunity to discuss human rights problems with the leader of a country where improvements are urgently needed. There are a host of other measures that can be used symbolically to send the desired signal, such as: cultural and educational exchanges; selection of the site of international conferences; the level of our representation at diplomatic events; port visits by our fleet. Carefully used, such symbols and gestures can help advance the cause of human rights. There is also significance in our willingness to meet, on appropriate occasions, with opposition leaders from countries with serious human rights problems. My colleagues and I have met with a number of such leaders in Washington—including some who are living in exile
