122 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV B. NATO 1. The US reaffirms NATO strategy as expressed in MC–14/3.4 Deterrence and defense in the NATO areas will continue to rely on a combination of conventional, theater nuclear, and strategic nuclear forces. US policy will emphasize the strengthening of conventional forces for deterrence and defense. 2. Consonant with present NATO strategy, including forward defense, the US is committed to having the capability, in conjunction with its allies, to stop a Warsaw Pact attack with minimum loss of territory and ultimately to restore prewar boundaries. 3. Consistent with the capabilities of the Warsaw Pact, US forces, in conjunction with those of its NATO allies, will be capable of responding to a full spectrum of hostilities—­from reinforced attack to war following a period of extensive mobilization—­recognizing the need to seek, within resource constraints, an optimum mix of capabilities along the spectrum. 4. The US will plan on sustaining a worldwide conventional war against the Soviet Union and its allies for a minimum of 90 days. The ninety day planning guidance will be reviewed following (1) an evaluation of Warsaw Pact capabilities to sustain combat, (2) consultations with the NATO allies concerning their acceptance of this guidance goal, (3) a review of the relative trade-­offs between early combat capability and capability to sustain extended conflict, and (4) an examination of the implications of alternative US/NATO mobilization and industrial preparedness postures. 5. US will meet its commitment to its allies to raise the level of defense spending by approximately 3% per year in real terms. C. Asia With the exception of the withdrawals from Korea directed in PD/ NSC–12,5 the US will maintain approximately the current level of forces deployed in the Western Pacific in order to preserve regional stability, to deter aggression in Korea and elsewhere, and to protect US interests and meet treaty commitments in the event of aggression. 4 On January 16, 1968, the NATO Defense Planning Committee adopted NATO’s Military Committee’s report, MC 14/3, as an overall strategic concept for the defense of the North Atlantic Treaty area. MC 14/3 stated that theater nuclear forces were meant to deter conventional attacks and, if deterrence failed, to respond to attacks and to confront the enemy with escalation of the conflict. (Gregory W. Pedlow, ed., NATO Strategy Documents, 1949–1969 (Brussels: NATO, 1997), pp. 345–370) 5 Carter signed PD/NSC–12, “U.S. Policy in Korea,” on May 5, 1977. (Carter Library, Presidential Directives, PD–12)
