3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
521
continued to warn against doing one thing or another. He said the So-
viet leaders were responsible people, but the persistence of the theme
contained in the note has a bad impact in the Soviet Union. The threat
in Asia is China and the risk that it will advance further—and yet, the
U.S. advises the USSR not to do anything. Dobrynin thought the Viet-
namese would block the Chinese advance, but nevertheless Hanoi
could ask the Soviet Union publicly to take action. So far Hanoi had not
done so, but it must be remembered that the fighting is taking place on
Vietnamese soil.
The Acting Secretary interjected that the first attack had occurred
on Cambodian soil. The Vietnamese had overrun the entire country.
Dobrynin reiterated that Cambodia was not the problem. He felt
the debate in the Security Council simply heightened emotions and
would not necessarily lead to a solution.
The Acting Secretary said he had a higher regard for the UN than
Dobrynin. Dobrynin recalled his own assignment in New York, and he
advised the U.S. to be more impartial.
Dobrynin said the Soviet Union had shown restraint, had not al-
lowed itself to be provoked into a major conflict. The Acting Secretary
said we should not allow the situation to spiral into greater conflict. Do-
brynin said the U.S. was asking the Soviet Union not to aid the victim.
Shulman urged Dobrynin to look closely at the language of our
note. We were not saying the USSR should refrain from any assistance
whatsoever. The point was to urge Moscow to consider the larger con-
sequences of the form of its response to events in Indochina.
Dobrynin said he thought Moscow had understood what we were
saying, since it had been raised three or four times. He argued that the
U.S. has forces in the Philippines, a sovereign country, and the USSR
raised no objections to this. Vietnam was also a sovereign country. Did
the U.S. maintain that it had rights which the Soviet Union did not
have?
Shulman reiterated that we were trying to anticipate future
sources of strain on our relations, and that the Soviets should look
closely at the language of our note.
Dobrynin nevertheless thought the U.S. was trying to constrain So-
viet options to act under the treaty with Vietnam.
The Acting Secretary said we had a responsibility to avoid future
hazards; this was the purpose of our approach.
Dobrynin asked rhetorically whether the U.S. preferred that the
Soviet Union attack China, since it wished to take away the option of
coming to Vietnam’s assistance. The Acting Secretary said he wanted it
to be clear for the record that the U.S. was not in any way encouraging
the Soviet Union to attack China.
