National Security Policy  965
the other hand, the experience of the last two years suggests that in 
some areas the honeymoon period that began in 1954 is drawing to a 
close and that the USSR will encounter problems as its contacts with the 
underdeveloped world expand. Developments in Burma, for example, 
have shown that an initial favorable impact may be vitiated by subse­
quent frictions, while the effect of Communist policy toward Iraq on 
Soviet-­UAR relations has shown the difficulty of supporting regional 
rivals. Another sign is the disillusionment of some non-­Communist 
students and trainees visiting Russia, both with ideological commu­
nism and with the physical and personal aspects of Soviet life.
25. More broadly, the extension of Soviet Bloc trade and aid pro­
grams throughout the world increasingly builds up the impression that 
the USSR can help any nation it wishes—an impression fortified by the 
Soviets’ own boasting of their economic progress. In effect, the USSR 
now appears to be a “have” nation, and underdeveloped countries will 
come more and more to consider that the Soviet Union has an obliga­
tion to help them. Hence, Soviet efforts to continue their aid program 
on a highly selective basis will increasingly encounter the political pen­
alties of aid denied or cut down in the face of hopes built up.
26. Long-­term Evolution within the USSR. Over the next five years 
we see no prospect of a change in the Soviet domestic scene so funda­
mental as to diminish the motivation, will, or capacity of the regime 
to project its rapidly growing power externally. But popular hopes for 
a better life are on the rise in the USSR. Some groups seek a greater 
degree of personal freedom from restrictions and there is a far more 
universal desire to enjoy more of the economic fruits of Soviet growth. 
Khrushchev so far has tended to take these sentiments into account and 
has thus somewhat strengthened the regime. However, looking beyond 
the next five years, conflicts are likely to arise between the desires of an 
increasingly significant popular opinion and the ideological impetus 
and allocation of resources required under a thrusting foreign policy. 
We do not predict that these conflicts will alter basic Soviet objectives, 
but their long-­run influence could be in the direction of reducing the 
outward pressure of Soviet policy, particularly if that policy should 
appear unprofitable.
27. Sino-­Soviet Relations. Insofar as we can now foresee, the USSR 
and Communist China will continue to be firmly allied against the 
West. However, frictions have already arisen over extremist tendencies 
in Chinese internal policy, over Chinese ideological pretensions, over 
foreign policy tactics, and probably over whether the USSR should sup­
ply nuclear weapons to China. These or other frictions may be magni­
fied in the future. As Communist China progresses and Soviet levers 
of authority become less effective, Peiping will tend to exercise more
