580 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI alternative would be to limit Backfire in CFE as we had proposed in Vienna. The U.S. was flexible, but this system had to be addressed one way or the other. We simply wanted to submit two alternatives. He added that there would be major ratification problems if we were not able to handle Backfire in some way. Shevardnadze said he wanted to make a clarification. He did not know if the Secretary was aware, but Soviet negotiators in Vienna had already expressed a desire to include medium bombers—­including the TU–22M or Backfire—­in the conventional forces agreement. So this would be discussed in Vienna and the Soviets considered the subject closed. The Secretary said he had wanted only to offer an alternative, specifically, inclusion in START with a discount. Shevardnadze rejoined that this would be a departure from the Moscow agreements. START: Other Issues to be Resolved The Secretary said he had spoken in his one-­on-­one meeting the previous night about exchanging a list of START issues to be resolved by the June summit. He wanted to pass over this list (attached).6 Shevardnadze said he believed we had very important work to do. The Soviets had their experts here. They would prepare their own list to be exchanged immediately. Defense and Space The Secretary said he wanted next to discuss the Defense and Space Talks. Our discussions in Moscow had been useful in making clear that a START agreement was not linked to a Defense and Space agreement. We hoped we could engage in Geneva in a dialogue on how new technologies could make a safer future. The draft treaty the U.S. had put on the table in early December, including our space testing and sensors initiatives, offered a sound basis for a transition from the past to the future. Our negotiator in Geneva had given the Soviet side a proposal to demonstrate our proposed predictability measures. This would work something like the START verification and stability measures. As a means of moving the Defense and Space Talks forward, the U.S. proposed that we work out a freestanding predictability agreement—­one that would not be linked to the ABM treaty—­in order to build confidence in this area. The Secretary added that he wanted to emphasize the words free-­ standing. We were talking about an agreement that was not tied in any way to the ABM treaty. This was the only basis on which we would 6 Not found.
