380
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
the Department has had in mind the possibility that we might be forced
to give financial aid to Iran even if an oil settlement were not reached.
Since this possibility existed in the American mind, the Foreign Office
had thought it well to mention it. (I confess I do not find this explana-
tion very satisfying but I suppose we must accept it in view of the fact
that Burrows could give no other.)
I commented that it seemed unrealistic to suggest that conditions
regarding anti-communist moves should be attached to the negotiation
of an oil settlement when it had so far been impossible to arrive at a set-
tlement even without attaching conditions. After some discussion,
however, both the British and we ourselves agreed that if he achieved a
satisfactory oil settlement Dr. Mosadeq might be disposed to move
against the Tudeh of his own volition, since he would be relieved of the
Western pressure and would no longer need to be so cautious about an-
tagonizing the Russians and their stooges. He would also no longer
need the Tudeh as a “bogie” with which to scare the Western Powers.
4. There was some discussion of the British emphasis on “absolute
Anglo-United States solidarity”. It appeared from what Burrows said
that this meant in their minds just what it said. We did not belabor the
point but I suggested there might be tactical advantages in maintaining
at least the appearance of independent action in certain cases. No at-
tempt was made, however, to arrive at a definition of the degree of soli-
darity which would be desirable. This is a point which I think should
have further attention in the Department if we are to avoid (a) upset-
ting the British by rejecting their appeal for solidarity, or (b) tying our-
selves hand and foot by agreement to a document which speaks of “ab-
solute” or “monolithic” solidarity.
5. We stated our opposition to the ideas of (a) “neutralizing” Iran,
(b) making a new statement of our interest in Iran’s independence, and
(c) causing the Russians to believe that a Tudeh coup would be the
signal for a British counter-coup in the south (the “big bluff”). I gath-
ered that the British representatives were disposed to agree with us on
all three points, although Burrows seemed attracted by the idea of neu-
tralizing Iran. On this particular point I took the line that we would
probably be very happy to see Iran neutralized, including the with-
drawal of American aid missions, if it could be done but that we did not
think it was feasible. We thought the Russians would simply seize the
opportunity to step in and grab Iran for themselves. We also feared that
neutralization, if successful, would encourage other Near Eastern and
South Asian states to adopt a neutral position and, if unsuccessful,
would be regarded as a betrayal of Iran and discourage other countries
from standing firm against the Russians.
6. With regard to the suggestions of military intervention or tribal
revolt after a Tudeh coup, we advanced the idea that such measures
