XXX Summary of Print Volume III Dulles also claimed that a shelter program would have an undesirable impact on “the psychology of the American people. There were prac­ tical difficulties in the way of maintaining, at one and the same time, both an offensive and a defensive mood.” When it was noted that the new addition to the State Department building did not include shelters, Dulles replied that “the State Department was expendable.” (8) Gordon Gray of the Office of Defense Mobilization, Secretary of Defense Neil McElroy, and General Twining, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), among others, also pointed to difficulties in trying to implement an extensive shelter plan. (4) Regular military briefings on the horrific effects of nuclear war, however, convinced President Eisenhower that more emphasis had to be given to defensive measures. (38, 97) Following one such briefing in September 1960, the President commented that “he had been making up his mind to go into training as an Indian and live on deer in the Rocky Mountains.” While he still believed that “most of our money should be put on deterrence,” he also recognized the political and psy­ chological need for the U.S. Government to demonstrate its ability to destroy an incoming missile before the Soviets could do so. He contin­ ued that “if greater emphasis is not given to passive defense, there will be no U.S. Without passive defense we could retaliate but the people we are supposed to be defending would be all dead and there would be no State Department to worry about foreign affairs.” He concluded by asking several agencies to re-­examine the administration’s shelter policy “on a down-­to-­earth basis. He would like to see all the agencies he had mentioned feeling a sense of responsibility for taking a new look at this question.” (120) Toward the end of the Eisenhower administration, the National Security Council again considered the question of fallout shelters. Eisenhower was now convinced that “we should be doing a lot more than we are doing for passive defense of the population.” He opposed massive new federal outlays for a shelter program, however, and ulti­ mately approved “the objective of obtaining fallout shelter for the pop­ ulation within five years, principally with local and private effort, and with Federal resources to be confined largely to setting an example and stimulating individual efforts to attain the objective but not to guaran­ tee its attainment.” (133) A major preoccupation of the National Security Council through­ out the Eisenhower administration was its annual review of the Basic National Security Policy (BNSP) paper. As the title suggested, these papers covered all phases of the nation’s security interests, including chemical and biological weapons, military assistance, policy toward developing nations, and weapons systems. At one point the NSC even considered inclusion of a statement on birth control as a “crucial”
