1340 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Ambassador Evron opened by saying that he had two letters to deliver to the Secretary from Prime Minister Begin, one replying2 to the Secretary’s oral message of August 23 on the U.S. abstention in the August 20 Security Council vote,3 and the other on the oil MOA negotiations.4 The Secretary first read Begin’s letter replying to his oral message of August 23. The Secretary asked Ambassador Evron to tell the Prime Minister that he appreciated the Prime Minister’s warm words of friendship. With respect to the Prime Minister’s comments on the Secretary’s use of the phase “unilateral action” the Secretary said he wanted to make clear that he considers it the right of any country to determine where its capital should be established, but if there is a negotiating process going on in regard to that particular place many countries may be involved. In a circumstance such as this, unilateral actions are not helpful. It is obviously up to Israel to decide what Israel’s position in the negotiation should be. But on the issues that are the subject of negotiations, no party should prejudice the result by unilateral actions. The Secretary said that was all the phrase was intended to convey. The Secretary recalled the remarks he had made before the Security Council on August 20 in regard to the unhelpful nature of the resolutions that had been introduced in the UN this year.5 We have said this and we will continue to say this. The only way we have to salvage the 2 Begin’s August 25 letter described the U.S. abstention in the Security Council’s vote on the draft resolution concerning the Jerusalem law, particularly following the Secretary’s “strong speech,” as “incomprehensible to us.” Begin defended the Israeli naming of Jerusalem as the national capital, remarking on Muskie’s “repeated reproach concerning the so-called ‘Unilateral Action.’”Begin continued, “I am not ashamed to admit that I do not comprehend that complaint or accusation. The reason is simple. I am ready to ask any historian whether at any time in recorded history any nation, decided where its capital should be otherwise than by ‘Unilateral Action.’” “As far as Jerusalem is concerned the Israeli Nation is fully entitled to decide where its capital is,” Begin concluded, “as any other nation, old or new, has done.” (Department of State, Office of the Secre-
