1340
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Ambassador Evron opened by saying that he had two letters to
deliver to the Secretary from Prime Minister Begin, one replying2 to
the Secretary’s oral message of August 23 on the U.S. abstention in
the August 20 Security Council vote,3 and the other on the oil MOA
negotiations.4
The Secretary first read Begin’s letter replying to his oral message
of August 23. The Secretary asked Ambassador Evron to tell the Prime
Minister that he appreciated the Prime Minister’s warm words of
friendship. With respect to the Prime Minister’s comments on the Sec-
retary’s use of the phase “unilateral action” the Secretary said he
wanted to make clear that he considers it the right of any country to de-
termine where its capital should be established, but if there is a negoti-
ating process going on in regard to that particular place many countries
may be involved. In a circumstance such as this, unilateral actions are
not helpful. It is obviously up to Israel to decide what Israel’s position
in the negotiation should be. But on the issues that are the subject of ne-
gotiations, no party should prejudice the result by unilateral actions.
The Secretary said that was all the phrase was intended to convey.
The Secretary recalled the remarks he had made before the Secu-
rity Council on August 20 in regard to the unhelpful nature of the reso-
lutions that had been introduced in the UN this year.5 We have said this
and we will continue to say this. The only way we have to salvage the
2 Begin’s August 25 letter described the U.S. abstention in the Security Council’s
vote on the draft resolution concerning the Jerusalem law, particularly following the Sec-
retary’s “strong speech,” as “incomprehensible to us.” Begin defended the Israeli naming
of Jerusalem as the national capital, remarking on Muskie’s “repeated reproach con-
cerning the so-called ‘Unilateral Action.’”Begin continued, “I am not ashamed to admit
that I do not comprehend that complaint or accusation. The reason is simple. I am ready
to ask any historian whether at any time in recorded history any nation, decided where
its capital should be otherwise than by ‘Unilateral Action.’” “As far as Jerusalem is con-
cerned the Israeli Nation is fully entitled to decide where its capital is,” Begin concluded,
“as any other nation, old or new, has done.” (Department of State, Office of the Secre-
tariat Staff, Special Handling Restrictions Memos, 1979–1983, Lot 96D262, Box 5, ES Sen-
sitive August 1–30, 1980)
3 See Document 400.
4 The letter, dated August 25, discussed the lack of progress made in the talks to
reach an agreement on the implementation conditions for the U.S.-Israeli MOA on Oil
Supply which had been signed in June 1979 and stated that, given Israel’s current eco-
nomic state and the relinquishment of the Sinai oil wells, it should not be “called upon to
pay an average price [for oil] comparable to the highest marginal price the U.S. pays for
oil imports,” a condition presented by U.S. negotiators in the latest round of talks in July
1980. Begin concluded: “In light of the above, I ask you, Mr. Secretary, to direct your dele-
gation to reconvene with Israel’s representatives as soon as possible with a view to final-
izing a practical agreement which takes into account Israel’s difficulties and deep con-
cerns from the standpoint of our national economy and the heavy burdens we have
assumed.” The text of this letter, as well as that of Begin’s second letter on the U.S. absten-
tion, was sent to Tel Aviv in telegram 227501 to Tel Aviv, August 27; National Archives,
RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880142–1009.
5 See Document 399.
