3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
176
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
40.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
ER M 77–10525
Washington, August 1977
The Value to the USSR of Economic Relations with the US
Foreword
The attached paper examines key elements of the US-Soviet eco-
nomic relationship—in technology, energy, credit, grain, and MFN—
and concludes that, in the current context, and taken individually,
these elements do not provide the US or the West with policy levers
that could be used to exert significant influence upon Soviet behavior.
But the assessment is focused narrowly on the current situation
and on specific economic instruments. To do justice to the potential for
leverage and influence in the East-West relationship, the problem
should be considered in a more dynamic and comprehensive context of
a long term political-economic-military competition. An assessment in
those terms would place far more emphasis on the deepening economic
problems and resource stringencies facing the Soviet economy over the
next five to ten years, and the strains and pressures these will increas-
ingly place on the Soviet resource allocation process, particularly in the
military sphere. In the context of such deepening problems, the poten-
tial for using East-West economic relations for political influence might
be much larger, particularly if conceived as part of a broader strategy
for long-term competition. These possibilities deserve far more atten-
tion and analytic effort than they have so far received.
CONCLUSIONS
The importance of Western technology, credit, and grain to Soviet
economy has increased in recent years, and will increase further during
the next decade. Moscow is determined to avoid exploitable depend-
ence, however, and expects to be able to do so.
—In the great majority of instances, alternatives to US sources are
available.
—Other Western countries have shown little willingness to sacri-
fice economic gains for a concerted, sustained policy of using East-West
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, General
Odom File, Box 2, Brzezinski, Zbigniew: 6/77–12/78. Secret. The paper’s forward and
conclusions are printed; its main text was not found attached. This paper is included in
an overview prepared by the NSC and distributed to select Cabinet members on August
26, along with briefing papers prepared by the Departments of State and Treasury and
the Central Intelligence Agency, for the August 31 meeting with the Policy Review Com-
mittee (see Document 46). A copy of the complete paper is in the Carter Library, National
Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Institutional File, Box 29, INT Documents: #5600s:
8–9/77.
