1979  657
thing, in that they might motivate us to seek improved verification 
arrangements in the near term rather than putting it off. (S)
Dr. Perry noted that the trench system might lend itself to veri-
fication through the use of various types of black boxes which could 
provide electronic verification information to the other side. (S)
Secretary Vance remarked that even aside from the verification 
problems, anything but an open trench or one covered with transpar-
ent plastic would generate complaints from the Soviets. David Aaron 
expressed skepticism about proceeding with any system if it required 
on-­site inspection, cooperative measures or other special procedures 
that might have to be negotiated. (S)
John White remarked that it’s important to understand the need for 
the dash requirement—­he was told that it simply reduces the need for 
location security. (U)
Frank Press noted that a system of this type, with interconnecting 
roads or rails on the surface, might be particularly susceptible to attacks 
designed to reduce the system’s mobility. The movements of the trans-
porters might be observed, and their positions reported back after their 
mobility had been lost. (S)
Secretary Brown said that most of these questions are probably 
resolvable in several weeks, but he asked whether we don’t already 
know enough to be able to choose to go ahead with some sort of ground 
system. If we can choose, then we can get started on a missile. (C)
Jim McIntyre remarked that there are a great number of uncertain-
ties to be resolved. (C)
The President remarked that he has no doubts that we should pro-
ceed with a large MX missile, but that we must look more to the ques-
tion of which land-­based system to deploy. He noted that we will face 
a massive outcry which could delay its deployment, at least outside 
DOD land. (C)
The Vice President then began a discussion of some of the politi-
cal problems involved with this decision. He said that we may wish 
to look at the possibility of legislation similar to that used to overcome 
environmental opposition to the Alaska Pipeline. He also noted that we 
are going to be in a touchy position on the Hill. If we make a very spe-
cific choice on the MX, we may lose some pro-SALT II votes. If on the 
other hand we make no choice at all, we will raise concerns that we are 
not maintaining an adequate strategic balance which will also reduce 
support for SALT. He suggested that the best policy may be to identify 
with the 190,000 lb. MX missile, yet stay in a reasonably flexible posi-
tion with respect to basing mode. He noted that Senator Jackson would 
take anyone’s help in beating SALT, and that he might be very ready to 
suggest an MX deployment for every state. (C)
