416  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
for anything resembling a significant bloc in Congress upon the votes 
of deputies led by former President Calderón Guardia, who initiated 
social reform in Costa Rica. A number of the important aspects of Costa 
Rican economic life are in the hands of autonomous institutions created 
by Figueres and manned by, at least for some time, officers sharing the 
Figueres economic philosophy. Perhaps most important, the danger of 
a drop in the price of coffee presents the possibility of severe economic 
and psychological consequences. As an outspoken and so far fearless 
spokesman for private enterprise, Echandi needs carefully planned 
assistance in overcoming these obstacles and leading Costa Rica toward 
a system of freer enterprise.
3. Planning: The Longer Range Need. While there is urgent need at 
the moment for special help to reverse the trend toward socialism, a 
major need for the long run is an economic plan for the country. Only 
such a plan will assure orderly progress toward a strong free enterprise 
economy as well as assure that U.S. assistance will make the most effec-
tive contribution toward that objective. Some rather haphazard plan-
ning exists within certain individual Ministries of the Government, but 
there is no centralized planning and only a minimum of coordination 
at the Council of Government (Cabinet) level. The need of such overall 
centralized planning was pinpointed by the recent Eisenhower study 
group as probably the most basic need of Costa Rica.
Therefore, Ambassador Willauer believes that a primary objective 
of our technical assistance program in Costa Rica should be to arrange 
within the near future for an economic advisory team to study the eco-
nomic needs and possibilities of Costa Rica and to formulate an overall 
economic plan for the country. This could be done by a private organi-
zation, even preferably so, at a cost of not less than $100,000 and per-
haps twice that amount. The recommendations resulting from such 
planning would be an important factor in determining our future tech-
nical assistance program. Specific projects of technical assistance might 
be undertaken on a contract basis. To the extent any such contracted 
projects might duplicate the present USOM program, the latter would 
obviously be reduced to avoid any overlapping.
The program as now planned would continue until a plan was 
finally devised, and it is quite likely that a majority of the current 
projects would be included, since they are designed to help resolve 
what are undoubtedly basic problems of the country. The difference 
would be the assurance that our technical assistance contribution was 
being used to the best advantage by Costa Rica itself in achieving its 
planned goal.
