742 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I 149. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, June 4, 1980, 1:15–1:30 p.m. SUBJECT US-Soviet Relations PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Dr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Ambassador Thomas J. Watson, Jr., United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union Mr. Marshall Brement, NSC Staff Member The President. Congratulations on your daughter’s wedding. I hope everything went well. (U) Ambassador Watson. Everything was fine. Thank you very much. (U) The President. I understand you appeared before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee this morning. How did it go? (U) Ambassador Watson. I think it was a good session. There were no problems. (U) The President. What message did you bring them? (U) Ambassador Watson. I voiced complete support for all your policies and everything you have been doing. I stressed the importance of evenhandedness and of getting the country behind the President. I talked about the need for the draft, and even for universal military training, if our adversaries as well as our allies and others throughout the world are not going to regard us as paper tigers. (C) The President. That is a very good message. (U) Ambassador Watson. I very much appreciate the chance to talk with you and I know that your time is very short. There are four points that I would like to make to you and I have written them down. The first point at the top of my list is real congratulations for the appointment of Ed Muskie. I have a summer house in Maine, have had it since 1958, 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38, Memcons: President: 6/80. Confidential. The meeting took place in the Oval Office at the White House. Drafted by Brement, who sent the memorandum to Brzezinski under a June 4 covering memorandum, requesting that Brzezinski approve it. Brement also noted that the memorandum “should make interesting reading for future historians studying internecine rivalry within the US government in the late 1970s.” Brzezinski placed a checkmark on the covering memorandum, indicating that he approved it, and added the following handwritten notation: “It makes for hilarious reading, but it’s accurate! ZB.” Aaron’s notation on the covering memorandum, dated June 12, reads: “ZB— This is wonderful! DA.”
