1236
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
7. In a one-to-one discussion8 with Begin I tried out with him the
Gaza First idea after I had already done so with Khalil and the other
members of the Egyptian Delegation. Interestingly enough, Begin said
that the only Gaza First proposal he knew about was one which would
call for an overall agreement with respect to the West Bank and Gaza
and implementation first in Gaza. I then asked him point blank
whether he would approve an agreement which dealt only with a plan
for Gaza for early implementation while further discussions continued
with respect to the West Bank. He did not answer me directly but
merely said that if such a position were presented “we will think about
it”. The Egyptians, however, did not respond favorably when I put the
same question, and Khalil said that Sadat had never intended that there
be a Gaza First option which would not include agreement on an
overall plan to be implemented first in Gaza. When I met with Sadat in
Ismailia, the conversation was such that it simply was not possible to
bring up the Gaza First option with him, therefore, I did not do so.
8. Begin’s political position is stronger than it was a couple of
months ago. The recent Hebron killings9 and his visit to Washington
apparently helped him in the polls since he now emerges as a tough
fighter on behalf of Israel’s security. When I met with Shimon Peres10
he told me that there was no more than a fifty-fifty chance that there
might be an election this year and asserted that he thinks Begin is
stronger than he was earlier this year. Begin obviously feels this be-
cause he told me several times that he thought that his position on secu-
rity had a national consensus behind it and the full support of the
people. When I asked Peres and Rabin11 about their own estimate, they
said that the nation would, indeed, be deeply concerned about its secu-
rity but they thought that this did not necessarily mean support for
Begin’s position. Both are confident Labor would handily win any elec-
tion now.
9. As to Sadat, he is about to unveil a new governmental plan
which he thinks will make a dramatic difference in the governing of
8 On April 30, Linowitz met with Begin for over two hours, during which, Linowitz
noted, Begin was “totally unyielding” and “the toughest I have yet seen him.” After
touching upon Vance’s recent resignation and replacement with Muskie, the two men
discussed the “four points” Begin had proposed in Washington. (See footnote 5, Docu-
ment 357) Linowitz pointed out that the Israeli positions “were bound to create serious
problems and might prevent any progress in the negotiations.” Linowitz “asked him
bluntly whether he really wanted an agreement on autonomy. He responded emotionally
and vociferously that there was nothing in the world he wanted more than an agreement
and he would do everything he could to achieve one except prejudice Israel’s security
and wellbeing.” (Telegram 7965 from Tel Aviv, April 30; National Archives, RG 59, Cen-
tral Foreign Policy File, P890005–0378)
9 See Document 367.
10 A record of this meeting has not been found.
11 A record of this meeting has not been found.
