1092 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI 436. Telegram From the Embassy in Chile to the Department of State1 Santiago, May 12, 1978, 2211Z 3612. For NRC. Subject: Chile Will Sign NPT and Accept Total Safeguards on All Nuclear Installations in Chile in Exchange for U.S. Assistance in Nuclear Field. 1. Summary: Reports reaching Embassy indicate Chile might be willing to sign the NPT, accept total safeguards on all Chilean nuclear facilities, and waive requirements for entry into force of Tlatelolco Treaty in exchange for an assured nuclear fuel supply and technical assistance from the USG. Ambassador will shortly be invited by CCEN for discussion on the subject. Chile’s strategy will be to first attempt to obtain nuclear fuel and technical assistance from U.S. without making concessions; second, attempt to obtain nuclear fuel and technical assistance from U.S. by placing La Reina reactor and facilities under total safeguards but only the fuel supply at Lo Aguirre under safeguards; and finally, agree to sign NPT, accept total safeguards, and waive requirements for entry into force of Tlatelolco Treaty in exchange for an assured nuclear fuel supply and technical assistance from the U.S. in event previous alternatives fail. End summary. 2. Embassy Science Officer was told by a member (protect) of the Chilean Nuclear Energy Commission (CCEN) on 11 May that Chile would be willing to sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), accept total safeguards on all Chilean nuclear facilities, and waive requirements for entry into force of the Treaty of Tlatelolco in exchange for a agreement with the United States government to provide Chile with a dependable supply of nuclear fuel and other undefined nuclear technology assistance. This decision was reached, along with a preliminary negotiating strategy, during a 10 May meeting of the CCEN Advisory Board. 3. During the meeting on the CCEN Advisory Board, CCEN President General (R) Jaime Estrada L. told board members that he had received inquiries from both the Chilean Foreign Minister Hernan Cubillos Sallato and Defense Minister General Raul Benavides as to why Chile should not sign the NPT. Estrada stated that he had been opposed to Chile signing the NPT and accepting total safeguards over all CCEN installations. He was, however, beginning to realize that Chile would not be able to continue operating its two experimental nuclear 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780203–1070. Confidential; Priority. Sent for information to Buenos Aires.
