3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
370
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
pressed this position to the Cubans as well, and they in turn had told
the Soviets that their position in this respect was identical. There was
not a single Cuban soldier fighting in Eritrea today. The Soviet leader-
ship had been informed that this was Fidel Castro’s firm position. As
for further developments in that area, he was not at all sure that there
would not be further bloodshed there. After all, there were certain
circles outside that area, who urged the Eritreans to resist a peaceful
settlement. What was more, Ethiopia, too, was not totally in sympathy
with arriving at a peaceful settlement. If the Ethiopians had not been re-
strained by the Soviets and by the Cubans, blood would have flowed
there long ago. Whether or not one could succeed in restraining them
over a period of time, Gromyko did not know, but the Soviet Union
was working in that direction. In Ethiopia the Soviet Union was a factor
restraining hostilities rather than a factor prodding military action. To
what extent this would be successful in the future he could not now
predict. The Soviets had learned that one could not rely on the word of
Siad Barre.27 If the United States had not learned that lesson yet, he was
sure it would reach that conclusion soon. At the time when the Soviet
Union had supplied weapons to Somalia, it had been done on the con-
dition that these weapons would not be used against third coun-
tries, but only for self-defense. Siad Barre had given the Soviet
Union a pledge to that effect, but everyone knew what had happened
subsequently.
As for Rhodesia, Namibia and Zaire, he could tell the President
firmly that the Soviet Union had28 no representatives in that area, not
even news correspondents, and did not intend to send any repre-
sentatives there. The Soviet Union knew absolutely nothing about the
recent actions of the so-called gendarmes of Katanga. The very word
brought back memories of the period when Tshombe had been in
charge.
Gromyko noted that the President had spoken of the influence the
Soviet Union had in Rhodesia and Namibia. If he had referred to ideo-
logical influence, he might have been right, because for many years the
Soviet Union had argued against colonialism and racism. That was no
secret. He would only point out that ideological influence knew no bar-
riers at all. As for anything else, absolutely nothing was being done. He
would guess that the President had received reports to the effect that
the Soviet Union wanted to lay its hands on the entire area; he would
tell the President, however, that the Soviet Union was doing absolutely
nothing in that area, and knew nothing of the developments there ex-
cept what was reported in the press. The Soviet Union was not sending
27 Bartholomew added “on how he will use arms” after “Siad Barre.”
28 Bartholomew added “not one soldier,” after “Soviet Union had.”
