Human Rights
561
We could not agree with you more that Senate ratification of these
treaties is imperative to the pursuit of a persuasive and constructive
human rights policy. As President Carter stated in his letter submitting
the Covenants to the Senate for ratification in February 1978: “While
the United States is a leader in the realization and protection of human
rights, it is one of the few large nations that has not become a party to
the three United Nations human rights treaties. Our failure to become a
party increasingly reflects upon our attainments, and prejudices
United States participation in the development of the international law
of human rights.” The President concluded his letter of transmittal by
recommending “prompt consideration” by the Senate of ratification of
the Covenants as well as the UN Convention on Racial Discrimination
and the American Convention on Human Rights. He said this would
“confirm our country’s traditional commitment to the promotion and
protection of human rights at home and abroad.”3
In furtherance of this action, the President, on the occasion of
Human Rights Day, issued a Proclamation stating that “there could be
no more appropriate gesture to mark the anniversary” of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights than Senate ratification of the Genocide
Convention and “early hearings” to permit adherence to the Conven-
tion and other remaining human rights instruments.4 The President
once again spoke out on behalf of ratification of the international
human rights treaties at the special White House Commemoration of
the 30th Anniversary. He urged the Senate to ratify the Genocide Con-
vention “at the earliest possible date” as the first step toward the ratifi-
cation of the Covenants and other human rights instruments.5
The President, thus, has expressed clearly and emphatically that
one of the goals of his Administration is the ratification by the Senate of
the Covenants and other international human rights treaties in support
of our commitment to promote human rights internationally.
With regard to the signing of the Optional Protocol to the Cov-
enant on Civil and Political Rights, we agree with you that the right of
individual petition is essential for the safeguarding of human rights. It
is in fact the cornerstone of redress for human rights grievances. For
this reason, the United States played an important role in the drafting
3 See footnote 2, Document 118.
4 Reference is to Proclamation 4609, Bill of Rights Day, Human Rights Day and
Week, issued on November 28, 1978, printed in Weekly Compilation of Presidential Docu-
ments, December 4, 1978, pp. 2089–2090.
5 See Document 176.
