660
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
The Soviet Union does not admit that the unit in question is a
combat unit. However, the Soviets have made certain statements to us
with respect to our concern: that the unit in question is a training
center, that it does nothing more than training and can do nothing
more; that they will not change its function or status as a training
center. We understand this to mean that they do not intend to enlarge
the unit or to give it additional capabilities.
They have said that the Soviet personnel in Cuba are not and will
not be a threat to the United States or to any other nation; that they reaf-
firm the 1962 understanding and the mutually agreed upon confirma-
tion in 19705 and will abide by it in the future. We, for our part, recon-
firm this understanding.
These assurances have been given to me from the highest level of
the Soviet Government.
Although we have persuasive evidence that the unit has been a
combat brigade, the Soviet statements about the future noncombat
status of the unit are significant. However, we shall not rest on these So-
viet statements alone.
First, we will monitor the status of the Soviet forces by increased
surveillance of Cuba.
Second, we will assure that no Soviet unit in Cuba can be used as a
combat force to threaten the security of the United States or any other
nation in this hemisphere. Those nations can be confident that the
United States will act in response to a request for assistance to meet any
such threat from Soviet or Cuban forces.
This policy is consistent with our responsibilities as a member of
the Organization of American States and a party to the Rio Treaty.6 It’s
a reaffirmation in new circumstances of John F. Kennedy’s declaration
in 1963 “that we would not permit any troops from Cuba to move off
the island of Cuba in an offensive action against any neighboring
countries.”7
5 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XII, Soviet Union, January 1969–October
1970, Documents 224, 226, and 228.
6 The 1947 Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, commonly known as
the Rio Treaty, committed its signatories to providing assistance to meet armed attacks.
7 Kennedy addressed the American Society of Newspaper Editors and took part in
a question-and-answer session at the Washington Statler Hilton Hotel on April 19, 1963.
In response to a statement made by a reporter that the American public felt that the ad-
ministration’s policy toward Cuba was one of “inaction,” Kennedy indicated that the
United States had “taken a good many actions” to contain Communism in the Western
Hemisphere. After outlining several of these actions, he noted: “In addition, the United
States maintains a constant surveillance. We have indicated that we would not permit
any troops from Cuba to move off the island of Cuba in any offensive action against any
neighboring country. We have indicated also that we would not accept a Hungary in
Cuba, the use of Soviet troops against Cubans if there was any internal reaction against
