86 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 76. Letter from McConaughy to Johnson1 Washington, August 12, 1955 Dear Alex: We have decided to send Douglas Forman, FSO–4, to assist you when Ed Martin leaves. We are awaiting word as to whether you intend to request a short extension of Ed’s stay before we issue Doug’s travel orders. He will be severely missed in CA and it does not seem necessary to send him until about the time that Ed will be leaving. Doug is well qualified for the assignment. He has been doing most of the leg-­work on your messages here and is thoroughly familiar with the issues, both from his service here and his experience in Hong Kong. He is an able and dependable officer and is good in Chinese. Ed and Ralph can tell you more about him. There has been quite a debate here as to whether USIA should be allowed to give normal “straight” news play to the story of the mis­ treatment of the eleven airmen. Naturally they would not be allowed to “play it up” while the Geneva talks are going on. Everybody is agreed that we should not do anything to inflame the Chinese Communists needlessly or afford them a pretext for continuing to hold the remain­ ing Americans. The question is whether straight normal news play, without comment or beating of the drums, accurately reflecting the attention received by the story in the American press, would be hurtful. The present instruction is for them to play it down—­in effect suppress it temporarily, and we understand Defense is instructing the airmen to keep quiet for the present. One piece of quite sensitive rumor, which is solely for your pri­ vate background info. Yesterday we saw the interrogation of one of the eleven released airmen, Benjamin. He reported that he had seen quite a bit of Fecteau for a while in prison. He said Fecteau had been able to give him bits and pieces of his story. Fecteau expressed some doubt as to whether the two American pilots of his plane had been killed in the crash. He said the plane landed fairly flat with­ out any lethal impact. He said he regretted to have to admit that he and Downey had left the vicinity of the plane immediately without investigating what happened to the two pilots so he had no real evi­ dence. Personally I am quite skeptical that the pilots are still alive. It is doubtful if the Chinese Communists would have any motive for public announcement that they were dead if this was not the case. In any event it is unlikely the pilots will ever turn up after the 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–Informal. The enclosure is not printed.
