Guatemala 691 with him while he remains in office.7 His “economic development” plans cover the field from housing, industrial development through electrification. To bolster national pride and armed forces support, he wants six B-26s, at least. For political reasons, he wants to put on a big show of developing the Peten region. We should think of what can be done for him within this framework. In discussing the overall question of aid, Ambassador Mallory no doubt will have strongly in mind the recent fracas between Clemente Marroquin Rojas (Minister of Agriculture and “La Hora” Editor) and USOM Director Oscar Powell. The Ambassador and Mr. Powell have somewhat different views on the future of aid programs, their usefulness, and the general political picture.8 Marroquin’s insistence that Powell and most of his staff be removed has reduced our flexibility for maneuvering. We should keep in mind that Ydígoras’ resentment toward the Department is currently reflected in his attitude toward other things American. Recent new regulations imposed on oil companies patently reflect suspicion that the companies are plotting to hide oil discoveries from him and so deprive his Government of the means for resolving all its problems. If he goes militantly nationalistic, it seems probable that the first to suffer will be American enterprises, beginning probably with the Empresa Electrica, and so on down the line. 2. SWING TO THE LEFT: The Embassy has reported a marked swing to the left in Guatemala and Ambassador Mallory has urged that we view this in its overall aspects, guarding, against any inclination to see it in terms of individuals on whom hopes and fears can be pinned. The objective to be pursued would seem to be the development of a moderate left capable of promoting a healthier social, political and economic climate than has been possible under the traditional ruling classes. Unfortunately, liberal elements in Guatemala seem to be almost as badly split (although perhaps not so violently at odds) as the right. The one element responsible for attempting to hold them together (for the time being) is the communist. 7 During a farewell visit of Ambassador Antillón of Guatemala on June 10, Assistant Secretary Rubottom told the Ambassador that “he confirmed fully the expressions of admiration and friendship for President Ydígoras that he voiced in December.” (Memorandum of Conversation by Gorrell in Rubottom Files, Lot 61 D 279, “Guatemala, 1959”) 8 Powell and Mallory had a disagreement over the administration of the ICA program, and Powell had questioned U.S. support of Ydígoras, but Mallory felt the United States should continue to support him. (Letter from Mallory to Stewart, May 27, 1959; ARA/OAP Files, Lot 61 D 473, “Guatemala”)
