First Responses be moved to Ebin Prison. (The Germans believe the latter would be a constructive move since it would place the hostages outside of student control.) The trials could take a number of alternative courses: —Quick, in camera trials with some or all of the hostages found guilty and all expelled unharmed. If trials are inevitable, as now seems likely, this is the most favorable outcome. —Some hostages are found innocent, but others are found guilty and sentenced to prison terms. This could include a public show trial in which hostages “confess” and “documentary” evidence of espionage is produced. —As above, but with some hostages sentenced and quickly executed. —Trials could be held at the compound by students, or by revolutionary courts, or by both. General Strategy —While we want to generate universal condemnation of the trials by governments, organizations and jurists in an effort to prevent them, we will also want, in recognition of the probability that trials will be held, to work through some special channels for the least damaging outcome. —Our primary objective, once trials seem imminent, should be to influence the Iranians to adopt the most moderate approach in conducting the trials, i.e., rapid, in camera proceedings leading to quick and safe expulsion of all hostages. —We should avoid any steps which would lend any legitimacy to the trials, such as urging the presence of international observers. —Policy options below should be considered against the following criteria: (1) will they have an impact on the Iranian position on trials or (2) will they further inflame opinion in Iran without producing the desired outcome? And will they help the President maintain the initiative with domestic opinion, but without inflaming U.S. public anger? —We need also to consider the psychology of Khomeini and his entourage. Open threats and punitive signs may influence the Revolutionary Council toward moderation, but may inflame Khomeini and arouse his own sense of martyrdom. Threats quietly delivered can also influence the Council, and may speak to Khomeini’s respect for “strength.” —A crucial question is whether a series of “tit for tat” actions, or a more dramatic step, is more likely to be effective in moving Khomeini. —In any case, we should keep the negotiating track open through Waldheim and the PLO, with elements already introduced, i.e., once
