676 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II speeches,3 and which the Secretary of State has elaborated recently at the CIEC Ministerial in Paris and will be discussing further at the OECD Ministerial.4 Many elements of the Administration’s approach to the “absolute poverty” problem—the basic human needs problem—are intimately related to the agenda of the World Food Conference. Since three-quarters of the world’s “absolute poverty” population lives in rural areas, and since the “life chances” of the vast majority of them are tied to increased agricultural production and programs of reform of rural health and education facilities and agricultural infrastructure, the Manila Conference is well suited to a further iteration of U.S. goals in the “basic human needs” area. I suggest therefore that you might wish to make the following general observations in your own language. 1) While the world undoubtedly needs some form of grain reserve system, what the developing countries need most of all is to develop greater capacity for domestic food production. 2) Breakthroughs in developing country agricultural production are intimately linked to a “basic human needs” approach in two crucial ways: a) More food will be available to increase nutrition levels for the poorest strata of developing country populations, and b) More productive employment opportunities will be created for this same population group—three-quarters of whom live in rural areas. 3) The United States is aware that programs to meet the needs of the poorest do not always work the way they are supposed to; e.g., few new jobs are created if capital-intensive technologies are used. 4) Therefore, the United States hopes to persuade its OECD associates at the late June Ministerial to begin to fashion a comprehensive approach to a “basic human needs” strategy, and to present this idea for global discussion in appropriate venues within the coming year. 3 The President addressed the United Nations General Assembly in New York on March 17 and delivered the commencement address at Notre Dame University on May 22. He used both occasions to explain how “basic human needs,” including food assistance, fit within a larger foreign policy strategy. See Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 444–451 and 954–962. Both addresses are scheduled to be printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy. 4 Vance attended the CIEC Ministerial in Paris May 30–June 2 and headed the U.S. delegation to the OECD Ministerial, also in Paris, June 23–24. Vance’s May 30 address to CIEC delegates is printed in Department of State Bulletin, June 20, 1977, pp. 645–648. His remarks at the OECD Ministerial are ibid., July 25, 1977, pp. 105–109 and 113–117. Additional information concerning the CIEC is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.
