404 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement is concerned. For this reason, he does not think that the Treasury Department would be setting precedent that would necessitate a revision of the whole 1950 arrangement. This has since been confirmed by Mr. Gordon, Legal Adviser in Treasury. However, if you concur, I should like to talk with Mr. Smith of Treasury to get his ideas on the matter. Although President Echandi has made the request of the Treasury Department, I think a decision to grant the countries in which bananas are produced a greater share of the United Fruit Company’s taxes would be considered a voluntary gesture on our part if done around the time Dr. Eisenhower visits Central America. Actually, Costa Rica is the only country that has made the request. According to Mr. Baggett, the Costa Rican Government may anticipate a greater tax increase from the United Fruit Company than the Treasury is willing to give, and this might cause some disappointment to President Echandi. However, our taking the initiative in this action might prevent long, painful and unsatisfactory negotiations between the Governments. President Echandi indicated to Mr. Smith in his conversations in Washington that he preferred to discuss the matter with the Treasury Department and arrive at a mutual understanding rather than have the Costa Rican Government arbitrarily set a price on bananas delivered alongside ship at Costa Rican ports which would be the basis for taxing the Company. A move of this kind, I understand, might put United Fruit Company in the middle of a disagreeable tax situation. An announcement of Treasury’s willingness to allow the banana producing countries to receive more of the tax revenues from United Fruit Company would undoubtedly assist in making Dr. Eisenhower’s visit to the Central American countries more successful if we decided to publicize the gesture.4 Recommendation: That the Department favor the revision of the tax arrangement that will provide the countries in which United Fruit Company grows bananas to receive more tax returns, this revision to be made by Treasury through United Fruit Company and if necessary through consultation with the Costa Rican Government.5 4 For documentation on Milton Eisenhower’s trip to Central America July 12– August 1, 1958, see Documents ETA–7; CO–1; CR–6–9; ES–2, 5–6; GT–8, 24; HO–3; NI–4, 7–9; PM–3; PA–7. 5 There is no indication on the source text of Rubottom’s action on the recommendation, but see his letter of June 19, printed as Document CR–7.
