374 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Army Modernization—As a final item on the Army, Mr. McElroy pointed out that the Army’s programs for modernization will slip, primarily with regard to modernization of those forces which will be mobilized between M-Day and M-/6. (Note: The objectives and capabil­ ities plans in the Pentagon are based on the assumption, for computa­ tional purposes, that D-Day will occur at M-/6 months.) Navy Missiles—In keeping with the policy of close scrutiny of air-­ breathing missiles, the Department of Defense has cancelled REGULUS II, which Mr. McElroy considers the best air breather in its range. This can­ cellation is considered justified in view of the advent of POLARIS. The question of simultaneous R&D and production then came up. Mr. McElroy and Mr. Quarles ventured the opinion that we are cur­ rently undergoing a technical revolution which requires unusually large R&D funds. This situation, they feel, should correct itself when the transitions now under way are achieved. With regards to POLARIS, the release of one submarine in FY 1959 brings the total at beginning FY 1960 to six, with three additional authorized by Congress but frozen by the Administration. Department of Defense, under its proposed budget, plans to release those three, bringing the total to nine, but not to request authority for any addi­ tional POLARIS from Congress during FY 1960. In addition, however, Department of Defense is including some specified long lead-­time items for three more POLARIS in this FY 1960 budget. Mr. McElroy considers this a conservative approach with which the Navy and the Congress might disagree. If pressed on this issue, Mr. McElroy feels that he can request additional procurement when technical problems are solved. Nuclear Attack Carrier (CVAN)—Mr. McElroy then stated that he proposed a second nuclear attack carrier to be built. Mr. McElroy pointed out the Navy planning now contemplates a two-­year cycle in shipbuilding with a carrier program every other year for at least a couple more years, and support ships programs for the alternate year. He reminded the President that under such a program a carrier would have been included in 1959 but it was deferred. This statement caused rather considerable discussion. The arguments advanced in favor of the building of a second CVAN as set forth by General Twining were: (a) Carriers are useful in cold war situations (General Twining dis­ counts any great value of the CVAN in general war). (b) If new carriers are built, in General Twining’s view, they should be nuclear. He admits, however, that in his mind this production of a second nuclear carrier is one of the more questionable items in this budget. Mr. Gray then interposed a word at the request of Secretary Dulles, not present at this meeting. Secretary Dulles had stated to Mr. Gray on
