986  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
1. Whether the guidance set forth in these recommendations with 
respect to the MATS fleet should be applied as appropriate to the oper­
ations of the remainder of the military cargo air fleet.
2. Whether there needs to be further integration of the military air­
lift capability.
CALL ON  MR. STANS
DEPUTY SECRETARY DOUGLAS
Reminder: Turning to one last point, the Department of Defense 
wants its report on MATS to be released to the public, with the recom­
mendations shown in the form approved by the President. In this con­
nection, I’d like to ask Secretary Douglas whether the second sentence 
of the first footnote on page 1, which talks about the SAC post-­strike 
recovery mission and other matters, is o.k. from the security point of 
view for release to the public. Perhaps, if there is any question about 
this sentence, it could just be deleted from the footnote.
CALL ON DEPUTY SECRETARY DOUGLAS
Are there any other comments on this question of releasing the 
MATS report to the public?
235.	 Memorandum of Discussion at the 433d NSC Meeting1
Washington, January 21, 1960
SUBJECT
Discussion at the 433rd Meeting of the National Security Council, Thursday, January 
21, 1960
Present at the 433rd NSC Meeting were the President of the United 
States, presiding; the Vice President of the United States; the Secretary of 
State; Mr. James H. Douglas for the Secretary of Defense; and the Acting 
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization (Patterson). Also pres­
ent at the meeting and participating in the Council actions below were the 
Secretary of the Treasury; the Director, Bureau of the Budget; the Attorney 
General (Item 1); Mr. Philip Ray for the Secretary of Commerce (Item 1); 
and the Administrator, Federal Aviation Agency (Item 1). Also attend­
ing the meeting were General Thomas D. White for  the Chairman, 
Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; the Director, 
U.S. Information Agency; the Assistant to the President; the Special 
1 Source: Agenda item 2: Significant World Developments Affecting U.S. Security: 
Soviet Missile Program. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Extracts—6 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whit­
man File, NSC Records.
