822 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement declaration as a renunciation of force in settlement of dispute between us. It seemed that he had tended to approach matter from former standpoint. 17. I said I thought therefore that part of our problem was whether this declaration was to be only pious repetition of desire to settle dis­ putes or whether it was to genuine renunciation of appeal to force to settle our disputes and then in that atmosphere to seek means peace­ fully to settle them—this was heart of differences in approach between us. As I had said this morning, question seemed to be whether we were in this declaration unconditionally renouncing appeal to force with regard to all our disputes or whether we only piously saying that we desire to settle disputes peacefully but that renunciation of force applies only to some of them. 18. I said statement he had made this morning with regard to inclu­ sion of specific reference to Taiwan in our declaration, seemed to me to bear out this view of mine. I must say that I find myself entirely unable to follow logic his position this regard. 19. I said what it seemed to me he had said was that he was willing make specific mention Taiwan only in context of FonMin conference. That is, he was willing make statement expressing hope for peaceful settlement of dispute between us in Taiwan area if US agreed in advance that only means of discussing such settlement was FonMin conference. 20. I said on other hand his position seemed to come down to an unwillingness to make clear that renunciation of force also applied our dispute in Taiwan area. It seemed me he suggesting that, however our dispute in Taiwan area might be characterized, they were free to use force in that area. 21. I said it hard for me believe he could seriously consider that it would contribute to peaceful discussion and settlement of our dis­ putes if they were to resort to war in very area where he himself agreed our policies were in greatest conflict. He himself had said this morning that our principal dispute lay in Taiwan area. He had said this morn­ ing that his Dec 1 draft specifically covered Taiwan area. If this case, it entirely incomprehensible to me why he unwilling accept mention of Taiwan area in form suggested in my Jan 12 amendment if he were in fact willing renounce force in settlement our dispute in that area and seek peaceful means for its solution. 22. I said he had again repeated this morning that he found clause on self-­defense as suggested my Jan 12 amendment as absolutely unac­ ceptable on grounds it was intention my side by that clause to obtain recognition by his side of US position with regard that area. It hard for me to recall number of times I had here said that there was no such intent and that this did not require him to recognize any particular state of affairs contrary to his views, any more than it requires US to recognize
