International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1025
nities where there are strong local organizations. The stronger the
community, the greater the community awareness of the need for ac-
tion in limiting population growth, and the greater the opportunities
for promoting peer pressures within the community for reduced fer-
tility. In this connection, we believe there may be merit in programs of
community incentives of the type now being launched in Indonesia
which rewards communities most successful in reducing fertility rates
commensurate with Government objectives.
In sum, the NSC Ad Hoc Group has no reason to recommend any
changes in basic U.S. policy on population or on the conclusions
reached in last year’s Report.2 We do, however, recognize the need for
far greater efforts and more innovative approaches along the lines sug-
gested in this Report, if the world is to be spared the devastating conse-
quences of uncontrolled population growth. All nations, rich and poor,
have a major stake in the outcome.
Introduction
The NSC Ad Hoc Group on Population Policy, comprising repre-
sentatives of eighteen U.S. Departments and Agencies, herewith
submits its 1977 Annual Report in accordance with the requirements of
a NSC Decision Memorandum of May 17, 1977.3
Basic U.S. policy on international population is set forth in NSC
documents as well as in the First Annual Report of the Interagency
Task Force on International Population Policy of July 1976. The latter
Task Force was replaced by the NSC Ad Hoc Group, but since its mem-
bership and purposes are identical, the Report submitted herewith can
be viewed as the Second Annual Report on the implementation of basic
U.S. policy on international population issues.
This Report is divided into the following five main sections, all
largely focused on 1977 developments and their implications for the
future:
I. General Trends
II. Program Developments in Key Countries
III. Developments in U.S. Population Assistance Programs
IV. Developments in Population Assistance from Other Donors
V. Conclusions
The conclusions of this Report do not alter basic U.S. international
population policy as defined in NSC documents, but they do expand
on existing policy in addressing a number of issues requiring attention.
2 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–14, Part 1, Documents on the United
Nations, 1973–1976, Document 125.
3 See Document 282.
