1498  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
400.	 Telegram Nusup 118 to Geneva1
Washington, December 15, 1958, noon
Nusup 118. USDEL authorized table Annex I as contained Decem­
ber 10 draft with following changes:
Article 1: Replace with following text: “The Nuclear Test Detection 
and Identification System (hereinafter referred to as the “System”), pro­
vided for in Article 10 of this Treaty, shall include the features set forth 
herein which are based upon the Report of the Conference of Experts to 
Study the Methods of Detecting Violations of a Possible Agreement on 
the Suspension of Nuclear Tests of 20 August 1958.”
Article 2: Insert after “shall” in para 1 words “when completely 
established and unless otherwise decided in accordance with the pro­
vision of this treaty”, and replace “a system of satellites” with words 
“agreed methods for detecting very high ­altitude nuclear explosions”. 
Replace present text para 2 subpara (f) with “(appropriate techniques 
as may be decided for detecting very high altitude explosions should 
be inserted here.)”
Article 3: Delete first sentence para 1. Delete paras 2 and 3.
Article 4: Delete all after word “from” in first sentence para 1 and 
substitute “elements of the system”. Replace present language para 1 
sub-­para (d) with “To examine continuously the work of the elements 
of the system to insure the maintenance of a high degree of technical 
proficiency”. Delete paras 2 and 3.
Article 5: Add to first sentence para 1 words “or other elements of 
the system”. Delete paras 2 and 3.
Article 6: In first sentence para 1 after “staff” add “equipment”, 
substitute “direct” for “supervise” and replace all after word “events” 
with “which cannot be identified as natural events and which could 
be suspected of being nuclear explosions”. Third sentence para 1: after 
word “responsible” add “at the direction of the Administrator”.
Article 7: Substitute “in accordance with the provisions of Arti­
cle IX of this treaty” for words “subject to etc.” in para 1, and insert 
after word “concludes” words “cannot be identified as a natural event 
and”. Combine para 1 sub-­paras (a) and (b) in a new sub-­para (a) with 
last sentence of old (b) changed to read “in addition, any unidentified 
seismic events with an estimated equivalent yield less than 5 kilotons 
which the data from the system indicates have an unusually high 
1 Source: Textual changes to delegation’s proposal. Confidential; Priority. 4 pp. 
NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/12–1558.
