600 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV conservative Arab governments;5 (c) the current anti-Soviet unrest in Afghanistan;6 or (d) the shift in US policy from arms control to increased military presence in the Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf area.7 These recent events underscore the difficulty of drawing balances in a time of significant and rapid political flux and the dubiousness of weighting all countries the same. —While we have an overall advantage in international political and diplomatic standing compared with Moscow, the picture is far more complex than that depicted in CNA–78. There was no pro-Soviet trend in 1977 as the CNA states. On the other hand, we have clearly had our share of problems and reversals in the last two years. In fact, some of the policies which have improved our overall standing have at least temporarily worsened our relations with some important governments. The balance between our global policies and some of our bilateral objectives has on occasion been hard to maintain. It is difficult to mesh these factors with the trends described in CNA–78 other than to emphasize the complexity of the issues and the difficulties of defining the world in terms of US-Soviet relations. The CNA recommendations on specific countries and on covert action are addressed more appropriately when we deal with specific issues relating to US security presence in the Middle East and to our relationships with Ethiopia and Afghanistan. Economic/Technological Balance. CNA–78 states that the “trend in technology remains strongly favorable to the Soviet Union” since Soviet R&D expenditures as a percentage of GNP are higher than the US. In real terms, however, the US has a major technological advantage over the USSR which the Russians are most unlikely to overcome. This technological advantage is still greater when comparing East and West as a whole. Indeed, given the West’s technological base, the East may well feel further behind the West, regardless of their relatively greater R&D investment. The paper also contends that the US should exploit its economic and technological advantage as a lever to affect Soviet behavior. Such 5 Reference is to either the November 1978 Arab League summit meeting in Baghdad or the Conference of Foreign Ministers from 18 Arab states and the PLO that convened in Baghdad March 27–31, 1979, which resulted in the temporary suspension of Egypt’s membership in that organization. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980. vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980, Second, Revised Edition, Document 242. 6 Reference is to armed insurgencies opposing the Soviet-­supported regime of Nur Muhammad Taraki. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XII, Afghanistan, Document 39. 7 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XVIII, Middle East Region; Arabian Peninsula, Documents 99–129.
