1980  787
their military arsenal in anticipation of US force modernization pro-
grams. Moreover, the holders of this view sense that the Soviet leader-
ship remains uncertain about the bounding of US national interests and 
American resolve to meet challenges to these interests. If such uncer-
tainties continue, there is the distinct danger that the USSR may grossly 
miscalculate US reactions during a regional crisis and thus set the stage 
for a serious military confrontation between the superpowers.6
9. This year the Soviets find themselves at what they may well 
regard as a critical juncture in their planning for future strategic forces. 
They are nearing the end of large ICBM and SLBM deployment pro-
grams and the beginning of a new five-­year economic plan. They 
confront growing internal economic problems, which could be com-
plicated by a transition in leadership some time soon. External prob-
lems include deteriorating relations with the United States and China, 
uncertainty about US ratification of the SALT II Treaty, and a grow-
ing Western determination to counter improvements in Soviet military 
forces. Further, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the international 
condemnation that it incurred probably indicate that, in their present 
planning, the Soviets are not counting on much benefit from detente.
10. The Soviets must now plan for the middle and late 1980s, a 
period that they almost certainly perceive as posing major challenges. 
US Trident submarines and air-­launched cruise missiles will make it 
even harder for them to overcome their insufficiencies in antisubma-
rine warfare and in air defense. Planned new NATO long-­range the-
ater nuclear forces could reduce the large Soviet advantage in forces for 
peripheral attack; long-­range cruise missiles in the European theater 
would be of particular concern to the Soviets. Finally, the Soviets would 
see deployment of an MX/MPS system as giving the United States the 
potential in the late 1980s to destroy the bulk of their ICBM silos and as 
restoring a measure of survivability for the US ICBM force. The Sovi-
ets interpret these Western programs as attempts to regain a strategic 
advantage rather than as countervailing responses to Soviet initiatives.
11. SALT considerations will figure heavily in Soviet decisions 
about how to deal with these challenges. As would be expected, the 
Soviets negotiated the SALT II Treaty so as to protect program options 
they considered crucial to their strategic needs during the period of 
the Treaty. The Soviets do not appear to have strategic requirements 
so pressing as to cause them to make major visible alterations in their 
strategic programs in the coming months, while US ratification of the 
Treaty is deferred. They have indicated their willingness, if the Treaty 
6 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant 
Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, 
Department of the Air Force; and the Director of Intelligence, Headquarters, Marine Corps. [Foot-
note is in the original.]
