264
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
raising group2 when the news came of the Knesset vote. I announced it
to them and I pointed out to them the courage that you had shown.
They gave you a standing ovation for three minutes.
The Prime Minister: Mr. President, I appreciate your calling me.
We spent seventeen hours debating in the Knesset without interrup-
tion. All 120 members took part. We got a big majority. I told them I
would have resigned if I had not gotten a majority in my own party. It
was a very serious debate. Some of my friends left me, and the opposi-
tion supported me. You will remember that I wanted to separate the
issues in the vote, but when I got back to Israel, I read the press and it
was strongly against that idea so I presented the agreements and the
vote on the settlements to the parliament together. I decided there
should be a single vote on the agreement and on the settlements. So we
had it, and we won with 85 votes against 19. I told Ambassador Lewis
how difficult it was for me.
The President: I know it must have been difficult to have many of
your close friends oppose you. I want to refer to one other subject.
There has been an unfortunate disagreement between us on the ques-
tion of the West Bank and Gaza settlements. I want to resolve it quickly.
We have a difference of opinion.
The Prime Minister: I sent you a letter3 through Ambassador
Lewis. Have you received it?
The President: No, I haven’t seen it yet. I also sent you a letter4 con-
gratulating you on the Knesset vote.
The Prime Minister: Thank you for your letter. I did receive it. I
have now sent you a letter5 through Ambassador Lewis. Ambassador
Dinitz will also have the details and he will talk to Secretary Vance. You
know that Mr. Barak took notes of our meeting. I spelled out every-
thing in this letter.
The President: I am concerned about our misunderstanding. There
was no thought of tying the West Bank and Gaza settlements to the
Sinai negotiations. Nor was there any discussion of a five-year morato-
rium. I hope that we can get some language that is mutually acceptable.
2 According to the President’s Daily Diary, President and Mrs. Carter attended a
Democratic National Committee fundraising dinner at the Washington Hilton Hotel
from 9:42 to 11:34 p.m. on September 27, where he addressed the assembled guests.
(Carter Library, Presidential Materials) In the middle of Carter’s speech, Hamilton Jordan
informed him that the Israeli Knesset had voted 84–19 to remove Israeli settlements from
the Sinai Peninsula. Carter paused to announce this news to the audience. (“Carter
Pauses in a Speech to Announce Vote,” Los Angeles Times, September 28, 1978, p. 16)
3 See Document 72.
4 The text of the letter was released to the press on September 28, and is printed in
Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1651.
5 See Document 70.
