Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1079
1. In response to Reftel, Embassy is requested to raise the following
points with Taborda3 and appropriate members of the government to
clarify US position.
A. The president is very appreciative of President Perez’ personal
support on non-proliferation.
B. The US does not repeat not want to indicate any falling off of our
support for the gift of uranium to Venezuela.
C. It is especially because Venezuela is seen as a leading nation on
non-proliferation issues that its failure to conclude safeguards agree-
ment pursuant to the NPT and the Treaty of Tlatelolco can be perceived
as a problem. In particular, other countries within the region may be
less inclined to take the final steps necessary to bring Tlatelolco into
effect.
D. While we understand that safeguards are applied under the ex-
isting trilateral (US/IAEA/Venezuela) agreement concrete movement
on the safeguards agreement pursuant to the NPT and Tlatelolco
would further enhance Venezuela’s traditional non-proliferation stand.
2. The US reminder about need for NRC approval, was in no way
intended as threat to withhold material but seemed a necessary caution
to prevent assumption by gov that US executive branch decision to al-
locate gift to Venezuela would per se assure export. Should more spe-
cific questions be raised again by Taborda or any other gov official, or if
Embassy feels response is necessary on Taborda remarks reported
Reftel, Embassy should draw on following information. Draft agree-
ment on transfer of fuel will be cabled in near future.
3. NRC is an independent regulatory agency, not repeat not part of
executive branch. In reviewing export license applications, NRC ob-
tains executive branch recommendations, but is not obliged to follow
them (although normally has done so). Several factors are taken into ac-
count by executive branch agencies in developing executive branch rec-
ommendations and by NRC independently in reaching its decisions on
license issuance. Among these factors is recipient nation’s position on
nuclear non-proliferation; in this connection, Venezuela’s support of
US non-proliferation policies would naturally be a strong positive in-
fluence. Other factors considered include, inter alia, whether an NPT
party has fulfilled its NPT commitment to conclude NPT safeguards
agreement; the fact that Venezuela has not yet done so would inevi-
tably be a negative factor. We cannot predict what weight the NRC
would give various factors in any particular case, but gov conclusion of
NPT safeguards agreement by time export license application is sub-
mitted is certainly highly desirable. However, if this proves impossible,
3 Admiral Jesus Taborda of the Venezuelan National Nuclear Council.
