XVI Sources Memoranda and Presidential Determinations. Documentation from all of these files is further supplemented by that contained within the collection of papers donated to the Carter Library by Zbigniew Brzezinski (“Brzezinski Donated Material”) and the collection of material assembled by President Carter in order to write his memoirs (“Plains File”). Both contain a significant amount of material on the Middle East peace process, including meetings between President Carter and Egyptian President Anwar al-Sadat, Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin, and King Hussein of Jordan. Moreover, the Plains File includes Carter’s handwritten notes of numerous meetings and telephone conversations with Egyptian, Israeli, and U.S officials, including exchanges in which no formal memoranda of conversation or other official records were produced. Similarly, for keeping track of the President’s daily work schedule, the President’s Daily Diary is a particularly invaluable resource. To document the Department of State’s role in the Middle East peace process, the conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty, and the U.S. role in the negotiations which addressed Palestinian autonomy after March 1979, as well as key bilateral contacts between the United States and the Egyptians, Israelis, Jordanians, Lebanese, Saudis, and Syrians on these issues, the Central Foreign Policy File is a core resource. In 1973, the Department phased out the old subject-numeric Central Files, replacing them with an electronic system, the State Archiving System (SAS), which has been transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration and is part of the online Access to Archival Databases (AAD). For this volume, the Central Foreign Policy File provided cabled accounts of key meetings between Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and the President’s two Special Representatives to the peace negotiations, Robert S. Strauss and Sol M. Linowitz, with their Egyptian and Israeli counterparts, accounts for which no formal memoranda of conversation were produced. Similarly, the system contains important cabled messages from President Carter and Secretary Vance to Middle Eastern leaders, many of which were not followed up by signed original copies. Some of the most tightly held telegrams are not in the electronic system, but appear only on microfilm reels; the same is true of all non-telegram documents, such as memoranda of conversation, letters, briefing papers, and memoranda to principals. For the sake of consistency and traceability for researchers, all citations to documents from the Central Foreign Policy File include the original microfilm reel numbers and frame locations. A number of Department of State lot files are also of particular value: the records of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance (Lot 84D241); the files of Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr. (Lot 80D166); the Bureau of Near Eastern and
