Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Having now surmounted it, we face the tremendous challenge ahead with a sense of excitement and hope. [Omitted here are remarks by Blumenthal and Kreps.] DR. BRZEZINSKI15 My purpose is to place our China policy in a wider context. As I address you, a number of troubling developments dominate the headlines. • The Shah of Iran is planning to depart for a rest, leaving behind him a new administration which will seek to return tranquility to an unsettled country in which the United States has an enormous stake.16 • Vietnam has invaded its neighbor, Cambodia.17 Through an act of aggression, it has imposed a subservient regime upon a Cambodian people wearied of the inhumane, callous rule of Pol Pot. • Among the first governments to recognize the new Vietnameseinstalled regime in Phnom Penh was Afghanistan, a strategically important country which borders on Iran and Pakistan and in which Soviet influence has increased significantly in recent months. • The situation in the Horn of Africa and in South Yemen, Angola, and southern Africa remains uncertain, as Cuban troops continue to promote Soviet interests. • Indeed, all the developing countries in the arc from northeast Asia to southern Africa continue to search for viable forms of government capable of managing the process of modernization. Their instability, uncertainty, and weakness can be exploited and intensified by outside powers. Balanced against these unsettling developments, however, are a number of quieter yet more significant, positive developments. • Progress has been made in bringing peace to the Middle East. The progress is slow and often painful. But through the persistent diplomacy of President Carter and Secretary Vance, we are, I believe, inexorably moving toward the realization of the Camp David accords. We are promoting reconciliation to one of the most volatile disputes in the world. • In Latin America, U.S. policy has undergone significant change, and our relations with most countries in the region are at or near all 15 Text from White House press release. [Footnote in the original.] 16 During his January 11 press conference, Vance indicated that the Shah was prepared to leave Iran; see Department of State Bulletin, February 1979, p. 7. 17 In late December 1978, Vietnam invaded Cambodia and took Phnom Penh in January 1979.
