534
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Having now surmounted it, we face the tremendous challenge ahead
with a sense of excitement and hope.
[Omitted here are remarks by Blumenthal and Kreps.]
DR. BRZEZINSKI15
My purpose is to place our China policy in a wider context. As I
address you, a number of troubling developments dominate the
headlines.
• The Shah of Iran is planning to depart for a rest, leaving behind
him a new administration which will seek to return tranquility to an
unsettled country in which the United States has an enormous stake.16
• Vietnam has invaded its neighbor, Cambodia.17 Through an act
of aggression, it has imposed a subservient regime upon a Cambodian
people wearied of the inhumane, callous rule of Pol Pot.
• Among the first governments to recognize the new Vietnamese-
installed regime in Phnom Penh was Afghanistan, a strategically im-
portant country which borders on Iran and Pakistan and in which So-
viet influence has increased significantly in recent months.
• The situation in the Horn of Africa and in South Yemen, Angola,
and southern Africa remains uncertain, as Cuban troops continue to
promote Soviet interests.
• Indeed, all the developing countries in the arc from northeast
Asia to southern Africa continue to search for viable forms of gov-
ernment capable of managing the process of modernization. Their in-
stability, uncertainty, and weakness can be exploited and intensified by
outside powers.
Balanced against these unsettling developments, however, are a
number of quieter yet more significant, positive developments.
• Progress has been made in bringing peace to the Middle East.
The progress is slow and often painful. But through the persistent di-
plomacy of President Carter and Secretary Vance, we are, I believe, in-
exorably moving toward the realization of the Camp David accords.
We are promoting reconciliation to one of the most volatile disputes in
the world.
• In Latin America, U.S. policy has undergone significant change,
and our relations with most countries in the region are at or near all
15 Text from White House press release. [Footnote in the original.]
16 During his January 11 press conference, Vance indicated that the Shah was pre-
pared to leave Iran; see Department of State Bulletin, February 1979, p. 7.
17 In late December 1978, Vietnam invaded Cambodia and took Phnom Penh in Jan-
uary 1979.
