Chapter 4, February–April 1990 597 Whatever the way, it should be recorded and established. It is most difficult to resolve this problem. Burt: If we adopt the politically-­binding declarations approach, and state levels in the declaration, we would not exceed those levels. Akhromeyev: But before that we should agree on those levels. The text of the 1987 summit joint statement says “the sides committed themselves to establish ceilings on such missiles, and to seek mutually acceptable and effective methods of verification of such limitations.” Burt: By thinking about this in a sophisticated way, we made progress in Moscow. That approach would solve your problem and our problem. Akhromeyev: I was not involved in Moscow. I would have raised this issue. Bartholomew: Two governments met, they worked, they produced a bracketed text, they reached conclusions, they agreed on a joint statement. Akhromeyev: That is true. I support the statement language 100%. Nazarkin: The question of levels has always been discussed in the negotiations. In Moscow the question of ceilings was not included because we did not agree on two negotiating criteria—­range threshold and nuclear versus non-­nuclear. At that point it was fruitless to discuss levels because we did not agree on what comprises a SLCM. Let me emphasize again we are not talking about including this as part of the Treaty or a Protocol, we want a common understanding. Akhromeyev: I have not participated in Geneva, but for 20 years I have written directives to the teams in Geneva. In all the directives I wrote, and in all the directives Geneva received, the question of determining the level of SLCMs was present at all times. We should report this difference to our ministers. Bartholomew: I must assume the most authoritative statement is the statement of the Soviet Foreign Minister in conjunction with my Secretary of State. Bartholomew: As for the other paragraphs in your paper—7, 8, 9, and particularly disappointed at 10—­let me say I believe that what we did in Moscow on SLCMs was a good outcome for both sides. We do not seek unilateral advantage, we want to build stability for 15 years and more. If one side were to secure unilateral advantage through this treaty, it would be worse than if we never tried to build what we are building. This text meets the concern you are speaking of. It creates transparency, stability, and predictability through politically-­binding limits. Let me ask you to look again at this in the light of what I have said, one can always have second thoughts. This is a good approach for both of us. We are seven weeks from the summit. We need to have a process, and not do anything that puts the process in question. We need
