National Security Policy 1105 these two steps, the study group made necessary revisions and adjust­ ments and then further developed the political and military situation in the light of such factors as enemy intentions, international (including Communist Bloc) reactions and allied support. CIA drafted that portion of the study dealing with international reactions. Once the basic script had been prepared and approved by the study group, the conclusions were written by the group as a whole. 3. An effort was made by all members of the committee to reflect insofar as possible the views of their agencies. Although the widest pos­ sible coordination was achieved, no effort was made to obtain formal agency clearances for the study prior to its completion. Where there were divergencies of views, the matter was resolved in the light of the consensus of the study group. C. SCOPE OF STUDY 1. The basic assumptions of the study are set forth in the terms of reference appended as Enclosure “A”. However, it should be noted that the study had to be conducted within certain artificial limits. For exam­ ple, each situation had to provide the occasion for U.S. limited military operations. On the other hand, situations likely to lead immediately to general war had to be avoided. Consequently, there was often a conflict between the need to develop a scenario which would permit an exam­ ination of U.S. and allied capabilities for conducting limited military operations, and the actual facts of the particular situation, based upon the best current estimates and intelligence. In almost all cases some compromise was necessary, but on the whole, the scenarios developed do reflect both the current situation and the best available judgment of enemy intentions and capabilities and of the probable responses by the United States in the light of existing national security policy. However, since judgments about enemy intentions were specifically designed to support the study, they should not be construed as intelligence esti­ mates for application to actual situations. 2. In several of the studies it was necessary to recognize that when hostilities had reached a certain point it was likely that one side or the other would take steps to terminate it. At the same time it was nec­ essary to continue the development of the situation to permit a more extensive examination of our capabilities. In these cases the device was adopted of noting that the situation might well terminate at a partic­ ular “threshold” or level of intensity; but that for the purposes of the study certain assumptions were made to permit the military operations to continue. Where necessary, the military actions were divided into phases in order to take into account alternative assumptions about the most probable ensuing developments. 3. On the matter of weapon systems, the study was based upon those known or expected to be in enemy or U.S. and allied inventories
