contract has not as yet materialized, and from all information obtainable on the present status of these loan negotiations it will in all probability never be, realized. The contract itself embodied terms which to any well informed person indicated that they would not be carried out. Mr. Powers Farr further states that “the bondholders have waited patiently for Ecuador to meet this obligation in the expectation that steps would be taken to reorganize the financial structure of the country” and bases his request that the United States Government use its good offices in protecting the rights of the bondholders to the full amount of the customs pledged to them on the statement that there is no immediate prospect of relief from this source: (reorganization of the financial structure). The Ecuadorian Government has in the past and is at the present time utilizing the revenue obtained from the aduana (customs) and from other sources for general governmental purposes, including, of course, the item of the upkeep and maintenance of the army, which in the past year has consumed 40% of the total revenue obtained by it, and the total revenue thus obtained is not sufficient to meet those expenditures, much less any obligations assumed as to foreign indebtedness. Realizing the situation, the Government of Ecuador has finally engaged the services of a financial expert in the person of John S. Hord, who, however, arrived here at a time when Congress was in session and who therefore did not have sufficient time to make a detailed and careful study of the finances of the country with a view to presenting a program of reform to the Congress then in session. However, since his arrival Mr. Hord has devoted his time to investigation and study, as I have had the honor to inform the Department from time to time, and is now prepared to present to the Congress which has just opened its session a complete program for the financial reorganization of the various governmental departments, as well as a balanced budget, which it is hoped Congress will endorse and adopt, and Mr. Hord informs me that this budget provides for the taking care of Ecuador’s external obligations. Under the circumstances it would seem to me ill-timed to make representations to the Ecuadorian Government on a matter which it cannot possibly meet unless Mr. Hord’s program is carried out, and by making
