154  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
all right” and that release remainder would not take long without say­
ing anything I could seize upon as commitment. (His instructions are 
clearly very rigid on this.) In response my pressing him throughout 
evening on definite time he continued return to an involved and tortu­
ous explanation which I found it entirely impossible to pin down to a 
definite time period.
However the purport seemed to be that time would be less than 
year, as would be “doubly easy and doubly quick” over situation 
during past year. However, ominous note of “state of relations” as 
one factor in timing continued reappear. I returned again and again 
to necessity specific promise on time, even private if they desired 
(Deptel 602 was not received until after I had returned) but he flatly 
refused. “Absolutely would not be forced into and could not state any 
exact time.”
3. While touching in varying degree on most of arguments I have 
used in previous meetings I hammered hard on theme that they were 
entirely misreading American public opinion if they expected slow 
piecemeal releases to “improve relations”. Any release involves tell­
ing of stories by former prisoners and produced very adverse pub­
lic opinion reactions. This had to be expected. Best course in their 
self-interest was carry out immediate release of all. Wang countered 
we had previously made flyers major factor, they would not release 
even response UN SecGen, but released unilaterally interest good 
atmosphere and demonstration good faith these talks. “Did not hold 
them as bargaining counters and did not intend hold any others as 
bargaining counters.” They knew Col. Arnold very “antagonistic” but 
this did not prevent his being included release. Intimation was they 
very disappointed not only at public reaction to release but that after 
flyers had been removed as subject these talks we had now raised ante 
in demanding release all others immediately or in specified time. I 
countered by returning to theme public reaction to be expected, noted 
press attention flyers now declining and cited as proof value getting 
remaining cases completed quickly as possible. Believe this line may 
have made some impression.
4. I carefully outlined successive concessions we had made to 
obtain agreement and repeatedly stressed “we could go no further”. 
“We did not even have a definite promise, much less performance we 
expected, particularly in light Chou’s statements”. I also made it clear 
could not proceed anything else until item one settled. (He has never 
suggested we do so but of course their idea of settlement and ours 
are still very different.) Also in context importance their meeting our
