Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I needs at home. If we can’t solve our problems here, we are not going to solve our problems, or anybody else’s problems, abroad. This is not a call to isolationism, nor unilateral disarmament. We must keep this country strong militarily, and we will no doubt devote the resources to do so. The Soviet Union and others should not be tempted by recent events into miscalculating our commitment to our friends and allies. We are not opting out of the world. In fact, I think that perhaps we have finally turned the last page on isolationism in the United States. Isolationism is an unwillingness to deal with the world as it is. At one time America demonstrated this by having nothing to do with international affairs. And when we became involved in world affairs, we seemed to want to control everything, to transform other countries in our image, to leave nothing to chance. This too was an unwillingness to deal with the world as it is, and really is a kind of isolationism. Perhaps now we will begin to accept the diversity, the conflict, and even the disorder that are inherent in the world. We cannot completely control such things, and we have found, to our tragic dismay, that if we try, they only end up controlling us. Mr. President. I have tried to outline my views on the basic principles underlying the development of a new American foreign policy in this post-Vietnam period. —First, our policy must be one that is not dominated by elitist abstractions like “national security,” but which is grounded in concrete interests which the American people can identify with and support. —Second, we must be more disciplined, but no less determined, in the pursuit of our ideals. The response to our overinvolvement in Vietnam is not a Philistine policy devoid of values. Rather, it is to rededicate ourselves more conscientiously to democracy, freedom, justice and the international agenda of human needs. —Third, we must draw upon sources of national power and influence in addition to military power in the pursuit of our foreign policy. We must recognize that America is strong abroad only insofar as it is strong at home. World leadership and respect will be determined by how well we meet the needs of our own people—for only in that way can this nation recapture its unique claim to being the last, best hope for mankind.
