298  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
I remarked that while this was undoubtedly a difficult and critical 
period which the administration was going through, that it had prob-
ably been inevitable from the beginning and that I had been pleased at 
the generally favorable findings of the Mission from the International 
Monetary Fund which was here last week. I said that members of this 
Mission had been quite laudatory in their assessment of what the 
Government had done in the past year and that actually the major 
danger they saw ahead was the problem of the budget. The President 
himself took this up and agreed wholeheartedly that the budget was 
the country’s number one problem and one that was going to be 
extremely difficult to solve. He emphasized the very greet need of not 
only continuing the present but expanding the whole public works 
program, and said that it was simply impossible to finance such a 
program from current income. This gave the President an opportu-
nity to return to the theme which he has often developed, namely, the 
urgent need for reopening foreign sources of credits and financing 
comparable to those which existed prior to 1932. As he has said many 
times in the past, he repeated that in order to meet the real needs of 
Chile and other Latin American nations for economic growth, it was 
not sufficient for foreign credits to be made available by the interna-
tional lending agencies or those of the United States to cover dollar 
costs of various projects, leaving the usually much greater costs in 
local currency to be met out of current operating budgets. He empha-
sized that he did not mean that such credits had to come from official 
government financed sources but rather that countries such as Chile 
should have access to the private lending market in the United States 
under such controls as might be necessary to avoid the mistakes and 
abuses which he quite readily admitted had existed during the 1920s. 
In the course of his remarks on this subject he recalled with some bit-
terness that many of Chile’s current troubles went back to the projects 
initiated by CORFO in the years after 1939, observing that many of 
these projects were in themselves highly useful to the country but that 
in initiating them with foreign credits for foreign costs CORFO had 
left the large balance of local cost to be met by the government out 
of current income, all of which had led to unbalanced budgets, defi-
cit financing, and the consequent evils of inflation. He remembered 
that among the current leaders of the larger South American coun-
tries, mentioning especially Frondizi, Kubitschek, and Lleras, he was 
the only one who had continuity of practical experience which went 
back to the days of the late 1920s and ’30s. He repeated what he has 
also said before: namely, the apparent lack of understanding of the 
capable, theoretical economists and technicians connected with the 
international lending agencies and U.S. credit institutions, of both the 
pressing needs and practical realities of the growth situation in South
