3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
249
over what had happened and your deep personal interest in our fate.
We realized that we not [now?] had a strong ally in our difficult
struggle.
Meanwhile, the Soviet authorities took a stiff course towards de-
fenders of justice in the USSR. They followed with the arrests of Alex-
ander Ginzburg, Yuri Orlov, Anatoly Shcharansky, Joseph Begun, and
many other fighters for human rights in the USSR.
This is a difficult time for us now. It is adversely affecting my
family. Let me remind you of my family’s story in brief.
We were invited to go to Israel in March 1969. In April 1969 I had
to give up my job as a chief of a laboratory in the Television Research
Institute. I have never worked in my specialty since then. I managed to
get various jobs at different times, but had to leave them every time my
chief was informed about my intentions to emigrate. I have not been
working at all since September 1974. We were able to apply to emigrate
only one year after receiving our invitation to Israel. The five members
of my family, my wife, her mother, our two sons, and I, applied to-
gether. That was in April 1970. Two months later we were refused per-
mission. In March 1971 my mother-in-law was allowed to go, and went
to Jerusalem. Old and sick, she has since then been living alone, with
the one dream of seeing us again.
Last October the Soviet authorities had to release our older son
Alexander from the USSR, since he was married to an American.
All these years my family has been subjected to various forms of
harassment and persecution, from house raids, arrests and imprison-
ments, to beatings, dismissals from work, and so on.
Another horror came creeping up on us when our younger son Le-
onid approached the military conscription age. Ever since he was ten
years old, Leonid grew up in a family fighting to leave the Soviet
Union. He was persecuted along with the rest of the family. He had al-
ready been honored with Israeli citizenship. Our family had rejected its
Soviet citizenship (but has never received any answer to our rejection).
How could he possibly swear allegiance and loyalty to the Soviet Gov-
ernment, as all soldiers most?
We decided on a desperate step. In January 1976, my wife and I of-
ficially divorced so that she and our son could apply to leave sepa-
rately. They were refused on the grounds that the authorities did not
regard that as a reunification of a family. They said, “You and your son
are one family, and your mother is another.”
When Leonid reached the military conscription age of 18, last year,
he was called in and told he would have to serve in the Soviet Army.
He refused. He sent the Minister of Defense a statement pointing out
that he is a citizen of Israel, and considers Israel his only homeland. He
