Chemical and Biological Weapons
203
example, the draft response discusses the status of each of the PD/
NSC–15 key elements but it is not clear on precisely what material the
Soviets have apparently agreed or disagreed, nor is the depth of dis-
agreement clear. For example, the draft response states that “most of
the issues” on scope have been resolved, that the Soviets have accepted
many of the “general points” within the U.S. key elements, and that
various “aspects” of the U.S. position have been resolved, although
most “details” which are “essential to give meaning to the ‘general
point’ remain to be resolved” (pages 11–6, 7). The relative importance
of “issues,” “general points,” “aspects,” and “details” is obscure. It is
misleading to infer that we are making good progress when most “de-
tails” have not been agreed to. In fact, serious disagreements exist on
key elements having to do with declarations of chemical weapons and
facilities, and verification. The reference on page 11–20 to the U.S. pro-
posal concerning challenge on-site inspections in the comprehensive
test ban negotiations is misleading because technical data provided by
on-site access would be indispensible to verifying an agreement.
The General Assessment of the negotiations (page 11–23) provides
an inadequate wrap-up of the status of negotiations. It should point
out, for example, that no agreement is possible unless one of the parties
changes its basic position on such central issues as declaration, destruc-
tion and verification of stocks and facilities. The Soviets have given no
indication that they are prepared to compromise on key issues.
The section “Rationale For Relying on Non-Chemical Means for
Deterring Chemical Attack” (pages 111–12 to 111–20) presents analysis
and argumentation which does not adequately address the military
concerns expressed elsewhere (pages 111–3 to 111–5) and contains nu-
merous assertions for which support is not provided.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
An issues/discussion paper should be prepared for SCC review to
resolve the question of whether to take measures now to improve the
U.S. chemical retaliatory capability and, if so, which alternatives
should be pursued. The SCC should also address the three suggested
alternatives in the U.S. negotiating position addressed in the PRM–37
response.
An Executive Summary of the PRM–37 response should be pre-
pared for common use by each agency. This summary should contain
appropriate excerpts from the annexes such as the views regarding So-
viet intentions (Annex B) and the Soviet assessment of U.S. capabilities
(Annex D).
The main body of the PRM response should contain frequent refer-
ences to particularly relevant material found in the annexes.
