Bolivia  181
BL–21.	
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of West 
Coast Affairs (Siracusa) to the Assistant Secretary of State 
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubottom)1
Washington, March 27, 1959.
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/WST Files: Lot 62 D 429. 3 pages not declassified.
BL–22.	
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
Embassy in Bolivia1

Washington, March 31, 1959, 6 p.m.
320. For Coerr Only
EYES ONLY COERR
Nationalized mines must be placed on as sound an economic basis 
as possible if there is to be any reasonable opportunity for restoration 
economic stability in Bolivia. One of key issues to be resolved in this 
connection is that of COMIBOL labor policy. Your recent reports sug-
gest that GOB may be resolved to carry through to a showdown on 
commissary price issue at this time. GOB success on this issue could 
have crucial effect on its willingness and ability to take on other 
COMIBOL operational and management problems. On other hand, 
failure of GOB to prevail on commissary price issue would seriously 
jeopardize chances of its being able to continue a stabilization program 
having reasonable chance to achieve even minimum objectives.
We believe therefore that entire effort of USG to assist Bolivia over 
last few years may well hang in balance at this time. For these reasons we 
strongly favor showdown now on commissary price issue on assump-
tion that GOB is willing stand firm on its agreement with IMF and 
has a reasonable chance to win out. We mindful of course paramount 
importance safety U.S. citizens but inclined believe that measures you 
are taking to safehaven dependents and are planning for establishment 
protected positions if needed for those Americans remaining may place 
us in best position face showdown that we have had or may be likely 
to have in future. Therefore consider it important that GOB continue to 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 824.10/3–3159. Secret; Priority; Limit 
Distribution. Drafted by Siracusa and signed by Murphy.
