during the Bernardes’ administration and while Dr. Pacheco was Minister for Foreign Affairs, I felt that it would be peculiarly fitting that negotiations for a treaty to contain the unconditional most-favored-nation clause should be begun while Dr. Pacheco was in office, I also stated that it would be gratifying if among the early treaties embodying this principle the United States could celebrate a general commercial treaty with Brazil, and that it would be a matter of personal satisfaction to myself and also, I felt sure, to Mr. Morgan if Brazil should be the first South American country to express the intention of negotiating such a treaty. I then offered to telegraph immediately to Washington for a special draft for presentation to the Brazilian Government if the proposal proved acceptable. Dr. Pacheco replied that he would take up this question with his colleague in the Department of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce, Dr. Miguel Calmon, and would advise me later of the decision reached. I took this occasion to ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether the results brought about by the exchange of notes of October 18, 1923, had proved satisfactory to Brazil. He said that they had, and referred to recent articles in the Jornal do Commercio which indicated the ever-increasing volume of trade between the United States and Brazil. I reminded him that in one of the articles to which he referred it was stated that the value of coffee shipments from Brazil to the United States alone in the 12 months ending June 30 was close to 204 million dollars, and that the value of goods exchanged between the two countries had increased enormously in the last few years. I left with Dr. Pacheco an aide mémoire embodying the ideas contained in the first three pages of the Department’s Instruction together with a copy of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Consular Rights of December 8, 1923, between the United States and Germany. Prior to my conversation with the Minister for Foreign Affairs on the subject of a treaty I talked with Dr. Sebastião Sampaio, who is Dr. Pacheco’s chief assistant. His personal opinion was that there would be too little time for the present Administration to undertake the negotiation of the treaty with the United States. He said that the Ministry of Agriculture, Industry and Commerce were particularly procrastinating in such matters and that it usually required two or three years for the negotiation of a treaty. As in my subsequent talk with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, I took pains
