“The Comintern has repeatedly indicated that a basic task of any
party situated in an imperialist country is to stimulate and give aid
to the nationalist and national revolutionary movements in the
colonial and semi-colonial countries under the heel of
imperialism. This, together with the work among the American
masses, form the basis of our party work. While our party has
made considerable progress in anti-imperialist work, it is still far
from a proper realization of the importance of this work. A far
greater proportion of the party’s resources must be utilized in
anti-imperialist activities. District executive committees must
have standing subcommittees on anti-imperialist activity, and
these must be directed by capable comrades. The party machinery
on a district as well as a national scale must be drawn into this
work.
“The anti-imperialist work has been greatly hampered by lack of
sufficient comrades. The party must take measures to create and
train a corps of comrades engaged directly in anti-imperialist
work.
“In spite of many handicaps, we have done much to build the All-
America Anti-Imperialist League into an organization engaged in
actual struggle against imperialism. We have carried on
systematic work inside of the Pan-American Federation of Labor
and have achieved some valuable results there. We have
participated in work against United States imperialism in a
number of Latin-American countries, notably Mexico, Porto
Rico, Cuba, Panama and Peru. We have also established some
contact with the Philippine independence movement, altho we
have yet to establish our own nucleus there.
“The main task for the period immediaely ahead is the building of
a substantial section of the AAAIL (All-America Anti-Imperialist
League) in the United States itself. This will be accomplished thru
the affiliation of groups organized around specific issues, such as
hands-off-Mexico committees, etc. The Workers (Communist)
Party must remain the central factor in the United States section
