Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1041
411.
Telegram From the Embassy in Venezuela to the Department
of State1
Caracas, April 21, 1977, 1920Z
3975. Subject: Latin American Non-Proliferation Consultations.
1. Amembassy utilized occasion of OPANAL meeting in Caracas
to discuss OPANAL matters and other non-proliferation related ques-
tions with several delegations and with OPANAL and Venezuelan offi-
cials. In an initial conversation between OPANAL Secretary General
Gros Espiell, Ambassador took the occasion to reiterate to Gros USG
concern over the position he had taken with the Soviets on transit (see
Mexico 5368).2 Ambassador emphasized the fact that the position Gros
had taken with the Soviets (that Article I of the treaty prohibited transit
of nuclear weapons and therefore the Soviets could become party to
Protocol II) was wholly inconsistent with the understanding that had
permitted the U.S. to become part of the Protocol II and now to take the
step of becoming party to Protocol I. Gros stated he did not wish to take
any action which would undercut the position of the U.S. or complicate
prospects for ratification of Protocol I. Accordingly, Gros said he in-
tended to drop the entire matter.
2. We also took the occasion to ask Gros his assessment of the pros-
pects for the other steps being taken to bring the treaty into effect. Gros
stated that the action by the U.S. greatly improves chances for the addi-
tional steps to be taken, though he cautioned that each of them could
take some time. We asked in particular about Argentina. Gros said he
had received some tentative indications that the Argentines might
prefer the Treaty of Tlatelolco to either the NPT or the British full scope
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770139–0423.
Confidential. Sent for information to Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Moscow, Paris,
and the Mission to the International Atomic Energy Agency. The U.S. Representative to
OPANAL, Viron Vaky, reiterated Carter’s decision to sign Protocol I to OPANAL on
April 20. His statement is in telegram 93329 to all American Republic diplomatic posts,
April 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770144–1038) After
Vaky’s statement, the Brazilian representative “pledged to do nothing which would frus-
trate the objectives of the treaty and reiterated Brazil’s support for the cause of
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in Latin America.” OPANAL subsequently
adopted a resolution “urging” Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Cuba to “become parties to
the treaty and to waive the preconditions to bring the treaty into effect.” (Telegram 93330
to all American Republic diplomatic posts, April 26. (National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770144–1027)
2 Telegram 5368 from Mexico City, April 18, reported that Gros Espiell “was de-
lighted and encouraged” by Carter’s announcement that he would sign Protocol I. (Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770134–0706)
