904
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
271.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 10, 1980
SUBJECT
Leadership in the War on Hunger
1. Sol Linowitz advised (Tab B)2 that the Hunger Commission’s
final report will be ready in late March. I suggest that you reply (Tab
A)3 stating your desire to receive the report at an East Room meeting
designed to energize international efforts to free the poorest nations
from the threat of mass hunger. Congressional, civic, and religious
leaders would attend the meeting, where you would demonstrate to
several important constituencies that your interest in relieving human
suffering has not been submerged by current budgetary and security
crises.
2. You could, at this convocation:
—sign the new international Food Aid Convention, putting a floor
under food aid programs (at no additional cost to the US budget); the
Convention should be completed at final negotiations in London next
week;
—ask the Congress to speed enactment of your Food Security Re-
serve and PL–480 bills, (at no increase in our budgetary outlays);
—call on other countries to parallel this US contribution toward
creating nationally held grain resources dedicated to meeting food
needs of the low income countries in emergencies;
—endorse, in general terms, the food policy recommendations of
the Hunger Commission report—that is, champion a strategy of con-
centrating international development aid on measures to free poor
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1979–1980. No classification marking. Sent
for action. A notation on the memorandum reads: “3/11 To rick h 1715.” A draft of the
memorandum, March 4, is in the Carter Library, White House Central Files, Box FG–224,
Subject Files—Executive, FG–311, 11/1/79–1/20/80. A March 10 note from Owen to
Denend indicates that Owen’s memorandum should be sent through Wise to Carter.
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File,
Subject Chron File, Box 93, Food: 1979–1980)
2 Not attached. A copy of Linowitz’ February 20 letter to the President is in the
Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subjects Files, Box HE–7, Executive, HE–3,
12/1/78–1/20/81. Linowitz indicated that the PCWH report would be completed by
mid-March, commenting, “While I regret the delay in presenting a final document, I am
convinced that the additional time will be most important in assuring a report that is as
useful as the subject deserves and respects.”
3 Attached but not printed is the undated reply from the President to Linowitz.
