Nuclear Non-Proliferation in Latin America
1039
lation3 would interpret the treaty as “prohibiting” transit of nuclear
weapons through the treaty territory. This interpretation, if accepted,
would prohibit transit of U.S. nuclear weapons in the treaty area under
Protocol II (Tab D).4
(U) When other requirements for full entry into force of the Treaty
of Tlatelolco are fulfilled, the U.S. should re-examine its policy re-
garding U.S. adherence. Presently there appears to be no compelling
reason to accept constraints on U.S. freedom in the Caribbean.
(U) The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff concurs in this matter.
Harold Brown
3 Telegram 80379 to Mexico City, April 9, explained that “While we support
OPANAL efforts to encourage Soviet adherence to Protocol II, we are concerned by for-
mula reportedly proposed to Soviets by OPANAL Secretary General Gros Espiell as pos-
sible basis for such adherence (i.e., interpretative statement that Article I of Treaty of Tla-
telolco prohibits transit of nuclear weapons through the territory encompassed by the
Treaty). Proposed interpretation,” the Department of State contended, “would be incon-
sistent with position on transit issue taken by states which participated in negotiation of
Treaty of Tlatelolco as well as by us.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy
File, D770124–1121)
4 Tab D is not attached.
410.
Editorial Note
On April 7, 1977, President Jimmy Carter announced that after “an
extremely thorough review of all the issues that bear on the use of nu-
clear power,” including his concern that nuclear materials ostensibly
designated for peaceful purposes could be diverted into weapons, he
had concluded that the United States must work with other nations to
explore “a wide range of international approaches and frameworks
that will permit all nations to achieve their energy objectives while re-
ducing the spread of nuclear explosive capability.” (Public Papers:
Carter, 1977, pp. 587–588)
A week later, Carter addressed the Permanent Council of the Or-
ganization of American States and promised to sign Protocol I of the
Treaty of Tlatelolco. However, he said that “banning the spread of nu-
clear explosives does not require giving up the benefits of peaceful
technology.” The United States, he assured his audience, would “work
closely with all of you on new technologies to use the atom for peaceful
purposes.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1977, pp. 611–616) The Department of
State forwarded Carter’s remarks to all American Republic diplomatic
