Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
113
the upcoming Special Session on Disarmament which I understand will
commence next year.8
But the search for peace also means the search for justice. One of
the greatest challenges before us as a nation, and therefore one of our
greatest opportunities, is to participate in molding a global economic
system which will bring greater prosperity to all the people of all
countries.
I come from a part of the United States which is largely agrarian
and which for many years did not have the advantages of adequate
transportation or capital or management skills or education which
were available in the industrial States of our country.
So, I can sympathize with the leaders of the developing nations,
and I want them to know that we will do our part.
To this end, the United States will be advancing proposals aimed
at meeting the basic human needs of the developing world and helping
them to increase their productive capacity. I have asked Congress to
provide $7½ billion of foreign assistance in the coming year, and I will
work to ensure sustained American assistance as the process of global
economic development continues.9 I am also urging the Congress of
our country to increase our contributions to the United Nations Devel-
opment Program and meet in full our pledges to multilateral lending
institutions, especially the International Development Association of
the World Bank.
We remain committed to an open international trading system,
one which does not ignore domestic concerns in the United States. We
have extended duty-free treatment to many products from the devel-
oping countries. In the multilateral trade agreements in Geneva we
have offered substantial trade concessions on the goods of primary in-
terest to developing countries.10 And in accordance with the Tokyo
Declaration,11 we are also examining ways to provide additional con-
sideration for the special needs of developing countries.
The United States is willing to consider, with a positive and open
attitude, the negotiation on agreements to stabilize commodity prices,
including the establishment of a common funding arrangement for fi-
8 See footnote 5, Document 24.
9 The President submitted his foreign assistance program to Congress on March 17.
For the text of the President’s message to Congress, which was released on March 18, see
Public Papers: Carter, 1977, Book I, pp. 455–458.
10 See footnote 4, Document 6.
11 Contracting Parties to the GATT met at the ministerial level in Tokyo September
12–14, 1973, and released the Tokyo Declaration. The declaration outlined the aims for
the Tokyo Round of comprehensive, multilateral trade negotiations, which included se-
curing “additional benefits for the international trade” of developing nations. For the
declaration’s text, see Department of State Bulletin, October 8, 1973, pp. 450–452.
