Chapter 4, February–April 1990  595
the range threshold. Akhromeyev: The US is against any total level on 
SLCMs for the US or the USSR.
Bartholomew: The US position is that we are prepared to abide 
by the agreement in the Moscow joint statement—­parallel politically-­
binding declarations. We cannot accept numerical limits on the total 
number or the number per ship type. This is excluded by the paper we 
worked in Moscow and by the joint statement.
Akhromeyev: I would like a clear-­cut answer. Is the US against 
including in the deal the exact level of SLCMs for each side? Burt: We 
are willing to state that the number of SLCMs deployed will not exceed 
a given number. We are prepared to give you this declaration every 
year.
Akhromeyev: The question is would the level be recorded in the 
negotiating record? Burt: This would be a separate declaration, not in 
the negotiating record. Bartholomew: Each year we will give you this 
paper with these numbers.
Akhromeyev: I understand. These levels will not be exceeded. You 
will not tell us the exact number, but will not exceed these levels. The 
question is whether the two sides will reach agreement on a certain 
equitable level.
Burt: The idea is not for the two sides to reach agreement on a 
level. The idea is for the two sides to express that the number of SLCMs 
deployed will not exceed a certain number. For example, suppose the 
US plans for the year beginning 1991 to deploy X SLCMs. We could 
say in our statement that our planned deployment of SLCMs will not 
exceed X. Suppose the USSR decides to deploy Y. You could state that 
your planned deployment would not exceed Y. We would make these 
statements for the period five years ahead, and they would be politi-
cally binding.
Akhromeyev: I am in no way questioning the agreement in 
Moscow, or the principle on which it was based. But we should reach 
agreement on a certain maximum level that would not be recorded in 
this document. This maximum level would extend for the duration of 
the START treaty.
Nazarkin: Such a commitment would not be part of the treaty. It 
would not require ratification, and not be a part of the statement. It 
could be a common understanding in the negotiating record. In the 
past this did not come up, we didn’t have enough criteria to address 
this issue. Now we are close to agreement and should start to think 
about such an understanding.
Burt: Agreeing on any limit assumes we can verify that limit. That 
is the whole concept behind the declaration approach. Bartholomew: 
Moreover, an agreed number between the two of us would convert this
