Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX of this process carefully, with a view to determining our future position on MDB loans. We identified the areas of greatest U.S. concern as “alleged abuse of psychiatry and penal labor to control dissidents, charges of restrictions placed on the cultural life of the Hungarian minority, difficulties experienced by some religious groups and the continuing issue of the so-called Jewish economic criminals.” We also decided to take into account the extent to which the GOR cooperated with Amnesty International or other private groups in reviewing the trends in the human rights situation. In view of the upcoming IBRD vote on a non-basic human needs loan for Romania, we now need to review the situation in Romania and decide how to instruct the U.S. Executive Director to vote on December 23. PROJECT DESCRIPTION The loan is for $125 million to the Investment Bank of Romania to support a three year segment of the Romanian Government’s 1980–85 investment program in electrical energy. It is a heavy infrastructure project that includes hydroelectric generating plants, heat generating plants, heat networks, and power transmission lines. The proposed IBRD loan would finance about 4% of the total cost of the project segment, and about 22% of the foreign exchange cost. The project is part of a longer term effort to reduce energy dependence on imported oil. HA, EUR, EB and S/P all agree that the project does not meet “basic human needs” (BHN) criteria. The Human Rights Situation in Romania Romania pursues a policy of internal orthodoxy on economic and political issues, with very strict limits on the exercise of civil and political rights and economic decision-making. The society operates within strictures determined by a centralized authoritarian state. Those who are politically active beyond the limits set by the Government or who publicly proselytize for religious converts are likely to be harassed or arrested on trumped-up charges. There are no reliable estimates of the number of political prisoners in Romania. There are allegations that some, including dissident labor union members, are confined in psychiatric hospitals. Freedom of speech, the press, and assembly are sharply limited. All publications are government controlled. Persons belonging to recognized religions may attend religious services freely. However, evangelical groups have difficulties with the authorities whenever they seek to proselytize outside of church buildings or when they oppose laws which they believe violate their faith. Romanians can travel freely throughout their country. However, few Romanians are allowed to travel abroad. Leaving or attempting
