328 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II —issue an annual study reporting on and analyzing trends in human rights conditions during the previous year. While other organizations already do this (Freedom House for example), every additional source is helpful. The lack of accurate information is still a hindrance to the programs of multinational institutions as well as to our own programs; —serve as a central clearing house—a place for those who need help, or who have information to share, to go to; —set up and award an annual human rights prize, with a sizeable award comparable to the Nobel, to recognize an outstanding contribution to human rights anywhere in the world. Depending on how the legislation creating such a Foundation is written, the Foundation could have a greater or lesser degree of official status. For several reasons I believe it would be best to maximize its distance from the government. This would: provide an independent source of information from official State Department views; allow the Foundation to employ foreign nationals who could provide essential expertise in certain areas, and give the Foundation a slightly multinational (and therefore more credible) image; and protect the Foundation should any of your successors not share your commitment to human rights. The Foundation would be run by a Board of Directors including a majority of private members with some representation of the Congress and the USG, as well as some non-Americans. I visualize a relatively small staff with most of the Foundation’s program being implemented through existing organizations. As to implementation, there are two basic approaches. Either this can be developed and presented as an Administration initiative, or we could interest a member of Congress in the idea and let him push it. The latter approach worked very successfully with the Inter-American Foundation. The idea for that Foundation was presented at an early stage to Congressman Dante Fascell, who took it over, saw to its enactment and has since zealously made sure that its appropriations come through. The disadvantage of this approach, is that you would not get credit for the idea. Hence I would recommend that it be launched as an Administration initiative. Recommendation: That you authorize detailed development of this proposal. To be presented as a Presidential initiative3 Find a member of Congress to father it 3 The President placed a check mark next to this option and added: “Fritz explore.”
