242
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
111.
Intelligence Assessment1
Washington, March 10, 1980
Intelligence Community Assessment of Disease Outbreak in
Sverdlovsk (C)
The Weapon and Space Systems Intelligence Committee has re-
viewed all available intelligence to determine if a reported disease out-
break in the Soviet Union in April 1979 was associated with a biological
warfare program and has determined the following: (C)
• An extraordinary outbreak of a disease, probably pulmonary an-
thrax, occurred at Sverdlovsk in April 1979. (S)
• The number of deaths and the virulence of the disease were sig-
nificant enough to force the Soviets to impose a quarantine in the area.
The situation was not brought under control until late May 1979. (S)
• The outbreak in the city was a result of an accident in southwest
Sverdlovsk at the military facility that has long been suspected of being
engaged in research and development on biological warfare agents. (S)
• The nature of the accident and the resultant number of disease
victims strongly indicate that the quantity of infectious agent exceeds
that reasonably expected to be required for prophylactic, protection, or
other peaceful purposes. (S)
• The official silence on this incident is in sharp contrast to usual
public announcements of naturally occurring disease epidemics in the
USSR. (U)
[less than 1 line not declassified] has provided consistent information
regarding time, location, and a disease outbreak associated with a mili-
tary biological warfare facility and has been supported by [less than 1
line not declassified] Specific details provided by these sources are tech-
nically accurate and does provide a plausible explanation for what
happened. (S)
We have considered explanations of this incident other than the re-
lease of a large quantity of disease-producing agent from a biological
warfare facility. None of these alternatives, including an improperly
conducted vaccine testing or production program, adequately explains
what occurred. Therefore, the Weapon and Space Systems Intelligence
Committee, with the exception of State Department, concludes that
there is a high probability that the Soviets still have an active biological
warfare agent program at this Sverdlovsk facility. (S)
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 110, SCC
288, USSR CBW Convention, 3/14/80. Secret. The Department of State forwarded the as-
sessment to Moscow and the Mission in Geneva in telegram 68653, March 15. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–0592)
