644
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
French would go along. He thought it was important that we stay close
to the British whom he thought supported our position fully. The
President responded by saying that we should be prepared to go public
with our views on Afghan neutrality. The Secretary of State agreed
and suggested that we could be most effective by staying close to
the British. Dr. Brzezinski then reviewed the points elaborating the
elements of Afghan neutrality which had been developed that morning
in the SCC meeting.3 Harold Brown commented that we should be
clear in our own minds whether the Soviet Union would accept these
principles. The President said that he assumed that they could not, but
he was concerned that the Soviets were getting away with their current
activities in terms of world opinion, indeed, in terms of our Allies’
opinions, too.
The Secretary of State thought that all the other European Allies
would go along with our definition of Afghan neutrality except the
French. Harold Brown added that the French may take the same sub-
stantive position, but do not want to be linked to a collective position.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.]
Secretary Brown said that we have a good case to present to our
Allies on what the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan means to them. When
he tries it out on them, they admit that the oil resources of the Persian
Gulf are more important to them than to the U.S. and that the implica-
tions of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan are more severe for them
than for us. He thought it would be useful for the President to give a
speech supporting the speeches already given by the Secretary of State
and himself on the Afghan issue.4 The Secretary of Defense expressed
concern that the Europeans may be so afraid of the Soviets that they
want to appease them. On the other hand, they may simply be deceiving
themselves. He thought that we should rub their noses in the strategic
facts of life created by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
As for the Soviets, he did not believe that we needed to change
our policy of being prepared to cooperate where possible, and to com-
pete when necessary. When they push, he said, we must push back
3 See Document 236.
4 Vance delivered a speech on Afghanistan at the Chicago Council of Foreign
Relations, March 3, in which he acknowledged that no quick solution to the crisis
was within reach and a U.S. response was required that balanced firmness and “the
indiscriminate confrontation of earlier times.” The speech was reported in Bernard
Gwerzman, “Vance Urging a Balanced Response on Afghanistan,” New York Times, March
4, 1980, p. A3; and reprinted in the Department of State Bulletin, April 1980, pp. 12–16.
Brown delivered a speech on March 6 to the Council on Foreign Relations in New York,
that discussed the Afghan crisis in the context of U.S. interests in the Persian Gulf. An
excerpt from the speech was reproduced in the Middle East Research and Information
Project, MERIP Reports, no. 90, The Vietnam Syndrome (Sep. 1980), pp. 20–23. The speech
is also printed in the Department of State Bulletin, May 1980, pp. 63–67.
