238  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
and that a Study be undertaken to develop current doctrine on when 
and how nuclear weapons could contribute to such limited operations.
3. State and Defense prepared terms of reference for a limited was 
Study covering the entire range of U.S. and allied capabilities for lim­
ited military operations (NSC Action No. 1844–­b).
The terms of reference, as approved by the Council (NSC Action 
No. 1881, March 20) anticipated that recommendations as to U.S. 
national security policy and U.S. and allied capabilities for limited mil­
itary operations would result from the Study.
The terms of reference precisely defined limited military opera­
tions, Study assumptions, and the scope of the Study—­matters which 
will be covered in the presentation of the Study by Admiral Triebel.
4. The written memorandum of the Secretaries of State and Defense, 
submitting the Study to the Council, summarized 14 Study findings 
which they deemed significant, made 8 additional observations, and 
stressed 5 Study limitations. While listening to the presentation of the 
Study, the Council should keep in mind these 5 limitations:
(1) The Study does not contemplate limited military operations 
against Soviet armed forces; because, under the current U.S. strategic 
concept, overt military engagement of USSR and U.S. armed forces is 
deemed to be general war.
(2) The Study does not cover enemy use of nuclear weapons in limited 
military operations; because such use of nuclear weapons up to July 1, 
1961, would be construed as overt employment of Soviet armed forces. 
(However, I should point out that some of the 12 hypothetical cases call 
for use by the U.S. of nuclear weapons.)
(3) The Study does not examine U.S. capabilities for covert limited 
military operations.
(4) The Study assumes—­as a working assumption—“that the U.S. 
could engage in effective military action against Mainland China with­
out undue risk of initiating general war.”
(5) The Study should not be used for determining the size and 
nature of U.S. forces required for limited military operations; and its 
conclusions and recommendations are not to be considered definitive.
5. The two Secretaries state in their memorandum, as a significant 
finding of the Study, that, within the foregoing limitations and if the use 
of nuclear weapons as required to achieve military objectives is autho­
rized, U.S. capabilities for limited military operations are adequate to 
undertake and carry out limited operations of the nature examined.
6. The Secretaries’ memorandum makes three recommendations 
(par. 5, page 4):
a. A National Intelligence Estimate should be prepared on world 
reactions and Sino-Soviet military reactions to U.S. use of nuclear weap­
ons in limited military operations against Communist (non-­Soviet) 
forces in the Far East.
