International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981 paring this Summit began in February and served not only to resolve contentious issues which would otherwise have required the attention of Heads of Government, but also gave impetus and direction to other international activities, particularly the IEA and OECD Ministerials.6 As a result, Summit participants were free to spend a larger part of their limited time together discussing broad policy issues. Further, the preparatory process involved frequent discussions among a range of officials from the Summit countries covering all of the issues covered in the communique´. This process fosters a higher level of mutual understanding and compromise than would be the case without the Summit. Organized follow-up is also an integral part of the Summit process, helping to assure that commitments undertaken by Heads of Government are pursued. The Summit series will continue with the seventh Summit meeting scheduled to take place in Canada in 1981. 4. Political discussion. The introduction of a separate political discussion at the Economic Summit was natural, given the strategic importance of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the opportunity the Venice Summit offered the Heads of Government to share their assessments of this event face to face. The principals confirmed the strong Western reaction to the Soviet aggression. The advance work on the political agenda and communique´ prepared the leaders to deal promptly and directly with the Soviet ploy in announcing the withdrawal of some troops from Afghanistan on the eve of the Summit. The result was solid Summit unity in calling for complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. 5. Economic discussions. Energy was clearly the central issue. As the President said on arriving at Andrews Air Force Base, “The one word that permeated all of the discussions was oil.”7 It occupied more than 75 percent of the time devoted to the economic agenda. “Unless we can deal with the problems of energy, we cannot cope with other problems” says the Summit Declaration in its opening paragraph. It recognizes OPEC’s responsibility for exacerbating inflation, recession, and unemployment in the industrialized world, and undermining and in some cases destroying the prospects for growth in the developing countries. The Declaration lays out at some length the essential elements of a strategy agreed among the seven nations to free themselves from their excessive dependence on imported oil within this decade. The main elements are conservation of oil in all sectors of their economies where substantial savings in the use of oil are possible, and reli-
