International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1980–1981
729
paring this Summit began in February and served not only to resolve
contentious issues which would otherwise have required the attention
of Heads of Government, but also gave impetus and direction to other
international activities, particularly the IEA and OECD Ministerials.6
As a result, Summit participants were free to spend a larger part of their
limited time together discussing broad policy issues. Further, the pre-
paratory process involved frequent discussions among a range of offi-
cials from the Summit countries covering all of the issues covered in the
communique´. This process fosters a higher level of mutual under-
standing and compromise than would be the case without the Summit.
Organized follow-up is also an integral part of the Summit process,
helping to assure that commitments undertaken by Heads of Govern-
ment are pursued. The Summit series will continue with the seventh
Summit meeting scheduled to take place in Canada in 1981.
4. Political discussion. The introduction of a separate political dis-
cussion at the Economic Summit was natural, given the strategic im-
portance of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the opportunity the
Venice Summit offered the Heads of Government to share their assess-
ments of this event face to face. The principals confirmed the strong
Western reaction to the Soviet aggression. The advance work on the po-
litical agenda and communique´ prepared the leaders to deal promptly
and directly with the Soviet ploy in announcing the withdrawal of
some troops from Afghanistan on the eve of the Summit. The result was
solid Summit unity in calling for complete Soviet withdrawal from
Afghanistan.
5. Economic discussions. Energy was clearly the central issue. As
the President said on arriving at Andrews Air Force Base, “The one
word that permeated all of the discussions was oil.”7 It occupied more
than 75 percent of the time devoted to the economic agenda. “Unless
we can deal with the problems of energy, we cannot cope with other
problems” says the Summit Declaration in its opening paragraph. It
recognizes OPEC’s responsibility for exacerbating inflation, recession,
and unemployment in the industrialized world, and undermining and
in some cases destroying the prospects for growth in the developing
countries. The Declaration lays out at some length the essential ele-
ments of a strategy agreed among the seven nations to free themselves
from their excessive dependence on imported oil within this decade.
The main elements are conservation of oil in all sectors of their econ-
omies where substantial savings in the use of oil are possible, and reli-
6 The IEA met at the Ministerial level in Paris May 21–22; the OECD met at the Min-
isterial level in Paris June 3–4.
7 For the full text of his remarks on June 26, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the
United States: Jimmy Carter, 1980–81, Book II, pp. 1234–1236.
