264
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
(7) In all Multinational Forums—Recognize and Promote the Power of
Words
Nothing could demonstrate more clearly than the Helsinki Final
Act, the unexpected and unpredictable power of “mere words.” El-
eanor Roosevelt’s insistence on including human rights language in the
UN Charter was of course greeted by roars of cynicism—and yet now
they have in many respects achieved the status of international law. It
was not the US, but the Helsinki Monitoring Groups in Eastern Europe
and the USSR, which turned the Helsinki agreement from a Western
loss into a triumph. We should learn from this lesson the potential for
exploitation of any international document which the Soviets sign.
There is no reason to allow them to continue to get credit for signing
documents to which they do not even pay lipservice. We might start by
reminding the world at Belgrade, that on August 8, 1975, Izvestia hailed
the Final Act as “a new law of international life” thus discrediting sub-
sequent claims of “interference in domestic affairs.”11
(8) Get the Genocide Treaty Ratified
This was the President’s first human rights goal, and yet we
haven’t yet succeeded—because we haven’t really tried. People are be-
ginning to notice and to criticize—“talk is cheap.” Signing all the inter-
national human rights treaties does us little good in international
forums if we can’t get them ratified, and the Genocide Treaty is where
we must begin. I still believe that this should be tried before the
Panama Treaty. If successful, it would aid that effort by demonstrating
that the Right wing can be defeated. Only about five votes are needed.12
(9) Find a Way to Use Allard Lowenstein’s Talents
Unfortunately we cannot make him an Assistant Secretary for
Human Rights, but we should find some way to make better use of his
abilities than his current job (US Representative to the UN for Special
Political Affairs) or to use his current post for some major initiative. All
of his energy, eloquence and idealism are exactly suited to this issue
(matched with lots more political savvy than others now involved).
11 Brzezinski placed a vertical line in the margin next to the portion of the sentence
that begins with “should” and ends with “life” and wrote “fine but need more concrete
expression.”
12 Brzezinski’s handwritten notations in the margin adjacent to this paragraph are
illegible.
