910
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
been talking with General Batmanqilich a few moments before he re-
ceived me. General Batmanqilich, known for his administrative and or-
ganizational ability, was a loyal, honest, and capable military leader.
If he was experiencing difficulties under the present budget, no
successor was likely to be found who would not. Even without re-
organization the Army should have 10,000 more men, particularly
non-commissioned and junior officers to make it efficient. Re-
organization which would give the Army defensive capabilities would
require 15,000 more men. Needs therefore for a re-organized Army
were for 25,000 men in addition to the 125,000 already in uniform. This
required budgetary funds and no such funds were as yet in sight.
Turning to civilian needs the Shah asked if there was not some-
thing I could tell him re U.S. plans. Did Secretary Dulles’ speech on De-
cember 12 indicate a radical change in U.S. policy?4 Was the U.S. plan-
ning to call home its troops and turn the defense of the world against
aggression over to the United Nations? Had the U.S. Government de-
cided to refrain from giving further economic aid to Iran at this time
when Iran was in such need? The U.S. had helped Turkey and Greece to
get started in their economic development; was he to understand that
at the moment when Iran was in a position to use such aid, and was ur-
gently in need of it, the U.S. had decided to extend no more aid of a fi-
nancial and economic development character? If Iran was not to receive
any additional aid, the Government should know at once so decisions
could be made as to what, if anything, could be done.
I told the Shah that we had endeavored to make it clear when the
$45 million aid was granted that the grant was on the basis of emer-
gency; that it would be difficult to find additional funds for Iran’s
budgetary use; that it had not been easy to obtain funds wherewith to
give this emergency aid and that no additional funds were in sight. The
U.S. Government had, of course, hoped that by the time the emergency
funds had been exhausted there would be an oil agreement which to-
gether with fresh funds obtained by Iran locally would take care of
Iran’s most urgent needs. Shah interrupted to say that Iran was not en-
tirely to blame for delay in achievement of an oil agreement. I replied
that it was true that the present Iranian Government could not be en-
tirely to blame for this delay but that I was sure His Majesty would
agree with me that Iran as a country had primarily itself to blame for a
situation in which it now found itself. In fact, the U.S. Government had
spent many millions of dollars in order to help Iran out of a predica-
ment in which it had put itself. The Shah asked if he was to understand
that the U.S. did not intend to give Iran any additional financial aid re-
4 Assistant Secretary Byroade, not Secretary Dulles, delivered a speech on Iran on
December 12; see Department of State Bulletin, December 28, 1953, pp. 894–896.
