456 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Brzezinski: The countries should be identified strategically in relationship to our stance vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and China. The Vice President: We should do more to compete economically. The recent tax law means that U.S. multinational firms are hiring non- U.S. citizens because it is easier and cheaper. This is the kind of mistake we should work on. The President: When Eanes came to the NATO Summit meeting,7 he was very concerned about Spain and, in answer to my question, said we could help by getting the key conservative Spanish military leaders to visit the U.S., and we did that. I think we should reach out our hands to military leaders and others and do more to bring people to the U.S. Brown: Bringing military leaders here also reassures them about our capabilities because of what they see here. Brzezinski: We will do a paper summarizing the conclusions of this meeting and the things that should be done. The President: I want to ask Paul Warnke what he thinks the impact would be on the Soviets’ desire for cooperation with us and detente if we were to commit GLCMs to Western Europe and establish a military presence in the Middle East. Warnke: The Soviets would feel that they would have to match us with conventional GLCMs in Europe, but putting GLCMs in Europe would not torpedo SALT. It would just accelerate Soviet development of cruise missile capabilities. But would Western Europe feel better if both sides had cruise missiles, rather than neither having them? I think that there would be greater fear in Western Europe of surprise attack. Brzezinski: Cruise missiles are not a surprise attack weapon. Jones: Our inability to talk about command and control of cruise missiles with the Allies—targeting, range, and the like—is slowing our GLCM programs and this is what caused the slip from 1982. We need to open a dialogue with the Allies on these subjects. The dialogue itself would help to reassure the Allies. The President: With reference to the trip I have asked Harold Brown to make to Europe, I have to do a personal letter to Callaghan, Schmidt and Giscard to find out what their thinking is and what they will do on: 1) ERW; 2) GLCMs in Europe; 3) medium-range ballistic missiles in Europe.8 I don’t have answers from them on these items. I have no doubt that if the Soviets had a chance to get a military base in the Middle East they would do it. But is it good for us to do it? 7 See Document 83. 8 Brown was scheduled to travel to Europe in October.
