Human Rights 191 target. The committee is a “working level” group which is chaired by the Human Rights Advisor who reports to the Deputy Director. f. Steps USIA has already taken to achieve human rights objectives. Human rights is a primary theme and prominent feature of Agency programs. All Agency communications media are being used to present the Administration’s human rights policies to overseas audiences. Radio has been the primary direct channel to audiences, particularly in closed or authoritarian societies, where local media are controlled and where human rights problems are usually most acute. In the early months of the new Administration, the Voice of America gave extensive coverage (news analyses, features and editorials) to statements by the President and other Administration officials which emphasized the heightened importance of human rights in U.S. foreign policy. Congressman Dante Fascell, Chairman, Joint Legislative- Executive Commission on CSCE, was interviewed in December on VOA’s “Press Conference-USA.” Human rights provisions of the CSCE Helsinki Final Act was a primary subject of this interview. In the field of television placement the Agency has provided extensive coverage of official USG statements, speeches and comments on human rights and its role in U.S. foreign policy. Since President Carter’s inauguration 18 different videotapes on human rights subjects have been made available to posts. Examples are: —Secretary Vance’s April 30 human rights policy speech before the University of Georgia Law School; —President Carter’s March 17 UN speech;8 his April 14 Organization of American States speech9 and the recent speech at the University of Notre Dame;10 —interview by U.S. and European journalists on April 30 with Congressman Fascell; —US human rights policy interview with Ms. Patricia M. Derian, Coordinator, Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs (D/HA). The Agency overseas speakers program incorporates U.S. and international human rights subjects by selected speakers. For example, Allard Lowenstein, head of the U.S. delegation to the recent UN Human Rights Commission, was programmed recently in five European cities where he discussed U.S. human rights policy before selected 8 See Document 26. 9 See footnote 40, Document 29. 10 See footnote 2, Document 51.
