Afghanistan
331
Dari, Pushtu and Baluchi languages condemning the Soviet interven-
tion in Afghanistan and calling for the overthrow of the Babrak regime.
2. According to reports reaching HI headquarters in Peshawar, by
the evening of 28 December, there has been little military action in the
southern and eastern parts of Afghanistan except for a report that a
large convoy of tanks and armored vehicles was sighted heading from
Kabul towards Jalalabad. (Source comment: The information on the
convoy was imprecise and could not be confirmed.) In the countryside
the HI describes the situation among the general populace as restive
with anti-Soviet sentiment increasing to a new high.
3. On 30 December, HI leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar along with
a member of the HI’s political committee traveled from Peshawar to
Islamabad where they intended to deliver communiqués to various
foreign missions asking these governments to withhold diplomatic
recognition of the Babrak regime and to ask for immediate material
support.2 (Source comment: It is not known which missions will receive
the communiqué nor how long Gulbuddin will stay in Islamabad;
however, it is possible that he might be seeking meetings with Govern-
ment of Pakistan (GOP) officials in addition to delivering the commu-
niqués. It is the hope of the HI that the GOP will make a realistic
appraisal of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and will rally to
the HI with immediate material support.) There is definite concern
within the HI leadership that as soon as it is practical for them to do
so, Soviet ground troops will be introduced into the fighting on a large
scale and they are concerned about their ability to defend against
massive Soviet military action. However, at the present time the HI
plans to keep their mujahiddin in the field and to defend the “liberated
areas” wherever possible.
4. ACQ: [1 line not declassified]
5. [less than 1 line not declassified] Dissem: [3 lines not declassified]
2 Hekmatyar met with officials at the U.S. Embassy in Islamabad. No record of this
meeting was found.
