Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
645
absolutely committed to the Soviet Union and was dependent on the
Soviet Union for military and economic aid, and now are completely
friends with us and have prohibited Soviet technicians and others from
coming into the country—that’s a major change in the Mideast itself.
“The People’s Republic of China, a fourth of the people on Earth—
it wasn’t long ago that they were endorsed and supported by and were
the closest of allies with the Soviet Union. Now, we have a new and
burgeoning friendship with the people of the People’s Republic of
China, and we have not lost our financial and economic and friendly re-
lationships with the people on Taiwan.
“I could continue to go on, but those are major countries. There
have also, obviously, been some setbacks. I don’t deny that.
“I think that the present commitment that I have given to defense
has reversed a longstanding trend. For 15 years, our country was
making no real increase in defense expenditures. In fact, when I came
into office, our real commitment to defense was less than it was in 1963.
This year, the current fiscal year, we have accommodated all the im-
pact of inflation, and we have at least a 3-percent growth in defense
expenditures.
I think we have restrengthened NATO, which was very weak, not
only militarily but politically. There’s a new spirit and a new dy-
namism and a new cooperation in NATO that did not exist before.
“On strategic weapons systems, if you take our sea-based missiles
and you assess the dramatic progress being made with the Trident sub-
marines and the new Trident missiles, that’s a quantum step forward.
“The air-breathing leg of our triad, with the new generations of cruise
missiles coming along—that’s a major technological and strategic
breakthrough. And with the MX missile that I announced this morning
on land-based, silo-type missiles—this is the first time that we have
ever seen a single missile acquire such a tremendous importance, and it
not only gives our country a better defense or attack capability, it also
contributes to stability because you’ve got a lot more defense with a lot
fewer missiles.
“So, I think that if you look at other factors—our espousing human
rights, the economic strength of our country, our overall trade relation-
ships—in almost every measure, I do not see our country as being af-
fected detrimentally, as contrasted with the Soviet Union.
“We recognize that they are a military nation; they put a lot more
emphasis on military weaponry than do we. And we are much more in-
clined to support the status quo, to put down regional conflagrations
and conflicts than are the Soviet Union. They espouse a revolutionary
political thesis and, to them, the change of governments, quite often, is
in their advantage. We, generally, are inclined to support the gov-
