408  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
293.	 Letter 20 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 20
Washington, October 17, 1955
Dear Alex:
This letter will be short since not much has transpired since I wrote 
you on the 14th.
The Secretary has noted that it would seem at some point we should 
try to smoke out the Chinese Communists by asking them whether the 
matters they have proposed constituted the only matters they have at 
issue with the U.S. The Secretary observes that the purpose of the talks 
was to discuss such matters and he thinks we might ask that they should 
bring out everything that is in their minds. Otherwise the talks cannot 
serve their agreed purpose.
The foregoing is related to your remarks about whether the raising 
of other subjects by either side is precluded. I do not believe that any­
one on our side thinks that as of now the raising of subjects other than 
the four mentioned under Item Two is ruled out. The only question is 
whether a deadline should be established for the introduction of new 
subjects.
Some of Judge Phleger’s people and also Ralph Clough, are 
working on material for your possible use in connection with the 
renunciation of force item. We are in something of a dilema in that any 
elaboration of our position on support of the GRC, the Mutual Defense 
Treaty, the Mission of the 7th Fleet, and the presence of MAAG units 
in Taiwan tends to get us involved in a discussion involving the essen­
tial interests if not the rights of the GRC. Yet avoidance of all mention 
of these matters and of our position on the juridical status of Taiwan 
puts us in a false position of seeming to have no defensible position 
and nothing to say in response to Wang’s ripostes. It would look as if 
our position were entirely defensive and untenable. It would almost 
seem that we were ashamed to even attempt to defend our position. 
Somehow we must work out a means of addressing forthrightly our 
basis stance without getting bogged down in a counter productive 
dispute.
I am enclosing a copy of an important speech which Mr. Robertson 
made at Davidson College on October 15. This will be of considerable 
background use to you. You will note that our problems are specifically 
dealt with beginning on the bottom of Page 5, running through Page 9. 
This speech is being given heavy play by the VOA throughout the FE 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; 
Official–­Informal.
