National Security Policy 207 60. Memoranda From Several DOD/ISA Offices1 Washington, June 11, 1958 MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF PLANNING SUBJECT US and Allied Capabilities for Limited Military Operations to 1 July 1961 This planning study was received on June 2nd and while the time element imposed upon the Office of Department of Defense is appreci­ ated, the Regional Director, Far East would have preferred additional time for thorough study of so important a matter and to allow more people to express their views. In general this is an excellent planning study and certainly a good thinking exercise. It cannot help but be felt however that a succession of limited wars or simultaneous limited wars on two far-­flung fronts could pitch the U.S. economy and way of life to a point where it might become preferable to throw aside normal restraint and restrictions defined for limited war in this study. Limited wars have brought the UK and France to an economic crisis that has only avoided catastro­ phy through extensive US support. Also it is felt that the study could stand a little more emphasis on the psychological, economic warfare phases. There is no doubt that limited warfare is precarious at best and any use of nuclear weapons, “Tactical, Minor or Clean”, can hardly but raise a doubt that the action will remain a limited rather than an overt conflict. Specifically, (1) On page 11, at the end of paragraph 2, after the word “southward” recommend that the period be deleted and the following added: “as a concurrent and supporting operation.” (2) It would appear that the present version of US and Allied capabil­ ities was prepared before the recommendations submitted concern­ ing appendix D were considered. It is suggested that attention be invited to the Regional Director, Far East comments on this subject. (3) Attention is invited in conjunction with the immediately previ­ ous comment concerning the U.S. capabilities together with strong loyal Vietnamese forces to reestablish the independence and territo­ rial integrity of Laos. This is not considered possible with forces out­ lined in this study, especially in view of the conclusion on page 3 that the U.S. cannot assume effective employment outside their national territory of the Vietnamese. (4) Another possible conflict exists in the 1 Source: Comments on “U.S. and Allied Capabilities for Limited Military Operations to 1 July 1961.” Top Secret. 10 pp. NARA, RG 218, JCS Files.
