Chapter 7, January–May 1991 1049 President Gorbachev: George, I very cordially greet you. And I would like to say that both of us have a lot of work in Moscow and in Washington. Since we both have a lot of work, I hope there will be good results for both of us. I am pleased we are in touch and working hard. I hope you can hear me well, George (there were phone line difficulties throughout the call). (C) The President: I am wondering if you have received my letter to you on General Moiseyev’s visit. I know you have so many other things on your mind, and I want you to know I’m with you. I don’t mean to press you on CFE but I am eager to get past this obstacle. First, I want to reiterate directly what I said in my letter about General Moiseyev. He showed real statesmanship and, I think, has helped prepare a solution. He also impressed me with his commitment to our relationship and to what you stand for. (S) President Gorbachev: Yes, I received it. The Moiseyev visit was good. I appreciated the attention you gave to it. I hope that in Lisbon Bessmertnykh and Baker will be able to wrap up that work. (S) The President: Moiseyev is a statesman and I knew that as a military man he had good reasons to say what he did. He described his core problem. He would rather not take 1100 pieces of equipment in the naval infantry, especially another 753 armored vehicles, out of service. As I said in my letter, he had practical military arguments for his view. But the issue transcends this equipment. This CFE problem is an obstacle to the summit. (S) President Gorbachev: I considered carefully your points. I listened to Moiseyev’s report and instructed my people on the basis of your letter to urgently prepare a proposal for Lisbon. I hope they will be able to solve it. (S) The President: I hope we can resolve CFE and START and that I can then come to Moscow. That would be a historic step and I very much want to come to Moscow. Mikhail, I really want to come there. (S) President Gorbachev: That coincides with what we want. That would be an enormous historical step forward. That is the way it will be and we should assume we must move to complete work on S TART. (S) The President: Moiseyev said the differences between us are very narrow and I agree with him. (S) President Gorbachev: I do too. I think there will be a solution in Lisbon. (S) The President: By the way, Primakov and Yavlinskiy will be in town this week and we will discuss with them economic issues in general and credit guarantees. (S) President Gorbachev: I think Primakov will give you a more detailed idea of what I had in mind during our last call. The concept of
