Chapter 1, 1988  17
had taken place in Moscow.5 In Geneva there was a lot of suspicion, 
distrust and caution. In Moscow and in Washington6 it had been com-
pletely different. This was possible because of the real steps which had 
been taken. If such big steps had not been taken no change in the rela-
tionship would have occurred. So the Soviet Union believed that if Vice 
President Bush were elected President, contacts between the two coun-
tries would continue and acquire new dimensions. But he added that 
he did not have the right to vote in the U.S. elections.
The Vice President wished to add one more observation to what he 
had said. Politically and philosophically there was no credible room to 
the right of President Reagan at present. Although the Vice President 
was identified as a believer in the Reagan program, there was some 
political room to the right of the Vice President, although this could 
change if he were to win the election by a large margin. His point 
was that he would need to demonstrate to the American people that 
any agreement between the two countries was a sound one from the 
American point of view. Any president would need to do this, but he 
would need to work at it with respect to people whom it would be a 
snap for President Reagan to bring along.
The Vice President continued that it would be easier for him to get 
the support of the American people in such a case, due to the continuity 
of policy, than for his opponent, who had no political standing. If his 
opponent won the election, he would be the president and would have 
everyone’s support. But at the moment he does not have the support of 
the political middle, much less the right. As we say in the U.S., he and 
his advisers are coming out of left field.
Shevardnadze said that perhaps this was his personal belief, but 
he was convinced that a big change had occurred recently in Soviet and 
American society. He hoped that the American people were convinced 
that it was in the U.S. interest to have a stable relationship with the 
Soviet Union.
The Vice President confirmed this.
Secretary Shultz said he wished to say something in support of 
what the Vice President had said. At the moment the two sides were 
working on the details of the 50% reduction of strategic weapons. Just 
the other day they had talked about ALCMs, verification of mobile mis-
siles, some aspects of the ABM Treaty and SLCMs. All of these were 
5 For the memoranda of conversations from Reagan and Shultz’s meetings with 
Gorbachev and Shevardnadze in Moscow, May 29–June 1, 1988, see Foreign Relations, 
1981–1988, vol. VI, Soviet Union, October 1986–January 1989, Documents 156–163.
6 For the memoranda of conversations from Reagan and Shultz’s meetings with 
Gorbachev and Shevardnadze in Washington, December 8–10, 1987, see Foreign Relations, 
1981-1988, vol. VI, Soviet Union, October 1986–January 1989, Documents 107–115.
