1150 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 245. Editorial Note On July 29, 1991, President George H.W. Bush and First Lady Barbara Bush traveled from Washington to Moscow via Air Force One, which departed Andrews Air Force Base at around 6 a.m. and landed at Sheremetyevo Airport at 9:47 p.m. Moscow time. The President and First Lady were greeted at the airport by U.S. Ambassador Jack Matlock and a Soviet delegation led by Vice President Gennadiy Yanayev. Bush participated in arrival ceremony before proceeding to the United States Ambassadorial Residence along with Mrs. Bush. On July 30, Bush met privately with Secretary of State James Baker, Chief of Staff John Sununu, and President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Brent Scowcroft, after which he and Mrs. Bush departed for the Kremlin, where they were greeted by Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Raisa Gorbachev. From 12:55 to 1:22 p.m., Bush and Gorbachev led U.S. and Soviet delegations in a meeting in St. Catherine’s Hall, before moving to the Official Residence Dining Hall for a working lunch from 1:28 to 2:07 p.m. At 2:39, the President departed the Kremlin to deliver a speech at the Moscow State Institute for International Relations, after which he was driven to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet for a meeting with President of the Russian Soviet Federal State Republic Boris Yeltsin before returning to the Ambassador’s Residence. At 7 p.m., President and Mrs. Bush returned to the Kremlin for a state dinner hosted by President and Mrs. Gorbachev. Memoranda of conversations of these meetings are scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. On the morning of July 31, Bush spoke with Baker before participating in a ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknown Solider, after which he attended a breakfast with U.S. and Soviet businessmen in the Composer’s at the Radisson Hotel. At 9:41, he and the First Lady traveled to the Gorbachev’s suburban residence, Novo Ogaryevo. At 3:05, President and Raisa Gorbachev escorted President and Mrs. Bush to the Kremlin, where they visited the Winter Garden. At 3:38, Bush and Gorbachev went to St. Vladimir’s Hall to deliver prepared remarks to an assembled audience of official and press delegations. “Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, comrades,” read the transcript of interpreter’s translation of Gorbachev’s remarks. “In a few moments the President of the United States and I will put our signatures under the treaty on the reduction of strategic offensive arms. This completes many years of efforts that required hard work and patience on the part of government leaders, diplomats, military officials. They required will, courage, and the rejection of outdated perceptions of each other. They required trust. This is also a beginning, the beginning
