250 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I The Soviet Perspective Over the next month or so, Brezhnev will be putting the finishing touches on whatever programmatic statement he and the politburo intend to issue in honor of the new constitution and the 60th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. These occasions tend to take on more than a purely ceremonial significance. Probably, there will be an appraisal of the general international situation, and in particular, the future course of Soviet-American relations. While the Soviets could opt for a freeze in relations, Brezhnev’s preference probably is to reinstate “detente.” —He knows that you will certainly be in office to deal with his successor; moreover, the Soviets cannot ignore the fact that the US has emerged from the Vietnam-Watergate turmoil with a new sense of confidence and thus in a far better strategic position to endure a period of stagnation or even confrontation. —In contrast to our situation, the Soviets are approaching the end of the Brezhnev period which will be symbolized by the new constitution. While this period has been marked by certain Soviet successes in containing dissent at home and in East Europe and in expanding Soviet influence, in the past several years troubles have also grown—in relations with the US, in the Middle East, in India and Africa. The growth of Soviet military power has not provided a basis for permanent political influence, in part because international concerns have broadened to include newer issues in which the USSR risks irrelevancy. And, finally, the USSR is constrained by the fact that it finds itself deeply indebted to and dependent on the Western world for its economic growth. Your Objectives Since the Soviets, including Brezhnev, profess confusion over your policies, you may want to use this as an opening theme: (1) laying out the general line of your policy; (2) relating it to Soviet-American relations, and (3) indicating quite frankly some specific problems we have with Soviet behavior. 1. American Foreign Policy Your policies have been designed to be responsive to the rapid changes occurring in the world and to reflect the new sense of confidence and moral consciousness among our people: —We recognize that a number of the challenges that arise from this process of change impose special responsibilities on the most advanced industrial countries—for example, non-proliferation, economic and social justice, the desire for individual liberty, and the gap between rich
