723.2515/1663: Telegram
[Document 241]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, October 29, 1925—8 p.m.
[Received October 30—11:45 a.m.]
From Pershing: Edwards called on me this morning and reasserted position of Chilean
Government on statement I made before Commission on reduction of troops by
discharge of conscripts. I had stated that Chile should reduce proportionate number of
officers and noncommissioned officers, announce that she was making reduction
herself in order to demonstrate desire for free plebiscite, discharge native-born Tacna-
Aricans and return others, and move these troops in public manner and notify
Commission of the proposed movements.
Edwards said that his Government could not accede to these conditions as they
infringed Chile’s sovereignty. Thus we were forced back to difference of views on
construction of award. Edwards said that Chile would not yield her position on that
construction, and I said that recognition of Commission’s power was vital to the
plebiscite. He then said that he hoped we could come to some agreement, and asked
why we should not make it a juridical deadlock instead of my continuing to insist on
passage of my motion for which at last meeting Peruvian Commissioner had said he
would vote.
I said that situation had been studied, and that the demands which had been made were
thought to be absolutely necessary; this action on my part had brought forward question
of Commission’s authority for decision which sooner or later would have to be made.
Edwards then said that this action would place Chile in difficult position toward any
consideration of diplomatic settlement, and again said that plebiscite was absolutely
impossible, even though we might be able to resolve the present impasse. He stated that
Chilean Government had cabled to Mathieu suggesting suspension of plebiscite.
Edwards also thinks that any Commission which might be got together to discuss
diplomatic settlement should meet in Washington.
Edwards then asked if there would be any objection to my calling off Saturday’s
meeting which had been planned but not announced. I asked him about his delayed
legal argument and his statement in answer to my presentation of facts and he said he
had been promised them for Saturday. I wanted to comply with his request that no
