702 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement GT–24. Airgram from the Ambassador in Guatemala (Mallory) to the Department of State1 Guatemala City, November 11, 1959. G-23 Called on President Ydígoras today2 noon for purpose saying goodbye and taking up contents Department’s Instructions A-55 and A-56.3 Conversation lasted approximately one and a quarter hours. President began by informing me recent intelligence received from Assistant Chief National Police Mexico whom he once assisted in exile of information on possible interventionist activities Caribbean Legion from Cuba. President said plans laid for three invasion attempts: one Guatemala, one Nicaragua and one Dominican Republic. He related general subject Juan José Arevalo stating his information Arevalo to receive $150,000 from Cuba with hope expressed by Raul Castro that money would not be primarily for political purposes but for military adventures. He said that the Caribbean Legion is supposed to have three MIG fighters in Costa Rica. I said I did not believe it. He said he didn’t either. As a forerunner to his discussion of invasion threats from Cuba, the President referred to the new Cuban Ambassador4 who he said is in contact with subversive elements. He said this occurred to the extent that the Venezuelan Ambassador5 who presumably had been closer to the Cuban here than anyone else had discussed with him some anxiety. He said the Venezuelan is a career Army officer and therefore deserving of attention and belief. He referred to an article to be published in 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.14/11–1159. Confidential. 2 November 10. The airgram was prepared on that day. 3 In airgram A–55 of November 5, the Department of State instructed the Embassy in Guatemala as follows: “It would appear desirable, therefore, to plant in Ydígoras the thought that there is little basic difference between the ideals and programs voiced by him and by the P[artido] R[evolucionario] leadership, and that it would be in the mutual party and national interest to enter into a tacit working relationship, in anticipation of the December elections and their results.” (611.14/11–559). In airgram A–56 of November 5, the Department of State instructed Ambassador Mallory to assure President Ydígoras of U.S. readiness to cooperate with his Government in elaborating and implementing programs intended to place Guatemala firmly on the road to stability within a democratic system.” (611.14/11–559). 4 Antonio Rodríguez Echazábal. 5 Brig. Gen. Rafael Virgilio Vivas.
