raw opium in such manner that there will be no surplus
available for non-medical and non-scientific purposes.”
The American Delegation to the second opium conference withdrew from
that conference before the completion of its work, because it was forced to
the conclusion that the convention which was being drawn up did not
conform to the principles and policy laid down in the Joint Resolution
under which they were instructed to act for this Government. Their reasons
were set forth in the memorandum which was attached to the letter of
February 6, 1925, addressed by the Honorable Stephen G. Porter, Chairman
of the American Delegation, to the President of the Second Opium
Conference. Copies of the memorandum and of the text of the Joint
Resolution (Public Resolution No. 20—68th Congress) are attached for
your information.73
It has furthermore been and continues to be the policy of this Government,
both in regard to its domestic situation and internationally in cooperation
with the other Powers, to seek the enactment of pharmacy laws and
regulations which will limit the manufacture, the sale and the use of
morphine, cocaine and their respective salts to the medical needs of the
world. (Cf. Hague Convention, Chapter III, Article 9.) With this in view,
this Government on October 14, 1926, addressed an instruction to the
American diplomatic representatives in the countries signatory to The
Hague Convention directing them to bring to the attention of those
Governments the steps which have been taken for the control of the
manufacture of and traffic in narcotic drugs within the territorial limits of
the United States pursuant to the requirements of The Hague Convention
and to point out the need for similar control in other countries, particularly
those producing opium derivatives, if the illicit international traffic in these
drugs is to be eradicated. A copy of this instruction with its enclosures is
transmitted herewith for your information.74 Since the instruction of
October 14, 1926, was issued, in order to perfect its system of control, this
Government has adopted a new form of import certificates for narcotic
shipments and has revised the regulations issued in pursuance of the
Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act. A set of the new import forms and a
copy of the revised regulations, which become effective April 1, 1928, are
attached.75 Moreover, Treasury Department Regulations No. 35 on the
