912 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Yemenis than the Soviets. The Egyptians suspect the worst of the Soviets. The Turkish Prime Minister could use this information. Newsom added that we have difficulty with all three, and that we should use this one card to overcome their resistance. (S) Dr. Brzezinski tasked Newsom to convene a meeting with Komer and the NSC staff to develop possible talking points [less than 1 line not declassified] with these countries for review at the next SCC. (TS) Communications with the Soviets Dr. Brzezinski recommended that either the President or Muskie in a public speech reconfirm the President’s State of the Union Address strictures on Southwest Asia and the Persian Gulf.4 He expressed doubt that bilateral communications would have much effect in light of our many such previous communications which we have more or less allowed the Soviets to ignore, e.g. Cam Ranh Bay.5 (S) Muskie suggested that the President could do this at the United Nations General Assembly in September but that at some point we must be specific with the Soviets. Until we reach the point beyond which their actions will become unacceptable that should be done privately. (S) Dr. Brzezinski responded that a two-step approach flows from Muskie’s points: a speech at the September United Nations General Assembly for the public, and a Muskie/Gromyko bilateral meeting when Gromyko comes to the United Nations. (S) All agreed that we could tell the President that this is our preliminary thinking, not a firm recommendation. (S) Defense Actions Muskie asked, “What is the bottom line”? Can we defend if the Soviets actually invade? Harold Brown admitted that we cannot defend militarily but we might save the Saudi oil and deter the Soviets from going further, or perhaps deter their invasion in the first place. Our one and one-third divisions moved to Iran in 30 days would confront 16–20 Soviet divisions. (TS) 4 In response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979, and later referred to as the Carter Doctrine, Carter stated in his January 23 State of the Union address to Congress: “Let our position be absolutely clear: An attempt by any outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States of America, and such an assault will be repelled by any means necessary, including military force.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 194–200) 5 In 1979 the Socialist Republic of Vietnam signed a 25-year, rent-free lease with the Soviet Union allowing the Soviet Pacific Fleet to base at Cam Ranh Bay. It was the largest Soviet naval base outside of the Soviet Union.
