82
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
5. Reasons for the DRA’s pro-Soviet attitudes: The primary well
from which the strong leftist views of this regime’s leaders spring is
their long-held beliefs in the tenets of Marxism-Leninism, and a proba-
bly more recently acquired conviction that the world correlation of
forces and events is evolving in such a way that the ultimate victory
of Marxism-Leninism cannot be denied. Although the Afghan leader-
ship’s grasp of many of the arcane principles of this doctrine has come
under polite fire by a number of visiting Third World officials (e.g.,
Indian Foreign Minister Vajpayee), in our assessment Taraki and his
colleagues are sincere in their devotion to this ideology and in their
belief that Marxism-Leninism contains the ultimate answers on how
to modernize Afghanistan’s feudal society. They also display full trust
and confidence in the Soviet Union as their sole support and defense
at this vulnerable stage of consolidation. There is no indication that they
see any unacceptable risks to their independence in this relationship.
Indeed, an ideologue like Amin would probably describe Outer Mongo-
lia as an “independent” state. The Khalqi perception of Afghan inde-
pendence is different from the classical stance taken by other Afghans.
6. Afghan security needs: Simultaneously, there is a practical side
to Taraki’s and Amin’s view of politics, and this element of the equation
may account, to a greater extent, for the recent pro-Soviet developments
noted above, and may also determine the primary significance of Tar-
aki’s trip to Moscow. Although the accession of a leftist regime in
Kabul has undoubtedly served a number of important Soviet foreign
policy and ideological interests, one could make a strong argument
that, at this stage of the game at least, the Afghan leadership needs
the Soviets more than the latter needs Kabul’s possible contributions.
The security of the Taraki regime has not yet been fully established,
despite the Afghan leader’s confident remarks in his November 27
address to his party colleagues. Active opposition, especially in the
eastern tribal areas, appears to be inadequate to overcome the military
force and ruthless determination of the Khalqi regime. Nevertheless,
it refuses to go away or be stamped out. Rightly or wrongly, it is widely
perceived here that Moscow has undertaken a bottom-line commitment
(some believe to the extent that it would provide para-military forces
if necessary) to the survival of a leftist regime in Kabul, a perception
that probably serves to intimidate somewhat any potential domestic
opporition—or any Pakistani inclination to contribute to this subver-
sion. Thus, in the crucial security field the possibility that the Taraki
regime might at some point be able to exercise the “Soviet option” is
from Kabul’s point of view an indispensable factor in Kabul’s bilateral
relationship with Moscow—and, for that matter, with Islamabad, as
well.
7. Regional politics: On the broader foreign policy front, Moscow’s
presence in the wings is probably a comforting one for the DRA leader-
