Afghanistan 4. MFN. We could announce that we do not intend to introduce legislation giving MFN to the Soviet Union during the current session of Congress. 5. Postponement of US-Soviet Trade Council. We could announce the postponement of the next session of the US-Soviet Trade Council, scheduled to meet in Washington April 16. 6. Tighten Up COCOM Procedures. We could announce that we are undertaking with our Allies a review of current COCOM procedures with a view to tightening them. 7. Expulsion of a Large Group of Soviet Agents. We could identify and arrest 50 to 100 Soviet KGB agents in the US, making clear to the Soviets that any retaliatory action on their part would mean further expulsions by us at a rate of two Soviets for one American, i.e. the current ratio of Soviet Embassy personnel in the US to Americans in the USSR, leaving out the 550 Soviets at the UN (which makes one-for-one expulsion entirely unsatisfactory and unreciprocal to us). 8. Withdrawal of Ambassador. We could (and probably should) recall Watson for consultations. (Dobrynin’s absence is obviously not entirely medical in nature.) 9. Broaden Security Relationships. The US could undertake new security relationships with Oman, Somalia, and Turkey, i.e. three Muslim countries. 10. Broadcasting. The US could announce increased broadcasts to Western Asia and to the Muslim portions of the USSR. 11. China. In conjunction with the Brown visit, the US could let it be known that we have agreed not only to the sale of certain high technology items to China, but to the sale of over-the-horizon radar and anti-tank missiles—clearly defensive weapons—as well. We could explain that this was done explicitly in light of the Soviet action in Afghanistan.3 Future arms sale to China, we could add, would be on a case-by-case basis. 12. Removal of Inhibitions on Covert Actions. The US could ask for revision of all of the legislative inhibitions on our ability to conduct covert actions anywhere in the world. In sum, Soviet negative reaction to various protests and expostulations, including ours, is completely predictable. These were taken into consideration by the Soviets before they made their move. This is an event of such importance that a strong and vivid US response must be made to it, and not just in terms of Soviet action in Afghanistan itself, but in terms of overall US-Soviet relations. The Soviets must be
