1360  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
334.	 Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, June 6, 1958
SUBJECT
Meeting with U.S. Experts for Geneva Technical Talks on Nuclear Test Detection
PARTICIPANTS
Dr. James B. Fisk
Dr. Ernest O. Lawrence
Dr. Robert Bacher
Mr. Spurgeon Keeny
The Secretary
S/AE—Mr. Farley
S/AE—Mr. Spiers
Dr. Fisk, who called at his request, introduced Drs. Lawrence and 
Bacher, who had been designated to serve as U.S. experts at the pro­
posed Geneva technical talks on nuclear test detection, and outlined 
some of the preliminary work that the experts had been doing in prepa­
ration for the talks.
The Secretary emphasized to the group the importance which 
he and the President attached to the work the experts were to do in 
Geneva. He expressed gratification that men of their caliber were will­
ing to undertake this assignment. He stressed also that he saw the 
group’s mission as being purely technical in character: the purpose of 
the meeting would not be to reach political conclusions or to determine 
whether a given system with a specific level of capability would be 
sufficient. These decisions would be reached in Washington, on a polit­
ical level, but the work done by the scientists and their views on the 
technical issues involved would weigh heavily as considerations. We 
had no idea, of course, whether the USSR would approach the meeting 
with serious purpose, or whether they would be willing to accept the 
inspection which we thought, at minimum, was necessary. The Secretary 
did not feel that a technically perfect system would be necessary, and 
that a lesser system which created an unacceptable risk for the USSR in 
undertaking violations might be adequate.
Dr. Fisk gave the Secretary a copy of the draft outline of points to 
be covered in the talks (attached) which he hoped the Department of 
State would be willing to send to the USSR to put them on notice about 
1 Source: Agenda for talks with Soviet Union. Confidential. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, 
Central Files, 700.5611/6–658.
