Chapter 2, January–June 1989  151
The options paper (at Tab A) addresses three specific issues arising 
from differences between the U.S. and Soviet proposals: 1) counting 
rules for ALCMs, 2) a range threshold to distinguish between short-­
range air-­to-­surface missiles and ALCMs, and 3) how to distinguish 
between nuclear and conventional ALCMs. An additional air-­breathing 
system—SLCM—­is not addressed because no agency favors changing 
our current proposal now (although there are divergent views on what 
our ultimate position should be).
Counting Rules. There are two basic questions: how far should we 
go in encouraging greater Soviet reliance on air breathing weapons? 
What restrictions on the U.S. heavy bomber forces should we accept?
We have proposed to attribute each specifically designated “ALCM 
heavy bomber” with ten warheads under the 6000 limit, regardless of 
their true capacity to carry ALCMs. This position sidesteps the need to 
verify actual ALCM loadings, which could change rapidly, and permits 
us to deploy ALCMs on the bombers we need, and in the numbers we 
want, without pressing against START limits.
However, the Soviets claim that our attribution rule is unfair since 
future wide-­bodied aircraft could carry dozens of ALCMs but would 
only be attributed with ten. Their proposal to count “ALCM heavy 
bombers” based on the maximum number of ALCMs they are capa-
ble of carrying would either (a) require modifications to U.S. bombers 
to limit their ALCM capacity or (b) lead to unrealistically high ALCM 
loadings, even though they would severely inhibit our flexibility.
Verification of specific bomber loadings is virtually impossible 
because a bomber’s capability to carry ALCMs can be changed rapidly. 
The U.S. position technically can be verified only because it defines 
away the problem of counting ALCM capacity. No proposal, however, 
will meaningfully limit the Soviet ALCM breakout threat to less than 
the ALCM capacity of their entire heavy bomber force.
The options in the PCC paper reflect a range of views about the 
trade-­offs between restricting the size of the future legal Soviet ALCM 
force (recognizing that ALCMs could be deployed on all heavy bomb-
ers in a breakout), and protecting U.S. options for a larger ALCM force 
than we now envision under START. In evaluating these options, a 
complicating factor is the reduced production rate for the B–2 pene-
trating bomber and Congressional concern with B–2 costs. If the B–2 
program is significantly delayed, ALCM options and flexibility could 
become more important for the U.S.
— Option 1—Accept the Soviet demand for an “as equipped” 
counting rule for ALCMs.
— Option 2—Retain the existing ALCM attribution rule of ten per 
bomber, but add a limit on the maximum ALCM carrying capability of
