1512 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. McCone said he felt we should be guided by the advice of the negotiators and take the calculated risk that an approach to the Soviet Delegation on Monday would be possible before the story appears in the American press. He stated that even though there would be con­ siderable concern in several quarters, including the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, if this information had leaked to the press before it had been made available officially, for the sake of good faith with the Soviets it would be well to take this calculated risk of delaying an announcement of the HARDTACK II data until after an approach to the Soviets on Monday. It was agreed that (1) Ambassador Wadsworth would seek an infor­ mal meeting with the Soviet Delegation on Monday at which Dr. ­Romney of AFOAT–1 would present the HARDTACK II data. Ambassador Wad­ sworth would then suggest that the Conference establish a working group of experts in this field to consider the implications of the new data; (2) on Tuesday an announcement would be made in this country setting forth the results of the observations of the HARDTACK II explosions as facts without setting forth any particular conclusions, pointing out that the U.S. Delegation is prepared to discuss the data which supplements the limited data available to the Conference of Experts last summer and also indicating that this data may make it possible to improve upon the capability of the system designed this past summer. Dr. Killian indicated that he will establish a technical committee here in Washington to study the implications of the HARDTACK II data more carefully. This committee would consist of several senior seismologists, geophysicists and others familiar with the phenomena associated with underground explosions and would also consider alternate seismic tech­ niques for discriminating between earthquakes and nuclear explosions and possibilities for improving the instrumentation of such installa­ tions. The Group approved the following terms of reference proposed by Dr. Killian: “The Panel should determine whether it would be possible within the present state of seismic technology to improve the capabilities of the system recommended by the Geneva Conference of Experts to detect and identify seismic events as either earthquakes or explosions with­ out increasing the number of manned control posts in the system. The Panel’s investigation should include, but need not be limited to, the following: (a) improvement or augmentation of equipment at control posts in the agreed Geneva system; (b) augmentation of the system with a more closely spaced grid of small, completely automatic seismic detectors; and (c) utilization of criteria other than the first motion of the P wave to identify events as earthquakes (or as explosions). “The Panel should also recommend a research and test program to evaluate any specific proposals advanced to improve the system as
