942  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
IF PRESIDENT’S ANSWER IS AFFIRMATIVE, CALL ON 
SECRETARY SCRIBNER
MR. STANS
MR. QUESADA
SECRETARY MUELLER
Turning to the statement of objective, paragraph 15 on page 9, I 
should like to read this agreed language.
READ PARAGRAPH 15
The first policy guidance paragraph (par. 16, pages 10–11) is 
divided into three parts. 16–­a deals with the first stage of transfer of 
MATS business to civil carriers. 16–­b deals with a further transfer as 
civil carriers equip themselves with uncompromised cargo aircraft. 
16–c sets limits on the transfer provided for in a and b.
In the first split in 16–­a, the majority would make the transfer of MATS 
cargo business to civil carriers dependent on the availability in the civil 
fleet of modern types of aircraft, such as DC–7F and L–1049H. The Budget 
Bureau proposes deletion of this condition on the grounds that it would be 
inconsistent with the general policy of the Federal Government, referred 
to in par. 11, not to carry on any commercial activity to provide a service 
for its own use if such service can be procured from private enterprise. I 
understand that Budget is now willing to withdraw from proposing the 
deletion of this condition. The JCS want to delete, here and in paragraph 
10–­c, references to specific aircraft because it is not desirable to site any 
illustrative examples which, by implication, suggest that the need for a 
modern cargo transport can be satisfied by aircraft which are essentially 
converted passenger types. This raises the question as to whether the JCS 
would support any transfer of business to presently available aircraft.
CALL ON  MR. STANS
SECRETARY GATES
GENERAL TWINING
MR. QUESADA
The second split in 16–­a involves the preference to be given, in con­
tracting out cargo business to the civil carriers, to those carriers which 
demonstrate a willingness and ability to acquire uncompromised cargo 
aircaft. Defense and JCS propose that such a preference be given to the 
extent feasible. Treasury, Commerce, Budget and FAA propose stronger 
wording: that such a preference be given wherever possible.
CALL ON  SECRETARY GATES
GENERAL TWINING
MR. QUESADA
SECRETARY MUELLER
