Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 3. Secretary met with King Hussein Sept. 24 for hour and a half. With King were Court Chief Abdul Hamid, Minister Hassan Ibrahim and Ambassador Salah. Secretary was accompanied by Under Secretary Newsom, Assistant Secretary Saunders, Ambassador Veliotes and Country Director Cluverius. Secretary welcomed King and said it had been too long since their last conversation. King expressed his pleasure at renewing their friendship. Secretary then expressed his interest in idea of Jordan-West Bank/Gaza confederation which Anwar Khatib had publicly espoused recently in Amman. King simply said such ideas have been around for a time and moved on to put them in context which he described as willingness of PLO to take a fresh look at Palestinian-Jordanian relations. King said he has been working to bring the Palestinians and PLO to a course with which all, including US and eventually Israel, could live. He said he wanted to bring Arafat to political maturity and he felt Arafat was ready now to discuss future Palestinian-Jordanian relations and wanted to know King’s views. Hussein said he had told Arafat that, on the contrary, it was up to Palestinian/PLO to tell him how they felt future relations should be shaped. Hussein continued that PLO does want dialogue “across the board” and he of course is ready to hear them out. Sharaf interjected that Anwar Khatib’s statements about a united Arab kingdom apparently were inspired by his Majesty’s meetings with Arafat. 4. Secretary then described Romanian envoy’s report to him of Arafat’s view which included PLO acceptance told Arafat that, on the contrary, it was up to Palestinian/PLO to tell him how they felt future relations should be shaped. Hussein continued that PLO does want dialogue “across the board” and he of course is ready to hear them out. Sharaf interjected that Anwar Khatib’s statements about a united Arab Kingdom apparently were inspired by his majesty’s meetings with Arafat.2 4. Secretary then described Romanian envoy’s report to him3 of Arafat’s view which included PLO acceptance of Israel within pre-1967 borders and, specifically, Arafat’s conclusion that ultimate solution is confederation. Hussein said Arafat had told him that Ceaucescu had made some suggestions and added that Ceaucescu had access in useful places and could make a contribution. Hussein said Arafat was concerned about motives behind apparent and seemly increasing USG desire to deal with PLO. Is USG doing it to involve PLO in a genuine way or as device to discredit PLO? PLO is worried that USG may be seeking contacts in order to keep PLO quiet. Nonetheless, King Hussein said, 2 The repetition of the first phrase of this and the next paragraph suggests that this paragraph is likely a transmission error. 3 No record of this discussion has been found.
