482
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
look forward to the establishment of much more intimate Soviet-Iranian
relations which it would be extremely difficult for the United States
or other foreign countries to disrupt. Outside powers would be hard
pressed for an excuse to interfere with a legitimate and viable Iranian
regime, and any credible threat of hostile action on their part could
provide the Soviets with a welcome opportunity to extend protection
to a friendly neighboring country which also shared a common border
with the Soviets’ Afghan allies. While the experience of President Amin,
et al., would doubtless make many Iranian leaders question the wisdom
of signing a Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Assistance with the USSR,
the external (and/or internal) pressures upon them might make their
position seem too precarious to allow them any choice.
10. Given the extremely remote prospect of an early pro-American
reorientation of Iranian policy, the Soviets would probably not attempt
to overthrow or subvert a post-Khomeini regime which denied the
Tudeh access to position of influence power. However, if they were
persuaded that such a regime was developing real durability and
becoming so anti-Communist that their potential leverage in Tehran
was in jeopardy (e.g., as a result of a credible threat to crush the Tudeh),
the Soviets would probably not hesitate to take strong counteraction.
Unless it were firmly convinced that such behavior would boomerang,
the Kremlin might well resort not only to stern diplomatic protests but
also to military intimidation and even, if necessary, to the encourage-
ment and support of intense centrifugal pressure on Tehran by anti-
Persian nationalist forces. So long as they themselves stopped short of
direct military intervention, the Soviets would probably discount the
possibility of US military action to save the incumbent regime. If, as
also seems probable, they were highly skeptical about the likelihood
and/or efficacy of US nonmilitary responses to a possible request by
Tehran for help, the Soviets might well risk the possibility that Tehran
could successfully resist their pressure and become militantly anti-
Soviet for the sake of the probability that it would bow to their pressure
or be replaced by a more accommodating successor.
11. Unless they become convinced that Iran was otherwise almost
certain to become a US client or was caught in the throes of an irreversi-
ble process of fragmentation and disintegration, the Soviets are not
likely to become wholehearted supporters of any of the country’s ethno-
nationalist secessionist or independence movements. If they were so
convinced, however, the Soviets would probably jettison Tehran with
alacrity and encourage the formation of Soviet-backed provisional gov-
ernments in Iranian Azarbayjan, Kordestan, Baluchestan, Khuzestan,
etc. Although the Kremlin would recognize that such a patent effort
to establish Soviet controlled mini-states could precipitate a US military
intervention (presumably to try to preserve the integrity of Iran but
