Chapter 6, June–December 1990  847
March or April. It is important that we not underestimate the time we 
will need between resolution of issues and the achievement of agreed 
treaty text and then conforming that text. The Soviets continue to pay 
lip service to the goal of finishing this year, but their contributions to 
solving issues are, like ours, not at all consistent with such a schedule. A 
well-­placed Soviet adviser (Sokov) told Peter Young over the weekend 
that both sides have recently decided at a high level to finish this year 
and that Moscow will be instructing its delegation here accordingly. We 
will be alert to see if anything happens to support that claim.
The Good News
4. The latest iterations have brought the sides reasonably close on 
the last remaining issues related to mobile ICBMs.
— The sides have devoted a lot of high-­level effort the last 2 weeks 
to whipping the MOU into shape. The October 31 deadline for exchang-
ing MOU data was a good idea, since it is forcing both sides to bite 
these bullets at last.
— Roslyakov told me September 4 that he thinks the Soviet side 
will drop its reference to the ABM treaty in the preamble.
— Roslyakov also told me September 4 that he thinks the Soviet 
side will agree to PPCM at SS–24 facilities. I did not discuss the issue 
of whether it will be first stage production or final assembly, but the 
expectation here seems to be that the sides will settle on the latter.
— We gave the Soviets our positions on new types and war-
head attribution on new types last week. These came out rather well. 
However, early indications are that the Soviets will have some prob-
lems, especially with the 50 default rule.
The Z Package
5. We have spent a lot of time here debating the “Z” package, a 
proposal for radical simplification of the MOU, as well as the inspec-
tion and notification regimes, prepared by Zaytsev and elaborated by 
Nazarkin in recent weeks. As it has evolved, it apparently is intended 
to strip out of the treaty virtually all material related to non-­deployed 
systems not subject to numerical limitations. It has been clear for a 
long time that the Soviets’ provisions on non-­deployed ALCMs were 
devised, not because they actually want to clutter the treaty up with 
such irrelevant trivia, but as bargaining material to trade in exchange 
for some of the provisions we have proposed for non-­deployed ballistic 
missiles. They are finally playing this card.
6. I understand that the ungroup recently discussed3 the Z package 
and more or less rejected it out of hand. Rick told Nazarkin last Friday4 
3 No minutes were found.
4 September 7.
