March 1952–February 1953
273
are likely to occur, not according to any set pattern, but as opportunity
or pressure permits. The changes are almost certain to be piecemeal.
These aims have been and are now developing in spite of the predomi-
nance of anti-British (not anti-foreign) policies.
The efforts of the government to conclude barter trade agreements
with the Germans, Italians, Czechs, Poles, Russians, etc., seems to con-
tradict the alleged anti-foreign feelings referred to in Section 10–c. Fur-
thermore, in direct contradiction to the conclusion in the same section,
we believe that the alleged aimlessness with respect to internal affairs
would be likely, rather than unlikely, to increase Tudeh influence sig-
nificantly. The growing frustration among urban groups in the face of a
drafting, direction-less government would almost certainly result in a
turning toward Tudeh.
In view of the comments in the preceding paragraph, we believe
that Section 10–d is inaccurate and should read “Translated into polit-
ical activity, this suggests a continuing uneasy equilibrium between na-
tionalist elements, advocating complete freedom from foreign interfer-
ence and the wider distribution of political power and the traditional
governing group (the vested interests), willing to accept some degree of
foreign interference and striving to maintain its privileged position.” It
is contrary to fact to assert that only the “traditional ruling class” recog-
nizes the need for some degree of economic and political stability.
In view of the astonishing rapidity and degree of change in urban
life in Iran during the past five years, there seems little justification for
the conclusion in Section 10–f–2 that the strength of the urban middle
class will probably not increase greatly for many years. Any policy
based upon that assumption would, in our opinion, be very hazardous.
88.
Telegram From the Embassy in Iran to the Department of
State1
Tehran, July 19, 1952, 2 p.m.
263. 1. During my talks this morning with Qavam our conversation
limited for most part to urgent need of Iran for financial aid. Never-
theless other matters were touched upon which might be of interest.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 888.10/7–1952. Secret;
Security Information; NIACT. Repeated to London. Received at 8:45 a.m.
