294
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
82.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, October 10, 1978, 4:45 p.m.
PARTICIPANTS
AMERICAN SIDE
Jimmy Carter, President
Walter Mondale, Vice President
Cyrus Vance, Secretary of State
Zbigniew Brzezinski, National Security Council Advisor to the President
Alfred L. Atherton, Ambassador at Large
ISRAELI SIDE
Moshe Dayan, Foreign Minister
Ezer Weizman, Defense Minister
SUBJECT
Middle East Peace Negotiations
The President opened the meeting by confirming with Dayan that
he was prepared to stay in Washington until a peace treaty was con-
cluded. Sadat was eager to conclude a treaty without delay. The Presi-
dent said he would be available to help if the negotiations slow down.
The President said we had prepared a draft treaty which we would
make available Wednesday to both the Egyptian and Israeli Delega-
tions. We had studied the maps carefully and had done our best in
drawing the lines.
Dayan noted that the Camp David framework speaks of full nor-
malization of relations after the interim withdrawal but does not say
this would happen immediately. Is it Sadat’s intention that normaliza-
tion should be immediate?
The President said his position was that Sadat should move to full
normalization immediately, including open borders and recognition,
including the establishment of diplomatic relations, perhaps with the
exchange of Ambassadors occurring a bit later. The President re-
sponded affirmatively to Dayan’s question of whether this meant full
normalization would occur in a matter of weeks after the interim
withdrawal.
1 Source: Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs,
NEA Front Office Subject File 1978–1984, Lot 85D251, Box 3, 1978 Memcons—President.
Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Atherton on October 11. According to the President’s Daily
Diary, the meeting took place in the Cabinet Room from 4:47 p.m. to 5:53 p.m. (Carter Li-
brary, Presidential Materials) Carter’s handwritten notes from the meeting are in the
Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel,
11/77–2/79.
