Afghanistan 811 304. Memorandum From Thomas Thornton of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, July 21, 1980 SUBJECT PRC on Pakistan (Continued) (U) I was rather bemused by Muskie’s performance at the first session of the PRC last Thursday, including his coy disclaimer at the end.2 One observer suggested that he was demonstrating his doubts about “your” policy of bolstering the rebels. He continually returned to the question of whether we were not, in effect, helping create precisely the situation we are worried about (i.e. a Soviet attack on Pakistan). (S) There is of course considerable truth in this but it is not much use for policy planning. First of all, there doesn’t seem to be much of any alternative that promises success for our policies. Also, we are not the only ones stoking the fire; the Arabs, Chinese and, of course, many Paks themselves are enthusiastically involved. Finally, the Afghans are going to carry on, and as long as they do the Soviets psychologically have to believe that foreign assistance is the reason for the insurgency no matter what the truth. (S) In the area of difficult questions, let me commend one more to your conscience. At what point does our rhetoric and covert assistance to the Afghans simply encourage them to get themselves killed uselessly? I don’t think we have reached the point yet and may not for quite a while. Perhaps never. It is something we have to keep in mind and review periodically, however, since a policy of using Afghans “to make the Soviets pay” is morally defensible only as long as it does not lead to avoidable and unnecessary bloodshed. (S) The second broad question that Muskie raised is how far do we want to go in committing ourselves to Pakistan? Would we commit military forces? Are we whistling in the dark? Do we risk misleading the Pakistanis to their great detriment? These questions make me extremely uneasy. I am not convinced that the American people and Congress have had their consciousness raised to the point where we would really 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council Institutional Files, 1977–1981, Box 80, PRC 144, 7/17/80, Pakistan. Secret; Sensitive. Sent for information. Copies were sent to Odom and Owen. In the upper right corner, Thornton wrote: “Note particularly the starred items.” A stamped note at the top of the memorandum reads: “ZB has seen.” 2 See Document 303. Reference is apparently to something Muskie said off the record.
