Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Memorandum From Zbigniew Brzezinski to Jimmy Carter1 New York, September 27, 1976 SUBJECT The forthcoming foreign policy debate and my recent trip to Europe 1. Leadership is the issue. I think it is essential that the public be given a sharper sense than was the case in the domestic debate2 as to what is the key issue. In my judgement, taking into account international expectations as well as the domestic mood, the two key and interrelated issues—which stand above the others—are: 1. Presidential leadership 2. The American leadership in the world. The first of the above requires more affirmative and explicit leadership by the President himself; the second a clearer definition of goals for the United States and the global community, a more affirmative expression of a sense of historical direction, and a greater awareness of global issues. Bearing the above in mind, I have a concrete suggestion for the debate, in order to set the tone for it: 1. If you are asked to make the opening response, use the initial part of the first three minutes for stating that whatever the question is it has to be viewed in a larger context or perspective; then go on to affirm that the major issue confronting us is the absence of effective Presidential leadership and the related absence of a clear sense of historical direction projected worldwide by America. You can then go on to use the rest of the three minutes to answer the specific question and you will have still additional two minutes as a follow-on. 1 Source: Carter Library, 1976 Presidential Campaign, Issues Office, Issues Office— Stuart Eizenstat, Box 9, Debates—Briefing Material [2]. No classification marking. Carter initialed the top right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum. Brzezinski circled the word “debate” in the subject line of the memorandum. Brzezinski attached a copy of his Columbia University business card to the memorandum and added the following handwritten comment: “Stu—I hope the enclosed is of help in order to focus the debate. ZB.” The second Presidential debate was scheduled to take place in San Francisco on October 6; for additional information, see Document 11. 2 The first Presidential debate between Ford and Carter took place in Philadelphia at the Walnut Street Theater on September 23. According to The New York Times, 90 million people watched the live televised debate, moderated by NBC News correspondent Edwin Newman, during which the candidates discussed domestic and economic policy. (R.W. Apple Jr., “Ford and Carter, in First Debate, Trade Charges on Economic Issue:
