International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1165 The Initiative Given (1) urgent population pressure and related health needs in many areas, (2) growing LDC requests for assistance; and, (3) the ability of the major population donors to mount effective and complementary population programs that respond to country-specific opportunities, IDCA and State propose an initiative to: a. extend high-quality family planning and closely related maternal and child health services as a first step toward primary health care; b. promote programs that build motivation for small families, particularly by improving opportunities for women and by giving recognition to couples that limit their family size; c. strengthen political will by clarifying the extent and seriousness of the population problem at both leadership and community levels. The initiative aims primarily at doubling family-planning practice in the developing countries by 1985, as a step toward lower birth rates. (It also aims at improving basic primary health care, particularly in maternal and child health.) It estimates roughly the expenditures on “population” needed to do this—assuming other development policies are conducive to smaller families and assuming adequate expenditures for other aspects of health. At present, total spending for population is approximately $1 billion, of which $450 million comes from international donors. Of this, the United States now provides about half. At this level of spending, we know that something like 1/5–1/4 of the couples of reproductive age use some form of contraception,2 and that birth rates in the developing countries (outside China) are roughly 35 per 1,000. To reduce birth rates to something around 25–28 per 1,000 (still far from a two-child norm) contraceptive user rates must at least double; roughly 1/2 of couples must practice family planning. This will only happen when most couples have access to safe, effective and affordable family planning services, and when they are motivated to use them. A doubling of population resources is the minimum necessary to achieve these important targets. This would imply about $2 billion in total spending (real dollars), including at least $1 billion in assistance. (Doubling resources may not quite achieve a doubling of practice, if programs hit diminishing returns. We have already reached some of the “easier” acceptors. But programs get more effective as they go along. On balance, the marginal cost per acceptor may rise, but modestly.) This initiative, which accords with the recent Declaration of the International Parliamentarians’ Conference sponsored by UNFPA and 2 These data take account of breastfeeding and abortion (often illegal and dangerous). [Footnote in the original.]
