International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1165
The Initiative
Given (1) urgent population pressure and related health needs in
many areas, (2) growing LDC requests for assistance; and, (3) the
ability of the major population donors to mount effective and comple-
mentary population programs that respond to country-specific oppor-
tunities, IDCA and State propose an initiative to:
a. extend high-quality family planning and closely related ma-
ternal and child health services as a first step toward primary health
care;
b. promote programs that build motivation for small families, par-
ticularly by improving opportunities for women and by giving recogni-
tion to couples that limit their family size;
c. strengthen political will by clarifying the extent and seriousness
of the population problem at both leadership and community levels.
The initiative aims primarily at doubling family-planning practice
in the developing countries by 1985, as a step toward lower birth rates.
(It also aims at improving basic primary health care, particularly in ma-
ternal and child health.) It estimates roughly the expenditures on “pop-
ulation” needed to do this—assuming other development policies are
conducive to smaller families and assuming adequate expenditures for
other aspects of health.
At present, total spending for population is approximately $1 bil-
lion, of which $450 million comes from international donors. Of this,
the United States now provides about half. At this level of spending, we
know that something like 1/5–1/4 of the couples of reproductive age
use some form of contraception,2 and that birth rates in the developing
countries (outside China) are roughly 35 per 1,000. To reduce birth
rates to something around 25–28 per 1,000 (still far from a two-child
norm) contraceptive user rates must at least double; roughly 1/2 of
couples must practice family planning. This will only happen when
most couples have access to safe, effective and affordable family plan-
ning services, and when they are motivated to use them. A doubling of
population resources is the minimum necessary to achieve these impor-
tant targets. This would imply about $2 billion in total spending (real
dollars), including at least $1 billion in assistance. (Doubling resources
may not quite achieve a doubling of practice, if programs hit dimin-
ishing returns. We have already reached some of the “easier” acceptors.
But programs get more effective as they go along. On balance, the mar-
ginal cost per acceptor may rise, but modestly.)
This initiative, which accords with the recent Declaration of the In-
ternational Parliamentarians’ Conference sponsored by UNFPA and
2 These data take account of breastfeeding and abortion (often illegal and dan-
gerous). [Footnote in the original.]
