186 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 4. Movement of Presidency to Munich: Gronouski explained that the prospective shift of the Presidency from Washington to Munich by upgrading the position of Executive Vice President would permit tighter policy and administrative control over radio output. This would help insure its conformity with established policy guidelines. We realized, however, that political sensitivities in the FRG might be better accommodated by a de facto shift in which the Munich position would assume broader functions while retaining the same title. The reaction of FRG officials varied. Ruhfus agreed on the need for tighter control of radio broadcasting. He believed the shift could be an effective means of accomplishing this if it were a de facto arrangement that did not give the impression of an increase in radio presence. This could be the subject of further consultation with the Embassy. Von Dohnanyi reacted somewhat negatively to the proposed shift. He agreed it had advantages from a management perspective but, more importantly, felt it ran counter to Schmidt’s desire to reduce the Radio’s presence in the FRG. The matter would have to be closely examined and his preliminary reaction was not favorable. At Von Dohnanyi’s request, Gronouski agreed to postpone BIB action on the matter until the FRG had had an opportunity to review it. Comment: As noted above, Von Dohnanyi does not have line responsibility for Radio affairs. End comment. 5. RFE/RL accreditation to Olympic Games: Meyer-Landrut asked about the status of Radio accreditation to the Moscow Games. He noted that this was a matter of public discussion here and suggested that a pooling arrangement between VOA and RFE/RL might be successful in meeting Soviet objections. Gronouski replied that this was one of many ways in which the issue might be handled. It was, in any case, important that the Radios have the right to be present in Moscow. The Olympics were an international, non-political event and RFE/RL as a serious, professional broadcasting organization must be permitted to take part in their coverage. Gronouski noted that Deutsche Welle might also have problems and that a joint position prior to the IOC meeting in Athens might be helpful to both stations. Meyer-Landrut indicated this might be worth pursuing though he made no commitment. 6. Name change: Meyer-Landrut, during an office meeting with Gronouski and again more forcefully at a social occasion, suggested that a change in the name of the Radios might be beneficial. More neutral nomenclature would sit well with Western critics and would also be helpful to the Poles who apparently jammed broadcasts only under Soviet pressure. It might also be useful to non-jamming countries such as Hungary and Romania in dealing with Moscow on this issue. Gronouski responded that some thought had been given to a name change and the matter might well be further explored. We would,
