1977  155
This is only half the story however. The Air Force will agree that 
the FB–111 would be a less effective penetrator than the B–1. Given 
the great uncertainty of the cost estimates for the still to be designed 
FB–111H, this system could easily be more expensive to deploy than 
an equally effective B–1 force. In addition, the probability that we will 
have to exercise the production option must be assessed. Thus, the 
appropriate question is: Is this probability small enough to make the 
near term savings on the option ($200–250 M in FY 78) adequate com-
pensation for the extra costs that we risk paying in the event that we 
build the FB–111H?
Arguments Against the FB–111H Proposal
A number of arguments can be made against initiation of FB–111H 
at this time.
• A decision to begin serious development of this system could be 
interpreted as essentially a reversal of your B–1 decision, since the air-
craft are similar in many ways. In terms of the primary arguments made 
against the B–1, the only major difference is a lower unit cost. This is no 
justification, however, since total cost of fulfilling the required mission 
is what counts—­not unit costs.
• The air-­launched cruise missile has been out from under the 
shadow of the B–1 program only a few months. Renewal of the compe-
tition between the standoff and manned penetrator options should be 
delayed for a while to maximize the seriousness with which the ALCM 
program is taken.
• The FB–111H option could adversely affect our long term SALT 
negotiating posture, although the near term impact of starting to 
develop a new penetrating strategic bomber may not be great. In partic-
ular, the similarity between the FB–111H and the Soviet Backfire could 
lead to negotiating difficulties.
• Finally, commitment to even a very small program now is sure to 
generate enormous pressures for full-­scale development and produc-
tion within a few years. The Air Force views the FB–111H as its last 
chance to buy a penetrating bomber—­an issue of strong emotional 
force with the Service. There are powerful congressional interests back-
ing the program and unfavorable past experience with terminating the 
F–111 and A–7 production lines attests to the difficulties involved.
RECOMMENDATION
In view of the above considerations, the B–1 option should be 
retained for the next year—­and for this period at least, any FB–111 
initiatives should be avoided. Beyond the problems the FB–111H may 
give us in SALT, and the fact that it is an inferior choice to the B–1, it 
seems premature to begin consideration of a manned bomber that is so
