shall bear its own expenses and half of the expenses of the tribunal”. So the
stipulation shall be in harmony with the tenor of the article 57 of the
Convention of 1899 (Art. 85 of the Convention of 1907),68 which article is
declared applicable by the Arbitration Convention, concluded between the
United States and The Netherlands.69 It does further seem unnecessary to
exclude the applicability of the articles 53 and 54 of the Convention of
1907. In case the High Contracting Parties might not succeed in agreeing
upon a compromise, it is not clear why a solution should not be found in the
way prescribed by the aforesaid articles.
5. To the opinion of the Royal Government the meaning of the second and
subsequent paragraphs of the Article 5 does not seem very clear. According
to the letter of these paragraphs a simple denunciation of the convention by
one party is not allowed; in case such party wishes to terminate the
convention the only way for her is to propose a modification unacceptable
for the other party. On the other side each proposed but not accepted
modification automatically does terminate the whole convention even in
case such modification may not be of such a nature that the party which
made the proposal wishes such consequence. It being obvious that this
would not be in accordance with the intentions of the United States
Government the Royal Government proposes to read these paragraphs as
follows: “If neither of the High Contracting Parties has given notice three
months before the expiration of the said period of its intention to terminate
the treaty, it shall be deemed to be renewed for a further period of a year
and so on automatically, each party being free to terminate it by giving
notice at least three months before the expiration of each period. If either of
the High Contracting Parties has given notice of its desire to terminate the
treaty it shall lapse at the end of that period”.
6. The Royal Government recommends an exchange of notes at the time of
the conclusion of this convention regarding the substitution of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration by the Permanent Court of International
Justice, in case the United States adhere to the Protocol of the latter Court.
7. The Royal Government wishes the convention to be concluded in the
English and Dutch languages.
