Chapter 6, June–December 1990  931
	
PPCM at final assembly facilities for single-­
warhead ICBMs with mobile variants (SS–25, 
Small ICBM).
	
Reciprocity in the number of PPCM sites when 
START enters into force.
	
SSI (or periodic scheduled tours) at all solid rocket 
motor plants not subject to PPCM.
Sov position:	
PPCM at 2 Soviet final assembly facilities—­for the 
SS–25 at Votkinsk and the SS–24 at Pavlograd.
	
PPCM at 2 US facilities—­for the accountable 
stages of the MX and Small ICBM or such assem-
bled missiles.
	
Limit solid fuel rocket motors for the first stages of 
the SS–24, SS–25, MX, and Small ICBM to produc-
tion, storage, assembly of stages or missiles, and 
test sites, and transit. These locations would not be 
subject to inspection.
	
Other facilities could be listed and subject to SSI 
without right of refusal.
Talking points:
 The mobile ICBM verification regime is extremely important to 
the US. Our agreement to drop our proposed ban on mobile ICBMs was 
based in large part on reaching agreement to an effective verification 
regime for these systems.
 Counting the number of deployed mobile ICBMs is an extremely 
difficult verification problem, one we will have to solve if the treaty is 
to be ratified by the Senate.
 We have concluded that the most effective means for doing so is 
to count the production of first-­stage solid rocket motors—­the first and 
most identifiable choke point in the production cycle for mobile ICBMs.
 Monitoring only mobile missile final assembly facilities does not 
provide for effective verification. As you know, final assembly facilities 
have no unique signatures and missile assembly can be done virtually 
anywhere.
 On November 6, prior to our meeting in Moscow, I sent you a 
letter which outlined a compromise proposal. That compromise incor-
porated ideas from your position and from our position.
 For single-­warhead missiles with mobile variants, PPCM would 
be established at final assembly facilities, as you propose.
 For MIRV missiles with mobile variants, PPCM would be estab-
lished at the solid rocket motor plants, as we propose.
— Since each MIRVed missile carries up to 10 warheads, it is neces-
sary to count the number of MIRV missiles with higher confidence. 
Hence the difference in the method of PPCM.
 There would be reciprocity in the number of facilities subject 
to PPCM, and that number could be very small, if production of first
