National Security Policy  661
letter are filed in the Minutes of the Meeting and are also attached to 
this Memorandum). After summarizing the views of the two Internal 
Security Committees (the IIC and the ICIS) and after reading the Council 
action proposed by the NSC Planning Board, Mr. Gray suggested that 
the Council hear from the Attorney General.
Apropos of the adverse effect on the Port Security program of deci­
sions of the lower courts, the President asked whether any thought had 
been given to taking such decisions to the U.S. Supreme Court or were 
we proposing to give up the fight in the face of the Circuit Court deci­
sion? The Attorney General replied that there was already a case, that 
of Greene v. McElroy, on this subject which would be argued before 
the Supreme Court in March and which the Attorney General hoped 
would have the effect of clarification.
The President then asked specifically why the decision in Parker 
v. Lester had not been taken to the Supreme Court. The Attorney 
General replied that this case had not been considered to be a good 
one for a test. He added that the Department of Justice also felt that we 
should give very serious consideration to what Mr. J. Edgar Hooever, as 
Chairman of the Interdepartmental Intelligence Conference (IIC), had 
said about the apparent trend toward backing away from various secu­
rity programs as a result of recent court decisions. There might indeed 
be something of a tendency to beat a retreat in the face of difficulties 
posed by the courts. While there might be some things that we could do 
in a positive way to arrest this trend, there was not much hope of signif­
icant action until the case of Greene v. McElroy was finally decided by 
the Supreme Court in March, particularly the issue of confrontation of 
witnesses by the accused.
Mr. Gray pointed out that the Acting Chairman of the IIC, Mr. Alan 
Belmont and the Chairman of the ICIS, Mr. Yeagley, were present in 
the room and might wish to say a few words. Mr. Belmont pointed out 
that the concern of the IIC had been expressed in its memorandum of 
January 26, 1959 to the Executive Secretary. He would, however, like 
to pin point the problem in order to illustrate it for the Council. Mr. 
Belmont then supplied figures to show that 357 individuals who had 
been barred, prior to the Parker v. Lester decision, from the waterfronts 
have since succeeded in obtaining their papers. The records of the FBI 
indicated that these individuals were very dangerous to the national 
security and included saboteurs whom we would feel compelled to 
“pick up” in case of war.
The President said that it did not seen reasonable to him that the 
U.S. should be so confoundedly limited by its Constitution in trying to 
keep out such undesirables as these. The Attorney General agreed with 
the President’s point but repeated that we should know better how to 
proceed after the case of Greene v. McElroy had been decided.
