252  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Attachment
Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Cheney to 
President Bush19
Washington, undated.
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
SUBJECT
U.S. Positions in START and the Defense and Space Talks (U)
(S) The fundamentals of our current approach to the START and 
Defense and Space negotiations remain sound. In START, while we 
reserve the right to make changes to improve the agreement, I do not 
believe that we are ready to alter our positions, particularly on central 
strategic limits, until we have a better sense of the overall direction of 
the negotiations and have studied possible new initiatives in detail, 
beginning with the verification of any new positions. In the Defense and 
Space Talks, and supporting your decision on SDI, I recommend that we 
reconfirm our negotiating positions as they have been tabled in Geneva.
(S) Since the initiation of START, the United States has opted for rel-
atively loose constraints on air-­breathing systems, to encourage Soviet 
movement toward these more stabilizing forces, and to allow us the air-­
launched weapons we need to cover the large and well-­defended Soviet 
target set. That approach remains sound. Therefore, we should maintain 
the 1500-­km. range limit, protect our conventional ALCMs, and continue 
with the current ALCM counting rule. Like the counting rule for heavy 
bombers, a substantial discount factor for ALCMs is essential.
(S) One basic premise of the U.S. approach to START has been that 
Soviet MIRVed ICBMs, especially the heavy SS–18s, are the most threat-
ening element of Soviet strategic forces, because their hard-­target-­kill 
capability and vulnerability to attack make them best suited for a first-­
strike. This basic premise remains correct. At the same time, we must 
recognize that MIRVing has substantial cost advantages, which have 
strongly influenced U.S. force structure decisions. In that context, we 
must vigorously protect our SLBMs from strict START constraints. The 
question remains open of further restraints on vulnerable, silo-­based 
MIRVed ICBMs, but any initiatives must take into account existing 
Soviet advantages in single-­warhead and mobile ICBMs, and must also 
avoid downloading provisions that could give the USSR a significant 
19 Secret.
