International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 497 factors that contributed to the disappointing July trade figures, preliminary analysis has not identified them. The markets remain cautious because of the uncertainty created by the statement that we expect to announce a series of continuing actions.4 But lacking positive steps in the relatively near term, we cannot be certain that the decline will not continue or accelerate. Foreign governments and private traders are stating publicly and privately to us that only forceful measures to deal with inflation and reduce the trade deficit will save the dollar from further declines, with serious consequences for the world economy and our leadership in world affairs. It also would appear that the Japanese have concluded that U.S. agreement to intervene in yen is not worth the price that we have requested—a 4 trillion yen supplemental budget and a 1% decrease in the discount rate as well as further progress on the trade issues. They have advised us that the overall magnitude of the supplemental budget would be 2½ trillion yen.5 It seems quite doubtful, therefore, that it would be advisable to proceed with any IMF drawing as a means of acquiring yen for intervention. While there have been suggestions that we announce a sizable sale of special drawing rights to the Germans for deutschemarks to hold for purposes of intervention, there is doubt that this would have a very significant or lasting impact on the market. In any event, the German monetary authorities are reluctant to have us continue to intervene in marks until we have taken more fundamental U.S. domestic measures. They are providing almost no dollar support them- (Hobart Rowen, “The Fed Raises Borrowing Rate To Bolster Dollar,” The Washington Post, August 19, 1978, p. A1; James L. Rowe, Jr., “U.S. Is Doubling Sales of Gold To Assist Dollar,” The Washington Post, August 23, 1978, p. A1; Hobart Rowen, “New Steps Designed to Aid Dollar,” The Washington Post, August 29, 1978, p. C1) 4 On August 17, after a press conference in which Carter had offered few clues as to what the administration would do to shore up the dollar’s value, Blumenthal issued a statement suggesting that “a series of continuing actions” would be undertaken “as decisions are reached over the next few weeks.” (Hobart Rowen, “Statement Follows Carter’s Press Conference,” The Washington Post, August 18, 1978, p. F1) For Carter’s remarks on the dollar at the press conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1441. 5 In his August 30 cover memorandum to Carter (see footnote 1 above), Owen commented: “Although this budget falls short of the four trillion yen that we have felt was needed to justify activation of a US-Japanese swap, it is a very substantial stimulus (about 1% of GNP). A great deal will depend on composition of this stimulus: A hard 2.5 trillion package could be worth at least as much as a soft 4 trillion package; a soft 2.5 trillion package would be a very different situation.” Owen promised that when more was known about the Japanese package he would “recommend whether a statement should be issued indicating your pleasure at Fukuda’s fulfillment of his Summit commitment, similar to the statement we issued after the recent German cabinet decision on growth.” For Owen’s subsequent recommendation to Carter, see Document 160. The White House statement on the West German decision was issued on August 3; see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Jimmy Carter, 1978, Book II, p. 1360.
