793.00/46: Telegram [Document 637] The Chargé in China (Mayer) to the Secretary of State PEKING, June 24, 1925—6 p.m. [Received 10 p.m.] 247. 1. Representative of Foreign Office has just handed me copy of the following identic note addressed to the representatives of Washington Conference powers. “With the object of further consolidating the friendly relations between China and the foreign powers, I have the honor to address you on a subject which is essential to the promotion of that happy mutual understanding and good will upon which international friendship result [rests]. During recent years there has been a steadily growing feeling shared even by many foreign statesmen that, in justice to China as well as in the interest of all the parties concerned, there should be a readjustment of China’s treaty relations with foreign powers to bring them more in line [with] the generally accepted conceptions [of] international justice and equity and more in conformity with existing conditions in China. It may be recalled that many of these treaties were not only concluded [a] long time ago but were negotiated under circumstances which hardly permitted the formulation, by full and free discussion, of the principles which should permanently regulate the normal intercourse between China and the foreign powers. But while designed in the first instance largely to meet the exigencies of a particular time these treaties have been allowed to remain in force to the present time when, the situation having been greatly changed, the further indefinite continuance of the extraordinary political and economic privileges and immunities therein conferred upon the foreigners seems to be hardly warranted by circumstances. Moreover on account of restrictions imposed by these treaties there are mutual inconveniences and disadvantages which affect matters concerning China and the foreign powers. So long as these inequalities and extraordinary privileges continue to exist there would always remain causes of disaffection which are apt to produce friction and disturb the cordial relations and good understanding between China and the foreign powers, such as for instance can be seen in the recent deplorable incident which took place in Shanghai.69
