March–August 1953
647
By conducting the nonsecret ballot provided for in Mossadeq’s de-
cree, his henchmen, supported by the security forces, will be in a posi-
tion to exert direct influence on the voters. Accordingly, there is little
doubt that such a referendum will approve the dissolution of the
present Majlis.
What may be expected thereafter? Since Mossadeq is currently op-
erating under virtual dictatorial powers voted him by the Majlis last
spring—powers which will not expire until January 1954—he is in a po-
sition to rule alone. He has, however, so far apparently been suffi-
ciently unsure of himself to desire that the Majlis share the responsi-
bility for his decisions. New elections can accordingly be anticipated.
Rigged elections are traditionally standard practice in Iran, and
normally several months are needed to conduct the actual ballot-
ing. During the last elections for Majlis seats, the Mossadeq govern-
ment used both legal and illegal means to ensure the election of its
candidates.
The present situation offers unique angles, however, and Mos-
sadeq may not be able to secure a new Majlis which will be more ame-
nable than the present one. While the Communists will support him in
the referendum, in a Majlis election it will probably put up its own can-
didates. In view of the overwhelming Tudeh demonstration in Tehran
on 21 July, some of its candidates would be successful there. In other
cities, such as Isfahan, it might also be successful. Tudeh candidates
would probably represent Communist-front groups; they might even
be disguised and run under Mossadeq’s banner. In districts where
Tudeh strength is weak, its support would be thrown directly to Mos-
sadeq in order to defeat his opposition.
The prime minister also faces considerable moderate and rightist
opposition grouped loosely around the shah and the royal court. Tribal
chiefs, army officers, the landed gentry, and religious fanatics under
the control of Mullah Kashani might, if they were united, defeat Mos-
sadeq. In the rural districts they can hardly be denied, and their candi-
dates can only be defeated through wholesale terrorism.
Under any circumstances, several months will elapse before a
Majlis can be returned to office. During this time the prime minister
must carry on alone.
The next Majlis, if and when it is ultimately assembled, gives no
promise of solving Mossadeq’s problems. He may manipulate a some-
what larger group, but will have difficulty in eliminating his conserva-
tive and rightist opposition. He will probably find a compact and deter-
mined Tudeh bloc facing him, ready to support his anti-Western
policies, prodding him on to more extremist action, and awaiting the
day when they can take over. Tudeh representation in a Mossadeq cab-
inet is not an impossibility.
