1468  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
have expressed willingness to meet this request so that it can be han­
dled by proper channels and procedures. Since I had made a remark 
that it was not necessary for governments to reach agreement on the 
handling of judicial assistance and if this is the considered opinion of 
the U.S. does this mean that the U.S. no longer seeks such judicial assist­
ance. If so, the U.S. has reversed its position.
10. I replied. I happened to have had personally considerable expe­
rience in this field while serving as consular officer at various posts. 
It is up to each country to determine for itself whether it will permit 
the taking of testimony within its territory and under what circum­
stances it will permit the taking of such testimony. Letters rogatory are 
merely one form for taking of such testimony. There are many other 
forms. It is up to the country in which the testimony is to be taken to 
determine in what form it may be taken and the courts in the coun­
try where the testimony is to be used to determine the acceptability 
of that form. The  1928 Havana Convention which he cited certainly 
has not ­supported the statement that testimony cannot be taken in the 
absence of such agreement. It merely agrees that letters rogatory will 
be the form. In the absence of agreements, it is up to each country to 
decide for itself. Mr. Wirin has been issued a passport at his request for 
the purpose of taking testimony in Wang’s country. Whether Wang’s 
government permits Wirin to do so and in what form it permits him to 
do so is entirely up to the decision of his authorities. It is not a matter in 
which the U.S. Government has responsibility.
11. Wang replied. There exist two forms of judicial assistance 
between two countries. One of the forms is to proceed in accordance 
with international practice. The other is to proceed not in accord­
ance  with international practice; one of the forms shows respect for 
the other country whereas the other form does not show such respect. 
One of the sides has requested judicial assistance from the other while 
at the same time it is not going to follow international practice in this 
regard. This cannot be considered as showing respect for another coun­
try. Suppose an official institution in China approaches a court of the 
U.S. Government. He would presume the U.S. Government would not 
agree to this procedure. His side has already made clear that they are 
ready and willing to consider the request made by the American court. 
But this matter must be handled and settled in accordance with proper 
procedures in this respect. Since I had made it clear that the U.S. will 
not consider entering into an agreement to cooperate on this matter, it 
appears that on the one hand the U.S. has made the request while on 
the other it refuses the acceptance of this request and its satisfaction. 
He much regretted the failure to reach an agreement on a matter on 
which his authorities were first approached by an American institution. 
It would appear that the U.S. Government has made up its mind not to 
resolve any issues between our two countries. He cannot but express
