716  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Mr. McElroy tentatively suggested that perhaps there should be a 
new limited war study on a different assumption, although he was not 
prepared to agree immediately to the launching of such a study. The 
Secretary of State commented that if such a study were undertaken it 
might help the Department of Defense if it showed up areas in which 
our capabilities needed improvement. Mr. Herter spoke of the need for 
mobility. The Secretary of Defense said the problem of mobility was not 
so much one of aircraft as of ground facilities at prospective landing 
points.
There was considerable discussion of the language in paragraph 
10a in NSC 5810/1 to the effect that nuclear weapons are to be regarded 
as conventional weapons from the military point of view. Mr. Smith 
pointed out that each time a situation had arisen in which the possi­
ble use of nuclear weapons had been considered the decision had been 
against using them. He thought that our weapons systems and force 
structure had been erected on a fallacy—i.e., that the use of nuclear 
weapons would be authorized in less than all-­out situations.
The Secretary of State pointed out that our existing doctrine might 
call for the automatic use of nuclear weapons in limited situations. 
(In that connection, he inquired concerning the status of the advance 
authorization for the use of nuclear weapons. Mr. Irwin said that the 
papers had recently been sent to State Department for resubmission 
to the President.) Mr. Herter hoped that the US could develop such 
forces as would make an automatic nuclear reaction unnecessary. Mr. 
McElroy expressed agreement with this position and said that para­
graph 14 of NSC 5810/1 might well have some change to clarify this 
point. The Secretary of Defense took the line that it was not so much 
the language of the basic National Security Policy that mattered; more 
important thing was that State and Defense had a common understand­
ing of what the language means.
Mr. Smith said that another central point was whether or not mas­
sive retaliation could still be relied on to deter all kinds of Communist 
aggression. He cited the present Berlin situation and possible troubles 
to come. Mr. McElroy doubted that massive retaliation had lost its 
effect. Mr. Irwin said that it was the threat of massive retaliation that 
was now restraining the USSR from turning over its responsibilities re 
Berlin to the GDR. The Secretary of State indicated a measure of agree­
ment with this assessment.
In a discussion of possible requirements for the use of force in the 
Middle East, the Secretary of Defense said that we ought to use all force 
necessary to deal with a specific situation. Mr. Smith identified this as 
the Radford doctrine and expressed dissent from it.
Mr. Irwin described in general terms Defense thinking re possible 
limited military operations in the Middle East. Mr. Smith pointed out
