Chapter 4, February–April 1990 461 previously, if we could reach agreement on a joint statement on CW at this meeting, it would be a substantial and important political signal. START The Secretary said he would like to lay out in greater detail than at the previous evening’s meeting some new U.S. ideas on START. Our two leaders in Malta had said we should try to agree on three issues at this ministerial: ALCMs, non-­deployed missiles, and telemetry encryption. The Secretary had given Shevardnadze a paper with proposed agreed common elements on ALCMs (copy of this and other U.S. papers are attached). He was prepared to discuss these proposals in detail if Shevardnadze wished. The papers3 spelled out all the details, so the Secretary would not repeat them; we looked forward to a Soviet response. For the benefit of Shevardnadze’s colleagues, the Secretary said he would repeat what he had said the previous night. The U.S. viewed this proposal as moving in the Soviet direction in each of the three major areas on ALCMs: counting rules, distinguishability and range. He hoped the Soviets would find it acceptable so that we could close out this issue as our heads of state had directed. On non-­deployed missiles, the Secretary continued, our initial position had been that there should be numerical limits on all non-­ deployed missiles. Recently, however, we had taken a hard look and now had a new proposal that took account of Soviet suggestions in Geneva. Thus, we could accept the Soviet proposal that non-­deployed missiles could be permitted near deployment areas only in agreed very small numbers, with all others confined to declared facilities some distance away. The U.S. now proposed to add numerical limits only on non-­deployed ICBMs of types that have been flight tested from mobile launchers. Specifically, we proposed that there be no more than 300 non-­deployed mobile ICBMs, and no more than 1500 warheads attributable to non-­deployed mobile ICBMs. Apart from this there would be no numerical inventory limits on other types of non-­deployed ICBMs or SLBMs. In this way we had considerably reduced the scope of our proposal to meet Soviet concerns. 3 Attached but not printed are undated U.S. papers entitled: “Additional Elements of Common Ground on ALCMs,” “Elements of Common Ground on Non-Deployed Missiles,” “Additional Elements of Common Ground on Mobile ICBM Verification,” “Elements of Common Ground on the Phasing of Reductions and Intermediate Limits,” “Elements of Common Ground on Warhead Attribution for Future Types of Ballistic Missiles,” “Elements of Common Ground on Non-Denial of Telemetry Data,” “Proposed Elements of Common Ground on Strategic R&D Boosters,” “Draft Joint Statement on Chemical Weapons,” “Proposal on Personnel,” “Agreed Common Elements on Combat Aircraft,” and “Declaration of Policy by the United States of America Concerning Nuclear-Armed Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles.”
