Comprehensive Test Ban
575
234.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
London, May 29, 1979, 1533Z
10489. Geneva for CTB Delegation. Subject: CTB: UK Ministerial
Decision on NSS.
1. (S—Entire text). Ambassador Edmonds, head of UK CTB Dele-
gation, called on DCM to convey UK ministerial decision on National
Seismic Station issue. Text of Amb Edmonds talking points follows:
Begin text:
As you know, both the Prime Minister and Lord Carrington dis-
cussed the comprehensive test ban with Mr. Vance during his visit to
London.2 Both voiced their misgivings about the requirement that the
United Kingdom should accept 10 National Seismic Stations (NSS).
Ministers have now reflected further on the question of NSS. In
doing so, they had very much in mind the need to hold the Russians to
their acceptance of 10 NSS on Soviet territory. They are also aware
of the importance of bringing the CTB negotiations to a successful
conclusion.
On the other hand, they were also much concerned about the diffi-
culty of defending a decision to spend large sums of money on a project
for which their is simply no technical justification. The Russians know
that the United Kingdom has no independent nuclear testing facility
and could not possibly establish one, either in the United Kingdom or
the dependent territories, without detection. Our technical people are
satisfied that NSS would not provide any effective addition to means
already available to the Soviet Union for monitoring United Kingdom
compliance with the treaty.
Ministers have considered the NSS issue against the background
of their commitment to severe retrenchment in public expenditure.
This will make it even more difficult to justify capital costs of 20–30
mission pounds on a project which is bound to appear nonsensical to
parliament and the public.
The government attaches high priority to increasing the resources
made available to defence, thereby improving our contribution to
NATO. The money needed for 10 NSS could be much better spent on
re-equipping our forces in Europe.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790243–0755. Se-
cret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to Geneva.
2 See footnote 2, Document 232.
