Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III (1) U.S. companies are replacing many of their American personnel with foreign personnel. (2) If American companies engaged in engineering or construction work abroad hire Americans in spite of the greater cost—because the companies are more confident of the skills and reliability of American employees—the companies risk losing contracts for overseas projects because of the higher cost of employees, and U.S. exports are lost. (3) If the companies hire nationals of other countries instead of Americans, they may gain the contracts, but the valuable follow-up exports of supplies and equipment will be lost, because foreign nationals favor more familiar foreign suppliers. (4) A number of foreign operations by American companies tend to create exports from the United States and also generate substantial earnings which help the United States balance of payments. Some U.S. companies feel they can be more successful in these beneficial foreign operations if they are able to use American employees rather than foreign employees, without having U.S. tax laws make this practice more costly for them. (5) American companies operating abroad sometimes pick up or develop valuable technology in the course of their foreign operations. If this technology is in the hands of foreign employees, it is more likely to be lost to foreign-owned companies as these employees change employers than would be the case if the technology is in the hands of American employees. (6) The detrimental effect on exports involves not only present competitiveness, but also a snowballing effect on future competitiveness as foreign companies gain strength at our expense. (7) The special deductions allowed for foreign living costs and hardship conditions under present law are insufficiently generous and too complicated. On the other hand, the cornerstone of U.S. tax policy has always been that all U.S. citizens share in the obligation to finance their government. That principle would normally govern tax policy in the absence of a countervailing national interest. It is of course difficult to quantify the effect of U.S. tax policy on exports in the aggregate. Not all Americans working abroad have an effect on exports. Many pay high foreign taxes, so have little or no U.S. tax after the foreign tax credit. And of course other factors such as increased foreign competition affect the success of U.S. exporters. Thus, taxation of U.S. employees working abroad is not solely responsible for the difficulty exporters are encountering. The U.S. tax is most likely to be significant for employees in a position to influence exports, working in places where the foreign tax is low
