966  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
independent judgment on doctrinal and tactical issues, both in domes­
tic and external affairs.
28. Thus, each party to the alliance may come to act more in terms 
of its view of its own national need and interest. In most cases, the 
respective views are likely to remain parallel, and on many occasions 
a forceful Communist Chinese policy may be favorable to Soviet aims. 
However, if there should be increasing differences over international 
tactics and policy, as over the Sino-­Indian border issue, the Soviets 
could be considerably embarrassed and their policy impeded.
29. The possibility of tactical or doctrinal differences does not mean 
that an open Sino-­Soviet rupture is in sight. The long range question 
is not so much one of outright rupture as of growing independence 
which could produce discord tending to reduce the effectiveness of the 
alliance in furthering the objectives of both the USSR and Communist 
China. There will probably be some evidences of such independence 
over the next five years, although at least for this period both parties 
will regard the maintenance of the alliance as vital.
III. THE COMMUNIST CHINESE THREAT TO ASIA
30. Under the stress of greatly accelerated domestic efforts, includ­
ing the recently reaffirmed commune program, Communist China 
clearly faces rough years indeed.8 Economic strains and the bitterness 
generated by vast social changes cannot help but produce an internal 
climate of great tension, although the regime can probably maintain 
basic order and prevent major disruptions by a combination of forceful 
measures and tactical adjustments. Economically, although rapid pop­
ulation growth will absorb much of the increase in agricultural pro­
duction industrial, growth from the present generally low level will 
probably continue at rates higher than those of the USSR or any major 
Western power, or India.
31. Communist China’s military capabilities, relative to the rest 
of Asia, will continue to grow. Over the next five years, Communist 
China will be producing an increasing portion of its need for conven­
tional military equipment, but will still be heavily dependent on the 
USSR. Within this same period the USSR may provide limited missile 
and nuclear weapons support to Communist China, retaining custody 
of the nuclear components. We have no information indicating that 
the Chinese Communists have a plutonium production facility pres­
ently in operation or under construction, although they are developing 
8 As to developments in Communist China over the next five years, this section 
relies principally on NIE 13–59, “COMMMUNIST CHINA,” dated 28 July 1959. Since the 
date of that estimate, however, events have pointed even more strongly in the direction 
of internal stress and external toughness. [Footnote is in the original.]
