Human Rights 637 C. Reassuring Nervous Governments Five-Year Goal: To demonstrate—with deeds, not just words—to all governments that our aim is not their “destabilization.” Our constant message must be that the only way to avoid further Nicaraguas or Irans is by beginning the process of liberalization when reform and compromise are still a viable alternative to revolution and radicalization . . . that the only thing more dangerous than change is refusal to change. This argument will need to be reinforced by demonstrated sensitivity to differing situations and political perceptions. Exchanges with Third World leaders on different forms of political expression can help convey the message that we are not trying to impose our form of government on others. ICJ-sponsored work with African officials on the nature of political competition in one-party states was useful in this regard. Direct USG exchanges would be better still in demonstrating our interest in understanding their perspectives. We also need to re-examine the question of which USG “sanctions”—opposition to MDB loans; curtailment of bilateral aid; denial of military sales or assistance—to continue when violations of the person have virtually ended but a regime remains fundamentally repressive. Easing sanctions just because a government is not at the moment arresting, torturing, or killing its opposition could undermine our efforts for those institutional changes which are the best longer-range guarantee of continued respect for rights of the person, as well as for political liberalization. But refusal to respond concretely to non-institutional improvements could reinforce suspicions—in the country concerned and among its neighbors—that we will be satisfied with nothing less than the downfall of individuals or regimes. That could lessen chances both for immediate human rights improvements, and for persuading governments of the sincerity—much less the wisdom—of our claim that internal stability and human rights improvements are inextricably linked. We favor the second course. D. Ensuring the Domestic Foundations of Our Human Rights Policy Five-Year Goal: Solid public and Congressional support for the human rights policy, and sophisticated understanding of its relationship to US security interests. Growing security and economic worries in this country could put the human rights policy in at least as much trouble at home as abroad. Two areas of endeavor can help with this problem. (1) Making our Case The litany of accomplishments—tens of thousands of political prisoners released in over a dozen countries; fewer “disappearances” and
