1616  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
447.	 Letter From Quarles to Herter1
Washington, March 26, 1959
Dear Mr. Secretary:
Reference is made to the 26 February meeting of principals of the 
Interdepartmental Coordinating Group on Disarmament, at which it 
was agreed that a Working Group from our staffs would proceed to 
develop a fall-­back position for guidance of the U.S. Delegation and 
for use in the event of failure to reach agreement at the current Geneva 
Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapon Tests.
It is the view of the Department of Defense that an important first 
step in developing a fall-­back position in the present situation should 
be the clarification of our basic policy on nuclear weapons test suspen­
sion. Then, within the concepts of that policy, the various possible fall-­
back positions would be explored.
As discussed at the last meeting of the principals, it was under­
stood by the Department of Defense that the following concepts were 
accepted as a basis for future U.S. policy on nuclear weapon tests in 
these circumstances:
1. As a result of the Soviet Government conducting a series of 
nuclear weapons tests 1–3 November 1958 the United States was 
released from the voluntary suspension announced by the President 
on 22 August 1958. Nevertheless, the United States should continue to 
abide by its voluntary suspension until 31 October 1959, with the pos­
sible exception of some underground tests to gain data for improving 
the proposed detection and identification system. (If the USSR should 
resume testing during this period, our policy should be reviewed in 
light of the circumstances at that time.)
2. After 31 October 1959, the U.S. should reserve the right to test as 
we deem necessary, until such time as there is an agreement to discon­
tinue specific types of tests under effective control.
3. The U.S. should take no further unilateral action to deny to our­
selves the right to test.
4. The U.S. should enter into no further arrangements whereby 
we would agree to suspend any types of tests, even though the USSR 
would do likewise, in the absence of agreement on an effective control 
system.
1 Source: U.S. position at resumed nuclear test suspension talks. Secret. 2 pp. Eisen­
hower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the Office of the Special 
Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament-­Nuclear Policy.
