North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977 825 icies. Without crucial progress in these areas where the US is already committed, the problems analyzed in this PRM 8 response will be immeasurably more difficult to manage, and new initiatives will be undermined by a continuing Southern bitterness over ‘unfulfilled pledges of good faith.’” The remainder of the Summary and Section V will give you the flavor of the analysis and argumentation which was accepted by almost the entire group. B. Issues for Resolution This section of the PRM (pp. 40–54) contains five major issues, for Presidential guidance, and five follow-up issues attached to specific major issues. I will list the issues in the order they appear, explaining briefly my view of the importance of the issue and adding comments on other divergent views which seem predictable at this time. Issue #1—The Bureaucratic Framework for Consideration of North- South Issues Earlier parts of this memo indicate why I give so much importance to this issue, and why I strongly hope that you and the President will support a continuation of the process begun by the PRM 8 Second Stage Work Group. State and CIA will be strongly supportive, both seeing this as an opportunity to overcome the singular, narrow focus brought to North-South issues by most of the Treasury line officers and State’s E Bureau. The rationale for placing this issue first is that all the remaining issues have work programs attached to them. An interagency group, along the lines of the PRM 8 Work Group, described in Issue #1 (p. 43) would have direct responsibility for tasking and overseeing all the follow-on work, reporting to the PRC, you and the President as directed on each major issue. My overriding concern is that if this bureaucratic framework is not blessed here and now, all “the action” will fall back into the hands of the line economic officers (or the EPG). That’s why this issue is placed first, and the PRM emphasizes that we are at the beginning of a process. One last word. Such a group is not “stacked” in any direction. Its make-up simply forces differing bureaucratic perspectives to join issue; the winner is the President and US foreign policy. But watch Treasury and perhaps AID and OMB; they may try to defend “bureaucratic turf”. Van Dyk, incidentally, feels that the DCC should get this job. He can’t see that aid is but one very small piece of a very large puzzle. He may make a pitch for the DCC taking over the job at the PRC meeting. Issue #2—US Strategy and Policies Toward the “Upper-Tier” of Developing Countries This issue was given great emphasis by Treasury and the E Bureau of State: their reasons are very briefly summarized in both Sections IV
