Chapter 7, January–May 1991  1015
Data Denial. The Soviets would meet us half way on these issues. 
They would agree to lock in current telemetry practices to ensure we 
could receive their telemetry, and give us interpretative information 
on their telemetry to ensure that we will be able to read their telemetry 
once encryption is ceased. We would defer exchanging telemetry tapes 
until either new telemetry practices are adopted or after three years if 
the sides fail to agree on rules to regulate future telemetry transmission 
practices. We would also agree to a smaller number of exemptions to 
permit encrypted SDIO tests. This is another case where the details are 
important. It could meet our arms control objectives and Intelligence 
Community concerns, but the SDI exemptions issue would be a hard 
sell to the Pentagon.
Stage Dimensions. The Soviets would agree to permit verification of 
the dimensions of first stages and entire missiles within the first three 
years. Although this appears to satisfy our objectives, the devil is in the 
details. For example, we do not know what confidence we would have 
that the missile we measured has the same dimensions as the deployed 
type. Would the Soviets allow us to measure a live missile, an inert mis-
sile, a training missile or some other type of mock-­up? Our preference 
would be to remove a deployed missile from its canister for measure-
ment, but the Soviets have rejected that out of hand because, they say, 
the missile would be damaged and have to be discarded.
Philip Zelikow, John Gordon and Art Kuehn concur.
205.	 Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear 
and Space Talks (Burt) to Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, March 5, 1991
SUBJECT
Completing START
Lint Brooks and I met with Brent this afternoon to discuss my ideas 
for finishing START. I had discussed the meeting beforehand with Arnie 
1 Source: Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary for Arms Control, 
International Security Affairs, Lot 01D127, 1969–1990 Subject Record of James P. Timbie, 
Moscow Ministerial (US/Soviet) March 1991. Secret. Sent through Bartholomew, who did 
not initial the memorandum.
