completion of the 10,000-ton cruisers now building or projected by them.
Further they would not have any considerable number of vessels which
would pass into the second group thus making room for new construction.
The vessels which the Japanese would be able to place in the second group
are generally of low combatant value and it is judged from their previous
propositions that they feel they would be as satisfactorily situated without
these vessels as with them. The Japanese have apparently acquiesced in this
proposal in an endeavor to facilitate solution of the British problem. The
only features of this plan which might make it deserving of consideration
with a view to modification to meet our situation are that it tends to restrict
new construction on the part of the nations and brings the tonnage of
cruisers in first group within figures Japanese are apparently prepared to
discuss.
An unsatisfactory feature of this proposal as presented is that the cruisers
we have available for placing in the second group are of low combatant
value and it will be impossible for us to derive any considerable benefit as
far as cruisers are concerned from the additional [125,000 tons] during the
life of the treaty as compared with Great Britain unless some satisfactory
modification can be found. The Japanese, like ourselves, secure no
substantial benefit from second group but they seem more interested in
restricting first group to approximately 300,000 so as to make further new
construction unnecessary.
In unofficial conversations, members of the Japanese technical advisory
group have stated that they do not favor the plan for themselves and further
that they recognize the plan as being obviously unfair to the United States
in its present form. Ishii and Saito on the other hand seem favorably
disposed to the plan but probably would not oppose modifications which
would make it more equitable for us if such modifications did not force
them to demand changes for themselves which would require new
construction.
We are giving careful attention to this scheme and to modifications
necessary to make it even a possible basis for discussion as we object to its
camouflage features. We are working on modifications which will fully
guard our interests and limit tonnage in a straightforward manner.
