To advance the time when the Indians may become self-sustaining, it is my
belief that the Federal Government should continue to improve the facilities
for their care, and as rapidly as possible turn its responsibility over to the
States.
COAL
Legislation authorizing a system of fuel administration and the appointment
by the President of a Board of Mediation and Conciliation in case of actual
or threatened interruption of production is needed. The miners themselves
are now seeking information and action from the Government, which could
readily be secured through such a board. It is believed that a thorough
investigation and reconsideration of this proposed policy by the Congress
will demonstrate that this recommendation is sound and should be adopted.
PETROLEUM CONSERVATION
The National Government is undertaking to join in the formation of a
cooperative committee of lawyers, engineers, and public officers, to
consider what legislation by the States or by the Congress can be adopted
for the preservation and conservation of our supply of petroleum. This has
come to be one of the main dependencies for transportation and power so
necessary to our agricultural and industrial life. It is expected the report of
this committee will be available for later congressional action. Meantime,
the requirement that the Secretary of the Interior should make certain leases
of land belonging to the Osage Indians, in accordance with the act of March
3, 1921, should be repealed. The authority to lease should be discretionary,
in order that the property of the Indians may not be wasted and the public
suffer a future lack of supply.
ALIEN PROPERTY
Under treaty the property held by the Alien Property Custodian was to be
retained until suitable provision had been made for the satisfaction of
American claims. While still protecting the American claimants, in order to
afford every possible accommodation to the nationals of the countries
whose property was held, the Congress has made liberal provision for the
return of a large part of the property. All trusts under $10,000 were returned
