3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1978
287
considered by the US side with due attention, impartially and without
attempts to link it with other questions.
A few words concerning other issues of disarmament which are
the subject of negotiations between our countries. In addition to the
agreement on strategic armaments which is under preparation, the
achievement of practical results at these negotiations would in itself
mean a step forward towards restraining the arms race. This has been
recognized more than once also by the US side. The more unjustified
are its attempts lately to link in some way or other the solution of these
questions with the development of the situation in various parts of the
world. Artificial linkage of such kind has never brought about anything
good in the past, nor will it be of any benefit now. There may be only
one result—complication, delay in negotiations. But is this what our
countries should strive for?
No less puzzling is the attempt to represent the Soviet Union as al-
legedly trying to get some advantages from the conflict in the Horn of
Africa, and even to speak of a possibility of negative consequences for
Soviet-US relations. We have already on more than one occasion
brought to your personal attention, Mr. President, as well as to the at-
tention of the US Secretary of State, that our policy in the questions re-
lated to the Somali-Ethiopian conflict pursues the sole purpose of re-
storing justice and peace in that region. It is precisely for that reason
only that we are helping Ethiopia as a victim of aggression on the part
of Somalia. If Somalia withdraws its troops from Ethiopia—and the
sooner outside support of Somali aggressive actions is discontinued the
earlier such withdrawal would occur—then the cause of the conflict
would cease to exist.
A settlement in the Middle East undoubtedly remains an impor-
tant question urgently requiring mutual efforts of our countries. In
your letter you would seem to reproach us for the fact that actions of
the USSR and the US go in different directions. And this is said despite
the fact that it is the United States and not the Soviet Union that has de-
parted from the Statement jointly adopted on October 1, 1977,4 has em-
barked upon the path of encouraging separate negotiations between
Egypt and Israel. Can this be regarded as an objective approach to the
issue? Of course, not.
Whatever is said in an attempt to justify those separate actions it is
perfectly obvious that the present course of events seriously compli-
cates the achievement of a genuine peace in the Middle East. Even if the
negotiations of Egypt with Israel deal not only with working out a sep-
arate agreement on Sinai but also with some general “principles of a
4 See footnote 2, Document 52.
