Chapter 5, May–June 1990  765
Karpov: What are your arguments? Bartholomew: The point is 
made later quite clearly. Dropping this phrase here makes the basic 
objectives stand out more. Our objective is not just reductions but other 
measures.
Karpov: The question of objectives for future negotiations is 
expressed here in very generalized form. We prefer to say how those 
objectives could be achieved. This could be achieved through further 
stabilizing reductions.
Bartholomew: We are making a problem here. That is why I began 
with our proposal on the first section.
Karpov: There the question is the phasing on defense and space 
and START. In para 1 I agree to delete “related issues.”
Bartholomew: We want “without delay.” When I tell my wife I 
“will continue” the discussion, the precise meaning is unclear. We sim-
ply want to make clear what will happen.
Karpov: I have made a second major concession.
Bartholomew: Then we can trade the other two. This paragraph 
begins with “within.” Karpov: OK
Karpov: Our proposal for the heavy missile section identifies heavy 
ICBMs and mobile ICBMs, without prejudging what will be agreed. 
The indented para also relates to strategic stability.
Bartholomew: We do not speak of the results of future negotiations, 
we speak of the direction of future negotiations. We carefully wrote “on 
working to.” Moreover, in the alternative you propose, of course stra-
tegic delivery vehicles include heavy and mobile ICBMs. This does not 
give us anything on singling out heavy ICBMs, which we thought your 
president said we could do.
Karpov: Our president did not agree to eliminate heavy ICBMs.
Bartholomew: Your phrase seems to predict the outcome—­simple 
downloading of the number of warheads on SS–18s.
Karpov: Let’s not prejudge anything, and delete any reference to 
heavy ICBMs and mobile ICBMs.
Bartholomew: To solve this, let us add the “in particular” paragraph.
Karpov: Your theory is at variance with everything we have done. 
I cannot agree to ban mobility as such.
Bartholomew: We are not banning mobile ICBMs as such, just 
MIRVed mobile ICBMs.
Karpov: We are prepared to discuss those issues, and listen to your 
proposals, and you would listen to ours, for enhancing stability. I sug-
gest we use the Soviet language, and make the phrase at the end “single 
warhead mobile ICBMs.”
