3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–June 1978 393 The Secretary said he would agree that there was a need to develop better understanding and more extensive discussion of matters where there were differences, to discuss them in detail and seriously face the issues. Sometimes the sides had different perceptions of things where further discussions could clarify the reasons for the difference in perceptions and perhaps eliminate them if they understood how things appeared to the other side. He suggested that both of them give thought to finding better ways to manage the relations between our two countries and to deal with differences. Perhaps more frequent meetings between the two of them would be helpful in this respect, perhaps meetings at other levels as well. He believed it very important that something be done to change the confrontational nature of the relationship between us. Gromyko acknowledged that this was indeed very important. The Secretary now wanted to digress and respond to Gromyko’s remarks about Cuban matters and the information we had received regarding Cuban participation in Zaire. The intelligence we had received clearly indicated that the Cubans had indeed been involved in training the personnel and planning the military operation for the invasion of Zaire. [3 lines not declassified] Gromyko with some feeling said that here was where the Secretary and the President had become victims of disinformation. If the Soviets were not sure of what they were telling the United States in this connection, they would not have said so, because in so doing they were assuming a grave responsibility. Gromyko would not repeat what he had said. [1½ lines not declassified] When information came to us based on good evidence, we had no choice but to take it into account. Gromyko asked: “Who the devil knows anything about that general? This is the first time I have heard of him.” The United States now had different information at its disposal and would have to sort out bad sources from good. Gromyko felt strongly that untruth had been presented as truth and had been placed on the Secretary’s desk and on the President’s desk. What hell did this general come from? Or, did he just drop down from heaven like Jesus Christ in the Bible? The Secretary would know very well that not everything should be believed and that the human brain and human reason were quite capable of analyzing information and separating truth from untruth. In any case, he had told the Secretary the truth, in spite of frivolous statements made by certain highly placed officials of the United States who had referred to truth as untruth. What he had in mind in saying this was what had been reported in the U.S. press—statements by high officials made with virginal frivolity. Serious policy could not be built on the kind of information the Secretary was being fed.
