3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 199 September 12;3 he thought it usefully clarified our position on the Palestinian problem, and called attention to Arafat’s favorable reaction. 3. SALT. In commenting on the possibility of a sublimit on MIRVd ICBMs, Dobrynin observed that this would be likely to evoke an immediate and unfavorable reaction in Moscow, as a step backward from our May position. The equity of this sublimit was discussed, against the background of the number of Soviet missiles at Pervomaisk and Derezhnaya. Dobrynin repeated his understanding of the importance of getting a response from Moscow to the illustrative principles discussed at the meeting on September 10.4 4. ABM Treaty Reaffirmation. In response to Dobrynin’s request to Shulman on September 125 for clarification of the time intended for the SCC review and the nature of the clarifications and modifications mentioned in our previous draft, Dobrynin was given a statement indicating that the review was intended to follow immediately after the November meeting, and that the clarifications and modifications were minor. Dobrynin made it clear that references to clarifications and modifications might raise questions in the public minds over the extent of the changes proposed. The statement was thereupon redrafted. The present text is attached as Tab A.6 5. Moscow Embassy Roof Materials. The Secretary made strong representations to Dobrynin requesting that the lumber required for the repair of the roof of the US Embassy in Moscow be granted prompt clearance by Soviet Customs. Dobrynin said he had no knowledge of the problem, but promised to seek expeditious handling of the matter. He added, however, that our Embassy was using the occasion of the fire to seek action on many unrelated requests. 6. Gromyko Visit. a. The Secretary indicated that Gromyko’s meeting with the President would be at 10:30 a.m. on September 23. It was agreed that Gromyko and the Secretary might meet together earlier that morning. Dobrynin suggested that Gromyko might wish to mention the Middle East in his talk with the President, and it was therefore agreed that a 3 The New York Times reported: “The State Department said today in a new policy statement on the Middle East that ‘the Palestinians must be involved in the peacemaking process’ to insure a successful settlement. Palestinian representatives ‘will have to be at Geneva for the Palestinian questions to be solved.’” (Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Asserts Need for Palestinian Role at Geneva Meeting,” September 13, 1977, p. 1) 4 See Document 47. 5 The September 12 memorandum of conversation between Shulman and Dobrynin is in the Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Special Adviser to the Secretary (S/MS) on Soviet Affairs Marshall Shulman—Jan 21, 77–Jan 19, 81, Lot 81D109, Box 3, MDS–Dobrynin, 9/12/77. 6 Attached but not printed is the “Revised (9/13/77) Draft Joint Statement.”
