348  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
As you have seen, the trial of Rojas before the Senate has ended 
with his conviction on two charges, violation of the Constitution and 
conduct unbecoming a president. After the Senate has sentenced him 
he will presumably be tried before the Supreme Court on criminal 
charges. The most the Senate can do is deprive him of political rights 
and pension.2 If convicted on criminal charges the Supreme Court can 
theoretically jail him or exile him.
The inglorious showing made by Rojas at his trial and the pub-
lic apathy with the proceedings have already gone far toward remov-
ing him as a serious threat to the stability of the National Union 
Government, whose enemies hoped the trial would discredit it beyond 
redemption. A more serious issue remains to be resolved, the matter of 
“alternation” of the presidency, coupled with increasing opposition to 
Lleras amongst leftist Liberals.
At the time of the plebiscite in December 1957, to amend the 
Constitution to provide for parity between the two parties in the 
Government, the joint candidate was Guillermo León Valencia, a 
Conservative. It was subsequently demonstrated that Valencia did not 
enjoy the support of a majority of his party, and as a result Lleras, the 
liberal, became the candidate by agreement between the Liberal and 
Conservative directorates, and Valencia voluntarily withdrew. This 
necessitated the introduction of a new legislative act to succeed the 
legislation already in force, so as to provide for alternation of the pres-
idency, beginning with a Liberal instead of a Conservative. It was also 
agreed between the two party directorates that the act would provide 
that the alternation provision should run for 16 years, instead of 12, as 
originally approved by the plebiscite.
The new Act provides the following:
(1) The Presidency shall alternate between the two parties from 
1958 to 1974, a Liberal followed by a Conservative in 1962–1966, then a 
Liberal again, and finally a Conservative from 1970 to 1974.
(2) The person who shall replace the President in office (the desig-
nado or other official as provided by the Constitution) shall be of the 
same party as the President.
(3) Parity in legislative bodies as provided in Article 2 of the 
Constitutional Reform of December 1, 1957 plebiscite shall be extended 
to 1974.
According to the Constitution, an Amendment must be passed in 
two consecutive sessions of Congress and be published in the Diario 
2 Telegram 499 from Bogotá, April 2, 1959, reported in part the following: “Following 
March 17 Senate verdict finding ex-President Rojas Pinilla guilty, Senate last night 
declared Rojas ‘unworthy’ and sentenced him to permanent loss political rights, pension 
and right to serve in armed forces.” (721.00/4–259)
