International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
163
Attachment
Paper11
Washington, undated
MTN Timetable
On July 11 the United States and the European Community
reached agreement on a four-phase timetable to be completed by Jan-
uary 15, 1978. The work done within this timetable will establish the
framework for the final stage of the multilateral trade negotiations
(MTN) next year. The four phases of the timetable (with target comple-
tion dates in parentheses), what each phase entails, and a brief descrip-
tion of the current status of negotiations on the subjects covered by the
timetable are given below.
I. Agreement on a Tariff Plan (October 1)
—Elements to be included in the tariff plan include a tariff-cutting
formula, language concerning the treatment of agriculture, procedures
for tariff negotiations with non-formula countries, and an agreed basis
for special and differential treatment of developing countries.
—Currently, there are four formula proposals on the table. The EC
proposal provides for an average tariff cut of around 38 percent before
exceptions and for a large element of tariff harmonization. The U.S.
proposal provides for an average tariff cut of almost 60 percent before
exceptions. In the US–EC bilateral discussions on July 11, and subse-
quently, the EC has backed away from its earlier proposal and is now
proposing a less ambitious tariff cut of around 20 to 25 percent but with
no exceptions.
—It is anticipated that the United States, the European Commu-
nity, Japan, Canada, the Nordic countries, Switzerland, and Austria
will apply the tariff-cutting formula.
—The United States has proposed a cross-notification procedure
with developing countries, whereby the developing countries would
notify the developed countries of those products on which they desire
tariff cuts and the developed countries would notify the developing
countries of those products on which the developing countries might
make some tariff concessions.
11 No classification marking.
