protection against the danger of probable aggression, then it would appear that substantial progress might be made toward the desired end. If, however, the term security be interpreted to mean absolute protection against any or all possible aggression from any country, then it appears that in this day and generation there is no answer to the question and discussion of the same might well be closed.

Assuming, however, that the first interpretation above given be accepted, then it would appear that security may have a very determining effect upon the extent to which any country will agree to limit its armament and further that such limitation will probably be in direct ratio to the degree of security which that country considers to be assured. Regional security should lead to regional limitation of armament but complete regional security probably will not result in the regional limitation of armament to the extent required solely for the maintenance of internal law and order, as long as a possible threat exists of aggression from one or more states outside of the region in which mutual regional security has been provided for. It appears, however, that the most practicable approach to the limitation or reduction of armaments is through the development of regional security pacts where such are necessary. Such pacts, to be absolutely effective, should include all powers within a given region. It is further believed that regional disarmament is a logical and practicable forerunner of general disarmament. Mutual confidence in the good faith of countries of a given region may render the conclusion of specific security pacts an unnecessary preliminary to the limitation or reduction of armaments. A striking case in point is that of the relations between the United States and Canada, which resulted from the Convention of 181791 by which the naval forces permitted the signatories on the Great Lakes, were specifically limited without any provision for security. The convention for the limitation of armaments concluded by the Central American republics on November 20, 1924,92 is a further illustration of the possibility of the existence and successful operation of a disarmament pact without prior specific agreements for security.
