1162 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II (c) Special Consultations: We are hosting today (Tuesday) a meeting of Summit country representatives to discuss G–2000 in relation to similar studies and perspectives of the other nations. This follows up on a decision at the Venice Summit to keep these issues “under review”. Bob Hormats (USTR) and I will co-chair the session. Henry Owen and Gus Speth will be the other U.S. participants. You will be receiving a separate report on this event.7 Our plan is to work toward consensus on priority problems and the development of recommendations for cooperative action to be submitted to the Ottawa Summit next year. As a general matter, it is our intention to take advantage of each appropriate opportunity to focus attention on Global 2000 issues. In particular, we are now undertaking to arrange a series of meetings specifically devoted to G–2000 as proposed in response to your personal letter to our Ambassadors requesting their views on how to build on the Report.8 These include briefings in Geneva for representatives of the UN specialized agencies, a meeting of representatives of Latin American countries in Panama, and a bilateral discussion with Mexican officials. (d) Congressional Relations: We and CEQ have briefed an array of Congressmen and major committee staffs associated with foreign affairs and population/environment/resources matters, and have received uniformly strong expressions of interest and support. I also testified on September 4th before the Subcommittee on International Economics of the Joint Economic Committee.9 Discussions are now centering on possible additional joint Congressional hearings and a major symposium under Office of Technology Assessment auspices. (e) Public Affairs: Media interest remains high. In consultation with State/PA, ICA and CEQ, an integrated series of activities, publications, films, etc., is being planned to promote greater understanding and discussion of the Report and its implications (Tab 3)10 for both domestic and foreign audiences. (f) State Department Capabilities: FSI is engaged in modifying instructional materials and courses to include a focus on G–2000 issues in the Department’s training and educational programs (Tab 4).11 Under 7 Not found and not further identified. 8 See attachment, Document 344. 9 During the course of his testimony, Pickering noted that Muskie had sent a personal letter to all Ambassadors underscoring the importance of the Global 2000 Report. He also indicated that the report had received extensive press coverage, much of it “uniformly complimentary.” (Richard L. Strout, “Congress hears more-optimistic view of
