884 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI One way to resolve this is to draw a clear distinction between testing and deployment. The draft elements of common ground only limit deployment.54 — We can agree to prohibit using START missiles to deploy in orbit ABM interceptor missiles or components capable of substituting for ABM interceptor missiles. — In Washington your representatives told us you sought limits on deployment but not testing. Our proposal, which precludes use of these missiles for military deployment should address your concerns.55 — We cannot agree to limit using START missiles for other purposes, such as research, development, and testing, and the language we propose does not do that. Limits on testing would relink START to ABM and are contrary to what we agreed in Wyoming and I have no flexibility.56 Our proposed language would not prejudice your position on the ABM Treaty, nor would it prejudice ours. If we can’t agree on this approach, the best solution would be simply to drop all restrictions on use of START missiles. That would be consistent with our Wyoming agreement and would not prejudice either side’s position on ABM. — After all, treaty constraints already exist, including a ban on placing mass destruction weapons in orbit.57 [Omitted here is are points related to the CFE Treaty.] Tab 2 Paper Prepared in the Department of State58 Washington, undated Agreed Statement The Parties agree that, with regard to paragraph 5 of Article II of the Treaty, the requirement that the strategic offensive arms of each Party shall be based only within its national territory refers to permanent basing involving the establishment of facilities equipped to support 54 Baker underlined “testing,” “deployment,” and “deployment.” 55 Baker underlined “deployment” and “but not testing.” 56 Baker underlined “research,” “development,” “testing,” and “Limits on testing would relink START to ABM and are contrary to what we agreed in Wyoming and I have no flexibility.” 57 Baker underlined “a ban on placing mass destruction weapons in orbit.” 58 Secret.
