918 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV force structure growth. General Jones replied that in his view the analysis underestimated the resources needed to correct C3 deficiencies and readiness shortfalls. (C) Harold Brown and Jim McIntyre both noted that difficulties in increasing U.S. military manpower will eventually constrain force structure increases. Russ Murray indicated that the analysis recognized this difficulty and chose programs which minimized the need for additional military manpower. Much of the increase in armored division equivalents, for example, was obtained through modernization rather than increases in numbers of divisions per se. Brown and McIntyre expressed skepticism as to whether further increases in pay could attract commensurate increases in recruits. (U) In Brown’s opinion the key issue raised by the paper is the role of the other free world countries—­what can we expect they will do, how should we proceed to encourage them to do more, and what should we do if they fail to respond as we would want them to. [5 lines not declassified] (S) Jim McIntyre thought the FRG was more apt to react in a way best calculated to protect its East European trade. [7 lines not declassified] (S) Muskie then asked what we were to do if the Allies in fact do not make an increased contribution. Brown replied that was indeed the crucial question and that in his judgement [11 lines not declassified] (S) [1 paragraph (5 lines) not declassified] (Secretary Muskie left at this point.) [1 paragraph (9 lines) not declassified] [1 paragraph (7 lines) not declassified] [1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified] Brown then turned to the Nuclear Land Attack Tomahawk program. There is concern that moving to procurement in this program in FY–82 could complicate implementation of NATO’s LRTNF program. Brown proposed that by retaining $3–4 million in RDT&E we could protect a FY–84 IOC and minimize any potential difficulty. This was agreed by all. (S) Brown raised the question of the proper level of military construction in Southwest Asia for FY–82. Bartholomew voiced concern that the currently proposed levels are systematically below those that we have previously announced to Oman, Somalia, Kenya, and to the United Kingdom for Diego Garcia. Brown replied that the levels proposed were chosen in light of a judgment that the Congress would only finance a limited amount of military construction in Southwest Asia and the reductions from previous goals elsewhere were needed to fund the Ras Banas construction in Egypt. Bartholomew, in response to a question from Brown, expressed confidence that we could have an
