1957 1381 in mental institution. Until recently Tseng had been subject to depor­ tation although he had not violated any laws. It is hard to understand under what authority so many have been detained, and, in the cases of Mr. Tseng and Mr. Liu, imprisoned in mental hospitals. Repetition of this kind of treatment shows US authorities pay no heed to our Agreed Announcement. This situation increases our anxiety concerning the fate of the 50 and the 32 people who not yet returned. Wang urged me impress on US authorities that they should stop violating Agreed Announcement and give accounting of those being detained. With regard to detention of Dr. Lin which he had mentioned last meeting he would like to hear any comments I had and would like to know whether US prepared to return property to owner. 6. I replied during past two years we had long and frank discus­ sions of certain questions existing between our two countries. Although our differences unhappily remain deep and fundamental I believed he would share my view that it had nevertheless been desirable and useful to have such a direct exchange of views between us. We had though, at times, tended to digress from what both of us agreed was a fundamental matter, and I first wanted briefly to return to that this morning. I referred to the question as to whether we were going to permit the clash of our policies and in particular our differences with respect to the Taiwan area to lead to a clash of arms. He would recall that at the very beginning of our discussion of this subject I had proposed the simple first step of a reciprocal renunciation of force couched in terms that would make it clear that neither of us were renouncing any policy objectives that we considered ourselves legitimately entitled to achieve. 7. I continued, Wang had this morning again spoken of what he called the policy of aggression and hostility of U.S. government against his country. He could not ignore fact that from beginning these talks it was U.S. which had made proposal we renounce force as means achieve national policy objectives and especially with regard clash our policies in general and specifically with regard Taiwan area. From very beginning of the time when his authorities took control of Mainland China they exhibited policy of undisguised hostility toward my coun­ try and everything for which my country stood. This hostility not only extended to my country but also to countries with which my country stood in relationship of friendship and alliance. It was authorities of his country who had grossly mistreated U.S. officials and made impossi­ ble the maintenance of U.S. official establishments on territory under the control of Wang’s authorities. It was the authorities of his country who expelled, mistreated and imprisoned Americans who attempted remain in territory under control Wang’s authorities. U.S. never had threatened, and never would initiate the use of arms against Wang’s country. It was Wang’s country which had attacked U.S. forces in Korea
