March 27–December 31, 1979
1039
the fact that we are compelled to expend some thirty percent of our
GNP on defence. This year our problem has increased substantially.
In your letter to me you were kind enough to make reference to the
significance of the transfer of the Alma oilfields to Egypt which is, in-
deed, one of the greatest sacrifices we have made in the cause of peace.
With this, we must buy every drop of oil from abroad at rising prices,
having now to expend an annual outlay of hundreds of millions of
extra dollars for the supplies from the Suez gulf. Simultaneously, we
have been compelled to undertake stringent measures to curb a very
high rate of domestic inflation. In so doing we have abolished subsidies
of the most basic commodities and have sharply reduced public ex-
penditure across the board. These measures, in their totality, naturally
create additional burdens in the daily life of our people.
It is in this context that the Government of Israel submitted its re-
quest for additional aid from the United States. Given the objective
facts, which I have described only in part, our submission for increased
aid is most urgent and objectively unavoidable.
I therefore respectfully ask of you, Mr. President, to give your per-
sonal attention and support to this request, the fulfillment of which will
help Israel through an exceptional period of economic strain arising,
inter-alia, from the sacrifices we have made—and which we do not re-
gret—for the sake of peace.
May I thank you in advance for addressing yourself to this, my ap-
peal, on a matter so crucial and urgent. I venture the belief, Mr. Presi-
dent, that you will give it your sympathetic and positive consideration
based upon your deep understanding of our problem and your friend-
ship for Israel.
I cannot conclude this letter without reiterating the sentiment I ex-
pressed to you in my previous message of our profound feelings of
identity, support and admiration for your steadfast courage and lead-
ership in this time of trial as you work unsparingly for the speedy and
safe return home of the American hostages in Iran.
Yours respectfully and sincerely,
Menachem Begin”
Sincerely yours,
Ephraim Evron
Ambassador
