3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 796 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 274. Special Analytical Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 Washington, undated USSR Suppression of Dissidents by [name not declassified] CIA As relations between the US and USSR have become more strained, Moscow has intensified its campaign against the Soviet dissident movement. The authorities have detained more than 40 dissidents since the crackdown began in October 1979, concentrating particularly on human rights activists such as members of the Helsinki Act Monitoring Group. The activists have been subjected to continual harassment, including repeated house searches and close surveillance. [handling restriction not declassified] The greatest blow to the dissidents was the exile in January of Andrey Sakharov to Gorkiy, which removed the human rights movement’s most prominent spokesman. He is now isolated from contact with all but family members. [handling restriction not declassified] In the past, Sakharov’s remarks automatically commanded the attention of Western correspondents in Moscow and shaped world opinion against Soviet tactics toward dissent. Without Sakharov, the members of the Moscow Helsinki group believe that they are being ignored by Western media at a time when the group is being decimated by arrests. [handling restriction not declassified] There was little publicity in the West when Malva Landa, one of the most prominent members of the Moscow group, recently was sentenced to three years of internal exile for “slandering the Soviet state.” Trials of several other human rights activists in custody should follow shortly. [handling restriction not declassified] The Soviets had been expected to remove likely troublemakers before the Olympics, but the severity of this latest campaign appears aimed at paralyzing all forms of dissent. Following Sakharov’s exile, a number of dissident activists reportedly were warned by Soviet officials that the action taken against Sakharov demonstrated that the authorities are prepared to take measures against any member of the dissident movement. Some reportedly were told that the authorities expect to “finish off” the movement within a couple of months. [handling restriction not declassified] 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and East/West, Brement Subject File, Box 59, USSR: Dissidents/Defectors: 6/79–11/80. [classification and handling restriction not declassified]
