3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
796
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
274.
Special Analytical Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
Washington, undated
USSR
Suppression of Dissidents
by [name not declassified] CIA
As relations between the US and USSR have become more strained,
Moscow has intensified its campaign against the Soviet dissident movement.
The authorities have detained more than 40 dissidents since the crackdown
began in October 1979, concentrating particularly on human rights activists
such as members of the Helsinki Act Monitoring Group. The activists have
been subjected to continual harassment, including repeated house searches and
close surveillance. [handling restriction not declassified]
The greatest blow to the dissidents was the exile in January of An-
drey Sakharov to Gorkiy, which removed the human rights move-
ment’s most prominent spokesman. He is now isolated from contact
with all but family members. [handling restriction not declassified]
In the past, Sakharov’s remarks automatically commanded the at-
tention of Western correspondents in Moscow and shaped world
opinion against Soviet tactics toward dissent. Without Sakharov, the
members of the Moscow Helsinki group believe that they are being ig-
nored by Western media at a time when the group is being decimated
by arrests. [handling restriction not declassified]
There was little publicity in the West when Malva Landa, one of
the most prominent members of the Moscow group, recently was sen-
tenced to three years of internal exile for “slandering the Soviet state.”
Trials of several other human rights activists in custody should follow
shortly. [handling restriction not declassified]
The Soviets had been expected to remove likely troublemakers be-
fore the Olympics, but the severity of this latest campaign appears
aimed at paralyzing all forms of dissent. Following Sakharov’s exile, a
number of dissident activists reportedly were warned by Soviet offi-
cials that the action taken against Sakharov demonstrated that the au-
thorities are prepared to take measures against any member of the dis-
sident movement. Some reportedly were told that the authorities
expect to “finish off” the movement within a couple of months. [han-
dling restriction not declassified]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR,
and East/West, Brement Subject File, Box 59, USSR: Dissidents/Defectors: 6/79–11/80.
[classification and handling restriction not declassified]
