1608 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement be 10 ev. Such a high temperature may remove solid material from the cavity surface which would come off with appreciable momentum and thus might give a recoil to the wall, which would increase the seismic wave. Estimates indicate that this ablation of the wall is prob­ ably not important. If it should turn out to be appreciable, it could be minimized by providing thin foils inside the cavity to absorb some of the heat. c. Plastic deformation. It is important that the wall suffer no appre­ ciable plastic deformation. The elastic behavior of rock is not known to us sufficiently to assess the limitation which this puts on the pressure in the cavity. Experiments would be important. d. Cracks in rock. If the rock wall has cracks that are likely to open on application of internal pressure, this would eliminate the hoop stresses around the cavity and would permit very much larger expansion of the cavity radius. This would increase the signal transmitted to a distance in proportion to the expansion. We are entirely ignorant on the occur­ rence of cracks in rock, and here again only experiment can determine the limitations from this cause. We believe that it should be permissible in any case to apply a pressure equal to the lithostatic ambient pressure which is about 1 atmosphere per 5 meters depth. It is suggested that salt may be particularly free of cracks, especially if it is leached out by water. 5. Maximum permissible pressure. We do not know the maximum pressure in the cavity which is permissible to insure elastic behaviour of the rock. It is important to know this pressure because the cavity volume is inversely proportional to the pressure, and the cost of exca­ vating the cavity will be approximately proportional to its volume. If we assume that 50 atmospheres is a permissible pressure, the required radius will be 33 meters for 1 kt which corresponds to a volume of 150,000 cubic meters. 6. Deficiencies in the theory. The following deficiencies in the theory are known to us which can probably be removed by further theoretical work: a. The generation of surface waves, in particular of a long period, has not been investigated. These waves may be important for detection. b. The ablation of the surface of the cavity due to high temperature must be determined, in order to assess whether it is necessary to pro­ vide foils. c. A calculation should be made of the effect of shocks in the gas in the cavity. Also, the impulse carried by the expanding bomb material should be considered.
