3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
123
cussed at the formal sessions, but the subject had come up in the private
talks.
Schindler asked whether the Soviets had given any indication of
distinguishing between direct emigration to the US and emigration to
Israel, and the Secretary replied, “No”.
Anti-Semitism
Schindler asked whether they had given any clues about the ap-
parent upsurge in anti-Semitism, and the Secretary said there had been
“no clues”. Shulman commented that it was questionable how much
recent developments were caused by anti-Semitism and how much
they reflected suppression of dissidents. He was inclined to doubt they
were caused by anti-Semitism. Goodman replied that Soviet Jews see it
as anti-Semitism. For example, the anti-Semitic television film “Traders
of Souls” has been shown on national television twice. Shulman said
anti-Semitism is a latent phenomenon which surfaces from time to time
in Russia. He cited as an example of official anti-Semitism the fact that
two years ago Academy of Sciences institutes had been directed by the
Academy Presidium to refer all decisions to employ Jews to the
Academy Presidium. Quotas for Jews had existed sporadically in the
past in some Academy of Sciences institutes, but had never been ap-
plied across-the-board until the decree two years ago. Gold and
Goodman noted that Jewish quotas had also been instituted in certain
university faculties. Shulman agreed that was true, at Moscow State
University for example. Gold noted that imposition of such Jewish
quotas encourages Jewish emigration. Shulman agreed, but pointed
out that the quotas are also an effect of Jewish emigration. Shulman and
the Jewish leaders agreed it was a cause-and-effect, self-reenforcing
phenomenon.
Trade
Goodman asked the Secretary to elaborate on his earlier comment
that in Moscow he had told the Soviets that progress in trade would be
related to progress in SALT and emigration. The Secretary said the So-
viets had been told that all were related in the eyes of the American
people. He said the Soviets did not respond directly to that idea. They
had countered that the US Government promised them MFN and then
reneged. The Secretary said he had pointed out to the Soviets that as
practical people they must take into account the trade-and-emigration
connection, recognizing that Jackson-Vanik is an enacted statute.5 To
remove the statute there must be progress in the emigration area.
5 See footnote 2, Document 22.
