Arms Control and Disarmament 1283 The present Atomic Energy Act of 1954 classifies data in both of these categories for both U.S. and U.K. weapons as well as the samples of debris themselves as Restricted Data because they may reveal “import­ ant information on the design and fabrication of nuclear weapons.” Two problems arise, therefore, in the operation of a monitoring sys­ tem. First, the data in the above categories would have to be cleared for distribution to foreign nationals, and second, some procedure would have to be developed to limit analysis of debris to those measurements necessary to establish the freshness of the debris but to exclude more esoteric measurements which may reveal important information on nuclear devices exploded by either the U.S. or the U.K. h. Installation Costs of a Long Range Detection System for Clandestine Tests in the USSR. The Long Range Detection System within the USSR discussed above involves 30 acoustic stations of the present type, 43 seis­ mic stations utilizing improved instrumentation at each station, 30 elec­ tromagnetic stations utilizing present equipment plus complete aerial filtering coverage of air masses emanating from the USSR and China. The seismic and acoustic stations, because of their mutually incompat­ ible technical site requirements, cannot generally be co-­located. The electromagnetic stations, however, are usually found, from a technical standpoint, to be compatible with either seismic or acoustic locations and they therefore may be co-­located with one or the other. Therefore, a total of 70 detection stations within the USSR and China would be required. The time required to install such a system will depend on a num­ ber of factors. First, negotiation with the Russians for station locations could turn out to be quite protracted. Technical surveys of possible site locations will have to be made for each of the acoustic, seismic and elec­ tromagnetic components installed. Low, flat land remote from electrical disturbances both man-­made and natural, as well as from large metal buildings, fences, etc., are the principal requirements for a good electro­ magnetic station. Level or slightly rolling terrain in areas of relatively low wind velocity provide good acoustic locations. Residential areas of cities are practical since man-­made noise does not affect the ultra low fre­ quency acoustic detectors. The geology of the region is critical to satisfac­ tory seismic locations. Of importance also to a good seismic site are areas of low storm activity and areas remote from man-­made or natural noise. The above general statements concerning the requirements for adequate site locations are greatly simplified and presented only to indicate that the survey for the location of all the proposed stations will be a relatively involved and time-­consuming operation. Usually it is desirable for the survey team to remain in the area taking back­ ground measurements for a period of approximately 1 to 3 months, depending on the technique which is to be used at the site. If several survey teams could operate simultaneously, the time could be reduced.
