Comsioner’s Series) to adopt permanently the status quo; Chargé’s opinion that their suggested solution of certain frontier difficulties by means of exchange of territory may open up a phase which would indefinitely delay a solution of the entire matter. includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275] Sept. 28 (639) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic Information that President Borno suggested during President Vasquez’ recent visit that the two countries sign a treaty of amity; apprehension of President Vasquez that the reported disagreement between President Borno and General Russell, American High Commissioner in Haiti, as to certain constitutional amendments may react unfavorably upon an early settlement of the boundary question. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] Oct. 5 (644) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic Haitian Minister’s assurance to President Vasquez that there is no basis for report of disagreement between President Borno and General Russell; Haitian Minister’s opinion that it would be preferable to conclude the proposed treaty of amity before entering into formal boundary negotiations, and his explanation that the proposed treaty would consist of a declaration outlawing war and a provision that if friendly negotiations should fail to settle any question between the two Governments, the question will be submitted to a “friendly third power,” which would be construed as the United States, or possibly to the League of Nations. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277] Oct. 8 (648) From the Minister in the Dominican Republic Inacceptability to Dominican Government of treaty of amity in its present form, principal objection being to the declaration outlawing war; Foreign Minister’s willingness to enter into such a treaty following the settlement of the boundary question or to incorporate the amity treaty provisions in the final boundary treaty. [Pg. includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278] Oct. 27 To the Minister in the Dominican Republic [Pg.
