Chapter 4, February–April 1990 603 Foreign Minister Shevardnadze stated that Akhromeyev had said which issues had been agreed in Moscow. This morning he (Shevardnadze) had confirmed everything that had been agreed upon and had in mind the issues now under discussion. What the Soviet side had agreed remained valid and he could confirm it once again. But the Secretary had shirked the main issue—­the range issue—­which was a condition for resolution of all other issues. The Soviet side operated on the assumption that the U.S. side would meet it half-­way. Shevardnadze recalled the Wyoming package discussion which had been continued in Moscow; it was in that package that the Soviet side had proposed resolving the ALCM issue. But unless the range issue was resolved, the sides could hardly talk about reaching agreement on the other issues. If the sides resolved the main issue, then it would be a totally different conversation. The sides should not exchange claims now. The Soviet side had explained why it could not accept other range thresholds; the U.S. side understood what it would mean for the USSR. If the U.S. side could resolve this, it should do so and then the sides could consider other elements of the package. The key issue was range; if the Secretary could find a solution on this, then even this evening they could discuss the other issues. As for SLCMs, Shevardnadze continued, he had already mentioned that the Soviets had made a decision to make serious concessions in this regard. But the concessions had limits. To say that there would be no top limit for the number of SLCMs would mean to open a totally new channel for an unrestrained arms race. For that reason, it seemed that political declarations as a mechanism should set a top limit for the number of SLCMs. Unless a solution was found on long-­range cruise missiles, the sides would find themselves at an impasse. The Secretary referred to the Moscow joint statement section on SLCMs and read: “The sides agreed that such missiles would be dealt with by parallel, politically-­binding declarations for the duration of the START Treaty.” He added that the sides’ experts had even worked out a formulation for the declaration. The U.S. side had refused to put in a numerical limit, much less agree to a legally-­binding treaty protocol. Turning to the question of ALCM range, the Secretary noted that the issue was not whether the U.S. side could agree to the Soviet figure. The U.S. side had come from 1500 down to 800 kms, a change of 700 kms. The Soviet side was still at the same level. He was well aware of the importance the Soviet side attached to range; the Ministers had discussed it with Marshal Akhromeyev for an hour and a half in Moscow. But for the Soviets to say that if the U.S. agreed to the Soviet range, then the Soviets would discuss other issues which had been settled in Moscow was not an appropriate way to proceed. The Secretary had no authority on range, as he had told Shevardnadze the previous
