1956 803 if possible. I had taken note and would transmit to my government Wang’s request that they be transmitted to Red Cross in Peking. I pre­ sumed that no further address than that was needed. 89. Wang said that correct; only “Chinese Red Cross Society, Peking.” 90. I said doctors who attending Mrs. Bradshaw and Kanady, who both suffering mental illness at time departure Wang’s country would appreciate receiving similar medical records with regard illness and treatment. Records could be delivered here to me and I would see they forwarded to proper people. 91. Wang said I had not yet given clear reply to questions he put regarding Chinese whose departure prevented and with respect ­Chinese who imprisoned by U.S. He could not accept my explanations and remarks regarding situation Chinese in U.S. as satisfactory. 92. Wang said they had not asked me make investigation of all ­Chinese in U.S. They had only raised question of those who have defi­ nite names and definite facts and where departure being prevented. 93. Wang said I claimed U.S. carrying out agreed announcement and carrying out obligation under it. This only one aspect of question. Other aspect this matter shown by measures taken by U.S. in forcing Chinese obtain entry permits Taiwan and apply for permanent resi­ dence in U.S., and such other measures which prevent Chinese who desire return from doing so. I had asked whether it intent their side for U.S. exert pressure on Chinese force them return home. They not asking that pressure be put on these people. Only asking that such pressures which preventing them from leaving be removed. 94. Wang said my argument seemed to be stating that U.S. on one hand granting Chinese freedom return while on other hand suppress­ ing freedom return and obstructing return. 95. Wang said I had made reference to communications with Indian Embassy. He had made views this regard clear previously. 96. Wang said I had made remarks to effect PRC side trying use as pretext bringing up of this question of Chinese who prevented from returning, trying use that as pretext to prevent Americans from return­ ing. He considered that distortion of facts. 97. Wang asked if I viewed agreed announcement as agreement solely relating to matter of Americans in China rather than agreement on return of nationals of both countries. 98. Wang asked if agreed announcement intended require only Chinese carry out agreement while US exempted from obligation of carrying it out. 99. Wang said I had made comparison with respect time already elapsed after issuance agreed announcement and stated that in 23 weeks
