124
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
In a memorandum to Carter, April 11, Brzezinski informed him of
the CIA and ICA responses and also noted that the Department of State
“has taken steps to notify the Iranians, Indians, Saudis, and Pakistanis
through diplomatic channels of Soviet plans to support and possibly
participate in a major effort against the Afghan tribal and religious
rebels and will continue bilateral dialogues on the Afghan problem.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency
File, Box 2, Central Intelligence Agency: 4/78–4/79)
45.
Paper Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1
Washington, undated
AFGHANISTAN
INTRODUCTION
On 5 March 1979 we forwarded for SCC consideration a paper on
covert action options for Afghanistan.2 This paper outlines specific
proposals for support of Afghan dissidents and insurgents.
BACKGROUND
In recent weeks Afghan dissidents have stepped up their insur-
gency against the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (DRA) and have
achieved surprising successes, despite having few weapons and almost
no outside support. The rebellion which heretofore has been centered
mainly in Afghanistan’s eastern provinces, broke out in Herat, a major
city near the western border. Although our information is incomplete,
it appears there were large scale defections from Army units in Herat.
1 Source: National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box
I–047, Afghanistan: 15 Feb 1979–22 Aug 1979. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
In the top right corner, an unknown hand wrote: “orig to ZB w/Eve Rept. Mini-SCC
3–30–79. SumCon not prepared.” No other record of the mini-SCC meeting was found.
A memorandum from Thornton and Henze to Brzezinski, March 22, called for a mini-
SCC meeting, tentatively scheduled for March 31. Thornton advocated the necessity of
convening such a meeting because the intelligence situation in Afghanistan remained
unclear; “the ambassadorial issue is still open” due to Dubs’s murder; the Americans
in Afghanistan were at risk; and there was a need for interagency policy coordination
with regard to Afghanistan. (National Security Council, Carter Administration Intelli-
gence Files, Box I–047, Afghanistan: 8 May 1978–7 Dec 1978) Thornton was responding
to a March 20 memorandum from Brzezinski that relayed Mondale’s inquiry regarding
what the United States could do about the growing rebellion in Afghanistan. (Ibid.)
2 See Document 38.
