1160 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX brackets? I will try to do the best I can with the Israelis to get agreement on it). He does not want differences here, between President Sadat and himself, and to try guessing what the Israelis will accept. Let’s do this, and he will then be in touch with President Sadat (after seeing Begin) and seek a common approach. Mr. el-Baz said that we will not need brackets. The President said he agreed. With Osama redrafting, though, you never know! When he (the President) was in the Georgia legislature, he had been a slow learner, and found out that in a conference committee, it is better to be the secretary than the chairman. In a meeting of 20 people, he would rather be the secretary. Whoever does the first draft has the advantage. We will try to get agreement and, if not, there can be brackets. President Sadat and he will decide. Did Ambassador Linowitz have anything else? Ambassador Linowitz mentioned East Jerusalem. The President said that there are two basic proposals and it may be necessary to discuss them. First, some form of absentee ballotting; or second, delaying a decision by letting the Gaza and West Bank mayors, who are elected, select or appoint the SGA. He strongly prefers the first alternative. If we remove direct elections, this would modify a part of the Camp David Accords, and that might open the door for both sides to modify other parts. He expects that Begin will refuse (to move) on East Jerusalem. This is an untenable position. We will stand firmly and publicly on this. It is an important issue, and it needs to be addressed. Would Ambassador Linowitz like to comment? Ambassador Linowitz replied: no. The President said he feels that if Begin is intrasigent on voting rights for the residents of East Jerusalem, he (the President) will push hard and publicly. Instead of letting the SGA breakdown, we could establish it from the mayors. His opinion is that Israel would prefer not to have the SGA set up, since that means the automatic requirement to withdraw the Israeli military government and the civilian administration. A profound change is required, with no delay, to withdraw armed forces, and to assign the rest to specified security locations. Among ourselves, we should be more flexible on what the SGA is, in order to get it set up. When it is established, even without some things, this will be a major development, leading to a step by step increase in the authority and stature of the SGA. (Dr. Brzezinski entered at 11:05). Would Ambassador Linowitz like to comment? Ambassador Linowitz said he wanted to add a footnote. There are two things this skeleton agreement would let happen, in signalling to the Palestinians—as the Egyptians say is their view: first, the military
