748 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew: We will continue discussing this issue, in the first instance between Burt and Nazarkin. This subject is of considerable importance at the top levels. Karpov: Of my government too. We need neutral language that makes these items for discussion. (Woolsey and Grinevsky return for CFE discussion) [Omitted here is a discussion of the CFE Treaty.] Karpov: I would like Nazarkin to address the joint statement on future negotiaitons. Nazarkin: This morning Amb. Burt, Brooks, Masterkov, and I discussed the future negotiations statement. The phrase that deals with stabilizing reductions is not yet agreed upon. In the sentence following that we resolved a minor problem; we wish to confirm agreement. In the first section we reached tentative agreement. Afterward, following home analysis, we now wish to address this section further. There are problems in the bracketed language on page 3. We will need to continue exchanges to resolve the outstanding issues. Burt: It is unclear what unilateral changes your side wants to make. Karpov: We can continue with the future joint statement, but first I want to know if the chemical weapons documents are finished. Lehman: We met today to address the outstanding issues in the bilateral agreement. We resolved all issues. We exchanged English language texts and Russian language texts. We are also ready for signature of the non-­proliferation statement. A compromise was worked out on missile language, it is now closed. Batsanov: I can confirm as far as the bilateral agreement and the non-­proliferation statement are concerned, they are ready. Some technical checking and proofing are continuing, the negotiation is over. Bartholomew: In all seriousness, both governments owe some recognition to the efforts of Batsanov and Lehman. Let the record show they worked on this one. Batsanov: Include on that list Ledogar. Karpov: I would like to confirm the text of the CFE statement, and say it is ready for our bosses. Bartholomew: We can confirm what we did this afternoon. Karpov: Let us return to the joint statement on future negotiations. We are suggesting changes to satisfy concerns expressed during discussions between Burt and Nazarkin. We suggest “stabilizing reductions” be accepted. In the first section, we accept “without delay.” We would like to add “on nuclear and space arms,” substitiue “resumed” for “begin,” and add “and other related issues.” We propose to drop the first sentence of the next para. Burt: The bulk of the statement is about offense. We ask for one paragraph on defense. You are sweeping an important subject under
