1980  889
In summary, you have taken a series of steps that add up to a major 
revision of our strategic doctrine, the third one since World War II. The 
previous two, like this one, have been driven by Soviet force develop-
ment. This is the first phase of the task. The second, the programmatic 
phase, will be a major task of your second-­term defense policy.14 (C)
14 Brzezinski sent the memorandum to Mondale and Muskie under cover of a Sep-
tember 2 memorandum. It reads in part: “The President asked me to share the enclosed 
memorandum with you, especially since there is likely to be some public discussion of 
our current strategic doctrine. In the last three and one-­half years, the President has taken 
a series of steps that add up to a major revision of our strategic doctrine, the third such 
major revision since World War II. The Administration should obtain more public credit 
for this than it has so far.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, 
Subject File, Box 68, Vice President 1–10/80)
212.	 Editorial Note
In Presidential Directive/NSC–60, “Nuclear Weapons Deploy-
ments,” September 26, 1980, President’s Assistant for National Secu-
rity Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski informed Vice President Walter 
­Mondale, Secretary of State Edmund Muskie, Secretary of Defense 
Harold Brown, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff David Jones 
that ­President Jimmy Carter had approved the Secretary of Defense’s 
Nuclear ­Weapons Deployment Request for Fiscal Year 1980–1981. The 
directive also enumerated conditions under which actual deployments 
might vary; directed the Departments of State and Defense to secure 
Carter’s approval of an Allied consultation strategy before proceed-
ing with the deployments; directed the Departments of State and 
Defense to coordinate any other deployment level changes and send 
them to Carter for approval; and outlined additional rules governing 
the deployments. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski 
Material, Subject File, Box 24, Evening Reports (State): 11/80)
