regards both the circumstance and manner of the opposition and protest of Brazil as an insuperable obstacle to the ratification of the treaty. In forming this impression I have in mind also the significant intimations and inquiries of President Leguía on the subject of the opposition of Brazil to the ratification of the treaty, which I took occasion to report to the Department in Despatch No. 62 of August 25, 1923,78 Cablegram No. 46, Nov. 16, 12 m.,79 Despatch No. 88, December 1, 1923.78 In addition to the foregoing, Doctor Salomón informed me that the Administration was compelled to respect the independence, and jealousy of its rights, of the Peruvian Congress in the consideration of a treaty, and that the Congress, in his opinion, would vigorously oppose the cession to Colombia of land bordering upon the Amazon River. Dr. Salomón stated specifically that he, himself, was also opposed to this, and that it was upon this point that he had disagreed with President Leguía, and had disapproved of the treaty, although signing it. He stated, nevertheless, that the treaty had been submitted to Congress with a recommendation for its ratification, and that, notwithstanding his personal objections to some of the terms of the treaty, he would be entirely content should Congress see fit to ratify it; but that, as Minister of Foreign Relations, he would be compelled to submit to Congress full information as to the protest of the Brazilian Government, and the grounds upon which it is based. … . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I expressed to Minister Salomón, as I have heretofore done to President Leguía, the lively interest of the United States as a friendly sister American nation, in the ratification of the treaty, and the profound regret which I knew would be felt by the Government and people of the United States, if this settlement of a long-standing controversy between two neighboring South American countries, which had come so near to a peaceable solution, should fail. I ventured to call the Minister’s attention to the fact that the entire trend of modern international policy was towards the opening of great navigable rivers to international navigation, and that a sound economic and international policy should promote the accessibility of the interior, for the
