International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 37 Options You have various options involving how much stimulus to give to production and employment, if any, and how much added cost consumers should be asked to bear, if any. I. No import restrictions A. Adjustment assistance (mainly loans or loan guarantees to firms and supplemental unemployment compensation to workers). B. A new special program with increased benefits that could be developed to provide effective help to the injured firms, workers and communities. II. Increase the tariff to 40 percent on imports above the 1974 level (a tariff rate quota) as proposed by the USITC. The 40 percent over quota rate would be phased down in the fourth and fifth year. The quota is allocated among countries on the basis of their 1974 market shares. III. Modify the tariff rate quota (TRQ) of the USITC (Tab A).7 A. Increase the tariff to 40 percent8 on imports above the 1974–76 average level and divide the TRQ between imports valued at $2.50/ pair or less and those valued over $2.50/pair in order to assure a continued supply of low cost footwear for consumers. Include athletic footwear valued over $8.00/pair, which the USITC excluded. Allocate country quotas according to 1974–76 shares of the U.S. market so as to reflect more recent trade patterns than the USITC formula. B. Increase the tariff to 40 percent9 on imports above the 1974–76 average level plus five percent of 1974–76 imports so as to provide growth for newer suppliers. The over quota rate of 40 percent would be phased down during the five year period (as recommended by the USITC) but the level of imports entering before the over quota rate applied would remain the same throughout the period. IV. Other import relief options: A. A straight tariff increase, e.g., to 30 percent as proposed by one Commissioner. The present tariff rates range from 6 to 20 percent and average 8.5 percent. 7 Tab A, attached but not printed, is an undated paper entitled “Modified Version of ISITC Tariff Rate Quota (TRQ).” Also attached, but not printed, are Tabs B through F. Tab B is an undated paper entitled “Considerations the Trade Act Directs the President to Take Into Account.” Tab C is an undated paper entitled “Adjustment Assistance Given to Firms.” Tab D is an undated paper entitled “Adjustment Assistance Given to Workers.” Tab E is an undated paper entitled “The Effect of Import Relief on U.S. Trading Partners.” Tab F is an undated paper entitled “Key Non-Rubber Footwear Data.” 8 This option could be made more or less restrictive by adjusting the over quota rate. [Footnote in the original.] 9 This option could be made more or less restrictive by adjusting the over quota rate. [Footnote in the original.]
