Human Rights 535 legislation.7 Next year there could be more.) I suggest that these be linked so that there will be no question that in opposing the reporting requirements the Administration is really trying to back away from human rights. We need to be taking positive actions while we are pushing this “negative” action.8 Our effort on the treaties should begin with the Genocide Treaty since it has seniority and the most support. Once that hurdle is passed, and sufficient strength has been demonstrated by the pro-ratification forces, it may prove much easier to ratify the others. Ratification is certainly possible.9 Last spring, I organized an Administration-NGO group which undertook a vote count on this issue. Letters were sent to every Senator, and only an explicit answer was counted as a positive vote. The result was 53 solid votes for cloture (60 votes required), 11 leaning towards, and 5 undecided. For final passage, (67 votes required) we counted 55 solids, with 14 undecided or leaning towards. Garnering 7 votes for cloture and a maximum of 12 for final passage (absentees lower the total required), should not be very difficult. The elections will change these counts to some degree, but we are clearly almost there. Our job can be made easier by keying it to the observance of the 30th Anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (December 10). In recognition of this event, the public interest groups, led by the Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy, are launching an effort this fall to build public support for the Treaties and Covenants—the first such public effort. See Tab A for the first publication of many.10 It occurs to me that a good day for the President to make his first statement would be October 11,11 Eleanor Roosevelt’s birthday. The whole effort could be made a tribute to her memory, which would popularize it and perhaps help to get active support from women’s groups, civil rights groups and others. If we miss the October 11 date, the anniversary of her death is November 7, election day this year and therefore appropriate since it is in a sense the birth day of the new Congress that would vote on the Treaties. On the negative side, our effort to stem the tide of mandatory reporting requirements would center on the argument that the information can be made available on request to any member (or on request by a relevant Committee, depending on how tough we want to be), but that wholesale publication of these types of reports does not promote 7 See footnotes 6 and 9, Document 139. 8 An unknown hand underlined this sentence. 9 Inderfurth added the following handwritten notation in the left-hand margin: “An up-to-date head count is necessary. RI.” 10 Not attached and not further identified. 11 Inderfurth added the following handwritten notation: “too soon.”
