874 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement his two drafts. It hard to call that serious or sincere negotiation. Way to negotiation did not lie in issuance such take-­it-­or-­leave-­it positions. 11. I said in contrast his position, I withdrew previous draft of Nov 10 my side to which he objected and adopted his draft Dec 1 as basis our negotiations. At our Jan 12 meeting I embodied amendments to his draft which I considered essential to make it meaningful. He had continued to misinterpret and misrepresent intent in plain words that Jan 12 draft. 12. I said I had often said here I thought that his position was not well taken. However, if he had other thoughts on way concepts therein could be stated I would be glad listen them. I had issued no ultimatum, I had taken no take-­it-­or-­leave it positions. I had and would continue try do my utmost to reach real agreement with him on basis honest negotiations. I did not see how he could feel that issuance ultimata such as he had again issued this morning helped in progress our talks here and in resolution tremendously important problems we called upon to deal with here. 13. I said I did not see how his govt felt that statements such as it again made March 11 were helpful to us. For example, in his govt’s March 11 statement it says my govt had forbidden Indian Embassy make announcements. I could only characterize this as willful and com­ plete misstatement of fact. I had told him here that even if it desired do so my govt had no way prevent Indian Embassy from making announcements and had not sought do so. Anyone having slightest familiarity my country would immediately recognize absurdity this, and other such statements in March 11 statement his govt. I honestly did not see how it helped these talks. I did not believe it even accorded with genuine interests his own side. I might mention another distor­ tion fact his March 11 statement, attempt made there to give impression I had admitted my govt’s restriction departure 32 Chinese. What pur­ pose was served by this sort juggling of words? Again why did his govt declare that all Americans his country free to contact office UK Charge d’Affaires when we knew as matter fact then only 6 of 13 remaining persons desiring return had been permitted do so? 14. I said I had hoped it not intention his govt in issuing statements this kind to face my govt with what amounted to ultimata, to force my govt to agree his demands. I could assure him that no tactic could be more mistaken or more certain of failure. I had hoped that if this was intention his govt it had been abandoned. However, his statement this morning gave me no grounds for feeling it had done so. I would hope that by next meeting his govt would have abandoned his intention and we would be able proceed in orderly manner to discussion of declara­ tion unequivocally and unconditionally renouncing use force. I would hope that it would enable us resume progress we seemed for time to
