Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I flourish in a world impoverished by economic decline or ravaged by armed conflict? The Administration alone cannot take all the actions that should be part of this government’s efforts on behalf of human rights. The Congress has a unique role to play by reflecting public concern for human rights in the laws it passes and monitoring their implementation, by forming and funding assistance programs, and by assuring that our domestic law is in conformity with our international obligations. We urge that you join us in giving present legislation with human rights provisions a chance to work and that we carefully consider together any new legislation. As a matter of especially high priority, we also urge your support for repeal of the Byrd amendment. The first weeks of the Carter Administration have been a time of change and, we believe, a time of renewed hope for the advancement of human rights. We believe our general emphasis on this important arena of international concern has already begun to have a favorable impact. Last week, in a major foreign policy statement, the British Government declared a policy comparable to that of this Administration.8 We hope other governments will both speak out in support of human rights and pursue human rights objectives through their diplomacy. In a number of countries, important segments of the population have been stirred to raise human rights issues internally. And in several countries, governments have taken positive steps, such as the release of political prisoners, which demonstrate that the voice of this Administration is being heard and listened to. This reaction encourages us along the path we have set. 8 In a March 3 address to the Diplomatic and Commonwealth Writers Association in London, British Foreign Secretary David Owen endorsed the Carter administration’s human rights policy. Owen noted that the British Government would “apply the same standards and judgments to Communist countries” as it did to Chile, Uganda, and South Africa. (Bernard D. Nossiter, “Britain Supports Carter Stand on Human Rights,” The
