106
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
flourish in a world impoverished by economic decline or ravaged by
armed conflict?
The Administration alone cannot take all the actions that should be
part of this government’s efforts on behalf of human rights. The
Congress has a unique role to play by reflecting public concern for
human rights in the laws it passes and monitoring their implementa-
tion, by forming and funding assistance programs, and by assuring that
our domestic law is in conformity with our international obligations.
We urge that you join us in giving present legislation with human
rights provisions a chance to work and that we carefully consider to-
gether any new legislation. As a matter of especially high priority, we
also urge your support for repeal of the Byrd amendment.
The first weeks of the Carter Administration have been a time of
change and, we believe, a time of renewed hope for the advancement of
human rights. We believe our general emphasis on this important
arena of international concern has already begun to have a favorable
impact. Last week, in a major foreign policy statement, the British Gov-
ernment declared a policy comparable to that of this Administration.8
We hope other governments will both speak out in support of human
rights and pursue human rights objectives through their diplomacy.
In a number of countries, important segments of the population
have been stirred to raise human rights issues internally. And in several
countries, governments have taken positive steps, such as the release of
political prisoners, which demonstrate that the voice of this Adminis-
tration is being heard and listened to. This reaction encourages us along
the path we have set.
8 In a March 3 address to the Diplomatic and Commonwealth Writers Association
in London, British Foreign Secretary David Owen endorsed the Carter administration’s
human rights policy. Owen noted that the British Government would “apply the same
standards and judgments to Communist countries” as it did to Chile, Uganda, and South
Africa. (Bernard D. Nossiter, “Britain Supports Carter Stand on Human Rights,” The
Washington Post, March 4, 1977, p. A–1)
28.
Editorial Note
President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brze-
zinski provided a background briefing to the press at the U.S. Mission
to the United Nations in New York the afternoon of March 17, 1977, in
advance of President Jimmy Carter’s address before the United Nations
