Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 609 other statements, but no one sent a message to Khomeini such as that which has been published in Tehran.5 Sec Vance noted that our reports indicate that, after 5½ hours of discussion about the modalities of making the transfer of the hostages to the Government, the Revolutionary Council reaffirmed its decision and that this had been agreed to by the students. Reportedly, Bani- Sadr was given two options: (1) for the Government to take over the Embassy and remove the students; or (2) to take joint custody of the Embassy with the students. We understand that Bani-Sadr has had a further meeting with the students and will make a statement tomorrow. ZB pointed out that the meeting with the students took place earlier today according to Reuters. We also had private reports that Bani-Sadr had rejected the idea of joint custody. Jordan said he was concerned that, according to the Reuters report, the students had no derogatory comments to make after the meeting, which may indicate that they cut a deal with Bani-Sadr. CV said we were trying to confirm these reports through the Swiss. We have an open line with them. ZB said we have a massive credibility problem. For example, Jim Schlesinger called him today and was convinced from the New York Times story that there had been a message from the U.S. along the lines publicized in Tehran. If someone as sympathetic to the Administration as he believes the Iranians, it means that the belief is widespread. With regard to next steps, if we go ahead with our sanctions at this point, we provide Bani-Sadr a perfect excuse to blame us for not taking the necessary steps to transfer the hostages. Cutler asked if we had any indication that they intend to move the hostages out of the Embassy. CV said no. Addressing the President, he said it was his view that to go ahead with the three items today would put us in an impossible position. We can wait until tomorrow. He would recommend against acting today. Sec Brown said he agreed but wondered what we could do to clarify the confusion over the messages. Could we clarify what was in the message which was actually sent to Bani-Sadr? The Pres said he had met last night with the editors of the Washington Post, the Star, the LA Times, the New York Times and the Chicago Tribune6 and had told them flatly what had happened. They agreed to honor 5 See Document 226. The counterfeit letter was also published in full in the United States. (“‘Errors’ in the past: Iran’s Version of Carter Letter,” Chicago Tribune, March 31, 1980, p. 2) 6 See footnote 5, Document 228.
