3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
54
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
hoped that our discussions will make a turning point in the long effort
to achieve a total cessation of nuclear testing, a subject in which, the
Secretary knew, the Soviet Union had deep concerns. Conditions may
be right for the United States and the Soviet Union to exercise unique
leadership in getting this process moving. We were moving promptly
to secure Congressional ratification of the Treaty on the Threshold Test
Ban and the Treaty on Peaceful Nuclear Explosions. What we accom-
plish during our meetings here would help us in the ratification of
those treaties. Another area where we could work together to move for-
ward was the Indian Ocean. We wanted to explore Soviet interest in
mutual restraint in that area.
The Secretary pointed out that conventional arms exports were
dangerous and wasted vast and increasingly scarce resources. Our two
countries have accounted for a large proportion of such trade. In fact,
the United States occupied first place in the export trade of conven-
tional arms, and the Soviet Union second place. Competition between
us in the export of arms placed stress on our bilateral relations. It
should in any event be a matter of principle for advanced countries to
make a serious effort to restrain and reduce this trade. We would wel-
come an expression of interest on the part of the Soviet side in an ex-
change of views on this subject. In this connection, we believed that the
best way to begin was with suppliers. The United States was ready to
exercise restraint in its own activities. We would be talking to our allies.
The President was interested in Soviet views on prospects for coopera-
tion. In the area of non-proliferation we were gratified by progress in
the London Suppliers’ Group, and in particular with very solid Soviet
participation. These were important problems, and we hoped to con-
tinue in close cooperation.
The Secretary wanted to inform Brezhnev today that in the very
near future we would announce certain policy decisions concerning
nuclear non-proliferation. They will include the indefinite deferral of
commercial reprocessing and recycling of plutonium in the United
States, and the restructuring of the U.S. breeder reactor program to em-
phasize designs other than the plutonium breeder. The Secretary had
instructed our Embassy to inform Minister Gromyko in detail of these
policy decisions. We shared Soviet concern about the dangers of prolif-
eration of nuclear weapons, and we believed that the actions which we
are about to take would constitute a major step forward toward this
end.
We had reviewed the Vienna MBFR negotiations and our MBFR
policy. The Carter Administration strongly supported these negotia-
tions. A satisfactory agreement could enhance the security of both sides
equally. The West had shown its will to move toward agreement. The
December 1975 Western proposal to reduce U.S. nuclear weapons was
