Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  385
57.	
Memorandum From the Undersecretary of State for Security 
Assistance, Science and Technology (Bartholomew) to 
Secretary of State Baker1
Washington, November 9, 1989
SUBJECT
Getting START on Track
In my memo to you on the Bush-Gorbachev meeting2 I said that the 
Washington process is not now on track towards settlement of the major 
START issues at next year’s summit and ratification of the START treaty 
in this Administration. This is the memo I promised you on how to get 
on track. I have designed it as a basis for you to talk privately to the 
President and to Scowcroft and Cheney because it will take a strong “top 
down” push. You might want to have a small meeting with me and oth-
ers to talk it out before you proceed.
The START Timeline
Come 1992, this Administration can have completed and rati-
fied the most remarkable array of arms control agreements in history: 
START, CFE, TTB and PNET, US-USSR CW reductions. I don’t think 
it’s necessary to argue at length why we should make a major effort to 
bring START home before 1992 (even though some might argue that 
if we have CFE and the other agreements we don’t “need” START). A 
good START agreement that serves major US interests is within reach. 
START is at the top of the Soviet agenda. We have much more control 
over the bilateral START negotiations than we do over the multilat-
eral CFE negotiations and START is farther along. Finally, START has 
high priority in Congress and the public as the one negotiation about 
weapons that can destroy the US, and there is a broad perception that 
the negotiations are well along and considerable expectation that we’ll 
have a treaty by 1992.
Thus, US interests, relations with the Soviets, what is doable, and 
domestic expectations all point to a major effort to complete and sign 
a START treaty no later than the spring of 1991 so that it can be ratified 
before the election year. To give some sense of the timeline that implies, 
consider that even after we crack all the big issues (ALCMs, SLCMs, 
mobile ICBMs, etc.) it will still take months to complete a Treaty text. 
1 Source: Department of State, Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Robert B. 
Zoellick, Under Secretary for Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Lot 96D484, START-
NODIS. Secret; Nodis. No drafting information was found.
2 Not found.
