1978 481 more prepared to fight a nuclear war than we have been in the past, we would weaken deterrence and decrease stability. This policy could prove more costly than Option a., but whether it would be substantially more costly is not certain. c. Still a further departure from current policy would add a higher confidence capability to limit damage. This would require not only greater capability against Soviet nuclear forces than in Option b. above, but also substantial improvements in defenses. Under this policy, we might return to the targeting objectives of the earlier SIOPs. For example, we might attempt to achieve something like [1 line not declassified] threatening the U.S. and our allies under all circumstances of war initiation. Obviously, the forces required for such a strategy would be substantial and would have to be acquired over a period of years. Thus, this could not be a short-­term objective of U.S. policy. Some would argue that a damage limiting capability at least comparable to that of the Soviet Union is the sine qua non of essential equivalence and a necessary requirement to make a strategy of escalation control credible. Without the ability to deter escalation at the higher levels the U.S. could not count on controlling escalation at lower levels. Others argue that the achievement of such a damage limiting capability would be highly destabilizing and would hardly be feasible given the Soviet capability to respond to whatever measures the United States might take. It seems clear that this option would be more costly than current policy or either of the two prior options. d. Finally, the U.S. might choose to move to the other direction from current policy and rely more heavily on assured destruction defined in either terms of industry, population or cities. This would avoid the need, perhaps quite costly, to improve current deficiencies in flexibility and endurance. Moving in this direction would imply a judgment that the post-­ war nuclear force balance is not a meaningful measure of “victory” and that the prospect of massive destruction is a credible deterrent for large scale attacks including those aimed at nuclear forces. A continued capability to execute a wide range of limited attacks would be possible with the forces provided by this approach, but, in general, the approach assumes that any nuclear exchange is likely to escalate very rapidly to all-­out countervalue exchanges. Indeed, it depends on that prospect for its deterrent effect. The argument against this approach is that it would narrow the scope of deterrence. In particular, such a policy would have an adverse impact on extended deterrence and thus on alliance relationships, and might suggest opportunities in the future for the Soviets to utilize their nuclear forces for coercion of the US and our allies. It would provide the US with a very narrow range of options should deterrence fail.
