March 27–December 31, 1979
871
tutional procedures after studying the nature of the request and of the
agreement. President Carter’s instructions to Ambassador Strauss are
in keeping with the above position. End text.
4. For the Secretary: Please note the following origins of two points
in the above text:
A. The next-to-last sentence is included to meet Boutros’ request
that we keep the door open to signing as a party. This is the one specific
request the Egyptians made. Our reply is that we will decide in the
light of the situation and the document produced. Bob Strauss inde-
pendently suggested this point.
B. The April 24 quotation from the President and the last sentence
are included at Bob Strauss’ request. I believe they are useful additions
because they show further continuity in our position reaching right
down into the new negotiations.
5. For Tel Aviv: Please hold the above in readiness for delivery to
the Israelis only when you receive a go-ahead from the Secretary in
Vienna.
6. For Cairo: When you have seen the Secretary’s approval, please
give the Egyptians8 the text of the above for their information.
Christopher
8 Atherton delivered the U.S. response to Khalil on June 16. (Telegram 12413 from
Cairo, June 16; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790272–0794)
265.
Editorial Note
During the fourth plenary session of the U.S.-Soviet Summit held
in Vienna on June 17, 1979, which was devoted to a tour d’horizon of in-
ternational issues, President Jimmy Carter and General Secretary of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union Leonid I. Brezhnev discussed
their countries’ respective positions on the Arab-Israeli peace process.
Speaking first, Carter stated that, on the Middle East, “our two coun-
tries have had differences in the past and in the present.” Carter, the
memorandum of conversation recorded, “had tried to bring together
all parties in Geneva, including the Soviet Union, with a view to
finding a solution to the differences in the Middle East. This was some
two years ago, but Syria and a number of other countries refused and
no progress had been made. President Sadat had taken an initiative—
the President would add that this was without consultation with us—
