1324 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Would a policy have to be fully coordinated with our allies? Mr. Farley noted that there was more of a pattern of cooperation now than there had been in 1955. The experience of last summer had built up a prece­ dent of NATO cooperation which we have continued in coordinating replies to the Bulganin letters. However, he could certainly recognize the value of surprise impact. [text not declassified] Mr. Farley said he thought he should make quite clear that the U.S. will not take much credit from cessation of testing. However, such a move will clear the air as to our general aims in disarmament. We must have more than this to recapture the initiative in world public opinion. He noted that we need during the preparatory talks to show the USSR that the U.S. really wants progress. General Fox said he felt that the members of the working group were not in a position to make decisions, that they could not judge this issue adequately. Mr. Farley agreed but said that the group must exam­ ine disarmament policy and, on the basis of their knowledge, make a recommendation to the principals. Mr. Keeney explained that this is what the Killian panel on nuclear testing had in effect done when it determined the impact on weap­ ons development which would result from cessation of testing, even though it had not discussed military implications. Mr. Farley said that the working group is expected to deal with the issues such as test ces­ sation. While the group cannot make final decisions it certainly must recommend courses of action to the Special Cabinet Committee. General Fox reiterated that on the question of test cessation the Defense Department’s answer would clearly be “no”. Mr. Farley said in that case the group would report differing views and perhaps ask for more studies. Admiral Foster said that the group might very well come up with a consensus that test cessation would be unwise from a mili­ tary point of view but that over-­riding political reasons made it wise to stop testing. Mr. Farley agreed with this and said it was possible that one or all of the members might take the position either (1) that there should be no decision until HARDTACK had been completed and eval­ uated or (2) that in preparing for the 13th General Assembly we must have a change in policy. Admiral Foster noted that it takes about six months properly to evaluate the results of a test series. This would be long past the opening session of the 13th General Assembly. Mr. Amory said it was quite clear to him that the political deadline of the 13th General Assembly must be met. General Fox said that from a national security point of view our vital security interest militated against a cessation of testing. Mr. Spiers
