1002
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
and health communities will have been provided. The biggest problem
in this entire sector is to chose efficaciously among the many possible
activities. For example, should we attack tropical diseases, or maternal
and infant malnutrition, or what? If tropical diseases, which one? And
by eradication of vectors, or by development of vaccines? Bilaterally, or
through multilateral efforts? The Report gives little guidance. What the
memo could do is call for the departments and agencies to establish
and adopt explicit priorities for their international health endeavors
(for example, to emphasize prenatal and infant health, or to target par-
ticular infectious diseases). Beyond that, of course, these priorities
should eventually be reflected in budgets.
Congressional relations. The document, like the Report, needs to give
much more attention to the need to work closely with the Congress, to
consult early, and to design initiatives within the limits of Congres-
sional tolerance.
Overall tone of the memorandum. Reference to “prevailing passivity
and skepticism” pages 2 and 4) are inaccurate and gratuitous and will
serve no constructive purpose. Also, the description of the failures of
the “trickle down” approach to development assistance (page 2),
though correct in its general criticism, does not give fair recognition to
the efforts and potential of the Peace Corps and other such activities.
These problems can be taken care of by editing.
Encouraging private sector involvement (page 5, item B). The ma-
jor study of incentives of private sector involvement might be con-
ducted better by a nongovernmental institution than by the federal
government.
Proposed Presidential Initiative (page 5, first paragraph of item C): “The
proposals which follow build on existing programs or create new ones;
they would specifically place your Administration’s stamp on basic
human needs in a comprehensive way which Senator Humphrey, Pres-
ident Roosevelt and President Truman, for example, have been try-
ing to do since the 1940’s.” This paragraph is both surprising and
unnecessary.
AID program (page 3). The recommendation that any increases in
health, population, and nutrition in the AID budget be made propor-
tional to any increase in the FY 79 budget needs examination. The
figures may even need to be increased above that level, but such a deci-
sion should be taken as part of an overall review of health and other
priorities relating to basic human needs. There is no reference to the
various AID reorganization studies. Organizational decisions should
not be made independently of an integrated view of AID’s future.
Other proposals: research and training centers (page 6); global health
consortia (page 7); Fogarty Institute (page 8); Presidential Scholars (page 8);
National Endowment for International Health Assistance (page 10). None of
