3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
164
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
tance in the minds of the Soviet leaders at the outset of the crackdown
was probably the desire to clean house and silence the dissidents before
the Belgrade review conference was convened. Indeed, some dissidents
have charged that the climate in the Soviet Union deteriorated immedi-
ately after, and as a direct result of, the signing of the Helsinki accords.
Recent emigre Bukovsky,7 among others, claimed that conditions in
his prison “tangibly worsened” after Helsinki. In 1976 there were a
few trials of dissidents, balanced by occasional regime conciliatory
gestures.
The first clear evidence that a crackdown might be underway did
not come, however, until late December 1976, seven months after the
formation of the Orlov group in Moscow. In December Soviet author-
ities moved in a limited way against the CSCE monitoring group, by
conducting searches of apartments of the members of its subgroup in
the Ukraine. But there is no evidence to indicate that at this early date
the Soviets intended the crackdown to assume the major proportions it
did in the spring. Rather, it seems likely that they intended to continue
“carrot and stick” tactics aimed at controlling dissent by a careful com-
bination of coercive and conciliatory measures, while holding in re-
serve the option of intensifying repression if circumstances warranted.
The new US administration’s public defense of Soviet dissidents
apparently was a major factor which reinforced and exacerbated the re-
lated Soviet anxieties about the coming Belgrade CSCE meeting, the sit-
uation in Eastern Europe, the behavior of the Eurocommunists, and the
food situation at home. The net effect was to impel the leadership in-
creasingly to conclude that harsher measures against the dissidents
were required. Since February the Soviets have moved to suppress the
Orlov group and its regional subgroups, by arresting leading members
and encouraging others to emigrate. Moreover, in the spring the So-
viets began to make greater and greater efforts to limit the access of
Westerners in Moscow to the dissident community, and to link the dis-
sidents with espionage activities.
Two incidents in June were particularly indicative of the changed
atmosphere in Moscow: the interrogation of newsman Robert Toth8
(the first such case in the detente era), and the surfacing of further sug-
gestions that dissident Shcharansky is under investigation for treason.
If Soviet authorities do charge him with treason, Shcharansky may be-
come the first intellectual dissident since Stalin’s day to be tried for this
7 Vladimir Bukovsky was exchanged in December 1976 for imprisoned Chilean
Communist leader, Luis Corvala´n Lepe. (Christopher S. Wren, “Soviet to Free Leading
Dissident in Trade for Chilean Communist,” The New York Times, December 18, 1976,
p. 49)
8 See footnote 2, Document 31.
