946  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
RECOMMENDATIONS
“As a result of the study and conclusions arrived at, actions are 
being taken within the Department of Defense to carry out the follow­
ing recommendations:
“1. That MATS be equipped and operated in peacetime to insure its 
capability to meet approved military hard-­core requirements in a gen­
eral war and in situations short of general war, and such other military 
requirements as cannot be met with certainty by commercial carriers on 
an effective and timely basis.
“2. That the modernization of MATS hard-­core military airlift 
capability be undertaken as a matter of priority to improve airlift effec­
tiveness and achieve operating savings.
“3. That MATS routine channel traffic (regularly scheduled, fixed 
routes) operations be reduced on an orderly basis consistent with 
assured commercial airlift capability and economical use of any MATS 
capacity resulting from necessary training or other operations related 
to its hard-­core requirement.
“4. That as commercial carriers equip themselves with modern, 
economical long-­range cargo aircraft and further orientation of MATS 
to the hard-­core function is effected, increased use should be made of 
the services of such commercial carriers for routine logistic supply.
“5. That commercial augmentation airlift procurement policies and 
practices be better adapted to the long-­range Department of Defense 
requirements for effective overseas commercial airlift service so as to 
encourage and assist in sound economic growth, development, and 
maintenance of an increased air cargo capability; that there be explored 
the feasibility of (1) increasing the amount of MATS overseas cargo air­
lift moving on a common carriage basis in accordance with certificates 
of public convenience and necessity issued by the Civil Aeronautics 
Board; (2) entering into longer term contracts for MATS traffic; and 
(3) giving some preference in the movement of MATS traffic to those 
commercial carriers (a) who are effectively committed to the Civil 
Reserve Air Fleet (CRAF) program, or (b) whose facilities and equip­
ment are most advantageous to the emergency needs of the Department 
of Defense; and that legislation be sought if necessary to permit accom­
plishment of any of the foregoing considered desirable.
“6. That the Department of Defense participate in and support 
governmental programs for the development of long-­range, econom­
ical turbine-­powered cargo aircraft for military and civil application.
“7. That the Department of Defense support proposed legislation 
for the guarantee of loans for the purchase of modern, newly-­developed 
cargo aircraft by commercial carriers.
“8. a. That consideration be given to the use of the Air Force 
Reserve equipped with transport aircraft that might be available from 
MATS excesses as augmentation forces for MATS in time of emergency.
“b. That a study be made to determine the desirability and feasibil­
ity of employing the Air National Guard in a transport role.
“9. That the role of CRAF be re-­examined with the objective of 
insuring optimum effectiveness and responsiveness of commercial air­
lift services to the Department of Defense under all conditions.”
