80
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
cessively absorbed by detail and thus of not responding to the more
fundamental crisis of confidence that pervades the West. In other
words, it is the old issue of the trees vs. the forest.
I attach a sheet of paper on which some thoughts of a more general
nature are briefly sketched out.2 They can be related to the needed ad-
vocacy of concrete actions. I also attach a useful article from today’s
London Times which reinforces the points I am trying to make,3 as well
as the pessimistic polls about East-West relations to which I referred at
breakfast.4
2 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “Some Themes on the Sub-
ject of Confidence.”
3 Attached but not printed is an article by Hugh Hanning entitled “President Carter
adopts the ways of the Ugly American.”
4 Attached but not printed is an undated paper entitled “European Perceptions of
Comparative East-West Military Strength.” The President’s Daily Diary contains no
record of a May 6 breakfast meeting between Carter and Brzezinski, nor was a memo-
randum of conversation of a meeting found. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials)
27.
Minutes of the London Economic Summit Meeting1
London, May 7, 1977
LONDON SUMMIT—First Session (May 7, 1977)—Morning Session
Callaghan: I want to welcome all of you to London. We are sitting
close together today because in my view the closer we are, and the
more intimate, the less likely we are to make speeches. This is not as de-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Trip File,
Box 1, President, Europe, 5/5–10/77: Memos and Cables, 5/5–20/77. Secret. Sent to
Carter under cover of a May 20 memorandum from Owen that reads: “I attach the notes
that Bob Hormats took of the Downing Street Summit. They cover the first day and the
morning of the second day. They do not cover the afternoon of the second day, which
was largely devoted to revising the Declaration.” (Ibid.) The sessions of the London G–7
Summit were held May 7–8 in the State Dining Room at 10 Downing Street. Two sessions
were held on May 7, the first from 10 a.m. until 1:10 p.m. and the second from 3:30 until
6:16 p.m. The third and fourth sessions on May 8 were held from 10:30 a.m. until 1:24 p.m.
and from 3 p.m. until 6 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily
Diary) The minutes of the Summit’s second session on May 7, which covered nuclear
non-proliferation and human rights, are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs,
Brzezinski Material, Trip File, Box 1, President, Europe, 5/5–10/77: Memos and Cables,
5/5–20/77.
