3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 128 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI 1. Disbelief that the US would cast aside the Vladivostok + January terms2 that had been reached with so much difficulty on their side. He said they kept waiting until the third day of the meetings to see whether “Vance had not brought something more.” 2. What loomed largest in the comprehensive proposal was the proposed cut in their ICBM force, which seemed transparently onesided in its effect. If the intention was to encourage a shift to a more stable sea-based force on both sides, this could have been understood if we had not tried to accomplish it so fast. 3. From the Soviet point of view, the absence of proposals for ground and sea based cruise missiles seemed cavalier, and not even in the US interests, taking into account the situation that would exist in a few years in the absence of such limitations. 4. Brezhnev felt he had gone to great length to explain candidly the Backfire limitations and was angered that his efforts seemed to be ignored. 5. The Soviet intention had been to reject the two US proposals, not to close off negotiations or to create a crisis in Soviet-American relations, but they felt the President’s press statements immediately after the meetings’ close3 seemed to suggest that the US proposals had been deliberately intended to evoke a Soviet rejection for propaganda purposes. These statements contributed to Soviet uncertainties about the intentions of the US Administration. Background factors, he said, were the human rights campaign and the request for funds for VOA and Radio Liberty timed to coincide with the beginning of the Moscow talks. Arbatov said he and his colleagues had debated two main theories about US intentions: 1. That the President may have genuinely wanted a substantial agreement, but because of inexperience tried to move too fast and ignored the logical starting point of the discussion as of January 1976, and may have been encouraged in this by people who did not want an agreement; or 2. That the President wished to produce a Soviet rejection that would justify further US military buildup and a general return to a confrontation relationship. In discussing possible ground for future negotiations, Arbatov thought some elements of the US comprehensive proposal could be ac- 2 Reference is to the SALT terms discussed by Kissinger and Brezhnev in January 1976. These are outlined in Brzezinski’s memorandum on SALT Negotiating History, February 2, 1977; see footnote 4, Document 1. 3 See the March 30 press briefing, “President Carter Discusses Strategic Arms Limitation Proposals,” in Department of State Bulletin, April 25, 1977, pp. 409–414.
