extent by the disposal of unprofitable lines operated by the Shipping Board,
for which the new law has made a market. Meanwhile it should be our
policy to maintain necessary strategic lines under the Government operation
until they can be transferred to private capital.
INTER-AMERICAN HIGHWAY
In my message last year I expressed the view that we should lend our
encouragement for more good roads to all the principal points on this
hemisphere south of the Rio Grande. My view has not changed. The Pan
American Union has recently indorsed it. In some of the countries to the
south a great deal of progress is being made in road building. In others
engineering features are often exacting and financing difficult. As those
countries enter upon programs for road building we should be ready to
contribute from our abundant experience to make their task easier of
accomplishment. I prefer not to go into civil life to accomplish this end. We
already furnish military and naval advisors, and following this precedent we
could draw competent men from these same sources and from the
Department of Agriculture.
We should provide our southern neighbors, if they request it, with such
engineer advisors for the construction of roads and bridges. Private interests
should look with favor upon all reasonable loans sought by these countries
to open main lines of travel. Such assistance should be given especially to
any project for a highway designed to connect all the countries on this
hemisphere and thus facilitate intercourse and closer relations among them.
AIR MAIL SERVICE
The friendly relations and the extensive commercial intercourse with the
Western Hemisphere to the south of us are being further cemented by the
establishment and extension of air-mail routes. We shall soon have one
from Key West, Fla., over Cuba, Haiti, and Santo Domingo to San Juan, P.
R., where it will connect with another route to Trinidad. There will be
another route from Key West to the Canal Zone, where connection will be
made with a route across the northern coast of South America to
Paramaribo. This will give us a circle around the Caribbean under our own
control. Additional connections will be made at Colon with a route running
