500.A15 a 1/251a
[Document 42]
The Secretary of State to President Coolidge
WASHINGTON, May 27, 1927.
MY DEAR MR. PRESIDENT: First. I have given a great deal of thought to the question
of the make-up of our delegation to Geneva. As you know, we have been
faced by the alternatives of going through with the same type of
representation we had at the preliminary conference, or of framing up a
delegation somewhat along the lines of that at the Washington Conference
in 1923. It appears that England is sending her First Lord of the Admiralty
and Lord Cecil, who is a Cabinet Member without portfolio. Japan has
made up a rather distinguished delegation, all of whom are naval officers or
ex-naval officers. Saito, the head of the Delegation, was at one time
Minister of Marines. So far as Japan is concerned, there is ample reason for
sending men who can speak with final authority and make decisions on the
ground. Her representatives would be so far away from the home base that
they could hardly be expected to refer questions back to Tokyo as they arise
from day to day. With us and with England it is, of course, otherwise. It
goes without saying that in our case every important move in the course of
the proceedings will be either dictated from or approved here.
I think we have all felt that Mr. Hughes has unique qualifications for the
task. As a dominant figure in the Washington Conference, his appearance
on this occasion might add considerably to the effectiveness of any
proposals that we may make. However, we know he cannot go.
In these circumstances, without attempting to rehearse the arguments pro
and con, I have concluded to recommend to you that we go ahead in the
normal, businesslike way, refraining from any effort to produce an artificial
impression by the selection of outstanding personalities. This would, of
course, mean that Gibson head the delegation and the Navy would send
very strong representatives including Admirals Jones, Long and Schofield,
with assistants from the Navy, including Captain Andrews. Allen Dulles,
