Venezuela  1241
VE–19.	
Instruction from the Secretary of State to Certain 
Diplomatic Missions1
 
Washington, January 19, 1959.
CA–6027.
SUBJECT
Recent Change in Venezuelan Income Tax Law
On December 19, 1958, effective December 20, 1958, and retroac-
tive to 1958 income, the Government Junta of Venezuela decreed an 
amendment to the Venezuelan income tax law providing for increased 
surtax rates. The decree has the effect of breaking the 50–50 principle 
which had its origin in Venezuela as pertains to the petroleum and min-
ing industries.
1. Venezuelan Concession System
The Venezuelan concession system, during its entire history, 
including under the 1943 Petroleum Law, has fixed and defined the 
terms and conditions of the respective concessions in the Petroleum 
Laws themselves. Until enactment of the 1943 Petroleum Law, such 
terms and conditions referred not only to technical and operating mat-
ters but, moreover, froze the tax regime for the full life of the conces-
sions in that the concessionaire was guaranteed against taxes directly 
burdening his enterprise or in amounts larger than those in existence at 
the time of concession issuance. The foregoing rights were considered 
to be acquired and inherent in the concession.
During the discussion of the 1943 Petroleum Law, the principle 
of equal sharing of profits between the Venezuelan Government and 
the petroleum concessionaire was developed. Although the petroleum 
industry full well realized that by converting petroleum concessions 
issued under prior laws to the Petroleum Law of 1943, it was expos-
ing itself to the legal possibility of unlimited income taxes, industry 
had, from the outset, the moral assurance from the government that 
the purpose of the new arrangement was only to share equally with 
the concessionaire the profits arising from his Venezuelan operations. 
While, as stated above, the Venezuelan Government has always had 
the power since 1943 to raise income taxes so as to impair the 50–50 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 831.112/1–1959. Secret. Drafted by M. 
Hollis Kannenberg of the Fuels Division, Bureau of Economic Affairs, and John Shaw of 
the Office of Near Eastern Affairs; approved by William M. Rountree, Assistant Secretary 
of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs. This despatch was also sent to the 
Embassies in Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Dhahran, Jidda, Kuwait, and Tehran.
