Eastern Europe Region 133 39. Memorandum From William Odom of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1 Washington, September 3, 1980 SUBJECT East-West Relations: A Formula for U.S. Policy in 1981 and Beyond I want to offer some perspectives on the current state of East-West relations and an integrating formula for putting both the resources and a clear sense of strategic direction into our policies toward the Soviet Union in the next four years. You will recognize much of the analysis, but I hope the framework is helpful for tying rhetoric to actions and programs in a comprehensive fashion. The inspiration for this memo comes in part from Sam Huntington’s recent paper on U.S.-Soviet relations2 which he wrote for Hedley Donovan, but it also stems from my own efforts in strategic doctrinal changes, the Persian Gulf Security Framework, and East-West technology transfers. We have accomplished a great deal over the past three years, and I would like to maintain the momentum and include additional areas and programs. The East-West Balance In early 1977 you told Sam and me to “tell us how we are doing in the world vis-a-vis the Soviets.” PRM–10 Comprehensive Net Assessment3 was the reply. It treated military and non-military categories as well as all major regions of U.S.-Soviet competition. 1. The military balance was judged as “essential equivalence” and the trends as adverse. That judgment looks sound in retrospect. 2. In the non-military categories of technology, economics, diplomacy, and political institutions, the U.S. was ahead although the critical military-related technology gap was closing in several areas. In retrospect this judgment has been vindicated. 3. In the major regions outside Europe, Soviet prospects were judged best in Africa and the Persian Gulf region. The Caribbean was cited but without alarm. In retrospect, the record is mixed in Africa; 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Unfiled File, Box 130, [East/West] 9/80. Confidential. Sent for information. Brzezinski forwarded the memorandum to Carter who wrote “Very interesting. J” at the top of the first page. 2 Not further identified. 3 Carter signed PRM–10, calling for a “Comprehensive Net Assessment and Military Force Posture Review” on February 18, 1977. (Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 3, Unclassified/Declassified PRM and PD/NSC Documents)
