3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–June 1979
595
Brezhnev noted that the Soviet proposal was on the negotiating
table in the Committee on Disarmament. He would like to hope that the
United States will add its word in support of that proposal. In this re-
spect, the Soviet Union would not wish to claim any monopoly. If ad-
visable, it could be presented as a joint proposal. Acting together, the
Soviet Union and the United States can achieve a great deal to the ben-
efit of all.
One of the key tasks at this time is to strengthen the regime of non-
proliferation of nuclear weapons. Where we have a common interest,
let us go on acting jointly and in parallel to attract more countries to ac-
cede to the NPT. Here we had a clearly common interest to establish
strict controls over materials, equipment and technology that can be
used for making nuclear arms. The appearance of such weapons in
areas in which there are acute conflicts, and in countries which assert
territorial claims against other countries would be particularly dan-
gerous. In this connection, it was enough just to mention the Middle
East and South Africa. Disturbing news in this respect was coming out
of Pakistan; perhaps the President had more information on that matter
than did Brezhnev. He had already drawn the President’s attention to
current plans to supply China with nuclear reactors produced under
American license. Unfortunately, he had to note that he still had not re-
ceived a satisfactory reply. But he would ask the President to take a
look at the knot that was being tied there. Both the Soviet Union and the
United States had urged Pakistan and India to accede to the Non-
Proliferation Treaty. But Pakistan was now working on the develop-
ment of its own nuclear weapons and was referring to India in this con-
text. In fact, however, this was just a pretext. The Soviet leadership be-
lieved the statement made by the leaders of India to the effect that their
country did not intend to produce nuclear weapons. This had been
reaffirmed again just recently by Prime Minister Desai.2 At the same
time, India was reluctant to sign the NPT at a time when the Western
countries were engaged in helping the Chinese to build up their mili-
tary might, including their nuclear potential. After all, the Chinese har-
bored territorial claims against India and were not at all averse to re-
sorting to outright aggression against neighboring countries.
Turning to another subject, Brezhnev said it would be very impor-
tant promptly to complete and sign a treaty on the general and com-
plete prohibition of nuclear weapon testing. The Soviet Union had
done a great deal in that direction, having met Western positions on a
number of important matters. Speaking frankly, he would have to say
that the CTB negotiations were being slowed and delayed, and by no
means through any fault of the Soviet Union. Brezhnev expressed the
2 Morarji Desai, Prime Minister of India.
