Afghanistan 3 8. The entire conversation was most cordial, with Daoud several times indicating his desire for close U.S.-Afghan relations. He showed his vigor especially when emphasizing the importance he attaches to Afghan honor and independence. He looked as healthy as I have ever seen him. Eliot 2. Telegram From the Embassy in Afghanistan to the Department of State1 Kabul, April 13, 1977, 1100Z 2544. Subject: Daoud’s Afghanistan and His Trip to the Soviet Union. 1. Summary: Daoud is not “in political trouble,” but the country he left April 12 for his three day visit to the Soviet Union is not quite the settled entity he ruled before the “Loya Jirgah” (Constitutional Assembly), the passage of a new Constitution earlier this year and the appointment of a new Cabinet. As for the visit itself we credit Afghan protestations that it is “routine”—though the intensity of Afghan-Soviet relations and recent political events in this part of the world will offer plenty to talk about. As seems to have become a regular event in Afghan-Russian relations, a Chinese delegation turned up in Kabul just in time to offer counterpoint to the larger theme. End summary. 2. President Daoud left for Moscow April 12, along with his Minister of Commerce (Jalalar), Minister for Planning (Khurrani), Minister of Water and Power (Mohammadi), Minister in Charge for Foreign Affairs (Waheed Abdullah), and a lower ranking staff that included Samad Ghaus (the Foreign Ministry’s Deputy for Political Affairs—de facto Deputy Minister). 3. The scene at home. The domestic political scene Daoud left behind was less tranquil, less settled than Daoud has experienced for some time. Discontent about the Cabinet announced March 17 (see Kabul 1921) has broken out in the Afghan “establishment”—and in less prestigious strata, we believe, as well. One influential Mohammadzai 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D7700132–0436. Confidential. Sent for information to Islamabad, Moscow, New Delhi, USLO Peking, and Tehran.
