598  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
infiltration takes various forms: entrance of subversive agents, introduc-
tion of subversive literature, smuggling of arms, traffic in contraband 
items, etc. These activities could be greatly reduced by the operation 
of a well-­organized and equipped border patrol. It is believed that the 
enclosed memorandum clearly demonstrates the almost appalling lack 
of equipment available to the public security forces of this country for 
carrying out their responsibilities. This fact is borne out to some extent 
by knowledge that when a local court orders the deportation of an indi-
vidual, he is literally walked to the frontier by a detail from the Guardia 
Nacional.
With respect to the non-­existence of craft for patrolling coastal 
waters, it has been made clear to President Lemus that it is most unlikely 
that equipment such as patrol launches would fall within the scope of 
the program currently under study. In reply to an inquiry as to whether 
his government might, under special circumstances, be in a position to 
purchase such craft, he said it would provided the price were low.
Justification
As is well known, this area is currently going through one of its 
most troubled periods in history. Castroism working in concert with 
international communism has made serious inroads, and, because of 
the combination of conditions existing here, El Salvador appears to have 
been selected as a prime target. The fact that El Salvador is extremely 
vulnerable is recognized by President Lemus, and he is rightly con-
cerned. What has been accomplished to date in an effort to hold back 
the tide and to channel it into evolutionary streams rather than per-
mit it to flow into revolutionary torrents has been accomplished by the 
Government of El Salvador almost exclusively on its own. The assis-
tance received from the United States and other outside sources has, 
up to the present time, been negligible. Yet, not only are the resources 
available to this Government extremely limited, but time is running out 
at an increasingly rapid rate. If assistance is to be effective, it is going to 
have to be made available on a crash basis.
There can be no denying that the public security forces of this coun-
try face some very real and serious problems. Reports of clandestine 
movements of agents and arms are reaching the Embassy in increasing 
volume. And overt threats to public order and safety have shown a 
decided increase in both number and boldness over the past several 
months. These facts together with the demonstrable inadequacy of the 
tools at the disposal of the public security forces of this country for car-
rying out their responsibilities provide more than adequate grounds for 
implementing this recommended program on an urgent basis.
In the hope that early favorable action would be forthcoming 
on the above recommendations, USOM included funds for bringing
