Romania
739
Soviets do not want to interfere in Poland2 and observed the situation
there appears to be calming down. The Counselor reviewed the U.S.
position on Poland, and welcomed Romania’s constructive contribution
at Madrid. The Counselor observed that next year’s most favored nation
(MFN) hearings will probably focus more on Romania’s emigration
procedures than on the numbers involved since the current rate of
emigration is relatively satisfactory. Bogdan disclaimed any current
interest in a new Mid-East initiative. Discussion of human rights, the
IBRD loan, and Romania’s domestic situation will be reported sepa-
rately.3 End summary.
3. The Director for the Americas in the Romanian Foreign Ministry,
Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan, accompanied by Romanian Ambassa-
dor to the US, Ionescu, and Embassy Counselor Ranghet called on
the Counselor December 16 to review the international situation and
discuss outstanding bilateral issues. EUR DAS Barry and the Romanian
country officer also participated in the meeting and luncheon which
followed. Conversation focused on Poland and CSCE and on the
Middle East, next year’s MFN’s hearings, human rights, and Romania’s
application for an IBRD loan for a power project. The last item is
reported by septel.
4. Poland. Bogdan reiterated Romania’s well-known opposition
to any form of outside interference in Poland’s internal affairs. He
2 In telegram 320368 to Bucharest and Belgrade December 4, the Department
instructed Aggrey to call on Andrei to discuss the situation in Poland, stressing that a
Soviet intervention in Poland would have wide-ranging consequences on U.S.-Soviet
relations. The Department also instructed Aggrey to ask Andrei for the Romanian view
of the situation in Poland, and assure the Romanian Government of “our own continuing
strong support for Romania’s independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity.”
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870123–0417) In telegram 9896
from Bucharest, December 4, Aggrey reported that he had delivered the U.S. position
earlier that day, and that Andrei promised to pass the information to Ceausescu and
discuss the Romanian position with the Ambassador as soon as possible. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P870104–0553) On December 6, Aggrey
met with Andrei who informed him that he had just returned from the meeting of the
Warsaw Pact countries Party leaders and Foreign Ministers in Moscow. “The general
consensus,” Andrei told Aggrey, “was that Poland’s problems should be solved by the
Polish people. At present, there is no intention of another Warsaw Pact state’s military
forces interfering in the internal affairs of Poland.” However, Aggrey reported, Andrei
warned that “if the situation in Poland reaches a point of unreasonable conflict” between
the government and protestors, “such an eventuality could lead the regime to invite the
Soviet Union to intervene,” something neither the United States nor Romania wanted
to see. (Telegram 9971 from Bucharest, December 6; National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, P870104–0550)
3 In telegram 336127 to Bucharest, December 20, the Department reported Bogdan’s
discussions with Ridgway on the internal situation in Romania. (National Archives, RG
59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800605–1009) Bogdan also met with Vest on December
22 and discussed Poland, CSCE, human rights, and bilateral relations. (Telegram 337804
to Bucharest, December 23; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File,
D800607–1136)
