360  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
will contribute increased effectiveness for a given investment. What 
should be the relative emphasis given to increasing the use of nuclear 
weapons, as opposed to conventional weapons for tactical systems?
Other technical advances as, for example, nuclear engines for ships, 
will require examination. To what extent do they simplify the logistic 
support of ground and sea forces and increase the effective mobility of 
such forces?
At a more general level, the question arises, whether, on the whole, 
present funds for the Navy give adequate support to its several mis­
sions. The Navy contributes to the strategic striking force; the extent 
of this contribution, and the cost thereof, will increase as the Polaris 
program advances. At the same time, the Navy assists in defending 
the home base, contributes a mobile tactical force, is a stabilizing and 
deterrent element in peace time, and is a major troop carrier in the case 
of general war.
B. Ground Forces
1. Davy Crockett
Is there a clear understanding of the nuclear warhead requirements 
for this weapon system based on approved operational concepts for its 
employment?
This system provides great explosive power in a weapon of light 
weight. It is effective against armor, troops, and installations; never­
theless, its effects are restricted enough that it can be used safely in the 
vicinity of friendly forces, and discriminately against ground targets.
2. Vigilante-Mauler (new AA gun and missile)
Are both of these projects necessary for battlefield defense?
3. Redstone
Does this weapon have sufficient mobility and invulnerability to 
make it dependable under combat conditions and useful under present 
Army organization and requirements for mobility?
4. Hawk
Should the procurement of Hawk missiles be limited to the num­
ber required for use overseas?
This air defense weapon for general tactical use should be con­
sidered in relation to other tactical air defense weapons. It may be that 
Hawk is the only available air defense weapon under the direct control 
of Army field forces.
5. Short-­range Missiles (Little John, LaCrosse, Missile A, Missile B)
Is there need for all of these tactical weapons?
