[8?] Soviet propaganda seems to have taken an anti-Christian turn during these
Christmas holidays.
Consul General at Canton telegraphs as follows December 29:
“December 29, 4 p.m. Considerable anti-Christian propaganda in Canton
during the holidays including speeches by former governor and other
politicians. Several American mission schools annoyed by agitators but no
serious disturbance. Report follows by post. Department was not informed.”
9. Similar agitation against Christianity in Chekiang Province; in Hangchow one anti-
Christian demonstration was held in which churches were denounced as tools of
foreign imperialism and capitalism; at Ningpo there was a violent campaign organized
by an “anti-Christian committee” of which the following is typical:
“Since the invasion of Christianity in China thousands of men and guns have
followed on the heels of the missionaries who come to us clad in black
gowns and carrying banners of evangelistic volunteers. Many ports have been
yielded; concessions have been granted and millions of dollars of indemnity
have been paid. So we must stand against Christianity because of its relation
to imperialism.”
10. If there has been any increase of antiforeign feeling there is no evidence of any
hostility to foreigners. Train robbers (see my telegram number 506, December 31, 3
p.m.)9 probably confined themselves to foreigners to secure nonintervention of Chinese
and in expectation of larger funds, though Military Governor Chihli Province tells
consul general at Tientsin robbery was an attempt to discredit Fengtien regime.
Governor declares every effort is being made to apprehend culprits and if not
successful he will make himself personally responsible for the losses besides punishing
responsible officers in the section where the robbery occurred.
Repeated to Tokyo.
SCHURMAN
1 For the defeat of Wu Pei-fu and overthrow of President Tsao Kun, see Foreign
Relations, 1924, vol. I, pp. 361 ff.
2 See telegram No. 480, Dec. 13, 1924, from the Chargé in China, and footnote, ibid. ,
p. 408.
3 Virtual ruler of Manchuria, who had estahlished his headquarters at Tientsin
following the civil war in the autumn of 1924.
