656 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX fully in the military sphere. And it would be unforgivable if we did not do everything to ensure precise coordination among the Warsaw Treaty countries on defense issues.” (Mastny and Byrne, A Cardboard Castle?, pages 418–421) Even before the meeting started, Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu’s foreign policy goals came at odds with the consensus of the other Warsaw Pact leaders. In telegram 28013 from Moscow, November 16, the Embassy reported that, according to a Romanian diplomat, the documents to be adopted at the Moscow meeting were still being worked on and that if Bucharest had its way “any documents adopted will be relatively non-polemical, non-offensive, and generalized.” Disagreement, the telegram continued, “exists primarily between the Soviets and Romanians on a number of topics to be mentioned in the conference documents,” including “the Middle East, Vietnam, and relations between socialist states.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780475–0330) The declaration, the Embassy in Moscow reported in telegram 29052, November 27, focused primarily on disarmament and was “less polemical than has been case in recent Soviet commentary on these subjects.” The Embassy reported: The declaration was “also noteworthy for what it omits. This is particularly true of its failure to attack the Camp David Accords. If any doubt existed that Romania was responsible for this deviation from the Soviet line, it was removed when the other six PCC participants issued their supplemental declaration.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780488–0757) After the end of the Moscow meeting, the members of the Warsaw Pact except Romania published a statement on the Middle East attacking the Camp David Accords and restating their support for the Bagdad Conference, the Arab League summit which denounced Sadat’s separate peace with Israel and excluded Egypt from the organization. Romania’s strong support for the Camp David Accords, despite Ceausescu’s previous reservations about a limited Egyptian-Israeli understanding without inclusion of the other parties, made it impossible to issue a unified Warsaw Pact statement. Its publication without Romanian support underscored the tensions between Bucharest and the other members. A much stronger disagreement revolved around the presentation made by Kulikov on the status of Warsaw Pact forces, and especially on the proposal for agreement on increased rights of the Pact’s Supreme Commander in war time. Following Ceausescu’s return from Moscow, the Romanian Communist Party Politburo met on November 24 to discuss the results of the meeting. Describing for the Politburo the Moscow meeting, Romanian Prime Minister Manea Manescu portrayed Kulikov’s report as a result of Soviet “militarist circles” created “for
