National Security Policy  1097
had suffered from cyclones and where they were constructing cyclone 
shelters that were also good fallout shelters. In response to a ques­
tion from the President, Governor Hoegh indicated that 18 inches of 
concrete or two feet of earth were now considered adequate protec­
tion from fallout. Previously two feet of concrete or three feet of earth 
were considered to be necessary. This difference arose from the fact 
that earlier studies had indicated that a dosage of 75 roentgens would 
cause illness whereas recent tests indicated that it took 200 roentgens 
to produce illness.
The National Security Council:
Discussed the subject, in the light of an oral presentation by the 
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, based upon a report 
prepared pursuant to NSC Action No. 2131–­c and the forthcoming 
annual report on the status of the civil and defense mobilization pro­
gram as of June 30, 1960.
5. U.S. IMPORT COMPETITION AS EXEMPLIFIED BY CASES 
UNDER SECTION 8 OF THE TRADE AGREEMENTS EXTENSION 
ACT OF 1958
(NSC Action No. 2166–­b–­(14); Memo for NSC from Executive 
Secretary, same subject, dated July 12, 1960)
Governor Hoegh’s presentation was based upon the reference mem­
orandum of July 12, 1960. When Governor Hoegh had concluded his 
presentation, Secretary Herter observed that the guidelines developed 
by OCDM were very good and that extraordinary good sense had been 
shown in the examination of these cases. Secretary Mueller stated that 
he agreed completely with Governor Hoegh’s report and noted that a 
few of the cases that had been brought under Section 8 should have been 
brought as escape clause actions. In fact, they had been brought as escape 
clause cases at the same time that they were brought under Section 8 as a 
device for getting action in one area or the other.
The National Security Council:
a. Discussed the subject, in the light of an oral presentation by the 
Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization, based on the enclo­
sures to the reference memorandum of July 12, 1960.
b. Concurred generally in the guidelines which the Director, Office 
of Civil and Defense Mobilization, has applied in making determina­
tions under Section 8 of the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1958.
Robert H. Johnson
