30
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
I know from our talks in Geneva3 of your own deep desire for a just
and lasting peace. My understanding is that Syria continues to adhere
to the relevant Security Council resolutions constituting the basis for a
negotiated settlement and has left the door open to rejoining the negoti-
ations if conditions acceptable to Syria are met. We are gratified that
Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat have both responded posi-
tively to the invitation to meet with me next month in a major new ef-
fort to establish a framework for a Middle East peace settlement.
We have purposely not set a fixed duration for the talks, scheduled
to begin on September 6, so as to be able to allow as much time as is
needed for our efforts to succeed. This is an encouraging indication of
the seriousness with which these parties are approaching this meeting.
I extended this invitation because I believe we have reached a cru-
cial point in the search for peace in the Middle East. Nine months have
passed since President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin opened signifi-
cant new possibilities for negotiations with the historic meetings in Je-
rusalem and in Ismailia. The sides have made progress toward re-
solving some of the issues that divide them at this time, but recently, as
you are aware, an impasse was threatened. I am convinced that we
cannot afford an impasse, since the positions would then harden and
the atmosphere deteriorate to the point where the present opportunity
for peace could well become another of the lost opportunities that have
marked the history of this tragic conflict.
The objective of the Camp David meeting will remain as it has
been defined by the two sides themselves in negotiations this year: to
make progress toward an agreement on a framework, based on Secu-
rity Council Resolution 242, that would allow steady progress toward
agreement on specific issues, within the context of the agreed goal of a
stable, just and comprehensive peace. An agreed framework such as
the United States is seeking might ultimately make it possible for other
parties to the conflict, including Syria, to rejoin the peace negotiations.
Our experience in attempting to facilitate and promote negotia-
tions this past year has demonstrated that it is impossible to carry nego-
tiations beyond a certain point on the crucial issues unless the heads of
government themselves can be engaged in a direct exchange. This was
one of the considerations that led me to the decision to extend invita-
tions to the two leaders to meet with me at Camp David. Our objective
will be to achieve agreements at the political level which can provide
guidance for the negotiators on the key issues. I plan to do everything
3 Carter met Assad in Geneva on May 9, 1977. See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol.
VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978, Document 32.
