National Security Policy 101 follows: 100 largest cities at an average of $200,000 per city, $20 million dollars; the next 400 cities in order of size, an average of $50,000 each, or $20 million; remaining areas (predominantly rural), $8 million. Surveys would take full advantage of data already collected by survival plans. -----$48 Millions (2 year program) 4c. Pilot Studies The Committee believes that the nationwide survey of existing shelters should be supplemented by an intensive study of the total range and nature of problems which might arise in conjunction with a shelter program. This would be done by intensive study of selected metropolitan areas on a pilot basis. The studies would extend to the development of complete engineering plans and specifications; probôÙ lems of zoning, condemnation, local organization and administration; detailed site studies, and plans for maintenance and operation. Studies of the type proposed would cost approximately $5 million for a major metropolitan area. It is proposed that 5 representative cities be included in the pilot study program, with all studies to be completed within two years. Studies would require State and local participation, but the major part of the work would be done through research-ôÙcontract financed by the Federal Government. -----$25 Millions (2 year program) $Millions 3. Public Education $12.5 (first year) 25.0 (annually thereafter) The Committee agrees that greatly increased public understanding of bomb phenomenology, especially the nature of gamma radiation, is required if Federal urging of fallout shelter construction is to be effecôÙ tive. There must also be increased awareness of the probable extent of the fallout hazard resulting from all-ôÙout nuclear war, and the public must be convinced that the problem is not hopeless, but can be dealt with effectively through provision of fallout shelters. The program recommended would be conducted in a low key of gradually increasing intensity in three parts: 4 The Department of Defense and Bureau of the Budget members believe that the survey and pilot studies described under 2b and 2c should require an appropriate perôÙ centage of State and/or local participation. They believe that this procedure would be more effective in stimulating locally financed shelter construction and would avoid estabôÙ lishing a precedent which might preclude local financial support of subsequent shelter construction. The other members believe that such a requirement would delay unduly an effort which gives promise of identifying quickly a substantial amount of effective fallout shelter at very little cost. [Footnote is in the original.]
