1955  547
Of the nineteen Americans still held in prison in Communist 
China following the issuance of the Agreed Announcement, only five 
have been released to date. The United States is continuing to press at 
Geneva and through the British Charge d’affaires at Peiping for early 
release of the remainder. The failure of the Chinese Communists to ful­
fill their commitment to allow Americans to return “expeditiously” is 
causing the United States Government serious concern.
The United States places no restrictions on the departure of Chi­
nese from the United States. The Department knows of no Chinese who 
claims his departure is being obstructed and the Indian Embassy has so 
far made no representations concerning any such case.
Under the second item of the agenda, the Chinese Communists 
asked for the removal of the United States economic embargo and 
agreement to talks at the Foreign Minister level. The United States 
asked for a Chinese Communist declaration renouncing force, and an 
accounting for 450 military personnel missing from the Korean War, 
and concerning whose fate we have evidence that the Chinese Commu­
nists might have knowledge.
Discussion has centered around the renunciation of force item. The 
United States has proposed that both parties make similar declarations 
renouncing the use of force generally, and with particular reference 
to the Taiwan area. The purpose is to remove the threat of war in the 
Taiwan area. The Chinese Communists have indicated a willingness 
to make a general renunciation of the use of force, but so far have ada­
mantly resisted our efforts to get them to apply this to the Taiwan area. 
They insist that the Taiwan question is domestic and refuse to consider 
any curtailment of their freedom to use military force if necessary to 
impose their control over Taiwan. They have demanded the with­
drawal of United States forces from the Taiwan area. The United States 
is continuing its effort to bring them to modify this attitude.
With reference to the proposal for a conference at a higher level, 
the United States view is that the ambassadorial level is the appropriate 
one. No proposal for higher level talks could even be considered until 
the Chinese Communists have permitted all United States citizens to 
leave, have renounced force in the Taiwan area, and all other practical 
matters at issue have been disposed of.
The questions of economic embargo and missing military person­
nel have received little discussion up to the present.
The United States has assured the Government of the Repub­
lic of China that it will not discuss at Geneva anything involving the 
rights, claims and essential interests of the Government of the Repub­
lic of China. There has been no discussion of recognition or admission 
of Communist China to the United Nations, as rumored in the press.
