723.2515/1624: Telegram [Document 229] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) [Paraphrase] WASHINGTON, September 28, 1925—6 p.m. For Pershing: Your telegram September 24, 10 a.m. I have carefully considered with former Secretary of State Hughes63 the legal questions and propositions in your proposed resolution and submit the following for your personal information, not as a ruling of the Arbitrator, but as personal opinion: 1. It is important that the Arbitrator should maintain his position strictly as arbitrator and should not assume any different responsibility. President Coolidge would not have consented to undertake to effect settlement between Chile and Peru by use of armed forces. Forcible intervention for purposes except protection of the interests of the United States and its nationals would not have been within proper exercise of his authority. President Coolidge consented to act as Arbitrator under definite terms of submission. He made his award upon careful examination of the facts, and has thus demonstrated his desire to obtain peaceable and just settlement. If his decisions within scope of the arbitration are not carried out, responsibility will rest with those who obstruct fulfillment of the award and not with him. Course of procedure should be so determined as to make perfectly clear that responsibility, so that all efforts to obscure it would be of no avail. 2. Chile is entitled to possession of the territory in dispute during holding of a plebiscite, and her administrative authority continues while she thus retains possession. The grounds of this conclusion are explicit in the award. The decision rests upon provisions of the Treaty of Ancon which Arbitrator had no authority to disturb. Right of Chile to remain in possession until the plebiscite is not only derived from construction of the treaty but is supported in terms of the submission to the Arbitrator which provide that, even should Arbitrator decide that a plebiscite should not be held, the administrative organization of the territory should not be disturbed until agreement should be reached regarding the disposition of the provinces. Chile would not have made an agreement divesting herself of possession and administrative authority during plebiscite period, and cannot now be held to a course which would violate her right under treaty and the terms of submission.
