National Security Policy  1199
made in 1963 instead of in 1965. He felt that our scientific knowledge of 
space depended on the gradual accumulation of data.
Dr. Kistiakowsky felt that to a large extent the extent the objectives of 
the space program must be charged to the cold war. The Soviets had suc­
ceeded by propaganda in instilling the idea that achievements in space 
were an accurate over-­all measure of a country’s scientific and techno­
logical potential. Perhaps it was necessary to re-­educate people here and 
abroad to the fact that there are other measures of scientific achievement 
besides space activities. After such re-education, the space program could 
be slowed down without adverse political effects. The President believed 
that he could use $1 billion to better advantage on some other aspect of 
the cold war. Secretary Gates thought the cold war argument had been 
refuted. The President added that $500 million more spent on our infor­
mation services might have more effect than the same amount spent on 
space. Dr. Waterman said that if space exploration could be international­
ized the competitive aspects of the space race would disappear.
Secretary Herter noted that at the Tehran and Istanbul meetings last 
year we had made a presentation to our allies on our space programs. 
Our allies had been very encouraged by this presentation because 
up to that time they had been concerned with propaganda about the 
Soviet achievements. Secretary Herter asked whether the Soviets had 
not already tried and failed to put a man in space. Mr. Dulles said the 
Soviets may have made such an attempt.
Mr. Gray said he had the impression that Drs. Glennan and 
Waterman and Kistiakowsky all took a dim view of the man-­in-­space 
program. He had not heretofore realized that this was the feeling of sci­
entists. The President said he was ready to say that he saw no scientific 
or psychological reason for carrying the man-­in-­space program beyond 
the MERCURY program. He thought the idea of a man on the moon was 
sheer Buck Rogers fiction. Dr. Glennan said his most difficult job was 
keeping the space program on a sensible basis. He believed that as solid 
scientific achievements were recorded from earlier space programs, the 
urge for putting man in space would disappear. The President said we 
were facing a difficult fiscal problem because our rate of expenditure 
was increasing faster than our economic growth.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed a presentation on the subject by the 
Administrator and Deputy Administrator, National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration, based primarily on the first annual revision of 
the NASA long-­range plan.
b. Noted and discussed a presentation by the Special Assistant to 
the President for Science and Technology of a report by a panel of the 
Science Advisory Committee on “Man in Space”.
c. Agreed that further testing and experimentation will be nec­
essary to establish whether there are any valid scientific reasons for 
extending manned space flight beyond the MERCURY program.
