390
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
166.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance and the
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
(Warnke) to President Carter1
Washington, September 6, 1977
SUBJECT
Proposed Strategy for CTB Negotiations
General Approach
The strategy suggested in this memorandum has two basic purposes:
—Accelerating the shift to concrete negotiation of practical solutions
with the Soviets;
—Increasing Soviet receptivity to sound solutions which will be ad-
vantageous over the long haul.
We believe we can now foresee the general shape of desirable, and
possibly negotiable, outcomes on the three major issues—peaceful nu-
clear explosions, verification, and participation by France and China.
Moreover, we can credibly portray these solutions as genuinely taking
into account the viewpoints of both sides. To give these approaches the
maximum weight possible, and to ensure that they are given serious
high-level consideration in Moscow, we recommend that you approve
our giving the attached draft memorandum (Tab A)2 to Dobrynin, for
transmission to senior levels in Moscow, as an authoritative statement
of U.S. views and proposals.
Realistically, such a memorandum may not persuade the Soviets
to see all the issues our way because, in fact, we are addressing
problems of great complexity and sensitivity. But the prospects of it
bringing the two sides closer together quickly are great enough, in our
judgment, to warrant the effort. Moreover, such an initiative would, in
the broadest perspective, be consistent with our basic strategy of stimu-
lating productive negotiations with the Soviets on an important arms
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Agency File, Box
1, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency: 8/77–2/78. Secret; Nodis. The memorandum
was attached to a September 15 covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Harold
Brown and Fri which asked for their comments by September 20. In the upper right-hand
corner of Brzezinski’s memorandum, Brown wrote “9/16. MSH—I think it improper that
we are given 2 days to comment on a memo 10 days old. Perhaps this is [illegible] one I
should [illegible] to ZB’s attention. (perhaps [illegible] a cover [illegible]). HB.” Next to
Brzezinski’s signature, Brown also wrote “Walt—I have read the memo for President,
only scanned Tab A. This seems to [illegible] one of the better efforts. What does Gerry
[illegible] think? HB.”
2 Attached but not printed.
