1552  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
thing on Friday; F. hoped they would hammer on that from now on. 
Sec said it gave us a good position to force the issue. F. said the only 
remaining question was the one raised in the Sec’s cable—has he made 
an explicit promise re the duration article. Sec said he would like to be 
informed about the business of the veto power in the control council. 
F. said he would get it to him first thing Monday morning. F. said it cov­
ered any decision to send in inspection team, find a state in violation, 
appointment of principal staff. F. said they really have a double veto, 
because there is also veto by the one who is to be inspected.
419.	 Telegram 1165 to Geneva1
Washington, February 1, 1959, 7:15 p.m.
For Wadsworth. Personal from Secretary. Regret that I cannot share 
your confidence that best way “to clear the decks” for focusing attention 
on veto and nationality of control staff will be to table remaining draft arti­
cles of the treaty. I realize that this is a close question and that from your 
standpoint there may be advantage in getting rid of accusation of stalling. 
However it seems to me that the tabling of remaining articles will almost 
certainly provide Soviets with opportunity to raise new issues and to pre­
vent focusing of attention on key issues of control. Furthermore in view of 
list of matters where Soviet demands veto power in Control Commission 
we now have an unassailable position to focus attention on this matter. You 
will therefore, pending further instructions, abstain from tabling any fur­
ther articles. Meanwhile please advise me whether you have any explicit 
agreement with Soviets that you would table draft of article on duration as 
soon as they tabled their article on veto power in Control Council.
I realize that no control system can be absolutely “fool proof” and 
that we must count upon the chance of detection being sufficiently 
great as not to justify gamble of treaty violation. If however Soviet view 
about the control machinery prevails then even that risk would be min­
imized. It is apparent that Soviets want the Korean type of inspection 
system which we know to be futile.
I shall probably be discussing this situation with Macmillan on 
Wednesday.
Dulles
1 Source: No further clauses to be tabled in nuclear testing suspension talks. Secret; 
Priority; Limit Distribution. 2 pp. NARA, RG 59, Central Files, 700.5611/2–159.
