Human Rights think we came out alright, and I recommend that the same kind of “nonclearance” system be arranged by December of 1980 for a fairly intensive exercise during the first half of January. The Madrid meeting of the post-Helsinki CSCE due to take place in September11 was for a while a subject of considerable activity, in collaboration with Marshall Brement. The chief reason for wanting to go ahead with the meeting following the precipitate deterioration of relations after Afghanistan12 was, in my view and that of others, the opportunity to reaffirm our strong commitment to the human rights elements of Basket I and Basket III of the Helsinki Final Agreement. The chairman of the U.S. delegation will be former Attorney General Griffin Bell, with Washington Attorney Max Kampelman as his deputy. State has set up its operational preparations, and you will want to get involved in collaboration with Brement and Blackwill in helping to monitor the human rights elements of U.S. policy as it develops over the next few months. One issue I would simply pass along is what strikes me as an imbalance in our tools for implementing the President’s human rights policy. The fact is that we have, both in practice and in law, a number of sticks to wield against countries which do not live up to the standards that are embodied in the international declarations and covenants on human rights, as well as our own policies. But there is a singular dearth of carrots. In this connection, I would like to see a more active policy of calibrated rewards to the list of countries we frequently boast of as having moved away from despicable practices of torture, political prisoners of conscience, an unfree press, military rule, etc. These might have the form of a special visitation (in my opinion the visit of Navy Secretary Hidalgo to Argentina in early July, apart from its potential for sabotaging a carefully crafted revised U.S. policy toward that country, was the kind of demonstration that ought to be cranked up more often for countries that have really gone the distance to stop leaning on their own people). In this connection, I am concerned with the trend that I understand Tom Ehrlich, the Director of IDCA, is pressing for a small number of a relatively large aid projects rather than a scatteration. I can appreciate his logic, but this already almost forced us to deny a tiny bit of symbolic but needful economic assistance to Equatorial Guinea, which has gotten rid of one of the bloodiest and most repressive dictatorships in modern history.13 I personally think that kind of flexibility belongs in the aid program. 11 The conference opened in November 1980.
