Human Rights
631
think we came out alright, and I recommend that the same kind of
“nonclearance” system be arranged by December of 1980 for a fairly in-
tensive exercise during the first half of January.
The Madrid meeting of the post-Helsinki CSCE due to take place
in September11 was for a while a subject of considerable activity, in col-
laboration with Marshall Brement. The chief reason for wanting to go
ahead with the meeting following the precipitate deterioration of rela-
tions after Afghanistan12 was, in my view and that of others, the oppor-
tunity to reaffirm our strong commitment to the human rights ele-
ments of Basket I and Basket III of the Helsinki Final Agreement. The
chairman of the U.S. delegation will be former Attorney General Griffin
Bell, with Washington Attorney Max Kampelman as his deputy. State
has set up its operational preparations, and you will want to get in-
volved in collaboration with Brement and Blackwill in helping to mon-
itor the human rights elements of U.S. policy as it develops over the
next few months.
One issue I would simply pass along is what strikes me as an im-
balance in our tools for implementing the President’s human rights
policy. The fact is that we have, both in practice and in law, a number of
sticks to wield against countries which do not live up to the standards
that are embodied in the international declarations and covenants on
human rights, as well as our own policies. But there is a singular dearth
of carrots. In this connection, I would like to see a more active policy of
calibrated rewards to the list of countries we frequently boast of as
having moved away from despicable practices of torture, political pris-
oners of conscience, an unfree press, military rule, etc. These might
have the form of a special visitation (in my opinion the visit of Navy
Secretary Hidalgo to Argentina in early July, apart from its potential for
sabotaging a carefully crafted revised U.S. policy toward that country,
was the kind of demonstration that ought to be cranked up more often
for countries that have really gone the distance to stop leaning on their
own people). In this connection, I am concerned with the trend that I
understand Tom Ehrlich, the Director of IDCA, is pressing for a small
number of a relatively large aid projects rather than a scatteration. I can
appreciate his logic, but this already almost forced us to deny a tiny bit
of symbolic but needful economic assistance to Equatorial Guinea,
which has gotten rid of one of the bloodiest and most repressive dicta-
torships in modern history.13 I personally think that kind of flexibility
belongs in the aid program.
11 The conference opened in November 1980.
12 Reference is to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan December 24–25, 1979.
13 See footnote 2, Document 191.
