March 1952–February 1953
349
ther bring in the communists nor fall victim to a communist revolt be-
fore next March as a very general date.
8. The above conclusion does not allow us to sit idly by for the next
few months. On the contrary now that the deadlock of the oil dispute
has been publicly exposed and the previous United States policy as
moderator has been abandoned, it is time to develop a new policy for
action to meet the Iranian situation.
Recommendations:
It is recommended that the British Government be informed that
the United States Government considers the oil dispute to have reached
a deadlock which can only be broken if the British set aside or
somehow make an arrangement with the Iranians to settle claims for
compensation and initiate arrangements to buy Iranian oil. It should be
pointed out that strategic considerations which must include reap-
praisal of military responsibilities in the Persian Gulf area have brought
the United States Government to the belief that consideration of main-
taining Iran independent from the communist world must override
legal considerations in the oil dispute. It should be pointed out that the
“blockade” which has been maintained by major oil companies in def-
erence to the AIOC’s legal claim to Iranian oil is breaking and that the
United States Government considers it necessary for the strategic con-
siderations described above to assist and encourage sales of Iranian oil
setting aside the British legal claim.
2. It is recommended that the Department of State consult with of-
ficers of important American oil companies to explore any possibilities
of American or other companies buying Iranian oil if the British are un-
able or unwilling to meet Iranian demands. It has been reported by the
Director of PED that even if the major oil companies do not purchase
Iranian oil and assuming that British claim to Iranian oil has been set
aside or is disregarded by the purchasers, Iran could sell between
100,000 and 150,000 barrels of oil per day. Such sales would probably
be made to Argentina, China (Formosa), Belgium, Spain, Italy and Yu-
goslavia who are not bound by any permanent tie-ups with the interna-
tional oil industry. The market would have to be built up gradually
over a period of time and the Iranians would probably not be able to
sell a maximum 150,000 barrels per day immediately. Some sales
would probably also be made to the International Cooperative Petro-
leum Association which supplies oil to a number of European coun-
tries. Finally, industries such as City Service and brokers with un-
known backing such as Denver, Consolidated have indicated definite
interest in purchasing Iranian oil.
It would also seem that the market for Iranian oil probably could
be expanded. Brazil has already expressed an interest in purchasing
