Afghanistan
269
occurred. The Afghan Government has yet to mention the event pub-
licly, and Moscow has also remained mute regarding the despatch of
perhaps two hundred Soviet Air Force planes and possibly thousands
of Soviet combat troops to a neighboring country. Whether the USSR
will formally invoke the “Brezhnev Doctrine” to justify its action
remains to be seen. If so, it will be difficult to avoid the conclusion
that the Khalqi regime in Kabul is considered a full-fledged member
of the “socialist community of states.” On the other hand, the two
governments may rely on the December 5, 1978, Treaty of Friendship
as justification for “cooperation” between two sovereign states. This
would strike us as potentially ominous for other countries with similar
treaties, since Moscow has decided to send combat forces to a non-
Warsaw Pact country at the request of a clearly unpopular Communist
regime hanging on to power by its fingernails and dependent princi-
pally on the zeal of a small cadre of dedicated party members, and the
loyalty of a few key military units in and around the capital.
6. This particular phase of Soviet military activity may now be
completed, and it is unknown if additional forces will be sent to Kabul
or to other Afghan cities or military bases. Our guess is they will. The
dimensions of the Christmas airlift to Kabul, however, are apparent to
all observers here, and it is now clear even to those who downplayed
the importance of the three battalions of Soviet troops at Bagram Air
Base that political developments have entered a new phase with the
arrival of Soviet units in Afghanistan’s capital. In this context, we
would like to reexamine the analysis in our reftel to set forth the added
dimensions which we see flowing from recent events.
7. The impact of the airlift will in time have repercussions beyond
Afghanistan’s borders. In addition to the effect these events will have
within this country, there is sure to be a major impact on regional and
international relationships well beyond Afghanistan’s borders. In the
wake of high-level expressions of U.S. concern at the arrival of the
three battalions of Soviet troops at Bagram Air Base, the massive and
blatant airlift to Kabul strikes us as a distinct and overt disregard of
U.S. interests on the part of the Kremlin. Despite whatever “legality” the
move may have under the 1978 bilateral treaty, Moscow has apparently
elected to underpin with military force a despotic regime which came
to power 20 months ago through a classic military coup d’état, whose
human rights record is among the worst in the world, and whose
“legitimacy” as the genuine representative of the will of the Afghan
people can be seriously questioned, if not completely discarded.
8. Afghanistan’s regional neighbors are also likely to take some
sobering second looks at the ramifications of Soviet Army forces sitting
in Kabul and some probably elsewhere around the country. Pakistan,
of course, will probably feel itself most threatened by this development,
