442 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 (Attachment 2).3 Until now we have concentrated on ending the crisis by seeking to arrange a package in which (1) all elements of the package would be firmly agreed in advance and (2) release of all hostages would take place simultaneous with initial gestures toward the Iranians. Approach 2: More and more, we are hearing from the Iranians that Khomeini’s way of operating makes it impossible to agree in advance on all elements of a scenario. They say it will be necessary to take several steps to begin changing the climate in Iran and then to go to Khomeini for agreement to release the hostages. They admit that he may reject that step; there is no way of assuring a positive decision in advance, so this approach would involve risks on our side. The Iranians would like the maximum in gestures toward them before beginning release of the hostages—for instance, completion of an international inquiry and the acceptance of its report. Our French contacts feel we should begin with the early steps in a scenario fully agreed but leave the later steps to be worked out in detail as we proceed. At the outset, we would aim only at a general understanding of the later steps. If we are to consider seriously moving to an approach like the second above, the issues for us are: (1) how far we can proceed before insisting on release of the hostages; (2) what means we can build into a scenario for testing at each stage the Iranians’ ability to respond to our moves so we don’t give away too much without a response; and (3) how we can justify each step to the American public since this approach would alter some of the strong positions we have taken previously. Channels for Communicating Our French contacts have suggested agreeing on an international figure, for example Sean McBride, to play the dual role as head of a commission of inquiry and as intermediary. They recognize that Sean McBride may not be acceptable to us and are prepared to try out other suggestions on the Iranians. In my view, Sean McBride is not the right person because he is too committed to his own ideas and is not likely to listen well to our concerns. I will be talking to Waldheim about other possibilities. The French contacts would be willing to assist in implementing the scenario. The full range of potentially active channels includes the following: —The Panamanians and their French lawyers. The Panamanians complicate this channel and have stumbled badly, but they have wisely taken themselves out of our most recent discussions. We probably can decouple them to a substantial degree from our talks with the Frenchbased lawyers. The Frenchmen have two advantages. They have access 3 Attached but not printed. See footnote 9, Document 144.
