906 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX UNTSO flap,4 a more activist U.S. role in the autonomy negotiation, and new proposed U.S. arms sales to Jordan and Saudi Arabia. Against this background, U.S. involvement in the postponement of the UNSC vote on the Palestinian rights resolution and what is seen here as the latest U.S. effort to draw the PLO into the peace process and establish a U.S.–PLO dialogue have set off a wave of emotional questioning of American constancy. The chain reaction has been given momentum by the ominous local interpretation of President Carter’s August 1 comments5 to the New York Times on the plight of the Palestinians (“Carter Equates PLO, U.S. Civil Rights Groups”, as one Israeli newspaper tendentiously headlined its report). Israelis now believe that the U.S. is moving in the direction of supporting or at least acquiescing in a Palestinian rights resolution which will supersede and, to use the Israeli phrase, “empty Resolution 242 of all meaning.” Hodding Carter’s statement6 the same day that the U.S. is willing to “build upon” Resolution 4 The Israeli newspaper Ma’ariv reported comments made by Dayan on July 30 “refuting US allegations that UNTSO substitution was discussed with the GOI. Dayan said that ‘The US had no reason to assume that Israel would agree to the idea of observers.’” On May 30, Dayan continued, “‘Begin told an authorized American representative that Israel would agree to the stationing of a multinational force in the event that the Security Council did not approve the continued presence of the existing international emergency force. But beyond this the Prime Minister did not agree to any other idea.’” (Telegram 16275 from Tel Aviv, July 30; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790346–1183) The following day, Bar-On protested to the Embassy in Tel Aviv an “alleged statement by an unnamed USG official” that Dayan was “making such a fuss over UNTSO” because he was “envious of Burg’s role in the autonomy talks.” (Telegram 16467 from Tel Aviv, July 31; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790348–0020) 5 On August 1, The New York Times reported that Carter had, in a conversation with a “visitor to the White House” on July 31, “likened” the Palestinian issue to the “‘civil rights movement here in the United States.’” The article continued, “If the Israelis permitted Palestinians to come back to the West Bank, Mr. Carter said, they would be satisfied with ‘just the right to do it,’ but relatively limited numbers scattered throughout the Arab world would want to return to the poverty of that area. On the other side, he believes that the Palestinian Arabs would be willing to accept the physical presence of Israeli military units as a safeguard of their national security. He maintains that a sizable majority of the Israeli people, based on polls he has seen, favor a generous settlement with the Palestinians, based on United Nations Resolution 242, as modified by the Camp David agreements.” Lastly, Carter said, “the other Arab states did not want a new Palestinian state that he suggested would be a source of continuing instability and a radical threat even to themselves.” (Leonard Silk, “Carter Expects Rise in Joblessness; Believes G.O.P. Will Pick Reagan,” The New York Times, August 1, 1979, p. A1) 6 Reference is to the July 31 daily press briefing. In response to a question whether the United States would not be “rigid” on Resolutions 242 and 338 and “participate in a search for a new formula,” Hodding Carter stated, “No. I don’t want to say that at all. We believe that the Resolutions are central, are the linchpin to the whole structure that we have participated in creating in the Middle East peace process and that to abandon those two would be a mistake. And I would simply keep the imagery of building blocks and linchpins and suggest to you that you build upon them. You don’t remove them. Now, what else might be feasible in the construction of a building large enough to encompass all of the views in the Middle East, that is the question that we are seeking to find an answer to.” (Telegram 198880 to multiple posts, July 31; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790347–0046)
