358
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
that might irritate the Soviets and showed a distinct interest in fostering
a limited improvement of relations with Moscow. The Soviets probably
calculated that the invasion of Afghanistan would have an analogous
effect, not just in Eastern Europe but in some other countries bordering
on Afghanistan.
2. The rapid dissipation of public indignation in the West. While most
countries reacted with shock to the invasion, it proved difficult to
maintain public indignation over a sustained period of time. “Normal-
ization” and the retention of Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia soon
became a fact of life, and a year after the invasion the West was actively
engaged in detente diplomacy.
3. Moscow’s continued interest in detente with the West. Contrary to
the expectations of many, the invasion of Czechoslovakia did not sound
the death knell of detente, but proved to be, as Michel Debrey accurately
predicted at the time, only “a detour on the road to detente.”3 In fact,
one of the most striking features of the post-invasion period is how
quickly Moscow moved to revive the strands of its detente diplomacy
left dangling at the time of the invasion.
—In his October 3 speech to the UNGA, Gromyko explicitly called
attention to Moscow’s desire for improved relations with the West,
especially the United States, and announced his government’s willing-
ness to resume the renunciation of force talks with the FRG.4
—In November Kosygin signalled Moscow’s interest in an early
start of the SALT talks during a visit to Moscow by former Secretary
of Defense McNamara and Senators Gore and Pell.5
—By mid-spring 1969, with the publication of the communique at
the end of the Warsaw Pact meeting in Budapest (March 17), the Soviet
campaign for detente was in full swing.
—In July in a speech to the Supreme Soviet, Gromyko signalled
Moscow’s desire to
1. Begin SALT Talks
2. Begin discussions on Berlin
3 Michel Debré was Prime Minister of France from 1959 until 1962. The source of
this quote was not found.
4 Excerpts from Gromyko’s speech were printed in the New York Times, October 4,
1968, p. 14.
5 The visit, November 18, was reported by Anatole Shub in “Sens. Gore and Pell
Reach Moscow Amid Signs of Shifting Soviet Trends,” Washington Post, November 19,
1968, p. A17. World Bank President and former Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara,
met with Kosygin a week earlier. A report on their meeting is printed in Foreign Relations,
1964–1968, vol. XIV, Soviet Union, Document 314.
