1980  921
afford to let the Soviets perceive that if they could separate us from 
our allies on issues vital to us we would not stand up to them. [portion 
marking not declassified]
5. Where this is of particular import is with respect to vital interests 
of the U.S. outside of Europe and Japan. What strategy can we have, 
though, if we do not have adequate military force to handle our vital 
interests in the three primary theaters simultaneously? We must have a 
capability to apply the military forces we do have selectively and rap-
idly wherever they are needed. Complementing this, we should also 
be able to exercise leverage with our economic power. A strategy built 
on these capabilities recognizes that the United States is not contig-
uous to its principal allies (excepting Canada), markets and areas of 
competition with other nations, and therefore must have the ability to 
move military forces to areas of immediate or continuing concern and 
to establish a military presence which can project power, if necessary. 
At the same time, it recognizes that our economic power can be brought 
to bear against both the immediate enemy and those who may be pro-
viding support to him. Such a strategy acknowledges that we are now 
unprepared in the Persian Gulf area precisely because of our preoccu-
pation with fixed military strategies in Europe and Asia over the past 
three decades. [portion marking not declassified]
6. A rapidly deployable military strategy comprises more than the 
present concept of an RDF. It would depend on two types of forces:
a. Land-­based air and ground forces that were lightweight and 
packaged for self-­sustaining capabilities.
b. Naval forces to ensure a line of communication, to secure ports 
and airfields for the introduction of ground and air forces into a hostile 
environment, and to project power directly ashore with air or ground 
forces. The ability to project power directly from the sea with carrier 
aircraft or marine amphibious troops is the preferred mode under this 
strategy whenever the requirements can be met from the sea alone. 
When the opposition is too sizeable for that, they can be used forcibly 
to secure a port of entry for mobile air and ground forces. Otherwise, 
we are dependent on having made advance arrangements for bases. 
While bases are desirable, they limit the areas of potential deployment 
to those in which we have had the foresight and the ability to obtain 
basing rights. In addition, base rights are too uncertain politically to 
be an essential ingredient of our strategy for protecting vital interests. 
[portion marking not declassified]
7. The ability to project force almost anywhere on the globe is 
important to us for several reasons:
a. The definition of what will be considered “vital” to us in the 
future is almost unpredictable. In the past, we have fluctuated from 
any area where the Soviets were intervening (directly or through sur-
rogates) only to areas where the intrinsic value of individual countries 
to us appeared to be great. We will fluctuate in the future. In defining
