Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
99
derstand that the problems we face will be with us for a long time to
come, that there will be no easy solutions, and that the effort to build a
more cooperative world framework will be tedious, painful, and fre-
quently disappointing.
I think it is necessary to emphasize these themes especially be-
cause we are likely to confront two short-term dangers:
1. Given our disagreements with the French and the Germans over
nuclear proliferation,2 and given the likelihood of some bitter disap-
pointments with the British and the French over the Concorde,3 it is
possible that in the short-term our relations with our principal allies
may in fact deteriorate. Since this will be coinciding with the forth-
coming summit, we should anticipate some rough sailing in alliance re-
lations.4 This may be unavoidable but it is bound to produce some ad-
verse comments, especially since we have put so much stress on giving
priority attention to better relations with our friends. Your critics, both
at home and abroad, will certainly emphasize such frictions as evi-
dence of our inability to do what we said we would strive to accom-
plish. A more specific policy implication of the foregoing might be a
more concerted effort on our part to try to minimize the negative fallout
from both the nuclear proliferation and the Concorde problems, as well
as more stress on those aspects on which we are in fundamental agree-
ment with our allies.
2. Secondly, it is likely that in the foreseeable future our negotia-
tions with the Soviets over SALT may prove more rocky and difficult
than the public has been led to expect. The Brezhnev response to you
might be a foretaste of some very hard bargaining, and it is quite con-
ceivable that our first report to the American people on SALT negotia-
tions will have to emphasize not areas of agreement but the reasons
why we have been unable to agree.5 Indeed, one of the forthcoming
paradoxes may be that Paul Warnke before too long will be engaged
2 Reference is to U.S. concerns about the proposed French sale in March 1976 of a
uranium reprocessing plant to Pakistan and the German sale in June 1975 of a nuclear re-
actor and plutonium technology to Brazil. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. E–15, Part
2, Documents on Western Europe, 1973–1976, Documents 334 and 289, respectively.
Mondale expressed U.S. opposition to Schmidt during his January trip to Europe and
Japan (see Document 16).
3 Presumable reference to issues related to landing rights for the Concorde—a
supersonic airliner—at U.S. airports.
4 Reference is to the economic summit meeting of the heads of state and gov-
ernment of the United States, Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy,
Japan, and the United Kingdom, scheduled to take place in London May 7–8; see
Document 38.
5 Presumable reference to Brezhnev’s February 25 letter to Carter, in which he criti-
cized Carter’s approach to arms control. The letter is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–
1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 12.
