292 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX number of Senators and Congressmen supported the 1974 agreement which we negotiated. Our basic goal remains to obtain compensation for U.S. claimants, many of whom are elderly and of limited financial means. Most of them would have been satisfied with, or acquiesced in, the 1974 agreement. In addition, we cannot expect any significant improvement in U.S.- Czechoslovak relations until we conclude a claims agreement. The Czechoslovak Government has made this clear by refusing to finalize the Consular Convention negotiated in 1973 and by delaying the opening of a U.S. Consulate in Bratislava. In June 1976, David Scott, President of Allis-Chalmers and the head of the U.S. Section of the U.S.-Czechoslovak Economic Council, informed Czechoslovak officials that Long would approve a $32 million lump sum payment (in addition to the $8.5 million already credited as having been paid in 1953). Czechoslovak officials rejected this proposal. However, they said adjustments to the agreement we had reached in 1974 were possible, and later indicated to us that the amount was “negotiable”. Nevertheless, Scott reported to Long that the Czechoslovaks were “intransigent”, and the Senator then wrote to me proposing that the U.S. Government seize the gold to satisfy outstanding claims. Meanwhile, Czechoslovak officials have again stated privately and publicly their willingness to confer with us on this issue. On June 28, senior State Department officials sought Long’s “blessing” to resume negotiations with the Czechoslovaks in which we would attempt to obtain from them the $32 million lump sum settlement (50 cents on the dollar using Long’s calculations; 56 [60?] cents using ours) which Long had previously indicated would be acceptable.3 Long forcefully expressed his view that the easiest method to settle the problem would be to sell the Czechoslovak gold held in the U.S. (worth approximately $45 million) and pay off the American claimants. He was not convinced by our arguments that we are restrained by law (Paris Reparation Agreement) and that such an action would severely damage U.S.-Czechoslovak relations. We are examining both the legal restraints on our disposing of the gold unilaterally and the political effects of this (vis-a-vis the French and British as well as the Czechoslovaks). In addition, we are examining our next steps in light of Long’s extremely negative reaction to our proposal. 3 See Document 97.
