3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
244
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
matters
can
be
satisfactorily
resolved
when
the
conference
is
reconvened.
During the past several days, I have had conversations with Prime
Minister Begin and by telephone and cable with President Sadat. I con-
tinue to find both of them committed to a comprehensive peace, and I
have stressed that this is our goal as well. While Prime Minister Begin
has developed tentative proposals on the Sinai and the West Bank and
Gaza, I have not endorsed these proposals but have made clear that the
ultimate judgment on their acceptability must be made by those who
will sign the peace treaties. It is my belief, however, that they in no way
preclude moving negotiations at an appropriate time to a broader
forum or discussing other fronts.
I would also hope that the United States and the Soviet Union
could collaborate in making certain that regional African disputes do
not escalate into major international conflicts. The fighting that has de-
veloped between Ethiopia and Somalia is a regrettable development,
one which should be contained and terminated before it spreads fur-
ther. We are encouraging the parties to accept mediation, we are re-
fraining from the export of arms to any of the parties involved in this
struggle, and we are urging the other African states to take an active
role in the early resolution of the conflict. We hope very much that you
will adopt a similar position, and we would be glad to work closely
with you to attain these goals.
I mention these concerns because I deeply believe that it is impor-
tant for us, to the extent that it is possible, to avoid becoming involved
in regional conflicts either as direct protagonists or through proxies.
We know from recent history that such involvement stimulates addi-
tional tensions and tends to paralyze progress towards wider coopera-
tion, which we both desire. I write about this because it is my determi-
nation to do my utmost to improve the American-Soviet relationship.
Precisely because we live in a turbulent world, it is encumbent upon us
to reach the greatest degree of mutual understanding regarding re-
gional disputes and to exercise the greatest degree of self-restraint.
I value our correspondence highly for it gives us both an opportu-
nity to speak frankly about the obstacles we encounter on the road to
the objectives of peace and friendship that we both share.
We still await your visit when it is convenient for you.
With best personal wishes,
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
