3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
506
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
But even in the light of these statements, which we would like to
take seriously, we have a number of questions. Indeed, a number of US
allies are preparing—and this is an open secret—deals for deliveries of
arms and transfer of technology to Peking. For us it is not so important
who exactly signs this or that contract. Much more important is another
thing: a state pursuing a policy hostile to the interests of peace gets
modern weapons, made under US licenses for that matter, which in-
clude many components and systems of American manufacture, and
such modern technology that can be used for the up-building of mili-
tary strategic potential. Therefore, to call things by their own names,
one has to conclude that the US is by no means standing away from
promoting the cause of arming China.
One also can hardly avoid the impression that in this question
there exists a certain coordination of efforts of the NATO countries.
And it is well known that the US has not the least role to play in the
NATO and its voice is closely heeded by the other partners.
In view of the aforesaid you, Mr. President, may well understand
that a question arises before the Soviet Union, how should we react to
the policy of arming China with the help of the US and other Western
countries.
The armament of the neighboring country pursuing openly hostile
course against us places us in a position where the necessity arises to
undertake what we shall consider required so that plans and actions di-
rected against us do not take even more dangerous turn, and to take
due care of our defense with ensuing consequences. Our duty before
our people demands it.
You evidently realize that all this could not but affect further steps
in the area of limiting the arms race and of disarmament with regard to
which both the Soviet Union and the United States as well as a number
of other countries are exerting efforts, known to you, with the obvious
advance to agreement. And indeed, a certain level of trust is needed for
the solution of these problems which would make it possible to relieve
the burden of armaments weighing on the peoples. There can hardly
remain any doubts that contributing to the armament of China does not
strengthen but, on the contrary, erodes trust in our relations which is
being built with such difficulty.
In view of the all said you may well understand that in the condi-
tions where concrete steps are being taken for levelling off the Soviet-
US relations, for giving them a new positive impetus the present posi-
tion of the United States with respect to deliveries of weapons and
transfer of technology to China causes quite definite alertness on our
part and desire to see this position more circumspect and weighed.
I hope that you, Mr. President, will appreciate my frankness and
will take most seriously the questions raised by me both in determining
