428 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I We are pleased that the governments of the region are taking the initiative in promoting the security and well-being of their peoples. We are proud of the constructive role of the United States in the area, and we look forward to continued cooperation with this most dynamic and populous region of the world. If the people of the American West continue to build special and closer ties with the Pacific—in trade, in cultural exchange, in peopleto-people contacts, and in any other ways—it will strengthen our nation, the entire vast region, and the cause of peace and progress in this most exciting and dynamic part of the world. 89. Editorial Note On June 19, 1978, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance testified on U.S.-Soviet policy before the House Committee on International Relations. Fourteen members of the committee had sent a letter to President Jimmy Carter requesting that the administration clarify its policy toward the Soviet Union in light of recent statements made by Vance, the President, and President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs Zbigniew Brzezinski. (Bernard Gwertzman, “Vance Urges Effort by U.S. and Russians to Reduce Tensions: Asserts Carter Backs View,” The New York Times, June 20, 1978, pages A–1, A–12) Vance began by thanking the committee for affording him the opportunity to address the issues contained within the letter. He continued: “There is perhaps no more important question on which we must consult than the entire range of U.S.-Soviet relations. I use the word ‘range’ advisedly. For it is very important, as we deal with these critical issues, that we recognize a fundamental reality of this relationship: That it is not a relationship with a single dimension but with many; that even as we have sharp differences, as we inevitably will, there are many other areas in which we continue to cooperate and to seek useful agreement; and that to view U.S.-Soviet relations from the perspective of a single dimension is to run the risk of failing to identify our interests carefully and to act accordingly.” The Secretary noted that the President’s June 7 address at the U.S. Naval Academy commencement exercises (see Document 87) outlined and described the elements of U.S policy toward the Soviet Union. Vance highlighted three points: the maintenance of military, economic, and political strength; the pursuit of treaties and agreements crucial to peace and security; and mutual conduct in global affairs. Regarding
