Yugoslavia 845 cated they are interested in studying Yugoslavia’s agricultural system, its industrial development and its system of self management. The Chinese may try to introduce at least some aspects of the self management system in an attempt to stimulate production. 14. Governor Harriman noted that he was sure that any thoughts President Tito might have on China following the August Hua Kuofeng visit would be of great interest to President Carter. He hoped the President would pass anything of interest on to Washington. Tito replied that he would do so “gladly.” 15. US-Yugoslav relations. Governor Harriman said that it was his impression that our bilateral relations were at a new high point. President Tito said that was correct; they are very good and improving every day. President of the National Assembly Markovic had reported to him on his recent visit to the United States, and had indicated his great satisfaction with it.6 There are no major problems between our two countries and many small matters have also been settled. There are a few small issues (unspecified) still between us, but they are of no significance. Tito said that he had a very good impression of President Carter when he met with him. He recognizes that President Carter had initial problems with the Congress but considers him “a sincere, honest, devoted leader who wants to accomplish much.” 16. The President then said: “The United States must understand that if we sometimes are critical it is only because we mean the US well. We have learned to live together as friends despite the fact that one or the other may be critical on occasion. With some other countries, however, where on its face it appears that Yugoslavia has very good relations, it is a fact that in reality the relations are not good. And you know who I mean.” (This is obviously a reference to the Soviet Union.) 17. Tito recalled that in his first meeting with Governor Harriman when the latter was Ambassador in Moscow during the war, the Governor had told him of Stalin’s highly critical anti-Tito remarks. Tito said it is an interesting fact that whenever Stalin dealt with him, he was kind, he made a great fuss, etc. But he (Tito) knew the true reality. 6 On July 19, Mondale met at the White House with Dragoslav Markovic, President of the Yugoslav Assembly, who led a delegation of Yugoslav Assembly members to meet with U.S. Government and legislative officials in Washington. Markovic and Mondale discussed the state of U.S.-Yugoslav relations. Carter briefly stopped by to greet the delegation. The Department informed the Embassy of the discussion in telegram 192091 to Belgrade, July 29. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780312– 0046) Prior to the Mondale-Markovic meeting, Vance, joined by Harriman and Vest, met with the Djuranovic and Vrhovec in New York on May 25 to discuss the Non-Aligned Movement and exchange views on the state of the international system. (Department of State, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Cyrus R. Vance, Secretary of State—1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 9, Vance Nodis MemCons, 1978)
