1980  825
—Develop a program to facilitate procurement and distribution of 
all appropriate department and agency secure voice equipment (STU 
II) which may permit the government to take advantage of large order 
procurements and resulting economies of scale. (C)
—Initiate procurement actions for commercial cryptographic sys-
tems to replace CY–104 systems where cost-­effective and technically 
feasible. The National Bureau of Standards (NBS) Data Encryption 
Standard (DES) will be used until a certification process is established 
and other technologies made available. (C)
—Expand the KY–70 to KY–3 interface from two to four ports to 
improve intersystem communications by eliminating queing problems. 
Both should be operational by July 1980. (C)
190.	 Memorandum From Secretary of Defense Brown to 
President Carter1
Washington, June 7, 1980
SUBJECT
False Missile Alert (U)
INTRODUCTION
During the last two weeks we have had three false missile warn-
ing incidents, each of which has been isolated to the same component, 
a dual-­channel multiplexer within the NORAD computer system. 
The first incident on May 28th lasted only 6 seconds and was imme-
diately recognized as an anomaly. No actions were taken. The second 
incident on June 3rd lasted for about 30 minutes. This is described in 
detail below. After this incident, a modification to the computer pro-
gram was installed in order to recognize a repeat of this error and to 
alert the system. Unfortunately, when a similar error occurred on June 
6th, the corrective modification did not immediately identify the error. 
As a result, SAC did respond to the June 6th incident by alerting air 
crews and starting engines. However, as in the June 3rd incident, no 
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, 
Box 42, Missile Warning Incidents: 11/79–8/80. Top Secret; Sensitive. Carter wrote in 
the upper right corner of the memorandum: “Harold—Mount every effort to correct the 
system. J.”
