Covert and Overt Operations 859 320. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, July 23, 1980, 2:55–3:07 p.m. SUBJECT Summary of the President’s Meeting with Katherine Keough and Louisa Kennedy PARTICIPANTS President Jimmy Carter Captain Gary Sick, NSC Staff Member (notetaker) Katherine Keough Louisa Kennedy The President opened the meeting by remarking about how wonderful Richard Queen looked and how excited he was to be back.2 Both visitors agreed that he was a wonderful young man. Unfortunately, his personal experience as a hostage was limited and may not be typical of the others. The President agreed that the experience of each hostage may be unique. Queen was obsessed with the different attitudes of the different militants. Some he despised. Others were much better. Katherine Keough said they had requested the meeting to assure the President of their support. Although some members of their family organization occasionally stray off—as was unfortunately the case at the Republican National Convention where some members “slipped through our fingers”3—the President could be assured that he has 53 hostage families behind him. That emphatically includes Richard Queen and his family who lead them all in support. The President said that was good to hear. He complimented the two visitors on their remarkable diplomacy and courage. If this turns into a partisan issue, it will detract from the overwhelming commitment of the American people. The President had seen Secretary of State Muskie and had told him to talk to you (the visitors) on a confidential basis about a move which might be desirable in relation to the new 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 38, MemCons President 7/80. Confidential. Drafted by Sick. The meeting took place in the Oval Office at the White House. 2 See Document 317. 3 According to Brzezinski, Keough and Kennedy were “embarrassed by the independent foray of several of the hostage wives to the Republican Convention.” (Memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter, July 22; Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 119, Trips/Visits File, 7/23/80 Hostage Wives Kennedy and Keough Meeting with the President)
