482  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
States to consider the Dominican charge that preparations for an inva-
sion were being made by Cuban and Venezuelan forces. (739.00/7–259) 
In a memorandum to Acting Secretary of State Herter dated July 6, 
1959, Rubottom discussed the COAS meeting scheduled for that after-
noon. Suggesting a possible U.S. position at this meeting, Rubottom 
recommended that U.S. representatives ask the Council of the OAS 
to defer action on the specific request of the Dominican Republic and 
to support the convening of a meeting of Foreign Ministers under the 
Charter of the OAS to consider the entire problem of tension in the 
Caribbean area. (ARA Deputy Assistant Secretary Files, Lot 61 D 411, 
“OAS, 1959”) Documentation on the fifth meeting of consultation of 
Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the American Republics, which was 
convoked to consider tensions in the Caribbean area, held at Santiago, 
Chile, August 12–18, 1959, is printed as VE–30.
DR–9.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State 
for Inter-American Affairs (Rubbottom) to the Acting 
Secretary of State1

Washington, December 10, 1959.
SUBJECT
Policy to Meet Contingencies in the Dominican Republic
Discussion:
1. Problem.
To determine what should be the policy and posture of the United 
States towards the Dominican Republic with a view especially to pre-
venting, if possible, the establishment of a Castro-­like regime in the 
event of the end or fall of the regime of Generalissimo Rafael Trujillo 
before the end of 1960.
1 Source: Department of State, ARA Special Assistant Files, Lot 62 D 24, “Dominican 
Republic Planning and NSC Briefings 1960.” Secret; Limited Distribution. The source text 
was Tab A attached to a covering memorandum from Hill to Rubottom dated December 3, 
1959. It is a summary of a longer paper entitled “Current Policy Toward the Dominican 
Republic,” which accompanied it as Tab B, not printed. In the covering memorandum, 
Hill suggested a handling procedure whereby Rubottom would review both papers, send 
the summary forward for approval to Livingston T. Merchant, Under Secretary of State 
for Political Affairs, and, if approved by him, assign the coordination and implementa-
tion of the policy to CMA.
