716
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
within the bureaucracy, possibly reflected in the stinging attack leveled
against him by an aged party veteran at the party congress in Novem-
ber. There is no evidence, however, of any organized opposition to
Ceausescu or of any serious disagreement—within the apparatus—to
the basic thrust of his policies.
[1 line not declassified]
226.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, April 23, 1980, 1:15 p.m.
SUBJECT
Vice President’s Meeting with Romanian Deputy Prime Minister
Cornel Burtica (U)
PARTICIPANTS
The Vice President
Phillip Klutznick, Secretary of Commerce
O. Rudolph Aggrey, U.S. Ambassador to Romania
H. Allen Holmes, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
Denis Clift, Special Assistant to the Vice President
Frank Tumminia, Officer in Charge of Romanian Affairs, Department of State
F. Stephen Larrabee, NSC Staff Member (Notetaker)
Cornel Burtica, Romanian Deputy Prime Minister
Nicolae Ionescu, Romanian Ambassador to the U.S.
Boris Ranghet, Counselor, Romanian Embassy
Ion Timofei, Interpreter
The Vice President opened the meeting by welcoming Deputy Prime
Minister Burtica to Washington. He informed him that the President
was aware that Burtica was carrying a letter from President Ceausescu
and that the President had asked him to bring Burtica by to deliver
the letter.2 (U)
1 Source: Carter Library, Donated Material, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, Box 67,
Foreign Countries—Romania, (1980). Secret. Drafted by Larrabee. The meeting took place
in the Vice President’s office in the West Wing of the White House.
2 Ceausescu’s letter, dated April 17, stressed Romania’s desire to strengthen security,
collaboration, and stability in Europe through the CSCE process. Ceausescu also
expressed his belief that a solution to the Middle East could only be reached after Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied territories and the creation of a Palestinian state. (Carter
Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, President’s Correspondence with
Foreign Leaders File, Box 16, Romania: President Nicolae Ceausescu, 1/79–6/80)
