urgently and unanimously pressed upon the attention of the
Council their judgment on this matter. The nature and gravity of
that judgment [are] indicated in the following passage from a
recent report by the committee to the Council: ‘The committee
regards the immediate ratification and the rigid enforcement of
the Geneva Convention of 1925 as the most valuable single step
which can at present be taken to combat the illicit traffic. It is glad
that this view has been unanimously indorsed by the Council and
the Assembly, and it desires to reiterate it. A close examination of
all the material connected with the illicit trade which has come
before it since its last session serves to confirm the correctness of
its views. Time after time, in case after case, the committee has
been forced irresistibly to the conclusion that, until the Geneva
Convention comes into operation, it will be difficult to secure the
effective application of measures which experience has shown to
be essential if the illicit traffic is to be effectively checked.’
(Report to the Council on the work of the tenth session of the
committee, document C. 521. M. 179. 1927. XI.)
In the light of such a judgment the Council while firmly
convinced that there ought to be the strictest adherence to the
provisions of The Hague Convention cannot share the view of the
American Government that ‘until there can be devised some
substitute for The Hague Convention more satisfactory than the
Geneva Convention the eradication of the abuse of narcotic drugs
will be more likely to be achieved by strict observance of the
provisions of The Hague Convention.’
The Geneva Convention incorporates at least part of the
accumulated experience of several years effort in this field such
as for instance the import certificate system and the extension of
the system of control to crude cocaine, ecgonine, coca leaves and
Indian hemp and the provision of definite machinery for still
further extension to other drugs; it has been accepted by many
states as offering a valuable advance on The Hague Convention
and it has already been definitely ratified or adhered to by twenty-
seven governments. The Council cannot but feel that the
