Venezuela  1281
issued the orders for close inspection of such ships, the refusal of the 
longshoremen to unload the vessels was a spontaneous one. He said 
that of course the Government could do nothing about this but also 
inferred quite clearly that even if the Government were in a position to 
order the longshoremen to work the ships, he would not be inclined to 
do so. The President referred to the years of persecution and attack he 
has suffered at the hands of Trujillo and said that as far as freedom of 
international trade is concerned, one has to be “realistic” about these 
matters. I mentioned Haiti in this same part of the conversation and the 
President said that after talking to Mr. James of the Saturday Evening 
Post yesterday, he was satisfied that DUVALIER is a “zombie”. The 
President added further that he knows that Duvalier’s Chief of Police 
is in the pay of Trujillo.
The President then mentioned the arrest of PEREZ Jiménez and 
I explained to him somewhat the procedure for handling extradition 
requests in the United States. The President demonstrated understand-
ing of all of this including the probability that the extradition hearings 
will be a protracted affair. He referred to PJ’s description of Betancourt 
as being a Communist in derisive terms.
The President then brought up the subject of delays in arms ship-
ments which Venezuela has ordered under the Defense Assistance 
Agreement. I said General LOPEZ HENRIQUEZ had spoken to the 
Ambassador about this the evening of August 20 and that I knew the 
Ambassador was following the matter up in Washington. Although 
speaking in pleasant terms, the President made it very clear that the 
Venezuelan Government is a serious one, that it has funds to purchase 
the arms which it needs and which it would not buy if it did not need, 
and that if it cannot get those arms under the contract with the United 
States, it will have to look elsewhere, specifically France or Italy. I 
explained the basis and the reason for our giving careful consideration 
to arms shipments at the present time in the Caribbean and said that 
although some shipments of arms to Venezuela have been delayed I 
was not aware that any had been definitively rejected. The President 
was obviously unimpressed and said that as long as Trujillo is in the 
area threatening Venezuela militarily, Venezuela has to be prepared 
to defend itself. He made it clear that General Lopez Henriquez had 
been speaking for him on August 20 and although the President did not 
say so, I gathered from the conversation that he supposed that Lopez 
Henriquez had made just as strong a representation for the prompt 
shipment of arms ordered by Venezuela as he, the President, had just 
done. I did not remark to the President that the Minister’s approach 
had been much less positive.
