622  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Baker: I understand that. What you are suggesting is a new position 
from what existed in Moscow.
Akhromeyev: Yes, I’m simply saying that we should use the same 
rules that we are going to apply for the existing bombers and apply that 
to the future bombers as well. That would be our proposal.
Baker: Yes, I understand that. That’s the proposal that differs from 
the agreed common ground in Moscow. I am not rejecting that. I am 
simply saying that it is important for us to understand and identify 
at this point they differ from what it is we had agreed to in Moscow. 
That’s important for us because in our determination of what we can 
try to do with you and what we could not do with you, we are going 
to need to see where there has been a divergence, where there are now 
new proposals from what had been agreed to in Moscow. Like you, we 
would have difficulty, in effect, having to pay twice for the same con-
cession or similar concession. I know that would be hard to sell with 
our arms control community.
Akhromeyev: But, Mr. Secretary, we have different perceptions of 
what was agreed to in Moscow. I said directly to Burt in Moscow, and 
I said here, that the bombers should be counted in terms of their actual 
equipment. You’ve brought from Moscow a different understanding. 
Now we are prepared to agree on a new approach and you say that we 
have retreated from your approach.
Baker: I know that’s what you are saying, that’s what you under-
stand. But if you recall I very carefully had read into the record the 
precise element of common ground. You may have had a meeting with 
Burt or with others where you express that position, but we have a 
record of what the precise elements of common ground were, and we 
are going to have a problem when we begin departing from that. In any 
case, it is important for us to identify the specific areas that remain in 
disagreement.
Shevardnadze: I agree with that. But there is no disagreement on the 
fourth point.
Akhromeyev: We’ve agreed on the counting rules for the future, we 
didn’t retreat.
Baker: What I’m saying is that our whole delegation understood 
that there were certain things based on the elements of common ground 
and on the joint statement. I just don’t want there to be another misun-
derstanding. I don’t think we could afford that.
Shevardnadze: Whether or not there has been a retreat from Moscow, 
let’s continue our discussion after the meeting with the President.
Bartholomew: Now, we don’t agree on this point. We maintain the 
position of agreed common elements from Moscow. So we have one 
position and you have another.
