Afghanistan
273
They must have concluded that an intervention of Soviet forces was
necessary to save the regime and for Soviet prestige.
5. I suspect that Soviet intervention in Afghanistan is the first
occasion since World War II of the Soviets entering a non-Warsaw Pact
country to maintain the special Soviet position. In Eastern Europe,
when uprisings occurred in Poland and the GDR, Soviet troops were
already in place, and in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, Soviet troops
intervened to reestablish those governments’ “traditional” and proper
position within the Soviet sphere. Thus, the introduction of Soviet
troops into Afghanistan would appear to represent a blatant power
move by Moscow to expand its sphere of influence in the world.
6. What should the USG do? Whether or not the Dept’s planned
IG meeting on Afghanistan has already convened,3 I think it would be
timely for the Dept to consider the implications of the new develop-
ments in Afghanistan, I also believe the time has come for us to take
some new policy initiatives. The fact that the Soviets have disregarded
our verbal warnings of the recent past suggests that they have been
ineffective and shrugged off by the Soviets as being all bark but no bite.
7. I would thus like to propose two possible courses of action, the
second of which could follow on the first.
8. The first course, this would be to try to mobilize the NATO
countries, together with India, Pakistan, PRC, Saudi Arabia, Japan (and
perhaps Iran through a third country), to make a harmonized if not
joint démarche to the Soviet Union.4 The démarche would consist of
a proposal that regional stability required two things: the establishment
of a new, broader-based government in Afghanistan, which would
include non-Khalqi and oppositionist elements; and the withdrawal of
Soviet forces. The Soviets, by their military presence now in Kabul,
can now probably influence the shape of any Afghan government;
Hafizullah Amin would probably have to go, but the Soviets probably
have the power to make him do so. The alternative for the Soviets is
prolongation of the expensive civil war, which could drag on for years.
9. This idea of a harmonized joint démarche originates with the
FRG Ambassador, Karl Berninger. While I see formidable obstacles to
trying to galvanize any kind of harmonized démarche to the Soviets,
and little chance of its succeeding, I see little harm in its being attempted
and some advantages to our consulting with the mentioned countries.
10. The second alternative. This course would see us take a tougher
stand. It would be based on the reality that Afghanistan is no longer
3 No record of a meeting was found.
4 The idea to send out telegrams to U.S. Allies on policy toward Afghanistan was
taken up at the NSC meeting the next day. See footnote 4, Document 107.
