March–August 1953
595
are many examples of this—one of interest refers to the fact that Arde-
shir is a fugitive and that twice now official announcements have been
made demanding that he present himself to police headquarters. Per-
taining to this, when the Ambassador asked me if I could contact
Ardeshir, I stated that I could, and proceeded to contact the man that
Ardeshir had indicated—this man is the Chief of Detectives, Imperial
Iranian Police Force.
Ardeshir is aware that Mossadegh is planning to try to force the
Shah to sign a Firman to close the Majlis and is fearful that by some
means he might come close to success in this. However, in the mean-
time, intense campaigning revealing Mossadegh’s plan is now being
planned and will be evident in a day or two in the newspapers and in
the Majlis. If Mossadegh ever attempts to close the Majlis without a
Firman from the Shah, Ardeshir feels that this would be Mossadegh’s
greatest mistake and with the present strength of the opposition would
be almost, literally, fatal to him.
He also mentioned that in the voting for “Speaker” of the Majlis
the opposition papers are encouraging the present internal quar-
relling within the National Front. At present a bitter struggle is being
carried on between Shayegan, Moazami and Razavi to be the National
Front candidate for Speaker; this could weaken the National Front
considerably.
Ardeshir stated that it is evident to most Iranian observers that the
British aim in Iran is as follows: To officially agree that Mossadegh
should go, but not to actively, covertly, work to this end, feeling that
the strength of the opposition itself will work this out and that there re-
mains a possibility that by a weak change in government the British
might be able to control the next government. The number one aim of
the British, however, is to weaken the Shah’s powers to intervene in
time of crises to the point that at some time in the future when a
pro-British Prime Minister appears the most can be made of it. He feels
that in spite of the weak character of the Shah such a curtailment of
powers would be disastrous to the country and would place the
country at the mercy of whatever adventurers might temporarily be in
position of political power, and that the country is not yet ready for
this. In addition, the only symbol which holds the diverse elements of
Iran together is the Shah himself.
He asked me if it was not a sign of the strength of the opposition
that in the Majlis which was practically handpicked by Mossadegh
there were men who realized that his course led only to Communism
and who had the courage in the face of serious intimidation to oppose
him and that among these men were the organizers of Mossadegh’s
strength—Kashani, Makki, Baghai, etc.
