Afghanistan
821
In particular it made it possible for almost anyone to see the elemental
mendacity of Soviet statements about their activities and intentions.
They lie. But then what happened? Almost immediately the United
States Government (evidently the White House itself) gave out informa-
tion to the press which supported, even confirmed, the Soviet lie.
Could there have been a greater disservice to our nation? What is
to be said of those who did it?
More importantly, what is to be said of the state of our institutions
when such things can happen? What does it mean when men charged
with the responsibility for this information find it more rewarding to
break the confidence than to keep it? This goes to profound questions of
institutional loyalty and morale. An organizational theorist, observing
such symptoms, would almost certainly judge that such institutions
were in deep trouble.
This surely is my view. After almost four years on the Intelligence
Committee I have come to the conclusion, for example, that the Central
Intelligence Agency is practically defunct and is in many ways a liabil-
ity. (I mentioned to you that earlier this year I placed the National
Intelligence Estimates in the Congressional Record,10 by which I mean
the reports of them that had by then appeared in the Post and the
Times.) Clearly we need an intelligence system that can keep its secrets
and, in a general way, its identity to itself. We have neither.
Nothing will avail less than running about with lie detectors look-
ing for leakers. If I were the President, I would look upon this as a
problem of institutions, not people. It is a profoundly serious problem.
(Thus: if it is impossible to keep secrets, perhaps the government should
not try to do anything that depends on secrets being kept.) This is a
subject about which political scientists, for example, might very well
have something useful to say. It is a subject that can be studied. If you
would like to pursue the matter, I am at your disposal, as nothing
troubles me more just now.11
Best,
Daniel Patrick Moynihan12
10 See, for example, Senator Moynihan speaking on “The Role of the Central Intelli-
gence Agency,” 96th Cong., 2nd sess., Congressional Record—Senate, 126, pt. 9:11371.
11 Muskie replied to Moynihan on September 19. Regarding the problem of leaks,
Muskie wrote: “I doubt we will ever be entirely free of the problem, for as you would
agree, the Draconian measures necessary to ensure total security of information would
be basically incompatible with our system. We could improve, however. We continue
to look for ways to ensure better security, and would welcome any additional thoughts
you may have.” (National Archives, RG 59, Official Files of Edmund Muskie, 1980–1981,
Lot 82D100, folder 1)
12 Moynihan initialed “DM” above his typed signature.
