Afghanistan relied on and whose troops were demoralized. The inability of the police and militia to carry out their everyday functions also troubled [less than 1 line not declassified]. [4 lines not declassified] They painted a picture of scattered, small Soviet units who face persistent supply shortages. They reported that flareups could come in any region [2 lines not declassified]. Recommendations to Moscow [less than 1 line not declassified] stressed that the Afghan Army must be made capable of carrying the main burden of combat. They called for a quick buildup of the Afghan armed forces. [1 line not declassified] called for an increase of two to four divisions. They were concerned that, otherwise, Soviet troops would have to carry the brunt of fighting and perform police functions against “the people.” This threatens to involve the Soviets in a Vietnam-type conflict. Apparently in response to such Soviet thinking, the Afghans earlier this month increased conscription [2 lines not declassified]. Although the Soviets did not urge military action into Pakistan, they did recommend closing the border. We believe they would be hard pressed to do this with the forces now available. [less than 1 line not declassified] recommended that airmobile and airborne forces be kept in Afghanistan until the situation stabilizes. They also thought one additional Soviet division should be brought into Afghanistan and kept there until order is restored. (The Soviets have had two additional divisions staging on the Afghan border; we have seen signs that elements of one may be entering the country.) They also wanted more transport units to solve the supply problem. Concern Over Future Role [4 lines not declassified] voiced particular concern that a large additional Soviet commitment would be a costly drain on resources and have a negative impact on military morale. [1 line not declassified] Implications The new evidence confirms our general analysis of the nature and degree of the problems the Soviets have encountered in Afghanistan. It also suggests that [less than 1 line not declassified]. Moscow had not yet decided on how to proceed. Even if the key recommendations [less than 1 line not declassified] were adopted, they would not be easy to implement. In particular, it seems highly unlikely that Moscow will be able quickly to reconstitute an Afghan military capable of assuming the primary counterinsurgency mission. Although we had seen signs of reserve and even opposition to the Soviet intervention among some Soviet officials, the pessimism expressed [less than 1 line not declassified] could impact on policy debates in Moscow.
