58
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Europe, you suggested State study overt possibilities while, meanwhile,
CIA consider modest expansion of selected activities.2
State did nothing. CIA, suffering from internal confusion, was slow
to move but during the course of the summer came up with a number
of proposals for expansion. Five CIA papers were reviewed by the
SCC/SAWG on 5 October 1977.3 CIA was asked to do further work
on three but two proposals dealing with expansion of existing programs
for publishing and distributing books and periodicals for Eastern
Europe and the USSR were put in final form and submitted to the SCC
on 26 October, when they were approved.4 CIA is going ahead with
this expansion. State continues to be unenthusiastic about it.
The recently appointed Deputy Assistant Secretary for East Euro-
pean Affairs, Bill Luers, was present at the 5 October SCC/SAWG
meeting and took it upon himself to promise a serious State investiga-
tion of possibilities for overt activity targeted against Eastern Europe
and the USSR. This was the first he had heard of your request to State
last winter, by the way, which confirms our impression that State’s
persistent arguing against covert programs on the basis that these
things could be done overtly is, in practical terms, nothing more than
a tactic for bringing everything to a halt. Luers, however, is not of this
view. He is an admirer of what CIA has done over the past 25 years,
an enthusiastic supporter of RFE/RL and deeply knowledgeable of
Eastern Europe. He would seriously like to see State energize the gov-
ernment to broaden activity. He also shares our view, which few others
in State do, that the covert programs should be continued and
expanded—not curtailed or abandoned in expectation that something
might eventually be done overtly.
2 See Document 2. At the May 10 SAWG meeting, Aaron stressed that Brzezinski
wanted “to see movement on this program, not necessarily expansion of only covert
things, but also new overt initiatives.” Representing the Department, INR Director Harold
Saunders said that the Department “found themselves really not in favor of expansion,
either covert or overt.” Aaron directed the Central Intelligence Agency and the Depart-
ment to prepare papers on the subject dealing with the covert and overt areas and
coordinate them with the NSC Staff, highlighting the policy issues. (National Security
Council, Carter Administration Intelligence Files, Box I–020, Minutes—SCC Special
Activities Working Group, 1977)
3 On October 25, Aaron approved the summary of the October 5 SAWG meeting,
which recommended that “proposals on expansion of book publication and distribution
to Eastern Europe and the USSR will be recommended, with some refinements, for
approval by the SCC.” The SAWG also recommended that CIA proposals for covert
action on certain human rights initiatives and Soviet nationalities be rewritten and that
the Department of State clarify U.S. policy affecting these proposals. (Ibid.)
4 On October 25, Henze informed Brzezinski of the agenda for the upcoming SCC
meeting, dealing with items on which a decision was not taken at the October 6 SCC
meeting, including approval of the expansion of book publishing and distribution pro-
grams for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. (Ibid.)
