1956 741 62. Wang also said this intent was clearly included in their draft of statement December 1, in which they stated two countries should settle disputes peacefully without resort to force and they want make this determination known whole world. This really declaration of peace. 63. Wang said then they had said they would continue to seek nec­ essary practical means for realization settlement of disputes. That idea also accepted by myself. He thought this statement which both sides should agree to and did not see how it could be objected to. 64. Wang said on other hand, by withdrawing self-­defense clause by US from proposal, US would sustain no loss or harm their drafts, in addition to declaration determination peaceful settlement disputes between two countries, provided for further research into peaceful means for settlement disputes between two. 65. I said this not very directly answering questions I asked, and which I asked in honest effort see whether we could not get ahead on this. I hoped if I could not have my answers today, that he would con­ sider them and answer me at next meeting. 66. Wang said their views been set forth very clearly, could not be any clearer than he had stated it. Their view is we should strive for making statement. He hoped I would give further consideration Dec 1 draft and be in position to state my views at next meeting. 67. I said I had nothing further but would like turn to another question. 68. Wang said good. (At this point they started gather up papers then, noting I still seated, Wang continued:) Oh, you have another matter to take up? 69. I said if it were all right with him. I then read following pre­ pared statement on implementation: A. At our last meeting you made series charges against my govt concerning case unfortunate Mr. Liu Yung-­ming, these charges were so exaggerated and so at variance with plain facts I found it hard to credit you were serious in stating them. B. Facts with regard Mr. Liu are perfectly plain. In May 1949, Mr. Liu, then student in US, became ill. His sickness was of mind: type sickness against which, unfortunately, scholastic degree is no magic amulet. C. Mr. Lius illness is fact. It is also fact had Mr. Liu not been inca­ pacitated by illness and had he desired return China, he would have been able do so. There were no restrictions on departure of any ­Chinese, students or otherwise, from US at that time. To contrary, it is fact that approximately 1,000 Chinese students returned your country in 1949 and 1950. This number not only returned but 637 of them had their passages paid by US Govt.
