1978  395
primarily on SLBMs and bomber/CMs. However, Harold points out 
that even if his long-­term plan is adopted, we will nonetheless face a 
period from the late 70s to the mid-80s during which our land-­based 
ICBM force will be very vulnerable. Thus, until 1985 when our ICBM 
force will theoretically get well with some form of mobile basing, we 
will be very dependent on the other two legs of the Triad.
Whether or not to permit this vulnerable period is an extremely 
important judgment. Domestically, it will be used against SALT; inter-
nationally, it may undermine our Allies’ confidence and be exploited 
by the Soviets. Harold is also concerned by the argument that if we can 
live with it for three or more years, why not indefinitely?—­which will 
undercut support for the measures he proposes to rectify the situation 
in the long term.
Thus, the greatest weakness in Harold’s program is the absence 
of an interim program to deal with the vulnerability gap in the early 
80s. You should press him on this point and ask that specific options be 
developed for consideration in the final budget meetings at the end of 
the year.
It is also clear that Harold still believes that the MAP basing scheme 
is the best long-­term solution to the MM vulnerability problem in spite 
of the fact that others outside DOD (including Frank Press’ panel and 
the Jason group) have serious reservations about the practicality of 
MAP, to say nothing of the problems it may create for SALT. You should 
therefore urge Harold to take a serious look at other schemes on a pri-
ority basis.
In light of the above, you might ask Harold the following specific 
questions:
—How can we bridge the gap from 1980 until we have modernized 
the Minuteman force? Would the adoption [1 line not declassified] Would 
the required changes in our C3I/warning systems be useful even after 
we had completed the modernization of the force? Could these changes 
be made in 1–2 years?
—Given the limits on our resources, wouldn’t it be better to sub-
stitute a short study of the MAP scheme and its more promising alter-
natives for the year-­long parallel development program proposed, and 
develop only the scheme that the study shows to be best?
—Does it make sense to begin full-­scale development of the rel-
atively large “mostly common” missile when the smaller common 
missile might be more compatible with the basing scheme we end up 
choosing?
—Why aren’t we considering a more vigorous CMC development 
program as a means for maintaining essential equivalence?
