452 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV confidence that is, by definition, already adequate for preserving our military security. With this perspective, it is reasonable to examine critically the SALT issues raised by MAPS: 1. Is MAPS legal under a SALT II agreement? (SALT says that we may not use deliberate concealment to impede verification by national technical means, including satellite reconnaissance.) 2. Can we design MAPS to allow verification and still keep the Soviets from knowing which shelters to target? 3. Is the Soviet Union likely to deploy a MAPS? 4. If the Soviet Union deploys MAPS, can we verify? 5. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, could they use it to “break out” from a SALT treaty? 6. If the Soviets deployed MAPS, and in fact complied with SALT provisions, would SALT critics claim the Soviets were cheating (and were also able to tell which of our MAPS shelters contained our missiles), thereby undermining public confidence in the system’s survivability, and perhaps thus push us to respond by filling up all our shelters? These, like most questions raised about SALT verification, are difficult and complex. Our studies of the past few months have provided some important answers. In this paper I will discuss these issues using MAPS with vertical shelters (silos) as a frame of reference, but most of the discussion is also applicable to hybrid trenches (MAPS with horizontal shelters under cover), which I believe is also a viable, but somewhat more expensive, option. 1. Is MAPS legal under SALT II? Yes. The verification provisions of the draft treaty say that we may not take deliberate concealment measures that impede verification by national technical means. Although MAPS obviously conceals the current location of launchers, we could and would as discussed below make special design provisions to permit verification of their numbers. Provided verification is possible through NTM, concealment of current location is not barred—­otherwise it would be illegal to send SSBNs to sea, an act which certainly conceals their location. 2. Can we design MAPS to allow verification and still keep the Soviets from knowing which shelters to target? Yes. In addition to the inherent verification opportunities afforded by our open society, we have ways of allowing the Soviets to verify our compliance with MAPS without endangering the security of the system. These have been studied by both SALT and military experts, and
