Chapter 2, January–June 1989 97 politically. For example, the SDI program outlined in the 1989 Report to Congress—­which was similar to President Bush’s new program—­ indicated that a certain level of confidence could have been achieved by continuing until FY 1997 under the narrow interpretation. It is not clear when the restructured program—­in particular the Brilliant Pebbles element—­would require broad interpretation testing (although it may require the broad interpretation in the early 1990s) or if it could benefit from such testing, since the issue of whether KKV are “based on other physical principles” remains to be resolved. (S) For tactical purposes, it may be in our interest in DST to continue to seek Soviet acquiescence to the broad interpretation, but we should not assume that either Congress or the Soviets will eventually agree to it. The Soviets have clearly rejected the broad interpretation, although they appear to have changed their position from one of being more restrictive than the narrow interpretation to one approximating the narrow interpretation. In various explanations of the meaning of their current proposal, first tabled prior to the Washington Summit, to observe the ABM Treaty as signed in 1972, they appear to have indicated a willingness to step up to the narrow interpretation. For example, in the DST plenary of November 1, 1988, the Soviets stated for the first time, their understanding that Agreed Statement D “permits the development and testing of only those ABM systems and components based on other physical principles which are fixed, land-­based.” In addition, in discussing their “list” proposal with U.S. negotiators, the Soviets stated that space-­based KKV testing could be conducted for any purpose. Some have concluded that this indicates that the “list” proposal could permit some space-­based KKV testing in an ABM mode that is banned by the narrow interpretation. Cooperative Transition (S) All agree that the DST objective of discussing a possible cooperative transition is valid. If the United States were to decide to deploy a large-­scale ballistic missile defense system, there would be strategic and political advantages in conducting the transition to defenses in a cooperative fashion with the Soviet Union. This would enhance stability during the transition by increasing the predictability of potential deployments, and perhaps, by regulating the nature and rate of deployments. Representing Soviet approval of the SDI program and the concept of mutual defenses, agreement on a cooperative transition also could bestow political benefits that could reduce domestic and allied opposition to SDI. An additional view is that an uncooperative transition to defenses could be strategically and politically disadvantageous to the United States and its allies.
