Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II there will be a debate over whether the working group should be continued, replaced by a rapporteur or abolished. The issue of a special human rights trust fund for the families that have disappeared in Chile will be before the UNGA. The U.S. objects to the formation of such a fund which singles out the human rights victims in Chile, but we should review our policy and decide whether we want to develop a U.S. proposal for the creation of a trust fund for the victims of all human rights violations. 9. There will be increasing pressure for the United States to “do something” in the UNGA concerning the human rights violations in Kampuchea. There will be no resolution on this subject introduced by Western European nations and the question is whether the United States should take action unilaterally at the UNGA against Kampuchea. The consensus decision was to limit our efforts at this point to making the case against Kampuchea at the Subcommission on Discrimination Against Minorities which is presently meeting in Geneva. The U.S. has submitted over 300 pages of material on human rights violations in Kampuchea to the Commission and Ambassador Carter believes there is sufficient evidence before the Subcommission to justify a recommendation by the Subcommission to the Human Rights Commission concerning follow-up action to investigate the allegations against the government of Kampuchea. Ambassador Vanden Heuvel’s suggestion that the material be distributed to all members of the Third Committee was endorsed. 10. Regarding Uganda, it was agreed that if Uganda reneges on its earlier agreement to permit a representative of the Human Rights Commission to enter Uganda to investigate allegations of human rights violations there, it will be necessary to “do something” about Uganda in the upcoming General Assembly. 11. On Argentina, there was advocacy for specific reference to human rights violations in Argentina because of the seriousness of the continued and persistent violations. This was generally resisted on the grounds that we should focus our efforts on attempting to strengthen the objective human rights machinery of the UN and resist the political pressures to single out nations individually for condemnation. The allegations of violations in Argentina are before the Organization of American States and there are current negotiations to secure the admission of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission. In addition, there is pending jurisdiction over Argentina by the UN Human Rights Commission; so it was decided that an Argentinian initiative would not be productive in the upcoming General Assembly. 12. There was substantial discussion of the continuing need to develop an improved procedure for responding to human rights communications sent to the United States by the United Nations. We are not
