524
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
there will be a debate over whether the working group should be con-
tinued, replaced by a rapporteur or abolished. The issue of a special
human rights trust fund for the families that have disappeared in Chile
will be before the UNGA. The U.S. objects to the formation of such a
fund which singles out the human rights victims in Chile, but we
should review our policy and decide whether we want to develop a
U.S. proposal for the creation of a trust fund for the victims of all
human rights violations.
9. There will be increasing pressure for the United States to “do
something” in the UNGA concerning the human rights violations in
Kampuchea. There will be no resolution on this subject introduced by
Western European nations and the question is whether the United
States should take action unilaterally at the UNGA against Kampu-
chea. The consensus decision was to limit our efforts at this point to
making the case against Kampuchea at the Subcommission on Discrim-
ination Against Minorities which is presently meeting in Geneva. The
U.S. has submitted over 300 pages of material on human rights viola-
tions in Kampuchea to the Commission and Ambassador Carter be-
lieves there is sufficient evidence before the Subcommission to justify a
recommendation by the Subcommission to the Human Rights Com-
mission concerning follow-up action to investigate the allegations
against the government of Kampuchea. Ambassador Vanden Heuvel’s
suggestion that the material be distributed to all members of the Third
Committee was endorsed.
10. Regarding Uganda, it was agreed that if Uganda reneges on its
earlier agreement to permit a representative of the Human Rights Com-
mission to enter Uganda to investigate allegations of human rights vio-
lations there, it will be necessary to “do something” about Uganda in
the upcoming General Assembly.
11. On Argentina, there was advocacy for specific reference to
human rights violations in Argentina because of the seriousness of the
continued and persistent violations. This was generally resisted on the
grounds that we should focus our efforts on attempting to strengthen
the objective human rights machinery of the UN and resist the political
pressures to single out nations individually for condemnation. The alle-
gations of violations in Argentina are before the Organization of Amer-
ican States and there are current negotiations to secure the admission of
the Inter-American Human Rights Commission. In addition, there is
pending jurisdiction over Argentina by the UN Human Rights Com-
mission; so it was decided that an Argentinian initiative would not be
productive in the upcoming General Assembly.
12. There was substantial discussion of the continuing need to de-
velop an improved procedure for responding to human rights commu-
nications sent to the United States by the United Nations. We are not
