Covert and Overt Operations
741
272.
Memorandum for the Record1
Washington, April 29, 1980
SUBJECT
Items from the Restricted Session of the SCC Meeting, Tuesday, April 29,
1980 (C)
1. The Oman letter2 will be redrafted to make it less apologetic. Reg
Bartholomew will deliver the letter but not as a Presidential emissary.
As a sweetener, we will respond to their request for a “gift” of six M–
60 tanks by providing them these tanks as a “loan.” Bartholomew will
explain that we have no grant military assistance. Defense will work
out the details of the loan. (TS)
2. [5 lines not declassified]
3. Rescue Plan. DOD will proceed with further rescue planning,
including:
a. Short-fuse option in which the President decides to go on a very
short-time basis in response, for example, to intelligence indications
as to where the hostages are located; (TS)
b. Long-fuse option in which we build up our resources and capa-
bilities; and (TS)
c. Emergency option; e.g., if we learn the hostages are being
killed. (TS)
Dr. Brzezinski also urged that we look at the question of a large-
scale option such as using the 82d Airborne. In this connection, General
Jones said the key is what staging bases would be available. (TS)
4. Information for Congress. We have held the line against saying
anything about the rescue operation past the point at which it was
aborted. All the Congressional Committees are pressing for information
on the rest of the operation so that they can make a judgment as to its
overall feasibility and wisdom. There is, however, a grave danger of
compromising important methods and techniques for the future. CIA
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Box
87, For President or Brzezinski Only File, Iran Rescue Mission 11/79–7/80. Top Secret;
Sensitive; Eyes Only. Drafted by Aaron. Carter initialed “C” in the upper right corner
of the memorandum.
2 Carter’s letter to Sultan Qaboos is in telegram 114517 to Muscat, May 1. Carter
explained that the rescue mission, if successful, would have reduced dramatically the
tensions between the United States and Iran and “would have allowed Iranians and
other peoples in the region to focus more clearly on the serious threat in the region
created by the projection of Soviet power and influence.” He also reiterated the assurances
of his April 25 message. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880025–
0915) For the April 25 message, see Document 269.
