importation or exportation of certain goods have been in force, and from
which prohibitions or restrictions abatements are made by contingents or
licenses. This Government desires that the paragraph be included in the
treaty with Chile as it is undertaking to have it included in all the treaties of
Friendship, Commerce, and Consular Rights, which it is now negotiating.
Stipulations in regard to prohibitions, restrictions and licenses are contained
in the International Convention Relating to the Simplification of Customs
Formalities signed at Geneva, November 3, 1923, in Article 9 of the Anglo-
Austrian Treaty of May 22, 1924, and in a provision contained in the
second paragraph of Exchanges of Notes signed by the United States with a
number of countries, namely,—
Poland, February 10, 1925, Treaty Series No. 727; Finland, May 2, 1925,
Treaty Series No. 715; Esthonia, March 2, 1925, Treaty Series No. 722;
Rumania, February 26, 1926; Treaty Series No. 733; Latvia, February 1,
1926, Treaty Series No. 740; Lithuania, December 23, 1925; Treaty Series
No. 742; and Haiti, July 8, 1926, Treaty Series No. 746.
The seventh paragraph of Article VII providing for equality of treatment of
vessels with regard to bounties, drawbacks and other privileges, although
not contained in the treaty between the United States and Germany is
included in a number of the older treaties to which the United States is a
party, and this Government desires to have it included in the treaties of
Friendship, Commerce, and Consular rights, which it shall sign hereafter
with maritime countries.
The sentence at the end of the second paragraph of Article XIII “If such
consent be given on the condition of reciprocity the condition shall be
deemed to relate to the provisions of the laws, National, State, or
Provincial, under which the foreign corporation or association desiring to
exercise such rights is organized” is designed for use in treaties with
countries in which the right of a corporation organized under the laws of the
United States to engage in business is conditioned on reciprocity. This
provision would have the effect of obtaining for American corporations in
Chile in the event that the laws of Chile in relation to the right of a foreign
corporation to engage in business contain a condition of reciprocity, the
right to engage in business according to whether the laws of the State of the
