Second. As soon as the negotiations began it became my duty, in the capacity of friendly mediator, to explore the various avenues of possible adjustment and to place before the parties such constructive suggestions as might hold out any reasonable promise of agreement. Your Excellency will recall that on April 6 I first suggested the general basis of division of territory. This was accepted by Chile with the reservation that it would have to be made more concrete before Chile could regard it as a justification for suspending the plebiscitary proceedings, which was rejected, however, by Peru. Accordingly, on April 15 I made to the Plenipotentiaries an alternative suggestion for neutralization or transfer of the territory to a third power. Peru promptly accepted neutralization. Chile has not replied to either branch of the suggestion. In these circumstances there ensued informal discussions which brought into the foreground a modification of the second branch of the pending suggestion, namely, the idea of a Bolivian corridor. This idea was expressed in substance as follows: (a) That a corridor be provided for Bolivia from the Bolivian boundary to the Pacific Ocean; (b) that the territory north of this corridor be assigned to Peru; (c) that the territory south of this corridor be assigned to Chile; all of the details, including boundary, compensation arrangements with Bolivia and other matters, such as treaty of amity and commerce between Peru and Chile, resumption of diplomatic relations and other details to be discussed as a part of this general proposition. Peru has agreed to accept as a basis for negotiation this proposal; so that as matters stand Peru has accepted both branches of the pending proposal, the first in its original form, and the second as modified in the course of the informal discussions which I have held separately with both parties. Third. Passing now to the messages of Your Excellency, which were communicated to me on May 21, I find it there stated, in language which scarcely admits of misunderstanding, that Chile
