Romania
549
1. The Romanian Position
Ceausescu had presented the Romanian position on conditions
necessary for a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. These include:
(a) Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied territories; (b) recognition of
the legitimate interests and aspirations of the Palestinians, including
the right to create an independent state; (c) assurance of the independ-
ence and integrity of all states in the region. Ceausescu had expressed
concern with some Israeli actions; namely, illegal settlements in the
occupied territories, and Israeli involvement in Lebanon. Ceausescu
said that Israel must revise its position and recognize the national rights
of the Palestinian people, lacking which, no lasting solution is possible.
He said that it is necessary to break the vicious circle around relations
with the PLO by a clear statement of the right of self-determination of
the Palestinian people. He added that the establishment of a Palestinian
state will not satisfy all Palestinian demands; there is also the problem
of compensation for losses suffered by Arabs who were resettled in
other countries.
Ceausescu said that no one can imagine a solution in the Middle
East without participation by the PLO at Geneva on an equal footing
and with full rights. He said that conditions are now most favorable
for progress toward peace, and he particularly emphasized that respon-
sibility rests with Prime Minister Begin and with Israel for not taking
advantage of these favorable conditions. Ceausescu noted that Israel
hangs on to old and rigid positions, and it is a grave mistake not to
meet the flexible positions of the Arab states. Ceausescu said the situa-
tion may change at any time with grave consequences for peace.
Ceausescu pointed out that the framework offered by the UN
cannot be ignored. Israel has to recognize the UN role, including that
of the Committee on Special Rights of the Palestinian People.
Ceausescu noted that Romania does not want to assume the role
of mediator but seeks to make its contribution to peace in the Middle
East along with other states.
2. Begin’s Position
Prime Minister Begin repeatedly underlined that it is his desire
and that of Israel to achieve peace and avoid another war in the Middle
East—this is the sole motive for his actions. There are no preconditions
for a reconvened Geneva Conference, and all problems should be sub-
ject to negotiations. Begin offered no new ideas on the framework of
the negotiations but explained the content and sense of proposals he
had made during his visit to the United States.
Begin said Israel would not oppose the inclusion of Palestinian
representatives in a Jordanian delegation, if they are not known PLO
members. Begin said that a single Arab delegation would not be justi-
fied since peace treaties must be negotiated and signed separately.
