422 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I system, and the latest advanced fighter aircraft, such as F–14’s for our carriers and F–15’s for Air Force squadrons. • Our combat troop withdrawal from Korea is being conducted in a way that will insure that stability is maintained on the peninsula. As U.S. troops leave, we plan to turn over $800 million in military equipment to bolster South Korean forces in addition to continuing assistance to Korea’s military modernization program. The scheduled departure of our forces has been “backloaded” with only one battalion leaving this year, two more in 1979, and the withdrawal continuing into 1981–82. This careful phasing will give us ample opportunity to assess North Korea’s behavior and will give Seoul time to train and equip its units. Our commitment to the Republic of Korea remains firm. South Korean forces now defend virtually the entire demilitarized zone with the U.S. military comprising only 5% of all forces in the country. We believe that the U.S. division can be withdrawn without jeopardizing the stability which has existed for the past 25 years. • With the agreement of the Philippine Government, and with full regard for Philippine sovereignty, we are committed to maintaining the two important U.S. bases in the Philippines. This will enhance our ability to project U.S. military strength into Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and East Africa and to protect Pacific and Indian Ocean shipping lanes over which 90% of Middle Eastern oil is transported. Relations With Japan The second element of our strategy is our relationship with Japan—still the cornerstone of our Asian policy.4 Our fundamental relationship has never been better despite serious economic stresses. The depth of commitment that both countries have brought to relieving these stresses and the efforts of Prime Minister Fukuda and President Carter have helped us resolve some difficult problems, such as the Tokai Mura nuclear facility, color TV and specialty steel imports, and fishing rights disputes. Perhaps the most significant effort has been our joint undertaking to address Japan’s current account surplus which reached $14 billion in 1977. Sparked by efforts of Japanese Minister for External Economic Affairs Nobuhiko Ushiba, Japan’s Ambassador to the United States Fumihiko Togo, our Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Robert S. Strauss, and our Ambassador to Japan Michael Mansfield, we have agreed to a number of steps such as: • Japanese agreement to increase beef and citrus import quotas; • Establishment of a U.S.-Japan forest products study group to explore ways to expand trade in this area; and 4 Japan was featured in the June 1978 BULLETIN, p. 1. [Footnote in the original.]
