632 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Counting Rules for Future LRNHBs Peresypkin described the U.S. proposal that for future types both sides’ LRNHBs would count at 10/20, and the Soviet right to 40% more LRNHBs would disappear. He raised the problem that would arise if, for example, the Soviet side kept 139 older-­type LRNHBs in its force but deployed one new type. Would the 40% right disappear immediately at that point, or after deployment of some higher number of new types? Peresypkin raised a new Soviet proposal concerning the point at which the Soviet side would switch from the 8/12 counting rule with the right to 40% more LRNHBs than the U.S. side to the “future types” counting rule of 10/20 with no 40% advantage. He said that at present the Soviet side had no plans to deploy a future type with the capability to carry 20 ALCMs, but that it wished to preserve the option. Until the Soviet side actually deployed a LRNHB with this increased capacity, however, he proposed that the 8/12/40% counting rule continue to apply to future Soviet LRNHBs. He noted that this proposal would be part of the Soviet package under which the Soviet side would also retain the right to have 100 heavy bombers in non-­nuclear roles. Curtin said the U.S. side had no authority to accept a change to the formula agreed in Moscow, under which all future Soviet LRNHBs would be counted at the 10/20 rate without the 40% advantage. However, he said the U.S. side would study Peresypkin’s proposal. Wheeler added a personal comment that Peresypkin’s proposal would extend an unusual situation indefinitely into an unknown future. By retaining the 40% advantage far into the future, the Soviet side could eventually have significantly larger numbers of LRNHBs than the U.S. side. Considering the fact that air defenses remained unconstrained, and that Soviet air defenses, for historical reasons, were significantly more developed than U.S. air defenses, this could prove a problem in defending the START agreement before Congress as being an equitable one. Wheeler noted that current systems on both sides had been designed before a START Treaty was envisioned. It was necessary to find a formula that dealt with current inequities, while ensuring that equity would be achieved in the future as future systems were designed with START provisions in mind. Peresypkin pointed out that under the rule for existing types the U.S. side would be able to deliver more ALCMs than the Soviet side despite the 40% rule. Wheeler countered that warhead numbers, which were most often cited in public discussions, were not the whole story; military leaders knew that carriers, weapons, destinations, defenses, tactics, tanker capacity, and numerous other factors went into determining true equity. Military planners also had to recognize that, no matter what rights were accorded in the Treaty, they would be limited to the kinds and numbers of weapons their civilian leaders would
