1164 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 349. Paper Prepared in the International Development Cooperation Administration1 Washington, October 17, 1980 INTERNATIONAL POPULATION/HEALTH INITIATIVE Rationale Even allowing for continued moderate slowdown in the rate of growth, world population is almost certain to exceed 6 billion by the year 2000, an increase in only two decades equal to the entire world population as recently as 1930. Ninety percent of this growth will occur in low income countries. With present trends, the two-child family will not occur world-wide until the year 2020, and the world’s population will not stabilize until 2090—at 10 billion, compared to today’s 4.4 billion. The demographic situation is serious but not hopeless. Worldwide population growth rates are no longer rising. Growing evidence from disparate cultures and economies demonstrates that fertility can be reduced by determined efforts to provide family planning services and information—in conjunction with efforts to build community and family support for family planning, particularly by improving women’s opportunities outside the home. Over the past decade, understanding of the seriousness of the population problem has grown, and many countries have begun to address population issues. Indeed, for the first time LDC government requests for population assistance substantially exceed the existing contributions of population donors. The U.N. World Population Conference in 1974, Conference on Primary Health Care in 1978, and International Women’s Conferences in 1975 and 1980 all called for provision of family planning services and information to all countries. The International Development Strategy also does. Providing family planning also improves maternal and child health. The principal threats to health in developing countries are malnutrition and common infections, particularly among young children. These threats are exacerbated by close birth spacing. Maternal mortality (and abortion) is also very high. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects— Hazel Denton, Box 63, Population: 9–10/80. Drafted by Herz; cleared by Benedick and Van Dusen. Herz sent an earlier version of the paper to Denton under an August 20 covering memorandum. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects—Hazel Denton, Box 63, Population: 8/80)
