893.00/6590: Telegram
[Document 597]
The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State
PEKING, September 9, 1925—11 a.m.
[Received 2:10 p.m.]
384. My telegram No. 293, July 28, 9 p.m. [a.m.]53
1. It appear that by a process so gradual that the phases of its development
have scarcely been discernible there has come about in general an abatement
of the tensity of Chinese feeling such as to warrant the hope that the crisis has
passed. The Chinese no longer “see red”; the aggressive movement against
foreign rights and interests has slackened; strikes and boycotts continue
apparently out of sheer momentum but with no new impulse behind them.
2. These generalizations are subject to local exceptions particularly in the
case of Canton which is now more than ever under Soviet domination and to
that extent abnormal to Chinese conditions. They are moreover subject to the
qualification that they are less strictly applicable to conditions in proportion
to the distance south from Yangtze.
3. To a large degree also a distinction must be made between British and
other interests. The Japanese originally grouped with the British have from
the beginning perceived psychological crux of the problem and by an
assiduously conciliatory attitude towards Chinese sensibilities have
succeeded almost completely in “getting out from under” and putting
themselves on virtually the same basis as those who like ourselves have been
merely incidentally affected by the present outburst of ethnical self-
consciousness on the part of the Chinese. The British Chamber of Commerce
and China Association of Shanghai have recently adopted and communicated
to the Chinese Chamber of Commerce resolutions so ludicrously ingratiating
in contrast with the previous attitude of community which they represent that
the fact of their being received without adverse comment is in itself an
evidence of subsidence of Chinese feeling even towards the British.
4. Although the aggressiveness of feeling may have passed its crisis it would
be a mistake to assume that the volcano has burnt itself out, that the danger is
over and that things in China have reverted to what they were before. The
passionate intensity of feeling has been succeeded by a new sentiment that
