National Security Policy 719 slow down our rate of growth and reduce the resources available for our security needs, including aid to the less developed countries. Having indicated the effects of protectionist policy on the domestic economy, I would like to indicate briefly the effects on the economies of other countries. Foreign trade is vitally important to our economy, but even so it constitutes only 4% of our gross national product. In other major indus­ trial countries (such as the UK, West Germany and France) the ratio of exports to gross national product is 3 to 4 times greater. It is 5 to 9 times as great for smaller advanced nations such as Belgium, Sweden and the Netherlands. For example, approximately one-­half of everything the Netherlands produces is shipped abroad. Our trade policy is of tremendous concern to all these countries, first because exports play such a major role in their economies and sec­ ondly because the United States is a major market for their goods. Both of these reasons explain why any action by the United States which adversely affects sales of their key products, or threatens those sales, is front page news abroad and has a serious effect on our international relations with those countries. This is true even when the action itself does not seem important to us. I can cite five specific examples of restrictive measures which have adversely affected four important allies. Lead and zinc affecting Canada, cheese affecting the Netherlands, electrical equipment and woolen fabrics affecting the United Kingdom and cotton textiles affect­ ing Japan. In the case of many less developed countries, one, or a few com­ modities, comprise the bulk of their exports. For many of these coun­ tries the US market is especially important. To illustrate this point, the United States imports 2/3 of Chile’s copper 1/2 of Cuba’s sugar 1/4 of Indonesia’s rubber 1/3 of Bolivia’s tin over 1/2 of Brazil’s coffee 2/5 of Venezuela’s oil 2/3 of Peru’s lead and zinc. The ability of the less developed countries to sell their products in the United States affects their ability to import capital goods and other necessary manufactured products. Therefore, it determines in large measure the basis of their eco­ nomic growth and their ability to raise standards of living. The promotion of economic growth in the less developed coun­ tries is of course a prime objective of our foreign policy. By this means we hope to help those countries to achieve peace and stability.
