440
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
Discussion
Introduction
10. Events since the nationalization of oil in 1951 have profoundly
changed the political climate in Iran. The political forces which brought
Mossadeq and the National Front to power are powerful and lasting.
The Shah and the formerly dominant landowning class have lost the
political initiative, probably permanently. Nevertheless, the coalition of
urban nationalists and religious zealots which Mossadeq heads has no
agreed program for the future, being united primarily by a common
desire to rid the country of foreign influence and replace the traditional
governing groups. The ability of the National Front to remain in power,
as well as Iran’s ultimate role in the East-West conflict, will depend in
large measure on the National Front’s success in working out solutions
to the serious social, political, and economic problems which will con-
front it during the next year.
11. Although unrest in Iran derives from a complex of factors ex-
tending far beyond the oil dispute with the UK, this dispute none-
theless has become the focal point of political activity. Mossadeq rode
to power on the issue of nationalization of oil, and his present political
strength derives largely from his continued defiance of the UK.
Prospects for a Negotiated Oil Settlement
12. British Attitude: We believe that the UK will almost certainly
continue to insist that there be some form of neutral arbitration of the
amount of compensation for the seizure of Anglo-Iranian Oil Company
properties even though nationalization per se is no longer an issue. The
UK will probably also continue to resist making payments against Ira-
nian claims without first obtaining firm Iranian commitments to follow
through with a settlement.
13. In taking this stand, the UK is motivated primarily by consider-
ations of prestige and precedent. The Conservative government would
face strong political opposition at home if it agreed to Mossadeq’s
present terms. Perhaps more important, the British feel that capitula-
tion to Iran would threaten their own and the Western oil position gen-
erally in other parts of the Middle East. Meanwhile, the British feel
under no immediate compulsion to make a settlement with Mossadeq.
In the first place, increased production in other areas has already made
up for the loss of Iranian crude oil production, although the refining ca-
pacity at Abadan has not been fully replaced. Secondly, although the
UK believes that lack of oil revenues will result in progressive eco-
nomic and political deterioration in Iran, it does not appear to regard a
Communist takeover in Iran as imminent.
14. Moreover, the British are not likely to be induced to make
greater concessions to Iran by the prospect of Iran’s selling oil in the ab-
