February 1951–February 1952
165
58.
Memorandum Prepared in the Office of National Estimates,
Central Intelligence Agency1
Staff Memorandum No. 171
Washington, undated.
SUBJECT
The Tudeh Problem in US Intelligence
1. The questions posed in NIE–462 have once again emphasized
our lack of definite knowledge about the Tudeh Party. We know that
the party exists as a disciplined and dedicated instrument of Soviet
penetration of Iran, that it is the only political grouping in Iran which
has any organizational coherence, and that it is steadily going ahead
with the task of building up its strength to the point where it will be
able to take over Iran. We do not, however, know the names of its
present leaders, and we lack precise information regarding the size and
character of its membership and following, its military capabilities
vis-a`-vis the government security forces, which it is attempting to pene-
trate, and its immediate objectives. Our current information about the
party is largely confined to that obtained from observation of Tudeh
demonstrations, from a scattering of captured documents and propa-
ganda utterances, and from a limited number of low-level informants
within the party recruited by SO contacts directly or by those of the Ira-
nian police, the Iranian Army, [less than 1 line not declassified].
2. This is a highly unsatisfactory situation and one which would
appear to warrant our putting strong pressure on SO, G–2 (whose rep-
resentatives are primarily concerned with army loyalty) and other
agencies to try to do something about it. In exerting such pressure,
however, I think it is incumbent on us to do two things. The first is to
recognize the nature of the problem we are up against. Tudeh is not a
big legal Western-style Communist party which periodically registers
its strength at the ballot box and generally operates on a big enough
scale to afford plenty of opportunities for penetration. It is a relatively
small conspiratorial party, by its own testimony highly concerned
about security, which has applied the cell organization strictly to pre-
vent individual members from knowing too much. If SO manages to
place an agent at the center of one of the three of four important provin-
cial headquarters of Tudeh or in the national Politbureau—and SO cer-
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, DDI Files, Job 79T00937A, Box 1, Folder 2,
Staff Memoranda—1951. Top Secret; Security Information. The memorandum was prob-
ably prepared prior to December 12.
2 An apparent reference to NIE–46 in draft form. NIE–46 was distributed in final
form on February 4, 1952, and is printed as Document 63.
