Negotiating Channels 401 request that the regulations not be issued until after his return from Europe this evening. The SCC agreed that it would review the regulations and the declaration at the meeting tomorrow, probably for issuance later in the day. The one remaining issue of contention within the government is the extent of extraterritoriality to be built into the regulations.3 (C) 2. Iranian Assets. The President also approved the SCC recommendation that Treasury be permitted to immunize from attachment new Iranian funds brought into the country to cover the obligations of companies such as Iran Air, NIOC and the Iranian Shipping Company. Treasury will proceed.4 (U) 3. Economic Warfare. Dr. Brzezinski noted that he had asked Henry Owen to head a small group to examine what is required to carry out the kind of economic warfare in which we are increasingly engaged. The group will be asked to make its initial report to the SCC on Friday.5 (S) 4. Cooperation by Allies. Secretary Vance circulated a spread sheet showing the various actions in the economic sphere which we have taken, what we have requested of our allies, and what their response has been. The paper is attached.6 At this time, the foreign response must be treated as preliminary since it does not have the benefit of Warren Christopher’s talks in Europe except for the indications we have received from message reporting. (S) Dr. Brzezinski wondered if the U.S. should do something more dramatic to galvanize the allies into action. Secretary Brown observed that, in his view, the Europeans might take actions together but not separately. Their public opinion was out ahead of the governments themselves, and we could perhaps shame them into doing more. He cautioned, however, that taking some public action without an assurance of results could hurt more than it helps by dramatizing the absence of European cooperation. This could then be exploited by the Soviets. 3 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Europeans a disappointment on Iran & Afghanistan—We must maintain leadership. We should push in every case to the limit that is practical. Even if allies are discomfited.” 4 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “What about Japan? See NY Times p. 1 & W. Post A19.” The articles covered Japan’s decision to oppose the imposition of economic sanctions against Iran and the USSR, and its fear of retaliatory oil cuts if it sided with the United States. (Reference is presumably to Henry Scott Stokes, “Japan Indicates It Would Not Join In Trade Curbs on Iran and Soviet,” New York Times, January 17, 1980, p. A1, and Dusko Doder, “Europe, Japan Warned By Iran About Sanctions,” Washington Post, January 17, 1980, p. A18) 5 January 18. 6 The spreadsheet, “Economic Measures Related to Iran and Afghanistan: Draft #2—January 15, 1980 PM,” is attached but not printed. For Draft #1, see footnote 2, Document 148.
