Peru 1085 President Bustamante,6 owed his election to APRA’s organized political support. APRA also elected a congressional majority and gained representation in the cabinet. However, its alliance with the Bustamante faction of the elite soon broke down as a result of growing conservative fear that APRA was becoming too strong. In 1948 APRA was again outlawed and soon thereafter a military regime headed by General Manuel Odria seized power. However, Odria’s authoritarian methods resulted in growing opposition, first at popular levels and eventually within the military and the upper class. Under pressure from these elements for a return to constitutional rule, elections were held in 1956, in which APRA and most of the upper class leaders supported the election of ex-President Prado. Upon his election, Prado again legalized APRA, which had before this been able to seat significant minorities in both chambers by running its candidates as independents. II. Political Situation 13. The Prado government, essentially conservative in leadership, has proven until recently to be a weak administration, even though it has managed to preserve constitutional order. The 70-­year old Prado has become increasingly unpopular because of his failure to assert firm leadership in the face of deteriorating economic conditions which have led to considerable labor discontent and subversive activity. To cope with unrest, the government has suspended constitutional guarantees on several occasions and made a series of cabinet changes. In the most recent of these—­in mid-1959—Prado felt obliged to appoint Pedro Beltrán, one of his strongest critics and a forceful leader among less conservative elements in the oligarchy, as Prime Minister and Finance Minister. Beltrán’s determined approach to Peru’s economic difficulties has restored confidence, to some degree offsetting his lack of organized political support, and is a major stabilizing factor in the current situation. 14. The Prado government is basically dependent on the cooperation of the country’s diverse political forces and on the acquiescence of the military. The political base of Prado’s government is an uneasy working relationship of political opposites: APRA and the Movimiento Democratico Peruano (MDP), which is a loosely organized group of conservatives and other Prado supporters. The principal bond between them is the common desire to avoid a return to military rule. Fearing repression and seeking respectability, APRA has followed a policy of moderation and cooperation with Prado, even though this policy has placed increasingly heavy strains on party unity and has caused a drain on its popular support. At the same time, the government and the MDP
