Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 321 to demonstrate Soviet verification technology. A more dramatic initiative, despite possible Soviet Navy opposition, would pick up on Karpov’s proposal last summer to ban nuclear SLCMs. On a different tack, there is some evidence that Moscow might be willing to defer SLCMs to START II.8 At RAND last year, Sagdeyev suggested that Soviet concerns about SLCMs circumventing START could be resolved for now by establishing SLCM limits, ensured by “political guarantees,”9 while deferring the details of verification to a follow-­on negotiation. — A third possibility, for which our evidence is sketchier, is that the Soviets may step up to our interest in deMIRVing options. Despite Akhromeyev’s view that any consideration of such options must await START II, a move on a MIRVed mobile ban is conceivable.10 New IC projections, indicating more SS-25s, SS-N-23s and single RV-SLBMs, suggest that the Soviets may have more flexibility than we to accommodate a deMIRVing option along the lines of those we discussed in the strategic review last spring. If they were so inclined, they might expect that such an initiative would be well received in Congress given the problem of funding missile modernization. III. The third substantive approach would reflect the views of those who believe that Moscow has already made too many START concessions and that the START process should be slowed down, either to delay agreement or to keep up the pressure on the U.S.11 This approach suggests that the Gorbachev letter would contain boilerplate language at best, but in any case not represent an effort to bring closure to outstanding START issues. Shevardnadze’s recent public complaints about the lack of U.S. progress are consistent with this approach. Defense and Space A D&S initiative at the ministerial would suggest that the Soviets believe that funding and technical difficulties with SDI might make the Administration more willing to strike a deal to limit defenses. A Soviet initiative would clearly be designed to appeal to those in Congress who would reduce or constrain the growth of the program, possibly by offering a concession intended to make an Administration rejection difficult and costly. The most likely initiative would include a proposal that both sides observe the development and testing limitations of the narrow interpretation of the ABM Treaty. On several occasions, Soviet officials have said they are ready to dismantle Krasnoyarsk in exchange for the 8 Baker underlined “defer SLCMs” and “START II.” 9 Baker underlined “establishing SLCM limits,” “ensured,” and “‘political guaran­ tees.’” 10 Baker underlined “a MIRVed mobile ban is conceivable.” 11 Baker underlined “the START process should be slowed down, either to delay agreement or to keep up the pressure on the U.S.”
