723.2515/1642: Telegram
[Document 233]
The Consul at Arica (Von Tresckow) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
ARICA, October 14, 1925—6 p.m.
[Received October 15—1:17 p.m.]
From Pershing: Secretary’s telegram October 12, 6 p.m. Agreement of Chilean
Ambassador with your construction of award and its legal effect may indicate attitude
of Government of Chile, but this view has not yet found expression here through
Chilean representatives. Commissioner Edwards takes ground that Plebiscitary
Commission does not have the authority which seems perfectly clear in your
construction. The Commission has not met since October 10, and I shall give Edwards
a reasonable time to receive instructions from his Government. Ambassador Mathieu is
wholly misinformed in placing cause of trouble on Peruvian agitators from the Ucayali.
Insofar as I am informed, Peruvians have in no instance provoked disturbances; but
whenever Peruvians, with exception of officials, have attempted to come ashore or to
visit their families or to circulate among their fellow countrymen almost invariably
they have been attacked and beaten up. Usually the Chilean police have stood by in
apparent approval. In the greater number of these assaults Peruvians have made
complaints before Chilean police courts, but in only one case has the Chilean offender
even been brought to judgment, and his fine was quite inadequate. No Peruvian would
dare to provoke a disturbance for fear of his life. Assertions similar to those made by
the Ambassador are constantly made here by Chilean authorities but are made merely
to shift blame. … Our investigations have proved that there have been 81 expulsions or
deportations since publication of the award, 5 of them on very day of my arrival in
Arica; there is also convincing evidence that at least 87 others were deported on or
about March 5. Responsibility for these deportations and other unlawful acts rests on
Chilean Government. …
The Ambassador’s suggestion that Chilean troops be confined to barracks instead of
being removed from the province is quite inadequate to meet situation. Impossible to
apply suggestion for necessary period and I would not trust promise to keep troops
confined unless they were under neutral guard. The presence of the troops is dangerous
menace to fair and free plebiscite; their removal will serve as outward and visible
expression of change of conditions. Responsible party cannot be allowed to plead
opposition of army itself, in order that this necessary prerequisite may be avoided.
