1956 801 practical and feasible means specified in declaration. They had never said Foreign Ministers conference should take place before issuance declaration nor had they contended that we should not discuss declara­ tion at this time but rather discuss Foreign Ministers conference at this time. He had only said that issuance declaration should be connected with holding Foreign Ministers conference. Only in this way could we express desire stated in declaration and at same time have practical means for peaceful solution our disputes. 73. Wang said of course at present stage most important question is issuing of declaration. They had made perfectly clear their views this regard. They had also pointed out what they considered unacceptable. They would hope that I would reconsider this whole matter in light of what Wang had said this morning and they would hope we would be able get closer in this regard next meeting. 74. Wang said if I had nothing further this morning, he wanted raise another matter. He wanted discuss with me question of Chinese nationals in U.S. who desired return but being prevented. He recalled that in previous meetings he handed me names 31 Chinese in this category. Their attention again been called to fact there three more Chinese this category who desire return but not able do so. He would hand me list of names and other information. (Did so) 75. Wang said next thing was he would appreciate if I had anything to say or any information give him regarding 31 whose names he gave me and who desire return but unable do so, as well as situation those Chinese who imprisoned by U.S. 76. Wang said with regard question of medical information about disease of Liu Yung-­ming which he discussed with me last meeting, he would appreciate it if I would kindly inform hospital send such mate­ rial to Chinese Red Cross in Peking. 77. I said let us be very clear about this matter. Neither in agreed announcement nor elsewhere had U.S. accepted any responsibility for investigating every individual Chinese in U.S. U.S. said it had not and would not offer any obstruction to departure any Chinese from U.S. to Wang’s country. Very simple, clear and definite procedures to which Wang agreed had been set up to insure this was case. U.S. has fully and faithfully carried out all its obligations under agreed announce­ ment. I had said over and over again no Chinese who desires return Wang’s country being obstructed in his departure. 78. I said I had explained to Wang procedures for assuring that this is case. If Chinese have not left U.S. for his country, it purely because they do not desire do so. I could not accept any obligation to poll or screen each Chinese to determine why he didn’t want return. Neither would I be party to bringing any pressure on Chinese to do so. He entirely free do whatever he wants. If he feels he in any way
