860 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII 322. Memorandum From Secretary of State Muskie to President Carter1 Washington, September 29, 1980 SUBJECT Relations with Pakistan: The Covert Dimension We have an unusual two-tiered relationship with Pakistan—overt and covert. On the overt level, we have a number of differences and Pakistan seeks to keep some distance between us in order to sustain its non-aligned and Islamic credentials. As you know, however, we cooperate closely in a number of covert activities, [1 line not declassified] and the program to assist the Afghan insurgents. Pakistan is absolutely key to our ability to keep pressure on the Soviets through the insurgents since it would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to channel arms and supplies through any other route. Without Pakistan’s support, the insurgents probably could not continue for long. President Zia has been very supportive and personally keeps a close eye on the covert programs through direct supervision of the responsible agency, the Inter-Services Intelligence Directorate (ISID). He has also carefully kept the covert program quite separate from most other aspects of our relations, never linking continued covert cooperation to military sales, economic aid, etc. However, some months ago he did choose to use the ISID chief as a channel to express his uncertainty about the nature of the American security commitment to Pakistan.2 In discussions in late August with CIA’s Deputy Director for Operations and Ambassador Hummel, Zia reaffirmed his intention to continue cooperation in assisting the insurgents, despite fairly heavy Soviet pressures.3 He indicated that he thought the current level of support to the insurgents was about right, implying that substantial increases could provoke serious Soviet reaction. Zia has rigorously limited knowledge in his own government of our covert programs. He has made clear, for example, that the subject should not be raised with Foreign Minister Agha Shahi. Zia is extremely sensitive to leaks in Washington and has threatened to cease coopera- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, VIP Visit File, Box 11, Pakistan: President Zia-ul-Haq, 10/3/80: Briefing Book. Top Secret; Sensitive. No drafting information appears on the memorandum. 2 See, for example, footnote 3, Document 209. 3 No record of these meetings was found.
