Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX well prepared. Assad made clear he would not close the doors to Syrian involvement in a settlement. Even Arafat, Pungan added, was not 100 percent against the Sadat effort. Pungan did not rule out the possibility that Syria, at some future stage, and even the PLO as well, would accept a formula for their participation. Continuing, Pungan argued that it was not enough to wait for such events; all concerned should prepare the ground. Ceausescu had suggested that perhaps another meeting, possibly organized under the UN, could be convened in another city which could provide the cover for bringing in others, including the Soviets. 12. The Secretary commented that the time may come when this would be feasible, but he first wanted to see some progress in the committee talks, and on a declaration of principles. Syria clearly would not go to a meeting in Cairo, nor would the Soviets. He agreed with Pungan that Egypt should at least keep the Syrians and even the Soviets informed of what they have been doing. Pungan said the Soviets will not go to Geneva, for example, merely to put their signature on a settlement already negotiated without their participation. The Secretary said that he, too, tried to keep the Soviets generally informed. 13. The Secretary observed that the PLO had been hurting its cause recently. He noted the murder of the PLO rep in London showed the strains within the PLO. 14. Pungan was gratified that both Sadat and Begin had made comparatively temperate speeches after the Jerusalem break up. It was important that diplomacy through the press be calmed and that the sharp public rhetoric end. This was the thrust of Romanian advice to Begin and Sadat. He was also encouraged by the two parties leaving open a future reconvening of the Security Committee. The Secretary said that his guess was that the Security Committee might be convened within the next seven to fourteen days; he was less optimistic about a reconvened Political Committee meeting. It depended upon the atmospherics, and he noted there were ideas for rotating meetings between Cairo and Jerusalem, or even meeting in the Sinai buffer zone. 15. Summing up, the Secretary said that, in most respects, the Romanian and U.S. analysis and approach to the problem were similar; there were some differences in our respective views of the Palestinian issue and the PLO. The Secretary thanked Pungan for coming to Washington to share with him Ceausescu’s views. Vance
