158
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
ised on an understanding of the task and the need for a long-term com-
mitment to produce results. The overall goal is to promote the
observance of internationally-accepted standards of human rights
throughout the world.
1. Specific objectives (the time frame for the attainment of these ob-
jectives will depend greatly on individual country circumstances, and
on the degree of coherence and persistence of U.S. human rights
advocacy).
(a) Promotion of rights of the person in all countries. The initial ob-
jective should be focused on countries with whom we have the greatest
degree of involvement. Failure to see human rights improvements ulti-
mately will jeopardize those bilateral relations.
(b) Promotion of civil and political liberties. The encouragement of
and identification of U.S. with democratic countries and those moving
in that direction is a legitimate goal, and one which has direct relevance
to the enhancement of rights of the person.
(c) Promotion of such basic needs as food, shelter, health care, and
education. This objective can be sought most effectively through posi-
tive support and international action.
(d) Achievement of greater international awareness and concern in
improving human rights conditions.
(e) Reduction in the level of U.S. association with regimes which
engage in gross violations of human rights of their citizens. It will dem-
onstrate our own commitment to human rights goals, maintain public
confidence in the thrust of our foreign policy, and, hopefully, influence
the nation involved and other states as well.
1—Lessening our identification could reach a halt to all assistance
and support if a country rejects pleas for improvements and moves
along a path of institutionalizing its repressive features.
2—Disassociation involving full cut-offs of assistance would occur
where any country reached the threshold defined as being engaged in
“a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized
human rights.” “Consistent pattern” would be defined in terms of pe-
riod of time, regular nature and trend. “Gross violations” would focus
on those rights of the person cited in current law—and derived from
United Nations Resolution—“torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading
treatment or punishment, prolonged detention without charges and
trial, and other flagrant denial of the right to life, liberty, or the security
of person.”2
2 Presumable reference to UN General Assembly Resolution 3452(XXX), adopted
on December 9, 1975.
