National Security Policy 115 32. Memorandum of Conference with the President1 Washington, March 20, 1958, 3 p.m. OTHERS PRESENT Dr. Killian General Goodpaster Dr. Killian reported the results of his analysis of Defense propos­ als for budgetary augmentations, which the President recently asked him to analyze. He said that the Services had asked for augmentation totalling $10 billion. At this point the President interjected that this type of thing seemed to him to show a lack of responsibility, and that he found it hard to retain confidence in the heads of the Serv­ ices when they produce such proposals as these. Dr. Killian said the sum had been screened, in prolonged discussions in Defense, to some $1,648,000,000. The President asked how much of this was for the continuation of the B–52 line. Dr. Killian said that $456 million was for B–52s and the air tankers to go with them. This would be enough to keep one production line open at five per month for about a year. The President indicated he supported this program. Dr. Killian said the next sum was $225 billion for the conduct of the NIKE–ZEUS program, and to continue development of the anti- ICBM. Up to one-­half of this total was intended for the overall devel­ opment phase. The Signal Corps also had a very attractive program for acoustic detection (using a “corridor” in the upper air), amounting to $3.7 million. The President said that is the kind of project he likes to hear about. Dr. Killian said the next proposal is for $400 million to increase the IOC for POLARIS. This sum would add two more submarines, plus tenders, bringing the total number of subs up to five according to Dr. Killian. (I think the correct figure may be eight). The next project was for a radio telescope development, involving $71 million. Dr. Killian said there are scientific and technical questions still remaining concerning this project, and he would like to suggest that it be subject to the review of the Science Advisory Committee. The President agreed, and said that in fact he would like to see the study and review conducted, and then have Defense come in for sup­ plemental funds if the project proves out. 1 Source: Defense proposals for budgetary augmentations. Secret. 2 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, DDE Diaries. Drafted on March 21.
