138  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
QUOTE Indian Embassy UNQUOTE only in first sentence paragraph 
2 of agreed announcement. Subsequent references to Indian Embassy 
should be retained. We plan make it clear to GOI in our reply that it is 
our understanding Embassy would be agency GOI for implementation 
agreement and that no Indian Commission or special team would be 
sent to US for this purpose.
Dulles
111.	 Letter 4 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 4
Geneva, August 19, 1955
Dear Walter:
I received your letter of August 17th today. This is very good pouch 
service and if it could be maintained would certainly be most helpful. I 
also received your letters of August 12th and 15th but did not reply in 
view of Ed Martin’s return as I knew that he would fill you all in much 
better than I could by letter.
Doug Forman has arrived, and I greatly appreciate the effort which 
was made thoroughly to brief him before he left. It has been very help­
ful to me.
Frankly I am still bothered by what might not entirely accurately 
be described as our present “all or nothing” position. I fully appreci­
ate that it is a question of judgment upon which it is not possible to 
be categorical one way or another. You may be entirely right that their 
desire to move on to item two is so strong that they will eventually 
concede, but I, nevertheless, stick to my original estimate even if this 
is true it is going to be a long, hard struggle. There is no question on 
the moral rightness of our position, but, unfortunately, that seems to 
have little influence on the people with whom I am dealing. What par­
ticularly bothers me is that our position is resulting in the retention of 
persons whose release could otherwise be obtained while we wrestle 
with getting all the others. I am finding it hard to equate the cases of 
say Harriet Mills and some of the missionaries with some of the other 
cases, much though we intend to get them all out. Of course, all this 
in turn largely depends upon whether it is Chou’s intention to exploit 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
