Chapter 4, February–April 1990  529
current START agreement is initialed in June, to eliminate first mobile 
MIRVs and then all land-­based MIRVs.
— I wanted to present these ideas to you now so that you will 
have time to consider them. I know you have ideas of your own for 
follow-­on negotiations which we can discuss at our April meeting.
— In sum, we are prepared to agree to ban mobile MIRVed ICBMs 
in the current START agreement provided that can be done without 
delaying the Treaty, and to address other stabilizing measures in fol-
low-­on negotiations that could begin as soon as the Treaty is initialed.
— If you cannot agree to dealing with MIRV mobiles in the current 
negotiations, we could agree to turn immediately to these issues once 
the current START agreement is initialed at the Summit.
— I hope that you agree that conditions will never be better for 
both sides to capture and build upon the momentum we have gener-
ated in the negotiations.
87.	
Telegram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization to the Department of State1
Brussels, March 16, 1990, 1823Z
1675. Subject: NST Delegation Briefs the NAC: March 7 Question 
and Answer Session
1. Secret—Entire Text.
2. Summary: U.S. NST negotiators Ambassadors Richard Burt and 
David Smith had a lively, productive discussion with NATO Permreps 
in the question and answer session following their prepared statements 
at the March 7 NAC.2 Unlike in past sessions, there was virtually no 
allied questioning of U.S. negotiating positions. A number of the allied 
Ambassadors called the briefings by Burt and Smith encouraging. The 
allies seemed surprised that the Soviets had moved toward U.S. posi-
tions in so many areas, particularly on the issue of SLCMs. In line with 
1 Source: Department of State, Economic and Agricultural Affairs, Lot 96D484, 
Robert B. Zoellick, Under Secretary for Economic and Agricultural Affairs, US/Sov 
Minis: Apr ’90. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Sent for information to NATO Collective.
2 In telegram 1424, March 7, the Mission to NATO transmitted Smith’s prepared 
statement to the Department (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, D900212-
0095) In telegram 1425, March 7, the Mission to NATO transmitted Burt’s prepared state-
ment to the Department (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, D900212-0099).
