498
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
economist, but it was absolutely made clear to me. The people should
rejoice in the peace. It will be for them disaster. So, I ask the Secretary of
State about the financial assistance, if it should be a grant. This is what I
actually meant, although it was my mistake at first.5 Then we need a
loan for a longer period of time which we shall repay. This is the form
of help. Of course, I can only present it to you as a most serious problem
not connected with the peace treaty. It will not be a linkage or condi-
tion. But I present to you with respect. These are the problems that we
have still. Mr. President, thank you for listening to me. Now I would
like to hear you.
President Carter: All right, sir. Let me say again that the instruction
by the Israeli Cabinet in approving the text of the treaty is very much
appreciated, I know, by myself and the world. We will proceed to en-
courage President Sadat to accept the treaty text also without change,
including, of course, Article VI which has been so troubling concerning
the priority of obligations. I have no idea whether we will be successful,
but we will be very eager to seek his approval of the treaty text. I don’t
want to mislead you, however. I think that there is still one outstanding
issue that needs to be resolved and that is concerning some assurance
to President Sadat about the West Bank and Gaza, the elections, and the
establishment of the autonomous self-government. President Sadat has
expressed to me by telephone and also through Vice President Mu-
barak, who I also think met with Defense Minister Weizman, that he
would prefer not to have the interim withdrawal from the Sinai until
the election process has been completed. In our side-letter6 which was
worked out, as you know, by your own negotiators, including Foreign
Minister Dayan, there was a target date—I think the words used were a
goal—of the end of 1979 for the conclusion of these elections. I have no
particular views to put forward except that I think our draft of this
letter is a fairly good compromise. We will, of course, continue our ef-
forts to get President Sadat to agree with your views and vice versa. I
will now be in touch with President Sadat to report to him on your
communication to me by telephone this morning and also to encourage
him to accept the draft of the treaty. I think that is very important that
the negotiations continue and my expectation is that President Sadat
will want some clear understanding with you, not through the treaty
text, but through a separate letter that there be some definite commit-
ment on the West Bank and Gaza.
5 In a marginal note on an earlier draft of this transcript, Carter underlined the word
“grant” and wrote beside the paragraph: “He [Begin] said he asked for a loan—it was an
error—he meant a grant.” See footnote 1 above.
6 See Document 131.
