698
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
—Soviet concern that unchecked arms transfers will in the long
run contribute to the modernization of the armed forces of a potentially
dangerous (and eventually menacing) adversary: China.
3. Prospects for the current talks: We believe the Soviets will ap-
proach the current talks with the utmost caution, much in the manner
in which they have examined other arms control proposals which im-
pact on central political-military policies and activities, e.g., CTB and
SALT. These talks will, therefore, be more difficult for the Soviets than
those which have only a peripheral impact on foreign policy, e.g. chem-
ical weapons, Indian Ocean, ENMOD. This caution will be further
reinforced by the fact that the Soviets, to the best of our knowledge,
have not yet developed a cohesive public policy with respect to arms
transfers. Our attempts to draw MFA officials and USA institute
staffers into detailed discussions of possible arms transfers controls
have been unsuccessful. Over the past eight months (since the March
proposal for a working group on this subject),3 we have elicited nothing
more from our Soviet interlocutors than a restatement of the Soviet
policy as outlined in the first paragraph above and the comment that,
since these talks are at U.S. initiative, it is up to the U.S. to take the first
step. Moreover, recent indirect contacts with relevant Soviet officials
have failed to produce any signs of a new policy consensus. Although
Soviets will be primarily interested in exploring U.S. intentions in the
talks, they will not want to be put in a tactical disadvantage of simply
discussing U.S. proposals. Instead, they will probably attempt to move
the discussions along lines more favorable to them without clearly indi-
cating their objectives in the CAT area. They may repeat the few consis-
tent Soviet reactions which we have heard on this subject:
—A critical review of the volume and character of U.S. arms sales
and transfers;
—A charge that U.S. practices set the tone and provide the mo-
mentum for world-wide conventional arms transfers;
—a criticism of the role played by U.S. allies in supplementing U.S.
transfers. (We should of course be aware of the arms transfer role of
such Soviet surrogates as the GDR and Czechoslovakia.)
5. It is possible that the Soviets may attempt to move the conversa-
tions towards discussions focusing on initial measures which would
impact much more severely on the U.S. and its allies. An example of
this might be some type of recommendation that would limit transfers
of arms to Latin America (less Cuba) or to China. Or Soviets could sug-
3 During a March 29 press conference in Moscow, Vance said that he and Gromyko
had agreed to set up bilateral working groups to discuss numerous issues, including con-
ventional arms transfers. The text of the press conference is in telegram 3034 from the Sec-
retary’s Delegation in Moscow, March 29; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770108–0039.
