Uruguay 1185 Uruguay’s Unusual Economic and Social Situation; Future Prospects Despite a degree of inflation which has increased prices more than it has wages, Uruguay probably still possesses a larger percentage of population who are fed, clothed and sheltered reasonably well than any other Latin American country. An ECLA study showed that, in 1958, about 78% of the Uruguayan population had a productivity of over 400 US$ per capita, which was the highest recorded in Latin America. Uruguay has long had the international reputation of having the largest proportion of pensioners, the largest variety of other social security services, the largest proportion of Government employees, the most public ownership of utilities and industries, and the most “welfare state” institutions in general of any Latin American country. On a comparative basis, this is probably true. For example, there are about 200,000 pensioners and about 100,000 others who are eligible but who have not been able to obtain pensions as yet because of delays that are fundamentally due to depleted pension funds that have made loans to the Government. There is a system of small “family allowances” which are funded like pensions and supplement wages, and there are unemployment funds. For medical and hospital services, the population is about equally divided between those whose income is low enough to make them eligible for public health services and those who are members of one of the many “mutual” health insurance societies; it is estimated that only about 5% of Uruguayans now depend entirely upon the private direct purchase of medical and hospital services. All of the utilities in the country except the (British-­owned) Montevideo gas company are now owned by the Government. And the Government monopolizes petroleum refining, most liquor distilling, a large part of gasoline distribution, a large part of cement manufacturing, fertilizer and chemical manufacturing, fishing and fish distribution, and insurance. There is very little foreign ownership of industry in Uruguay and the funded foreign debt is well under $100 million USCy. Despite the reputation of Uruguay, however, the backbone of its economy is private capitalism, ownership is concentrated in a surprisingly small proportion of the population, and the economic and social attitudes of these capitalists are, on the whole, not conspicuously enlightened. About 35% of all the arable land in the country is concentrated in the hands of about 600 families, and the concentration of the ownership of industry is probably about the same. Farm workers average less than $20 USCy, a month plus room and board, and ordinary industrial workers average from $60 to $80 USCy, a month, plus about 20% more from the employer for pension funds and other social security payments. Also, some of the wealth that has built Montevideo into an impressive city for such a small country has come from persons who have
