Chapter 7, January–May 1991 957 185. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the Soviet Union1 Washington, January 5, 1991, 0658Z 3800. Subject: START Letter to Shevardnadze 1. Secret, Entire Text. 2. Please deliver ASAP the letter in para 3 below to Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze. It responds to Minister Shevardnadze’s letter of December 30, 1990 to Secretary Baker.2 There will be no signed original. 3. January 4, 1991 Dear Eduard, – I have studied your letter of December 30 on the START package, and note that in the main it confirms the package you and I discussed in Houston and I outlined in my letter of December 14.3 – However, I must tell you as clearly as I can that certain substantive positions put forth by the Soviet side in Geneva are inconsistent with what was discussed by you and me in Houston and confirmed in our exchange of letters, cannot be the basis for a START agreement, and will block efforts to complete START by the time of the summit. – Your letter of December 30 states that you have reviewed my letter of December 14, which laid out in detail the elements of the package, and your letter goes on to say that you consider as definitively agreed the PPCM and heavy bomber issues as we discussed in Houston and Washington. But the Soviet positions tabled in Geneva do not reflect your confirmation of the Houston solution on these issues. – On the B–1, you and I discussed a specific set of measures that would give the Soviet side confidence that B–1 aircraft are not equipped for long-­range nuclear ALCMs. But the Soviet delegation in Geneva has gone beyond that to propose additional measures that are designed to make it technically not feasible to modify the B–1 to carry long-­range nuclear ALCMs. This we cannot do.  Specifically, what you and I discussed in Houston on the B–1 was: the bomb bay bulkhead will not permit long-­range nuclear ALCMs to be loaded, the ALCM pylon attachment points will be covered (except 1 Source: Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, Electronic Telegrams, N910001–0037. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent Immediate for information to NST Geneva. Drafted by Timbie; cleared by Bohlen, and in OSD, JCS, ACDA, CIA, NSC, S/S, and S/S-O; approved by Bartholomew. 2 See Document 183. 3 See Document 179.
