Eastern Europe Region 99 nationalism and Russian control. Moscow therefore has shown limited tolerance for either “destalinization” or “desatellization.” 3. In this situation, the Russians also are continuing to press for tighter economic integration in Comecon and military integration in the Warsaw Pact. Moreover, the Soviets seem intent, as a counter to increased East-West contacts, on tightening up internal discipline in Russia and in Eastern Europe. 4. Nonetheless, the actual exercise of control over the countries of Eastern Europe has not proven to be easy for Moscow. Beyond the broader forces of nationalism, East European instability has become an increasing possibility. This is due to the expansion of East-West relations, and, in particular, to the economic factor, CSCE, China and the effects of “Eurocommunism” and ideological ferment. 5. The Economic Factor. East Europeans are straining to pay for higher-priced oil and other imports from the USSR as well as Western advanced technology, raw materials, and semi-manufactures necessary to modernize and expand their industries. Their export earnings are far from adequate. Thus far, the very large growth in imports from the West has been financed by massive hard currency borrowing. East European and Soviet hard currency indebtedness has risen sharply, and the debt service ratios of several countries are being watched closely by creditors. The post-1973 Western inflation/recession has contributed further to the surge in East European hard currency trade deficits. Unless East European exports can be greatly increased, trade will stagnate and it will be difficult for these countries to satisfy rising consumer expectations. This could produce further political instability in some East European regimes which have tried to gain popular support through the satisfaction of consumer demand. 6. CSCE. The Helsinki Final Act provisions on human rights have had considerable psychological impact in Eastern Europe, stirring Soviet and East European leadership concerns. They were cited, for example, not only by the “Charter 77” dissidents in Prague but also by the vast majority of the estimated 100,000 or more East Germans who have sought to emigrate legally to the West. 7. China. The enhanced international role of China and Peking’s independent stand in the communist world poses serious problems for Moscow. Deepening Chinese relations with the U.S., Western Europe and Japan have generated some Soviet concerns. The USSR is thus all the more likely to oppose most efforts at political innovation in Eastern Europe as threatening to its own interests. 8. “Eurocommunism”/Ideological Ferment. The stands of the Italian, French and Spanish communist parties, and the positions of the Yugoslav and Romanian regimes, have had a marked effect on intellectuals and more independent-minded party members in Eastern Europe.
