Human Rights 6) Assistance to Organizations and Individuals in the U.S.—Alan Schwartz noted that the Bill specifically mentioned organizations “in the U.S.” only once (Sec. 3(a) (6)). He urged that the Bill ensure funding to groups in the U.S. promoting international human rights and to individuals and their families residing in the U.S. who were the victims of violations, for example, who had been stripped of their citizenship while visiting the U.S. Financial Assistance Provided by the Institute (Section 3 (b)) The following recommendations were made with respect to financial assistance provided by the Institute: 1) Providing Assistance Openly—Leonard Meeker proposed the deletion of the phrase “only with the consent of the recipient” from the provision: “Financial or other assistance may be provided under this Act only with the consent of the recipient and shall be provided openly.” (Section 3 (b) (3)). He said its inclusion implied that the Institute might try to provide assistance without the recipient’s consent. He furthermore noted that in some cases, consent could not be gotten. He considered sufficient the phrase “shall be provided openly”. Jan Nowak concurred with this deletion and further proposed the deletion of “provided openly.” He argued that this provision could endanger victims of political oppression; they would be perfectly free to refuse help but should not be involved beyond this point. Alan Schwartz’ testimony to the contrary stressed the necessity for providing assistance openly. In his opinion, while the Bill’s requirement of complete disclosure of grants of the Institute “may well foreclose the possibility of having grants made to those who require anonymity in order to protect their own security and that of their families, this limitation is far outweighed by the need to have all of the activities of the Institute placed on a fully open basis . . . To permit any covert operation in this area, regardless of the motive, would be counterproductive to the objectives of the Institute.” In this connection, Mr. Schwartz furthermore proposed that the “detailed report” to be submitted by the Institute to the President and Congress be a published report (Section 9). He noted that whereas Section 4 on Public Information specifically referred to the publication of Institute grants, Section 9 could imply a covert relationship between the Institute and the President and Congress, harmful to the independence of the Institute and to the NGOs and individuals it would support. 2. Consistency with Foreign Laws—Leonard Meeker proposed the deletion of the phrase “Assistance provided under this Act for use in a foreign country must be consistent with the laws of that country” (Section 3 (b) (4)). He argued that this phrase would encourage gov-
