Human Rights
443
6) Assistance to Organizations and Individuals in the U.S.—Alan
Schwartz noted that the Bill specifically mentioned organizations “in
the U.S.” only once (Sec. 3(a) (6)). He urged that the Bill ensure funding
to groups in the U.S. promoting international human rights and to indi-
viduals and their families residing in the U.S. who were the victims of
violations, for example, who had been stripped of their citizenship
while visiting the U.S.
Financial Assistance Provided by the Institute (Section 3 (b))
The following recommendations were made with respect to finan-
cial assistance provided by the Institute:
1) Providing Assistance Openly—Leonard Meeker proposed the de-
letion of the phrase “only with the consent of the recipient” from the
provision: “Financial or other assistance may be provided under this
Act only with the consent of the recipient and shall be provided
openly.” (Section 3 (b) (3)). He said its inclusion implied that the Insti-
tute might try to provide assistance without the recipient’s consent. He
furthermore noted that in some cases, consent could not be gotten. He
considered sufficient the phrase “shall be provided openly”. Jan
Nowak concurred with this deletion and further proposed the deletion
of “provided openly.” He argued that this provision could endanger
victims of political oppression; they would be perfectly free to refuse
help but should not be involved beyond this point.
Alan Schwartz’ testimony to the contrary stressed the necessity for
providing assistance openly. In his opinion, while the Bill’s require-
ment of complete disclosure of grants of the Institute “may well fore-
close the possibility of having grants made to those who require ano-
nymity in order to protect their own security and that of their families,
this limitation is far outweighed by the need to have all of the activities
of the Institute placed on a fully open basis . . . To permit any covert op-
eration in this area, regardless of the motive, would be counter-
productive to the objectives of the Institute.”
In this connection, Mr. Schwartz furthermore proposed that the
“detailed report” to be submitted by the Institute to the President and
Congress be a published report (Section 9). He noted that whereas Sec-
tion 4 on Public Information specifically referred to the publication of
Institute grants, Section 9 could imply a covert relationship between
the Institute and the President and Congress, harmful to the inde-
pendence of the Institute and to the NGOs and individuals it would
support.
2. Consistency with Foreign Laws—Leonard Meeker proposed the
deletion of the phrase “Assistance provided under this Act for use in a
foreign country must be consistent with the laws of that country” (Sec-
tion 3 (b) (4)). He argued that this phrase would encourage gov-
