Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX Subphasing of withdrawals/ambassadors—Cabinet also to review this. It would be helpful to have diplomatic relations—also El Arish would be evacuated. (Cy reads details of subphasing withdrawals.) Targetting language—o.k.—“can” changed to “will” Gaza—prolonged discussion. Could not arrive at acceptable language. Israelis would not agree that formal commitment be made to start with Gaza and Egyptian presence. Agreed to free passage. Israelis finally agreed if Israelis can move freely in Egypt, then Egyptians can do so in Israel, West Bank, Gaza. After diplomatic relations, Consulate or Cultural Center could be established—maybe on the fringes of Gaza. Sadat: This depends on opening Egypt to Israelis? The President: Even before treaty is signed any Gazan can travel to Egypt. After one month the negotiating teams can travel. The highway between Gaza/El Arish can be opened within three months. After normal relations, consulate or cultural mission. Khalil: Designated liaison offices? The President: No designated liaison offices but consulate OK. Israelis do not want to split off the West Bank from Gaza—not write it into documents. Secretary Vance reads the proposed letter. The President: It’s a very good letter, and it leaves you flexible. Khalil: Wouldn’t it be better to have Gaza first? The President: It’s better to have a genuine invitation to Hussein stand—for a while at least. Khalil: When does the five-year transitional period begin? The President: If the West Bank Palestinians and Jordan refuse to participate, Sadat/Carter would have to resolve the future of the West Bank without their participation because the clock has run out. So we fall back on the Camp David language. I would like to induce Hussein and the Palestinians to take part. Khalil: Suppose Hussein doesn’t come in? He can block the whole thing. Discussion about implementation letter doesn’t cover it. Discussion of this issue and intent of Camp David. The President: I would like to have your approval of what we have negotiated, including U.S. position on oil and phased withdrawal/ambassadors (if Cabinet approves). Sadat: Ambassadors—one month after? Yes, if the Cabinet approves the withdrawals. The President: One month after interim withdrawal—we need your approval. I would like to ask two more things as gestures of goodwill: —Open the borders to movement of people, maybe in three months after El Arish.
