934
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Muskie and Christopher argued that we should not surrender the
future option to avoid confronting the Soviets militarily over Iran
because in some cases, such as one or two Soviet divisions in Tabriz
only, Congressional and public support might not be adequate for a
U.S. military action. Muskie argued that we risk bluffing because we
do not have the military capabilities to defeat the Soviets in Iran.
Christopher argued that we should not be so specific to the Soviets
when we are not sure what we have in mind for military actions even
among ourselves. (TS/S)
Thus the argument was joined. (C)
Dr. Brzezinski and Brown cited the example of Berlin as a place
where we were not capable of a successful defense but nonetheless
deterred the Soviets by ruling out ambiguity about whether we would
respond. (TS/S)
Brown insisted that we do have some idea of how we would
respond militarily. We could arm the Chinese. (TS/S)
Dr. Brzezinski responded that the Chinese are unlikely to enter
the fight with the Soviets if the U.S. is not willing to fight in Iran. (TS/S)
Muskie returned to what the JCS had said at the previous SCC
about our ability to conduct a defense in Iran.3 The absence of an
effective military capability disturbs Muskie. When Brown and Dr.
Brzezinski once more cited that we were not in military shape to defend
Europe in the early years after World War II, Muskie insisted that that
was different. We at least had some forces on the ground in Europe.
If it only takes a trip wire, as Komer had insisted about the role of two
or three platoons of U.S. troops in Iran, then why do we have all those
U.S. divisions in Europe? Perhaps we should withdraw some of them.
(TS/S)
Dr. Brzezinski tried to change the line of analysis by asking what
would happen if we leave the situation ambiguous for the Soviets and
in fact if the Soviets intervene in Iran. We will be in the soup! Will the
dilemma about whether to respond militarily be any easier in that
event? (TS/S)
3 The September 2 SCC meeting concluded that, for the September 5 SCC meeting,
CIA and DIA would brief on what the United States could tell its European and regional
allies about the Soviet threat; the Aaron group would develop talking points and draft
the non-paper for Muskie’s September meeting with Gromyko; and Defense would
report on horizontal escalation possibilities. On an attached September 3 note, Brzezinski
wrote to Carter: “These minutes are unusually important. An NSC meeting may be
needed. Zbig.” Carter then wrote in the upper right corner of the SCC Summary of
Conclusions: “Zbig—Set up an NSC meeting next week when all principals can be
present (incl. VP). JC.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office
File, Box 22, SCC #337 Held 9/2/80) See also Document 350.
