Bolivia  143
9. Much of this improvement reflected the relative success of measures 
to balance national and foreign exchange budgets. U.S. aid was still needed 
to cover a budget deficit estimated at $13 million in 1957. Nevertheless, 
the government was able to limit borrowings from the Central Bank to 
about one percent of the money supply in the first nine months of 1957 as 
compared to 150 percent the same period of 1956. Bolivia’s balance of pay-
ments deficit in 1957 is expected to be less than half the level of 1956, and 
will be covered almost entirely by U.S. aid. Continued deficits through 
1958 are expected to require about $22 ­million in U.S. aid funds.4
10. Despite this progress, serious problems affecting the stabili-
zation goals remain. In the mining industry, although incentives for 
production were increased, these as yet have had little effect and the 
problems of obsolete facilities, high costs, and surplus labor remain 
acute. A serious reduction of export income from the mines accounted 
for much of the pressure on the exchange rate in 1957, and a further 
decline in this source of income is expected in 1958. The relatively small 
manufacturing industry—­employing 55,000—is still in a distressed 
condition. Throughout the economy high wage costs and the inability 
of employers to dismiss excess workers is a continuing difficulty.
11. The rate of capital investment is not adequate to maintain 
present per capita consumption levels at current rates of population 
growth. A program to raise per capita consumption one percent a 
year in 1958–1967 and to absorb the estimated increase in labor force 
of 26,000 per annum would probably require an annual investment of 
$80 million. Average annual investment in the 1950–1955 period was 
only $37 million. Bolivia’s ability to obtain foreign loans and invest-
ment will continue to be adversely affected as long as the problem of 
settling claims of former owners of the nationalized mining properties 
remains open. However, with the curbing of inflation there may be a 
better use of available resources and U.S. aid will be channeled more 
directly to development needs than in the past.
12. Economic Prospects. Agricultural development depends to a 
great extent on substantial improvement in farming techniques, on the 
solution of the difficult problem of relocating labor, and on the develop-
ment of adequate means of bulk delivery from farm to market. Efforts 
to relocate a surplus labor force of 10,000 to 18,000—primarily from 
mining—have only begun. The fertile lowlands of eastern Bolivia are 
almost unexploited, but resettlement from the highlands is difficult for 
physiological reasons. However, the long-­term potential for increased 
agricultural production is good.
13. While metal production in the private mines has been expanding, 
total metal production has been declining, chiefly as a result of difficulties in 
4 According to present estimates, the U.S. will furnish 34 percent of Bolivia’s gov-
ernment budget and 20 percent of its foreign exchange budget in 1958. [Footnote in the 
source text.]
