1955  533
6. Wang said his side desirous improving relations our two coun­
tries through present talks, but such improvement must be without sac­
rifice sovereign rights either party. Cases American law offenders being 
dealt with in accordance agreed announcement; at same time handling 
must be in accordance Chinese legal procedures.
7. Wang then replied to my renunciation of force statement. He 
said his side fully shared desire I had spoken of that these talks succeed 
and lead to peaceful settlement disputes between us.
8. Wang said question presently under discussion is renunciation 
of force. The basic points in this discussion. First, it is essential we both 
have common understanding nature of conflict of policies between 
us. Second, we should strive settle question on basis of such common 
understanding.
9. Wang said we both agreed desirability making public statement 
on renunciation of force. Question now is what is to be said in such 
statement. His side has made careful study of US draft of November 10. 
At last meeting he had again set forth his views. In my statement this 
morning, I had again amplified and explained draft I had proposed. 
Consequently it is necessary prior side also renew clarification its point 
of view this regard.
10. Wang continued with a prepared statement. He said that he had 
put forth October 27 draft agreed announcement after having consid­
ered my renunciation of force proposal and my desire that both sides 
make a public statement. His draft embraced points of view acceptable 
to both sides. His side was not seeking to impose its views on our side.
11. Wang said his draft quoted articles of UN Charter pertaining to 
renunciation of force. I had said that as member of UN, US willing abide 
by Charter. If this case, how could it be construed, as I had tried to do at 
last meeting, that specific provisions UN Charter were being imposed 
upon US or that they were points which were unacceptable to US.
12. Wang said third paragraph his draft stated PRC and US agree 
settle disputes by peaceful means without threat or use force. This con­
crete application of UN Chapter in Sino-US relations. He could not see 
how US side could possibly raise objections.
13. Wang said obvious difference of principle existed between PRC 
draft and first paragraph US draft. Latter simply states differences two 
sides shall not lead to armed conflict but makes no provisions what­
ever settle disputes between two countries. Such wording in no way 
acceptable under circumstances in which US side has already used 
force Taiwan area. Since we both recognized grave differences espe­
cially in Taiwan area, PRC side obliged stipulate concrete provision for 
peaceably settling differences.
