Chapter 2, January–June 1989 153 There are four options on the range issue and three on distinguishability. We recommend that you do not discuss the options in detail, but use this meeting to: — hear out the JCS on the specific types of programmatic flexibility we need; — discuss the flexibility/verification tradeoff; and — begin the discussion of what kinds of tradeoffs between range and distinguishability we should consider. Because the ALCM issues are closely interrelated, we probably want to resolve them in a package with the Soviets. But we do not need to deal with that issue now. The first task should be to flesh out our distinguishability position in Washington and begin to nail down an agreement with the Soviets. At that point, the path through the remaining issues will be clearer. 2. Nondeployed Missiles. There are two issues in the options paper (Tab B): should we modify our current proposal on nondeployed missiles, and should we require a missile to be destroyed whenever a launcher is destroyed. Nondeployed Limits. Limits on nondeployed missiles has long been one of the most controversial parts of our proposal. In 1982, President Reagan decided to limit nondeployed ballistic missiles (NDM) in START, in order to deal with what some believe to have been one of the critical flaws of the SALT II Treaty—­its failure to control missiles which could be used for refire, force reconstitution, and ballistic missile breakout. In subsequent years the following considerations came to light: — Despite years of study, no way has been found to monitor inventories of NDMs accurately, especially existing missiles. — The JCS and others have questioned the military utility of NDMs to the Soviets, especially SLBMs and silo-­based ICBMs. — U.S. requirements for NDMs (although not internally agreed) may be higher than Soviet requirements because we plan to produce missiles at the most economical rate and stockpile missiles for use in future years. Stretching ballistic missile production could result in significantly increased costs; for example, the Congressionally mandated stretchout of Peacekeeper from 5 to 14 years increased unit cost from $16 million to $60 million. — Our commitment to support the U.K. TRIDENT program requires that nondeployed D–5s for British SSBNs be stored in the United States and, for reliability testing, procedures must allow for intermingling British and U.S. NDMs. — There are a number of technical issues with respect to tagging and it is not yet certain an acceptable tagging regime can be devised.
