Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII ideological brethren, and a willingness to run risks in order to preclude the demise of a Socialist revolution may also have played a part in Moscow’s decision. Whatever the case, an active Soviet military presence here would seem to be a long-term prospect, and we consider it likely that the Soviets will expand their occupation throughout the country. End of summary. 4. In considering future political developments here, one scenario we have consistently considered as plausible yet unlikely has been a Soviet supported (perhaps with direct military force) seizure of power from the Taraki-Amin led Khalqis by some group of “alternate” leftist leadership. Because it was presumed that such a Soviet-supported group would necessarily be ideologically and politically acceptable to Moscow, the exiled Parcham wing of the Afghan leftist movement— including its long-time number one, Babrak Karmal—was viewed as a prime contender for this role. During the years before the Afghan Left seized power in April 1978, the Parcham wing was generally believed to have a larger following among Afghan intelligentsia, and was supposed to be popular among leftist university students. The Khalqi faction, on the other hand, focussed its recruitment on the military, a background which explains why the Khalqis under Taraki- Amin prevailed in their struggle against the Parcham in the first few months following the April 1978 revolution. Moreover, Babrak Karmal and some of his followers were also generally believed to be more pro- Soviet than were the Khalqi leaders, although information on this point was difficult to verify. Thus, some observers had believed that Moscow would quite readily throw its weight behind the Parchamists should the Khalqis falter seriously in their efforts to build a revolutionary Afghanistan. 5. Most observers, however, downplayed the possibility of the foregoing scenario, principally because it appeared to hold little promise for solving any of the serious difficulties being confronted by the leftist party in power. Most Afghans, certainly the mass of the population, see no difference between the two leftist groups, and consider them as equally evil, Communists and atheists. Informed Afghans and foreigners also believed that past differences between the two factions were based more on personal animosities than on opposing doctrinal views, revolutionary zeal, etc. Babrak’s perceived pro-Soviet ardor added to doubts that he would represent an any more viable or popular alternative should the Khalqi position become drastically eroded. Thus, this particular analysis, to which we adhered, concluded that the accession of Babrak and the Parcham would have virtually no ameliorating impact on the hostility of the insurgents fighting for the overthrow of a Communist regime in Kabul, nor would it present any broader appeal to the Afghan middle or upper class, with the possible exception of a
