1977 165 an acceptable settlement (although not necessarily a settlement that achieves all of the objectives or goals desired by either side). (U) Options to control escalation are intended to work on the will and determination of the opposing political leadership. They are not intended to fulfill a total set of military objectives but rather to: —Reverse or stalemate the situation, at least temporarily. —Diminish the enemy’s expectation of success. —Convince him that his limits will be exceeded. —Present the enemy with a set of response alternatives which make it difficult for him to respond militarily in kind, and disadvantageous to escalate. —Convince him that early termination is his most attractive alternative. Key questions, perhaps unanswerable, are the degree to which such an approach can influence Soviet actions during a nuclear war, the means for conveying such messages (explicitly or implicitly), and the potential effectiveness of the whole approach. Even if the likely effectiveness is low, the stake is so high that in the absence of clearly better approaches, some pursuit of this one is justified. (U) The concept of escalation control requires establishing boundaries limiting the scope, level, and duration of the violence. Planning emphasis is shifted from the traditional approach which places specific military targeting requirements (designed to secure military advantage) foremost to an approach in which political-­military objectives established by the NCA (designed to terminate conflict as quickly as possible) are paramount. Special emphasis is placed on mutually supporting military (conventional and nuclear) and political measures. A high degree of interaction would be required among the NCA, the JCS, and the commanders of the unified and specified commands in selecting the details of the attack. (U) Behind the concept of escalation control is the assumption that statesmen define some limits as to the losses (costs) they are willing to suffer to achieve their objectives. In theory, if the Soviets realize they cannot achieve their objectives quickly or easily, they will be deterred from further escalation. The options involved would be clearly below the level of a massive attack, and they would seek to coerce the enemy into negotiation for early war termination by striking relatively small numbers of selected targets and providing a deterrent to further escalation by holding forth the prospect of subsequent massive attacks on targets he values highly. If, however, there are virtually no limits on the enemy’s objectives or the costs he is willing to incur, then control of escalation through limited nuclear options may not be possible, and the conflict could only be stopped by destroying his capability to achieve his objective. If deterrence fails, the essential first step would be
