Non-Proliferation 847 seems like short sighted policy. What are we going to offer to the next nation—Pakistan and the others which will follow—which will already be members because of the expansion. —In an expanded group the Soviet Union would gain direct access to Western supplier relations with Western consumers. It could be expected to take a hard line—and then sit back and watch us try to pick up the pieces with Brazil and others. I believe that this is a very important decision, and one which has not been seriously enough studied. I note that it has been discussed with several parties, including the Russians. My feeling is that we should make clear to the Germans and to others who may ask, that the U.S. position is that the expansion is a proposal—one among several— that we are willing to consider and to study, but no more. Anything beyond this I believe would require the President’s direct approval. I would welcome your thoughts on this matter. Zbigniew Brzezinski3 3 Brzezinski signed the memorandum “Zbig.” 336. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, April 2, 1977 SUBJECT Proliferation—Follow-on to PD–8 As a result of the Presidential Decision you signed last week, several tasks were immediately assigned to the follow-on group. The first paper is attached. A second decision paper addressing the Japanese problem is also ready at this time.2 Negotiations with the Japanese begin next Tuesday. Three more short papers, dealing with different aspects of U.S. nuclear export policies, will be ready within a few days. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 4, PD–08 [1]. Confidential. Sent for action. In the upper right-hand corner, Carter wrote “Zbig— What do we have in reprocessing capacity now. For military or other purpose? J.” 2 Reference is to a discussion paper on Japan’s reprocessing plant at Tokai. The paper can be found in the Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, James Schlesinger Papers, Energy Department, Japan, 1977–1979.
