partial closing of the frontier, Finland in order to avoid the complete closing in case of epidemic reserves to itself the right to set up observation if occasion arises notwithstanding the provisions in article 58. The Plenipotentiaries of Japan declare that their Government reserves to itself the right: 1. To forward through the Eastern bureau of Singapore the notices and information, the mailing of which to the International Office of Public Hygiene is required by the Convention; 2. To take such measures as the sanitary authorities may deem necessary with regard to carriers of cholera vibrios. The Plenipotentiaries of Lithuania declare that though adhering to the Convention, they make special reservations as to its being put into practice between Lithuania and Poland as long as normal relations between the two countries shall not have been restored. These reservations are of particular importance with respect to the provisions in articles 9, 16, 57 and 66. The Plenipotentiaries of The Netherlands declare in the name of their Government that it reserves to itself with regard to the Dutch East Indies to enforce the measures provided in article 10, sub-section 2 in the same degree to arrivals from districts afflicted with murine plague. They further declare that their Government reserves to itself with respect to the Dutch East Indies the right to put on article 27–2 a construction to the effect that the destruction of rats referred to in that article may be applied to vessels taking a cargo from a district afflicted with murine plague when the sanitary authority believes that the cargo is likely to carry rats and is stowed in such a way as to make it impossible to affect the search provided in the last sub-section of article 24. The Plenipotentiaries of Persia declare that there is nothing warranting any special provision concerning the Persian Gulf being retained in the Convention. The fact that there is in the Convention article 90 constituting Section V of Title II, prevents their signing without making the most express reservations. The Plenipotentiaries of Persia further declare that the status quo could not in any way bind their Government. Again they reserve
