Bulgaria 265 appear to be taking the initiative in raising the issue, although in fact they had done so. He said specifically some version of what he termed “the Hungarian variant” was not rpt not out of the question. Gotsev then continuedbycommentingthattheBulgarianreadingfromtheAmbassador’s own statements after his return from consultations in the fall of 1978, and their assessment based on the conversations (with Tsvetkov and himself) in Washington, as well as the Morse report suggested the time was not ripe to pursue the matter. Now, they hoped the changed international circumstances to which he had alluded might make it appropriate—if not immediately, at least in some time frame they could take into account in making their own decisions. 11. Gotsev also noted the importance of decisions taken in the course of developing the next five-year plan. He said that if some projects and investments could not be undertaken with American firms, or with other Western countries, they would have to depend on Soviet assistance. (While not specifically stated, Gotsev implied both that heavier reliance on Soviet economic assistance was for one or another reason less desired, and perhaps not always forthcoming.) 12. Gotsev remarked that the Bulgarians had very little to offer the US in a concrete way. They had already made a number of steps, and frankly had little left to bargain with. But the specific matters which the Ambassador had raised with Mladenov, for example, could all easily be taken care of. There were, however, those in the leadership who felt that without reciprocal moves or signs of a more forthcoming American view that the Bulgarian side had already made perhaps more concessions in advance that it should have. In addition to MFN, Gotsev (as had Mladenov) stressed the importance of higher level political contacts and higher level American visits to Bulgaria. While the Bulgarians certainly did not expect, for example, a visit by the American President at any time in the near future, they would hope to have cabinet-level visits—perhaps first the Secretary of Commerce, and in due course the Secretary of State. More immediately, they very much hoped that the US would respond to their repeated invitations and expressions of interest in early visits and regular consultations picking up from the Tsvetkov visit. They very much hoped that Assistant Secretary Vest could visit Bulgaria this year. In addition, the Foreign Minister—and not he alone—was well aware that he was the only Eastern European Foreign Minister who had not yet had the opportunity to meet with Secretary Vance. 13. As to other possibilities for an American sign of interest in developing closer relations, Gotsev remarked that the one concrete step which would have some symbolic as well as intrinsic value would be an increase in the Bulgarian fishing quota in American waters. He hoped that the Ambassador could bring back some good news in that
