January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1193 Minister Kubersky said that on January 16th, at Mena House, Israel presented its model.7 In it, Israel delineated powers and responsibilities, chairmen, divisions. It gave details on each of the divisions and the details of sections. The Israeli model has three categories. First, they described in the model all powers and responsibilities to be given to the Administrative Council—in Israel’s opinion, all the elements needed for full autonomy. They did a comparative study with the military government and the civilian administration. They took the powers in category number 1, which cover more than 80% of those of the military and civilian government—there is a difference between military government and autonomy, under the Administrative Council. The second category includes powers and responsibilities of shared powers. Prime Minister Begin asked what are the 18 powers? Minister Kubersky said that they are 80%. He will tell what they are later. Prime Minister Begin said that the list is important. Minister Kubersky said that in the third category are the residual powers retained by Israel. This draft, this proposed model, is under Camp David. He asked Egypt to tell if Israel had forgotten something. Now for the details: the Administrative Council would have 11 members, including a chairman and 10 members. Each would be the head of a division. Therefore, they suggest general powers. They should have the power to issue regulations, set up a budget, issue contracts, sue and be sued, and to employ staff. The Administrative Council can delegate to heads of divisions. The divisions can function within the framework of the Council. (He then listed some of the powers of the following divisions: agriculture, health, relations (?), labor and welfare, finance, transport, education and culture, administration of justice, local affairs). Each division would be managed by a director general, with special assistants and helpers. The chairman will coordinate, and have non-elected functionaries, in statistics, civil service, publicity, and archives. There would also be legal officers, an ombudsman, and others. There would also be two zonal representatives, who would work with Israeli authorities on an ongoing basis. This represents responsibilities for coordination. This is the Israeli model, which was rejected totally by Egypt. Ambassador Leonard said that he welcomed the Israeli model, and said that it seemed to mark the beginning of a new phase of the negotiations. The U.S. warmly welcomed it. No details were discussed after this, and 7 See Document 331.
