Chapter 2, January–June 1989 169 Points on underlying mobile issues: — Given the President’s decision to fund two mobile ICBM programs, should we drop our ban on mobiles in START? If so, when and how? – The consensus we are seeking to build could unravel if rail-­ mobile Peacekeeper were seen only as a bargaining chip. – On the other hand, a Treaty which allows mobile ICBMs might prove unratifiable without a well-­funded U.S. mobile ICBM program, if not actual deployment.5 — Verification is a significant mobile ICBM issue. There are two kinds of verification: – ­political – Are the Soviets honoring their treaty commitments (should we proceed on the assumption they will cheat)? – ­military – How much cheating might go undetected? What is the military significance? What options does the U.S. have to counter once cheating or breakout is detected?6 — We are agreed that verification needs to be handled more directly on the Hill, and in public. Several areas of this treaty cannot pass the “political” verification standard. We need to develop more data to answer the questions about how “military” verification will be achieved, and at what cost. — Is there so much uncertainty in our ICBM programs that we need to protect options in START for entirely new kinds of systems, such as so-­called movable ICBMs? — How do we trade-­off U.S. mobile ICBM operational flexibility (and future survivability options) against our confidence in monitoring the Soviets? Some have proposed that we establish a deployment area for mobiles. How much does this help monitoring? How small does the area have to be? How much area do we need for survivability? How do we hedge against future Soviet targeting improvements? — With regard to continuous monitoring and suspect site inspections, some would expand our, and the Soviets’, rights to inspect. What do we gain? Without “anywhere, anytime” rights (which we all agree is not acceptable), what confidence do we have that the Soviets are not conducting illegal activities elsewhere? What do we lose by a Soviet presence in and around a greater number of U.S. facilities? Is the budgetary cost of significance? 5 Gates drew brackets in the left-­hand margin beside the section on whether to ban mobile missiles. 6 Gates drew brackets in the left-­hand margin beside the section on verification of mobile missiles.
