International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1057
ternational Health, Department of Health, Education and Welfare);
Robert Andrew (Director, Agency Directorate for Health and Drug
Control, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of
State); Lee Howard (Director of Health Services, AID), and U.S. Repre-
sentative to the U.S. Mission in Geneva William vanden Heuvel. (Public
Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, page 885)
314.
Briefing Memorandum From Harry Blaney of the Policy
Planning Staff to the Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Cooper)1
Washington, July 10, 1978
Status Report on Peter Bourne’s International Health Review
After considerable interagency meetings, numerous lengthy drafts
of reports, etc., the White House on May 2 released a Presidential State-
ment on International Health. (See Tab A.)2 This statement generally af-
firmed the intention of the President “to launch a program to
strengthen the participation of the United States in worldwide efforts to
overcome disease and ill health.” The basic elements of this strategy
included:
—concentration on prevention of disease and ill health with em-
phasis on clean drinking water, basic sanitation, immunization, and
blindness;
—control or eradication of major infectious diseases—particularly
tropical; and
—causes of death in children.
The President stated that the strategy would be developed “as part
of our budgetary and legislative recommendations for the next year.
Where possible, however, we will move immediately to carry out this
program.” Secretary Califano elaborated on this statement in his
speech to the WHO Assembly on May 9. (See Tab B.)3 The basic White
House/OMB memo to the President on this is at Tab C.4
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P780120–1998. Un-
classified. Sent through Lake. A copy was sent to Garten.
2 Attached but not printed. See Document 313.
3 Attached but not printed is the Department of Health, Education and Welfare
copy of Califano’s May 9 WHO address. For additional information, see Document 313.
4 Printed as Document 311.
