Chapter 4, February–April 1990 651 it was important that we react promptly to requests from our delegations for guidance and that we establish contacts as needed between us in the seven weeks between this meeting and the summit. It was important that we institute and utilize whatever processes were necessary, in addition to the normal channels, in order to make the summit a successful one for both Presidents. What we achieved would depend on what we were able to accomplish in the next seven weeks. Despite our differences in one area, he too was optimistic that we could make progress. This would enable our heads of government to have a successful summit. The meeting adjourned at 4:10 p.m. 109. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Scowcroft) to Secretary of State Baker, Secretary of Defense Cheney, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Powell) 1 Washington, April 11, 1990 SUBJECT START Issues to be Addressed Before the May Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (U) During the meeting last week with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, the two sides agreed on a list of issues to be addressed in the negotiations in preparation for the May 16–19 Ministerial meeting. These issues range from major policy issues on which the. U.S. does not have a fully fleshed-­out position to technical issues for which the Negotiator has primary responsibility. (S) The attached lists sort these issues into three groups, based on the level of attention they require in Washington. First are the major policy questions that reflect either internal USG or U.S.–Soviet differences. I have asked Arnie Kanter’s “Ungroup” to press ahead on these and have suggested tentative dates for us to meet on those that may require our personal attention. (S) Second is a list of the issues that the Arms Control Policy Coordinating Committee should resolve. This list may grow as the Delegation requests additional guidance in the weeks ahead. Issues 1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft Collection, USSR Chronological Files, OA/ID 91122–001, START Files, Soviet Power Collapse in Eastern Europe—Strategic Arms Control (October 1989–April 1990). Secret. Sent to Scowcroft for his signature under cover of an April 9 memorandum from Davis. (Ibid.)
