1200 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement (1) Although convinced present or future situation created by restrictions can affect normal development trade under 1952 agreement,4 Venezuela considers time inopportune raise this aspect problem. (2) Venezuela considers indispensable any steps adopted be within spirit complete understanding, harmony. (3) Government believes measures taken will affect internal economy and fundamental aspects Venezuela life, petroleum being essential factor. Without doubt measures will affect bilateral trade. (4) From broader viewpoint observe that tendency towards restrictionist policy can unfavorably influence traditional principles cooperation underlying hemispheric relations. (5) Transcendence problem has caused impact on Venezuela public opinion which showing concern over consequences that (restrictions) have on “La Vida Nacional” notwithstanding confidence mutually satisfactory solutions can be found. (6) Government considers existing ties two countries require maintenance close permanent contact order achieve understanding between parties respecting common problems and measures adopted solve same. Therefore government views with special pleasure “idea suggested by Rubottom that consultation between Venezuela and U.S. be held” to study any measures affecting imports Venezuelan oil in U.S. Comment: Note was written last week prior our approach tri-­ partite technical review.5 Although point 6 reference to idea suggested Rubottom more specific than warranted by February 27–28 talks6 believe aim is provide record considering we did not give Venezuelans note or memorandum (as they suggested) of those conversations. Believe tri-­ partite talks may constitute sufficient consultation for the present. Burrows 4 Reference is to the Supplementary Trade Agreement of 1952, which entered into force October 11, 1952. For the text, see United States Treaties and Other International Agreements (UST), vol. 3 (pt. 3), p. 4195. 5 Reference is to proposed informal discussions between U.S., Canadian, and Venezuelan technical representatives aimed at establishing a hemispheric approach to oil policy. 6 When Rubottom visited Caracas in late February, he held consultations with Venezuelan Government officials and corporation lenders concerning the hemispheric petroleum situation. A summary of the talks and the recommendations Rubottom subsequently submitted to the Department is contained in a memorandum by Terry B. Sanders, Jr., of the Office of South American Affairs, March 3, 1958. According to the memorandum, Rubottom recommended: 1) that the Department should begin to study the necessary steps to comply with Article 13 of the United States-Venezuelan Trade Agreement as revised in 1952, 2) encourage a responsible U.S. medium to publish an account of the oil problem, “giving figures to show that the entire cut-back in Venezuela’s oil production since the height of the Suez crisis has not been due to the voluntary import restrictions in the U.S., as is commony believed in Venezuela”, and 3) consider an international conservation agreement which would “provide a means for cutting back production in all affected countries during periods of falling consumption.” (ARA Files, Lot 60 D 262, “Oil-U.S. Legislation”)
