National Security Policy 931 modernization has resulted in a lack of emphasis on the development of the cargo business and of uncompromised all-­cargo aircraft. As a result, commercial cargo planes are merely improvised modifications of passenger configured aircraft. Adaptation of the present essentially passenger configured aircraft to cargo use results in high operating costs, high handling charges, and inflexibility as to operating bases and facilities. 3. In the last several years the Department of Defense has had a higher priority requirement for the development of convertible (troop-­ cargo) aircraft than for the development of all-­cargo aircraft. 4. The characteristics of uncompromised cargo aircraft are unique and differ importantly from the characteristics of presently available passenger aircraft. This difference is not unlike the difference between busses and trucks, or the difference between Pullman cars and freight cars. What is needed to further the sound growth of air cargo are types of aircraft which would (a) have an intercontinental capability, (b) be capable of operating from relatively small unsophisticated airports, (c) employ a minimum of high cost and high maintenance components, and (d) be capable of being routinely operated at a direct operating cost of 3.5 to 4 cents per ton-­mile. This last-­named capability would make possible air cargo service to the user at about 10 cents per ton-­mile, or something less than one-­half the present average rates. At present this is considered to be a very economical air cargo charge. A cargo aircraft currently being produced in Canada represents a major step toward achievement of these characteristics, and U.S. aircraft now under devel­ opment show even greater promise. 5. Aircraft with the characteristics enumerated above could serve civil and many military uses. With the exception of certain outsized and sensitive cargo, the characteristics of most routine military cargo (dimensions, weight and density) are compatible with those of com­ mercial cargo. 6. The U.S. Government maintains a substantial military cargo airlift capability and has not fully utilized in peacetime available civil cargo airlift. The stated basis for this practice has been that the U.S. commercial cargo airlift capability has not been adequate to meet civil requirements and those military requirements which could be moved by civil aircraft during periods of national emergency. However, in recent years, the Department of Defense has increased its use of the civil air cargo fleet by placing contracts with the civil air carriers (11% of the total MATS air cargo traffic in FY 1959), thereby making a contri­ bution to the continued growth of the air cargo industry.
