Costa Rica  447
of the Government’s move in diverting part of the short-­term Chase 
Manhattan loan to rural credit purposes.4 A beefing up of the rural 
credit system would directly help all walks of life in this country.
Thirdly, the Echandi Administration is attempting to implement, 
through local bond issues which it can ill afford, a plan to improve its 
own road network, as distinguished from the Pan American Highway. 
This is known locally as the Plan Vial. Since every member of the 
Assembly has a direct interest in a piece of this project, help on this plan 
ought to gain us a lot of good will with the Congress, which is where 
we most badly will need it to forestall criticism, if the Executive acts on 
Cuba the way we want it to do.
Perhaps as a fourth point, we might try to find moans of purchas-
ing more Costa Rican sugar than they would otherwise expect under 
the new law.5
If my recommendations are favorably received in principle, I sug-
gest the desirability of early consultation to work out the best possible 
package and to decide on the most important matter of tactics for the 
utilization of decisions taken.
Whiting Willauer
4 The proposed use of the $10 million Chase Manhattan Loan is described in desp. 
644 from San José, June 9, 1960. (818.10/6–960)
5 Reference is to P.L. 86–592, approved July 6, 1960, which authorized the President 
to cut the Cuban sugar quota and make up the deficit by purchases from certain other 
countries including Costa Rica. For text of the Act, see 74 Stat. 330.
CR–24.	
Letter from the Ambassador in Costa Rica (Willauer) 
to the Director of the Office of Central American and 
Panamanian Affairs (Stewart)1

San José, July 27, 1960.
Dear Allan:
In your informal Washington roundups of July 15 and 22 (Reverse 
Weekas)2 you remark that “President Echandi’s rather shabby perfor-
1 Source: Department of State, OAP Files, Lot 63 D 127, “Costa Rica, 1960.” Secret; 
Official-Informal.
2 The letters from Stewart were not found in Department of State files.
