International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 953 ilies, this approach can significantly improve the actual conditions of life of the poorest, especially those in rural areas. Most importantly, a developmental strategy which is aimed at strengthening community structures supports a number of important goals: (a) reducing economic and social inequality, (b) fostering local democratic processes by involving community institutions in self-help programs, (c) improved health and productivity as well as (d) population growth reduction. Community involvement in such “self-help” efforts also provides peer pressures or values which promote improved quality of life and smaller families. This approach must, however, be part of an integrated national developmental plan with strong government support. A firm commitment by the United States towards the above goals and accompanying strategy would also contribute towards a sensitive North-South plan of cooperation focusing on real needs and away from empty ideological posturing. Such a program also strengthens our human rights efforts since strong and active local communities are vital in promoting participation processes at the grass-roots level. Since the strategy also emphasizes national leadership and the mobilization of indigenous resources, it ensures that what aid we do provide fully relates to the receiving country’s own program and priorities. It also comports with the above-cited Congressional precepts. Perhaps the key in our promoting effective population policies in the developing world is to obtain the support and commitment of their national leaders for a sustained and effective effort to reduce excessive population growth. Success in this area is vital for progress. Yet we have not always used our high-level influence to this end in many key countries. Action and Initiatives for the US We need to pursue a comprehensive and well-coordinated USG global population strategy which takes into consideration all of these problems and possible responses. There is particular need for a better coordination of our diplomatic and developmental assistance efforts. This is a matter you may wish to discuss with Gov. Gilligan as well as other key officials, followed by specific instructions to our Ambassadors and AID Directors. At each suitable occasion, formal and informal, we should raise the population issue with LDC leaders and relevant heads of international institutions and donor programs, helping develop an awareness of the new directions in our assistance strategy. Such talks should embrace population issues, although the focus would be on all the components of development that improve conditions of life for the masses.
