ARTICLE 32
This article relates to the coming into force of the convention when ratified
by certain powers among which figure the United States and, as now drawn,
would appear to be inconsistent with Article 27 as now proposed, which
provides for adherence as well as ratification.
CONTROL OF THE PRIVATE MANUFACTURE OF MUNITIONS AND IMPLEMENTS OF WAR
In addition to the draft convention relating to the traffic in arms and
ammunition which has been discussed above, the Department has also
given its attention to the report of the special committee appointed by the
first sub-committee of the T. M. C. which met at Prague in April last. This
report was transmitted with the Legation’s despatch No. 1508 of May 13,
1924.43 In connection with this report your attention is called to the
Department’s instruction of February 7th last to Mr. Grew, through the
American Consul at Geneva, and to point one of the Department’s
instruction of March 7th …
The latest figures available to the Department do not indicate that this
country is in any sense taking the lead in the production of arms and
ammunition. In fact the figures given in the enclosed pamphlets issued by
the Census Bureau44 which contain comparative statements respecting the
manufacture of arms and munitions in the United States for the period prior
and subsequent to 1914, including the year 1921, indicate that in the
number of establishments manufacturing arms, the number of persons
employed in this trade and the value of the production, the United States in
1921 was substantially on the same basis as in 1909. It would be interesting
if comparative figures of this character could also be obtained with respect
to the important arms producing countries of Europe.
Further, with respect to the production of arms it should be recalled that the
situation of this country differs from that of certain of the powers
represented on the T. M. C. in view of the fact that there are in the United
States no important government munition factories. The United States is
therefore dependent for its needs both in time of peace and in time of war
largely upon private manufacturers.
