156 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 virtually insure that the movement will become public, and it requires some time to complete. It is doubtful that the planes could arrive before December 1 in any event. Building up a base capability in Egypt without the AWACS could be seen as more menacing than the AWACS itself. JCS will examine our options for review at the meeting tomorrow. (TS) 3. Congressional. Since a Congressional resolution on Iran is probably inevitable, the SCC agreed that we should attempt to get a resolution as favorable as possible. State and the White House will follow through. It was also agreed that a stronger position of opposition to the Hansen mission8 should be made public since he played into their hands and diverted attention from the basic issue. This could provide the basis for another round of criticism of the way our hostages are being treated. (C) 4. Longer-Term Options. Dr. Brzezinski reported that the CIA finding had been approved9 and they can proceed with propaganda and other actions provided for in the finding. The DCI will use its report to the President on additional options, which is due November 28, to explore longer-range alternatives. This will be considered at the SCC on Wednesday.10 (S) 8 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin next to this paragraph. Representative George Hansen (R–ID) traveled to Iran in late November, met with some of the hostages, later stating they were being treated well. The administration publicly rebuked his proposal for a congressional inquiry into the Shah’s rule. (Edward Walsh, “President, Hill Rebuke Hansen for Iran Mission,” Washington Post, November 27, 1979, p. A1) In his debriefing, Hansen argued that his mission was “a reasonable and responsible initiative,” that he held the “strong view” that the students holding the hostages were not amenable to instructions from Khomeini, and that the students might release the hostages if Hansen’s idea of congressional hearings into the Shah’s misuse of U.S. resources was pursued. He also met with 19 hostages. (Memorandum from Atwood to Christopher, November 30; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P800010–1202) 9 See the attachment to Document 54. 10 November 28. See Document 67.
