1979  531
crisis. With no evacuation, prompt casualties could be on the order of 
100 million, whereas with about a week for urban evacuation and other 
preparations, prompt casualties could probably be reduced to the low 
tens of millions. The civil defense program is not capable of preventing 
the destruction of much of the USSR’s industrial capacity and its most 
valued material accomplishments, and it is not proceeding in a way 
which seems likely to achieve a significant reduction in the vulnerabil-
ity of the Soviet economy.
31. The Soviet leaders view their civil defense program as integral 
to the USSR’s military strategy and strategic posture. They almost cer-
tainly believe their present civil defenses would improve their ability 
to conduct military operations and would enhance the USSR’s chances 
of surviving a nuclear war. Given the many uncertainties attendant to a 
nuclear exchange, however, they cannot have confidence in the degree 
of protection that would actually be afforded. We do not believe that 
their present civil defenses would embolden Soviet leaders deliberately 
to expose the USSR to a higher risk of nuclear war. We have no firm 
basis for judging the degree to which civil defense preparations will 
affect Soviet perceptions of the future strategic balance.
32. There is a divergent view in the Intelligence Community which 
holds that the USSR’s civil defenses, in conjunction with its other strate-
gic capabilities, provide the Soviet leadership with a significant advan-
tage in the event of a nuclear war. In this view, the Soviet civil defense 
program—­through its potential for influencing political perceptions, 
providing leverage for coercion during a crisis, affecting nuclear 
exchange outcomes, and contributing to postwar recovery—­impacts 
on the reality of the strategic balance and on perceptions of the balance 
in the USSR and elsewhere.13
33. [less than one line not declassified] The foregoing evaluations 
assume SALT II conditions and adherence to the ABM Treaty. They 
reflect our best estimates of likely Soviet programs. The results, how-
ever, are sensitive to a number of uncertainties about the size, structure, 
and capabilities of Soviet forces and their supporting elements. In addi-
tion, [2 lines not declassified]
—Soviet concealment programs are becoming more sophisticated, 
centrally directed, and better enforced. [3 lines not declassified]
—In the area of Soviet weapon characteristics, Soviet security mea-
sures in many cases prevent us from learning enough about the pro-
spective capabilities of systems in R&D to determine the threat until 
after the systems have reached the flight-­test stage or its equivalent. 
Uncertainty sometimes persists even after a system is deployed. [3 lines 
not declassified] These factors, along with the breadth of Soviet military 
13 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the 
Senior Intelligence Officers of each of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]
