1302 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement immediately lose understanding and support of majority of American Republics. In such case, he said, his first act would have to be to send battalion of Venezuelan troops to protect American Ambassador. President again said Venezuela and many American Republics are not prepared to take action required against Castro until problem of Trujillo is definitively resolved. This is an oft-­repeated Betancourt position but Department will wish consider Betancourt has contemplated this situation for days and recognize that his conviction was not hastily reached. Betancourt wants and is prepared to do those things vis-­a-­ vis Castro in line with U.S. objectives—­difference between his and U.S. position is one of timing and method. I informed President of measures being taken re Cuban sugar quota pursuant to the new sugar legislation and I stressed unanimity opinion in U.S. Congress. President recognized this U.S. action as inevitable and even appropriate in circumstances. Again he repeated his plea that U.S. not take direct or indirect military action which would alienate from U.S. support of American Republics. As President was obviously wearying, I broke off conversation and said I would return at later date. Sparks VE–46. Telegram from the Ambassador in Venezuela (Sparks) to the Department of State1  Caracas, August 10, 1960, 3 p.m. 146. Monday night President Betancourt met with sixteen Chiefs of Mission American Republics. Also present was First Secretary Cuban Embassy. Costa Rica, El Salvador and Uruguay have no representation. Also present were Foreign Minister and high Foreign Office officials. Significant were presences Senator Prieto representing AD, Jovito Villalba URD, and Miguel Angel Landaez COPEI. President Betancourt addressed group extemporaneously for about 45 minutes. He first expressed appreciation of sympathy extended by American Governments following attempt on his life as well as their support Venezuela request convoke organ of consultation. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 731.00/8–1060. Confidential; Priority.
