Nicaragua 871 that an erroneous interpretation had been placed on the Secretary’s remarks and hoped this would be a passing thing in our friendly relations. Mr. Rubottom spoke of the friendship we had for the Nicaraguan people and asked the Minister to express this feeling again to President Luis and to let the President know we felt he was doing a good job. He asked the Minister to convey to President Somoza his warm regards as well as those of Secretary Herter. The minister expressed appreciation for Mr. Rubottom’s remarks and said he would convey the above to his President. Mr. Rubottom also mentioned to Quintana the fine work Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa was doing not only in the capacity as Nicaraguan Ambassador, but as Dean of the Diplomatic Corps. He told him that Sevilla was held in high esteem by his colleagues. Mr. Rubottom then asked if it was correct that Quintana had been working to bring about an understanding between the Government and the opposition parties. Quintana said this was true and mentioned that he had been working particularly with the Independent Liberal Party prior to his automobile accident. He said that the situation had been complicated by the Micro parties (four small political groups) joining in a coalition with PLI, in that one group in particular, the Movilizacion Republicana, was communist lead. He mentioned the leftist swing of PLI leader Puenaventura Selva and Icaza Icaza and spoke of the trip they had made to Costa Rica a few months ago to talk with Lacayo Farfan (Nicaraguan exile opposition leader) on this matter. He said the PLI leaders were not in complete accord as to what policy they should adopt, but that he would continue in his efforts to bring about an understanding, wherein the opposition would agree to work peacefully toward their objectives. Mr. Rubottom told the Minister he hoped that he would continue with his efforts to effect a conciliatory understanding between the opposition and the Government. Dr. Quintana reiterated Nicaragua would have free and honest elections in 1963 and that the Government would be turned over without any question to the winner. In answer to an inquiry from Mr. Taylor, he said the electoral law was in the process of being changed to enable the political parties to register more easily as legal parties, but added that of course those which were communist dominated would not be permitted legal registration. Ambassador Sevilla-Sacasa then went into a rather involved discussion of the history of the PLI, which became a splinter from the Government party (Partide Liberal), and mentioned President Somoza’s progress and serious intent in trying to bring democracy to his country. Minister Quintana concluded the conversation expressing again his appreciation for the medical attention given him at Walter Reed Hospital.
