630 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV were to respond to our mobile systems by deploying something like the SS–16. George Seignious said that getting a survivable system ourselves is more of a concern than what the Soviets do. Secretary Brown commented that we will always want to verify limits on Soviet proposals and should thus pay attention to the example we set in verification. Finally, General Jones argued that the Soviets will be able to cover very large areas with overpressure that would be lethal to a surface-­mobile system, and that dispersing it in a crisis might be destabilizing in that it could send a bad signal. (S) There are [was?] some discussion of Option 5A,2 which deploys a common missile in silos, the Trident sub, and a small number of aircraft, and uses this same aircraft in an accelerated cruise missile carrier program. Stan Turner noted that this option would provide significantly more surviving capability than any of the others. Dr. Brzezinski commented that he had not made up his mind on Option 5A and wanted to see it brought forward. Secretary Brown noted that this option would be more frightening to the Soviets due to the rapid rate at which it would improve our SSBN and strategic aircraft forces. Frank Press noted Option 5A’s greater effectiveness, and the fact that it did contain the air mobile deployment option. He then added that the trench scheme being discussed is only two weeks old—­and is a relatively uncertain concept that is still changing. General Jones answered that the air-­mobile concept is more uncertain than the trench concept, and Secretary Brown showed a short film on trench construction and testing to illustrate the point that the current trench concept is building upon a body of knowledge that has been evolving for some time. Secretary Brown concluded the discussion of basing modes by suggesting that the MPS, covered trench and Option 5A alternatives be presented to the President for decision. (S) In discussing the issue of missile size, Dr. Brzezinski commented that if we are not going to proceed with a ground-­mobile system that might need a smaller missile, he favors building the largest missile possible under SALT II—­the 190,000 lb. M–X. He argued that this missile is better defined than the various common missiles, and could be put in full-­scale development almost immediately, where the others would involve significant delays. Dr. Brzezinski noted that such delays might be seen as an attempt to make it easier to cancel the deployment of the new land-­based missile once SALT II ratification is behind us. George Seignious added that there appears to be strong support by the Congress for proceeding with the largest possible missile. (S) Frank Press argued that we will have no flexibility to deploy the new missile in other basing modes if we proceed with the large M–X. 2 The options paper was not found.
