146 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement well as rural workers—­which is split into pro-Lechin and pro-Sanjines factions. The basis of the Lechin support is the 60,000-man Mineworkers Federation and other groups hard hit by austerity measures. The federation, formerly the most powerful COB affiliate, is presently weakened by disunity among the rank and file. The COB faction headed by Sanjines is numerically stronger but contains elements of diverse orientation. For example, the factory and petroleum workers and the urban transport workers have generally responded to moderate MNR leadership, while the construction and particularly the railroad workers have been infiltrated by Communist and pro-­Communist elements. 20. Among rural and middle class elements Siles and his stabilization program probably enjoy considerable support. However, these elements of the population are by no means as tightly organized as is labor, and are hence less effective on the rational scene. The peasants, moreover, are isolated and tend to distrust national politics. The Opposition Parties 21. The right wing parties are incapable of offering more than a limited challenge to the MNR. The right-­of-­center Bolivian Socialist Falange failed to consolidate its gains after the 1956 elections when it polled 14 percent of the total vote and obtained five congressional seats. Its position has been weakened by an open split between moderate and extremist elements, despite their agreement on the objectives of limiting state intervention in the economy, reducing labor’s political influence, and re-­establishing the traditional role of the army. The extreme rightist Republican Socialist Union Party—representing the old oligarchy of big business, large landholders, and former top army officers—­is totally discredited. Its leaders both at home and in exile have persevered in their efforts to undermine the regime. 22. Communist Groups. The capabilities of the Communist parties, though much greater than their numbers indicate, are in general limited. In the 1956 elections, they polled only 14,000 votes (1.5 percent of these cast) and have no representation in Congress. The orthodox Communist Party (PCB) has a maximum membership of about 2,000; Trotskyite factions, most important of which is the Revolutionary Workers’ Party (POR), have a strength of 1,000 to 1,500. While the PCB provides conditional support for the regime, the Trotskyite POR maintains an uncompromising opposition. Despite probable support from the Czech Legation, the Communist movement is handicapped by chronic factional differences and financial difficulties. At the same time, however, the presence in government circles of such individuals as Juan Sanjines and Edwin Moller8 provides a potential channel for the extension of Communist influence. 8 Edwin Moller, long a Trotskyite, joined the MNR in 1954. Although he was recently ousted from the party by Siles because of his oppositionist activities against stabilization, he still retains his seat in the Chamber of Deputies. [Footnote is in the source text.]
