Guatemala  669
by private American activities. ICA and the Government as a whole 
undoubtedly have a right to speak in fairly decided terms in this matter 
to those companies which seek assistance from the U.S. Government in 
the form of investment guarantees.
Two American companies in Guatemala have been objects of con-
tinued and effective public attack: The international Railway and the 
Empresa Eléctrica, a property of American and Foreign Power. A third 
major company, United Fruit, saw the light and improved its public 
relations.
Compared with the job done by public utilities in the United States 
of building public acceptance or confidence, it can be said with truth 
that here nothing is done. Rather, continued refuge in a “legal” position 
has served to convince labor and the public of the validity of charges 
hurled.
The companies’ attitudes and lack of action seriously counter 
efforts to improve relations or advance our cause. The subject has been 
raised with them here with negative results.
The problem is serious in Guatemala and must exist elsewhere. 
It is hoped the question can be attacked positively on a base broader 
and more effective than can be done locally. I recommend that compa-
nies involved in the various countries be invited to send senior repre-
sentatives to a conference where policies of the United States may be 
explained, the role of American companies emphasized, and the bene-
fits of positive public relations made clear. (In the case of Guatemala, as 
matters now stand, our position would be better were the companies 
owned in some other nation.)
At the suggested conference a strong effort should be made to make 
American companies operating in this area understand and cooperate 
with our labor policy. Even the United Fruit Company, whose public 
and personnel relations have greatly improved, has a dangerous short-­
sighted attitude toward unions.5
C. Unfair Charge of Development Aid Supervision to TCA. The 
TCA budget for Guatemala contains a heavy amount for supervision of 
Development Aid. Not only development aid, but likewise it is under-
stood supervision of Development Loan Funds are chargeable to TCA. 
It would be possible to have a considerable TCA budget in a country and 
no technical assistance at all. The distortion to the general aspect, of this 
is bad enough but more important, it would appear, is the disruption 
within field organization and a proper askance by Congress. Moreover, 
there should be no covering up of the total cost of Development Aid or 
Loan Funds by charging part of the cost to TCA—­let their supervision 
5 Documents on UFCO Guatemalan labor policy are in files 814.06 and 814.237.
