International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
123
fect in terms of the impact on the U.S. market. The Japanese industry
has admitted on the public record that a significant part of the growth
of imports in 1976 was due to inventory buildup. Our estimates suggest
that 500–700 thousand receivers imported in 1976 went into inven-
tories. Thus the impact of Japanese imports in the U.S. market in 1976
was on the order of two million receivers or less. The replacement of
complete set imports by sets assembled by Japanese subsidiaries in the
United States should be on the order of 400 thousand receivers in 1977
so that a level of 1.6 million receivers imported from Japan in 1977
would have essentially the same impact as 1976.
We estimate that 1977 imports from Japan will be on the order of
two million receivers representing substantial growth in Japanese im-
ports in the market as compared with 1976 even if Japanese affiliate
production is not counted. Japanese participation will be even higher
than the import level suggests due to inventory buildup prior to the ef-
fectiveness of the agreement on July 1, 1977 and inventory drawdown
after that date. We believe several hundred thousand receivers have
been stocked at a minimum, in anticipation of restrictions.
Impact on Japan
The Japanese apparently feel that the agreed levels will be suffi-
cient to permit them to participate in an acceptable way in the U.S.
market. The Japanese predict that their own television industry will
move off shore over the next five years. There will be three incentives
for the Japanese to come into the United States to invest in assembly op-
erations: (1) quantitative restrictions in the agreement; (2) the potential
antidumping duty liability (now requiring posting of a 20 percent
bond); and (3) potential countervailing duty liability (now requiring
posting of a 15 percent bond). The Japanese were offered an option that
provided a slightly smaller first year restraint level than 1.75 million
but with growth in later years; however, they preferred the current
deal.
Three companies are already operating in the United States and
these firms will be expanding production in 1977 and 1978. Two other
Japanese companies are on the verge of starting production in the
United States and are likely to make substantial additions to domestic
production capacity in the United States.
As the definition used for the scope of the agreement will permit
importation of Japanese components and subassemblies without re-
striction, there will be no pressure on domestic U.S. capacity in these
areas and the Japanese firms will still realize substantial labor input in
their own country.
Impact on U.S. Industry and Unions
The level of restraint in the agreement is well above that requested
by the domestic industry and unions but can be sold to them on the
