1188ŌĆā Foreign Relations, 1955ŌĆō1957, Volume III, Supplement
In this sense their proposal on lifting embargo was step towards better┬Ł
ment relations. He very much regretted we had as yet made no prog┬Ł
ress on that. In order that talks might not waste time meaninglessly he 
had again this morning put forward proposal on┬Āmutual contacts and 
cultural exchange between two cuntries.
17. Wang said it their consistent conviction that uninterrupted 
human contacts and cultural exchanges would contribute to better 
understanding between peoples and to relaxation international ten┬Ł
sions. His government not only maintained this conviction but had 
actually carried out policy along these lines. In 1955 his country had 
received more than 4,000 visitors from some 66 countries of world. 
This represented increase of 60 percent over previous year. Number of 
visitors expected to double this year. Most foreign visitors who had 
come to their country during past year had come from countries which 
had as yet no diplomatic relations with his government. It their belief 
that presence or absence diplomatic relations should not be obstacle to 
human contacts with peoples these countries. Many people had prej┬Ł
udices and doubts before contact made but after such contacts such 
prejudices and doubts in most cases been eliminated or reduced.
18. Wang said his people entertained friendly feelings towards 
people US. People our two countries had traditional friendship. It 
consistent policy his country protect all foreign nationalsŌĆöincluding 
AmericansŌĆöresiding in his country who abided by laws. There were 
still number American nationals who desired remain his country to 
carry on normal livelihood and work. They had never felt any preju┬Ł
dice or mistreatment on part of Chinese Government. However, any 
law-┬Łbreaking foreign nationals, no matter what country they came 
from, would be dealt with in accordance Chinese law. This was normal 
practice any sovereign state.
19. Wang acknowledged at present relationship between China-┬ŁUS 
subject to interruption and broken. Nevertheless, any dispute between 
two countries should be settled peacefully. However, such disputes as 
exist between China US should not be made pretext for hindering free 
contacts and cultural exchanges between two peoples. Artificial barri┬Ł
ers would not contribute any ordinary improvement relations between 
two countries. To put up artificial barriers was against interests both 
peoples and against desires. Today it up to US to remove artificial 
barriers in contacts of people. It US which now adopting extremely 
unfriendly policy towards Chinese people. This policy of US was in 
complete contrast to policy of China towards American people.
20. Wang said present situation was that US occupying portion 
Chinese territory and not China occupying part US territory. Present 
situation was US carrying on policy embargo against China and not 
China carrying on policy embargo against US. It US which putting
