1956 1265 26. I asked what meaning did agreement have with regard Mr. McCarthy? How was his situation any different from what was before we reached agreement. 27. Wang said difference lay in fact time not come in which his case might be resolved according to that agreement. 28. I just could not follow. It seemed to me he in exactly same position was before we reached that agreement according to Wang’s statement. 29. Wang said blame not on Chinese Govt but on prisoner him­ self. Blame on prisoner who came China to oppose Chinese people and Govt under cloak missionary work. 30. I did not get point. Agreement did not say it did not apply to those whom Chinese Govt alleges came to China to oppose Chinese people and Govt under cloak missionary work, agreement said it would apply all Americans. 31. Wang said all Americans to whom agreement applied and should be able return under that agreement had already returned. Agreement did not provide all prisoners be able return within pre­ scribed time. Agreement provided that all persons who desired do so should be allowed return their country; however, in my country great number Chinese who desired do so had not been able return. They had not only been unable return country but even their correspondence with families been subject interference by FBI my country. This interfer­ ence violates fundamental principle of democratic state. This violated fundamental freedom of persons. This exactly violation and breach our agreement. It to be hoped my govt would speedily correct all these actions which in violation agreement all these obstructive activities. 32. I said Wang’s last statement came down to two points. One that agreement applied only to those Americans to whom his govt chose apply it. Other point seemed be they had not applied it to other Americans remaining in their prisons because of what they alleged to be obstruction to Chinese in America desiring return. With regard first point, agreement did not state would be applied to those to whom his government chose apply it. Said applied all Americans. With regard second point, mechanism which Wang himself suggested to deter­ mine whether agreement carried out had as far as the US concerned not offered any evidence or even allegation of obstruction. As far as Americans in his country concerned same mechanism had alleged obstruction and had made representation on it which his govt refused accept. 33. Wang did not agree to explanation offered by me. There was dif­ ference between obstruction and law breaking. We could not make alle­ gation Chinese Govt obstructed people who broke Chinese law. This not question his govt offering obstructions to those Americans but question
