International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1105 330. Paper Prepared in the Department of State1 Washington, January 11, 1980 U.S. NATIONAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL DECADE FOR DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION The Government of the United States of America is committed to playing an important part in the International Decade for Drinking Water and Sanitation and, in accordance with the Action Plan adopted by the Mar del Plata Water Conference2 and the decisions of the Third Special Session of the Committee on Natural Resources and ECOSOC,3 is prepared to share its experiences with other governments and to assist interested countries in upgrading their drinking water supply and sanitation facilities. General Few issues of public policy offer a greater complexity than those associated with water resources and water management. In the U.S., the availability of good quality water is considered a necessary element of an acceptable standard of living. At the same time, increasing efforts are under way to bring together science, technology, economics, management skills, and political awareness in order to assure responsible planning and management of our water resources. The advent of the International Decade for Drinking Water and Sanitation is serving to raise the consciousness of every nation to the need to adopt not only national plans but also to examine the possibilities of regional and global cooperation in this vital sector. The United States welcomes this opportunity. Water in the U.S.A. In the United States, adequate safe drinking water is accessible to most of the population. The quality of drinking water is now generally high, but this has not always been the case. As recently as seventy years 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of International Organization Affairs/ Health and Narcotics Programs 1980 Health Files, Lot 83D343, Box 3, HLT 80 WHO— Programs Water Decade; UN. No classification marking. Drafted in AID/IIA/IA and IO/DHP. 2 The Action Plan is printed as a portion of the Report of the United Nations Water Conference, Mar del Plata, 14–25 March 1977 (United Nations publication: E.77.II.A.12) 3 The third special session of the Committee on Natural Resources was held in March and April 1979 to follow up activities related to the Mar del Plata Conference, specifically, those related to providing safe drinking water and sanitation. At its meeting in July and August, ECOSOC took note of the Committee’s report (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1979, pp. 671–674)
