Preface
Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series
This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Rela-
tions series that documents the most important issues in the foreign
policy of the administration of Jimmy Carter. This volume documents
human rights policy and significant humanitarian affairs from 1977 to
1980, focusing on the institutionalization of human rights policy within
the United States Government; world hunger and food policy; interna-
tional health, water policy, population growth, and international
women’s issues. It does not include documentation on specific human
rights problems; for U.S. human rights policy with a particular country
or region, readers should consult the relevant geographically-focused
volume of the Foreign Relations series. Readers interested in the intellec-
tual foundations of U.S. human rights policy should consult Foreign Re-
lations, Volume I, Foundations of Foreign Policy. For information on
North-South relations, economic summits, and overall U.S. trade
policy, see Foreign Relations, Volume III, Foreign Economic Policy.
Readers should also consult Foreign Relations, Volume E–7, Documents
on United Nations; Law of the Sea for documentation on other transna-
tional global issues, including space and telecommunications, trust ter-
ritories, narcotics, and the Olympics.
Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, Volume II
This volume documents the Carter administration’s efforts to de-
fine and implement a broad-based human rights policy. It also illus-
trates various steps undertaken by the Carter administration to amelio-
rate hunger, launch a global health initiative, and advocate for
women’s rights. The section on human rights focuses on overall human
rights policy, including the establishment of the Bureau of Human
Rights and Humanitarian Affairs within the Department of State, the
creation of human rights coordinating and review groups, issuance of a
Presidential Directive on human rights, institutionalization and stand-
ardization of human rights reporting, and pursuit of human rights
within the United Nations and other multilateral venues. The section
on world hunger and food policy documents efforts to revitalize the
Food for Peace program (Public Law 480) and connect it more firmly to
human rights concerns, the establishment of the Presidential Commis-
sion on World Hunger, the administration’s support for both domestic
and international grain reserves and a food corps, and the U.S. re-
VII
