1614 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement Mr. McCone said that he was disturbed by the idea of “deterrence” and thought that this was a new concept which had not been previ­ ously discussed. Ambassador Wadsworth said that this had been an inte­ gral part of our approach from the beginning. Mr. Farley said that it had become apparent in his appearances before the Joint Committee and the Humphrey Subcommittee that the inability to achieve 100 per­ cent perfection was recognized. He described the approach presently set forth in the U.S. Annex to the Treaty which involved inspection of only 20% of the unidentified events below five kilotons. The ques­ tion was not whether the principle of deterrence was acceptable, but what constituted adequate deterrence. Mr. Herter said that a decision on the degree of deterrence which we could accept would need to be made only in the event of a change in the Soviet position on the veto. Ambassador Wadsworth said that such a change was a distinct possibility in view of the adoption by the conference of a duration article which made withdrawal easy. Referring to the two contingencies he had described, Mr. Herter said that in the event of Soviet sticking on the veto he would prefer to have President Eisenhower and Prime Minister Macmillan propose by letter an agreement limited initially to atmospheric tests. He did not personally believe this should be proposed during the course of the present negotiations, but that it should be done immediately after a recess in the negotiations. Ambassador Wadsworth said it might be possible after the return of the Delegation to Geneva, when it become apparent that the Soviet position had not changed, to recess the nego­ tiations for this purpose. In any event he did not believe that we should seek an abrupt break in the negotiations, since it would be easy for the Soviets to make it appear that we were responsible for such a break. Mr. Herter then raised the question of whether we should move to a unilateral cessation of atmospheric tests if the Soviets turned this proposal down. Dr. Killian said that this would mean giving up the chance to make a beginning step in arms control. He felt this point was of overwhelming importance since new technological developments in the weapons field will increase the uncertainties and instabilities of the present world situation, and with it the hazards of war. The only way out of this dangerous situation was through some monitored arma­ ments accommodation with the Soviets, and we should not give up this important objective lightly. Mr. Quarles said that he agreed with this view. Dr. Killian went on to say that the changing situation with regard to the technical aspects of detection and the possibilities of evad­ ing detection created a situation which perhaps led to the desirabil­ ity of seeking an agreement on atmospheric tests first. This initial step could be done, he felt, without giving up the ultimate objective of an
