290
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
General Richard Lawrence, Military Member
Herbert Hansell, Legal Advisor
George Sherman, Spokesman
While part of the delegation, I would not plan to spend full time
with the talks. With the Egyptian-Israeli talks launched, I would plan to
devote my time—in addition to tending other NEA matters—to pre-
paring for the West Bank/Gaza talks.
Engaging the Two Sides in West Bank/Gaza Issues
The Egyptians will be all for this, although we do not know how
far Sadat is prepared to go in slowing down progress on an Egypt-
Israel treaty to achieve a further stage of understanding on West Bank/
Gaza issues. Boutros Ghali, in his latest conversation2 with Hermann,
continues to deny any formal linkage but says Egypt will be expecting a
“gentleman’s agreement” with Israel that progress on West Bank/Gaza
issues should be synchronized with movement toward agreement on
an Egypt-Israel treaty. He warns that the pace of Egypt’s willingness to
see normalization of relations put into effect will be affected if Israel is
“stiff-necked” about moving further on West Bank/Gaza issues. The Is-
raelis will be prepared to talk about the West Bank/Gaza but will be re-
luctant to make any further concessions prior to Jordan entering the
talks.
In particular, the issue of the settlements in the West Bank looms as
crucial, and may have to be isolated if we are to progress on other
issues. The credibility of the Framework will be seriously vitiated in
Arab eyes if Israel is allowed to continue to “create facts” on the
ground, and this would also weaken Arab confidence in the U.S. role.
On the other hand, it will be the hardest point for the Israelis to give
ground on because to do so will strike at Begin’s ability to maintain, for
his domestic political purposes, that the Camp David Framework
leaves room for an essentially “Israeli solution” for the West Bank and
Gaza.
Thus, with the Israelis signalling us that they want to talk immedi-
ately about normalization of relations, and the Egyptians telling us this
will be linked to progress on the West Bank and Gaza, West Bank/Gaza
issues will probably emerge early as the crux and potential sticking
point of the talks. It will be important to make our own early assess-
ment of Egyptian intentions, because regardless of Boutros Ghali’s in-
tentions, it will be Sadat that ultimately decides to bring into play the
sanction of delaying progress on the bilateral treaty, and we will need
to tailor our approach accordingly. We believe the best approach
2 A record of this conversation is in telegram 22407 from Cairo, October 5. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850067–1855)
