Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I —Are we truly committed to revitalizing international institutions, like the IMF, and are we prepared to follow through on the commitments made (jointly) in London? —Will we approach the multilateral trade negotiations in ways which avoid threatening fundamental EC institutions like the Common Agricultural Policy?3 —Are we capable of preventing another Middle East war, that would cripple the European economy in another oil embargo? —Can we understand—and account for—their long-range fears of being swamped by a more productive and innovative economy? Concorde, non-proliferation, defense procurement, and arms transfer policy are thus seen by many Europeans (especially in France) as interrelated. These issues raise real questions about the capacity of European economies to compete with the United States in an age increasingly dominated (in exportable goods) by high technology. —Conversely, can we work with Western Europe (and Japan) so that the restoration of their economic strength will not lead to another period of intense economic competition (like that of 1970–73), in which the United States again defaults on its pledges to respect and support a strong European Community? —Can we work out differences on North-South issues with them and the LDCs to prevent economic disruptions adverse to the more vulnerable European economies? U.S. Leadership Your Administration holds out great promise for Europe—and what it can derive from renewed American strength of will and purpose. You have effectively put Vietnam and Watergate behind us, and have offered the promise of new vigor in a host of areas. The “European first” strategy is attractive—but there is still a lot of cynicism about what you will do in practice. Even after the Summit, many Europeans are still from “Missouri.” The issue is complicated by what has long been European ambivalence about American leadership: when it is not there (as during the Vietnam/Watergate years), there is deep concern about our will and purpose; but when we exercise leadership, there is contrary concern about specific actions and U.S. dominance. Thus many Europeans could welcome the vigor of your early decisions, and yet object to policies like 3 The 1957 Treaty of Rome, signed by Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands, defined general objectives for a Common Agricultural Policy, which included the initiation of subsidy payments and price supports designed to stabilize European agriculture. The European Commission proposed the CAP in 1960; provisions went into effect in 1962.
