8
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
3. By all means at their disposal to prohibit the existence on their
territory of the troops or armed forces of any third state whatsoever, the
presence of which would constitute a threat to the frontiers, interests,
or security of the other High Contracting Party.
“Clause VI:
Both the High Contracting Parties are agreed that in case on part of
third countries there should be attempts by means of armed interven-
tion to realize a rapacious policy on the territory of Persia or to turn the
territory of Persia into a base for military action against the R.S.F.S.R.,
and if thereby danger should threaten the frontiers of the R.S.F.S.R. or
those of Powers allied to it, and if the Persian Government after
warning on the part of the Government of the R.S.F.S.R. should prove
to be itself not strong enough to prevent this danger, the Government
of the R.S.F.S.R. shall have the right to take its troops into Persian terri-
tory in order to take necessary military measures in the interests of self
defense. When the danger has been removed the Government of the
R.S.F.S.R. promises immediately to withdraw its troops beyond the
frontiers of Persia.
The technique used was one of intimidation, of holding over the
heads of the Iranians the threat to invoke the Treaty and occupy the
northern area. The cause for the threatened action was found in the
presence of the two American Military Missions, which allegedly were
engaged in turning Iran into a base for operations against the Soviet
Union and so constituted a danger to the security of that country. Very
strong notes were sent to the Foreign Office in Teheran, but those notes
were vigorously answered by Teheran. A state of tension was created
but the Iranians stood up well under the pressure. Perhaps the Iranian
rebuttal should have put on record the true fact that Clauses Five (V)
and Six (VI) of the Treaty had been drafted with an entirely different set
of conditions in mind and, as those conditions would no longer exist,
the articles mentioned obviously were inapplicable. In other words,
perhaps the Soviets did accomplish something through this maneuver
to the extent that they created the belief that they had the right to in-
vade the country should a situation which might menace their security
develop. Plainly, however, the technique did not accomplish the de-
sired purpose, for the Iranians retained both Military Missions while no
Soviet occupation occurred.
[Omitted here is information about Iranian-Soviet commercial and
consular activities.]
(f) Reversion to Technique of Friendship and Commerce—
The latest Soviet move was made but several months ago. They
then apparently became worried by the implication inherent in our
plans to assist the country economically and seem to have decided to
meet that challenge through a reversion to peaceful techniques, antici-
