Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Weapons and Talks
65
gotiations are ongoing. State that the US has no immediate plans to
conduct low-altitude ASAT testing, but we will give the Soviets six
months’ notice if the pressures of the current asymmetry favoring the
Soviets require us to commence such testing. (Favored by Defense. JCS
feels that neither approach has been thought through enough and that
proposing any testing suspension at this time would be premature.)
Treatment of the Space Shuttle
There was agreement that the US would avoid discussing the
Shuttle if at all possible, but if such a discussion can’t be avoided, we
will not permit the Soviets to designate the Shuttle as an ASAT system.
30.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Geneva, June 5, 1978, 8:00–10:00 p.m.
SUBJECT
Anti-Satellite Systems
PARTICIPANTS
U.S.
USSR
Dr. Herbert F. York
Academician A.N. Shchukin
Dr. G.W. Johnson
On Monday, June 5, Shchukin entertained Johnson and me and
our wives at the USSR Mission in Geneva, Switzerland. The most sub-
stantive part of the conversation concerned ASATs.
Shchukin started that part of the conversation by saying he was fa-
miliar with ASATs and invited me to ask any questions I wished about
them. I started by asking him why the Soviet side had undertaken such
a program in the first place. In reply he said that the program simply
consisted of experiments whose purpose was to understand the possi-
bilities and that in addition one might want to inspect some satellite up
close in order to determine if it was complying with the rules outlawing
nuclear weapons in space. At this point I noted we both have devel-
oped manned and unmanned systems for rendezvous in space, and he
agreed with that. (Neither at this point nor at any other did he once
mention the Shuttle). In this same context he also added that there were
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 82,
Brown Files—General #1, ASAT Arms Control. Secret; Exdis. The meeting took place at
the Soviet Mission. Drafted by York on June 6.
