348 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX 115. Memorandum From Stephen Larrabee of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron)1 Washington, July 21, 1980 SUBJECT Revised Claims/Gold Proposal for Czechoslovakia I. Background State had planned to table a proposal for a settlement of the Claims/ Gold issue in October 1979, but its efforts were suspended at that time due to the trial of 6 Czech dissidents. In May of this year State proposed renewing its efforts to settle the issue with a revised proposal which included: —A 100 percent cash settlement of the remaining principal value of the claims ($66.5 million); —Simultaneous delivery of the gold (now worth $420 million); —Full cash settlement of the surplus property debt ($8 million). (C) At that time I sent a memo to Zbig informing him of State’s intention, which was forwarded to Madeleine for comment. (Tab A)2 After Madeleine looked into the Congressional situation, she recommended going forward, and Zbig approved the recommendation. (Tab B)3 (C) II. Rationale The main reason for moving forward now—even in an election year—is that a bill (HR 7338) was introduced into the House by Congressman Wolff on May 13 to vest the gold—despite efforts by State to head it off. The essence of the Wolff bill is that the Secretary of the Treasury would be instructed to sell any of the gold allocated to Czechoslovakia which is in the custody of the United States, invest the proceeds in interestbearing securities, pay the American claimants from the interest, and return the principal to Czechoslovakia after the claims are settled. (C) Such action would be contrary to the Tripartite Agreement signed with the British and French in 1946 which stated that the gold would 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 17, Czechoslovakia: 1/77–1/81. Confidential. Aaron forwarded the memorandum to Brzezinski with a handwritten note: “ZB—Note see p. 2.” 2 Tab A, a May 19 memorandum from Larrabee to Brzezinski is attached but not printed. The memorandum was forwarded to Madeleine Albright on May 20 by David Aaron. 3 Tab B, a May 22 memorandum from Albright to Brzezinski and Aaron, is attached but not printed.
