1979  739
(TS) Within less than sixty seconds of initial alert, system redun-
dancy and direct paths of critical warning information from sensors to 
users had enabled responsible officials at SAC Headquarters and the 
NMCC to detect anomalies in warning indications which could not have 
been present had an actual mass attack been underway. Inconsistencies 
also began to emerge at NORAD Headquarters in about one minute. For 
example, Defense Support Program (DSP) satellites and transmission 
systems were operating normally but were producing no displays to 
corroborate the missile launches depicted on the NORAD warning dis-
play. Similarly, our radar sensors were operating normally, but detected 
no SLBM activity even though the NORAD display depicted over 200 
SLBMs en route. Assessment of these and other anomalies raised seri-
ous questions regarding the validity of the NORAD-­generated display 
and avoided any precipitous reaction involving nuclear forces. (No 
nuclear armed aircraft were activated and no increased alert measures 
were ordered for any US nuclear forces.)
(TS) However, this incident deserves close attention, causes me 
real concern, and requires corrective actions.2 There are two issues. The 
first involves the technical and procedural causes of the false alarm, 
the scrambling of the air defense aircraft, and the launch of NEACP. As 
to the cause, the possibility of recurrence of such an incident has been 
eliminated by prohibiting connection of the test computer to the main 
system in the future without advance coordination and warning to all 
concerned. Action is also underway to review, clarify, and refine proce-
dures governing launch of air defense and command and control air-
craft. In short, mistakes were made and imperfections brought to light 
which have been and are being corrected.
(TS) But there is a higher order of concern. It involves the broader 
issue of the reliability, responsiveness, and human control over both 
our strategic warning system and our nuclear forces. In these terms, 
the events of 9 November appear to me to provide, overall, consider-
able reassurance on all counts. Despite a freak incident which severely 
stressed our warning and assessment procedures, the systems worked 
as designed, the redundancy of warning paths provided the basis for 
correct decisions and eliminated the risk of precipitous action. Most 
important, the people involved at every level acted responsibly and 
with good judgment, based on the information available to them. Under 
the demanding situation of conflicting information, a narrow decision-­
time window, and the natural stress accompanying such circumstances, 
I believe that the following were amply and creditably demonstrated: 
a high degree of responsiveness; safeguards against precipitate action; 
2 Carter drew two vertical lines in the left margin next to this paragraph.
