966 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 13. Secretary said he wanted to mention the tank sale, which we hoped to move forward soon to Congress. He said he wanted King to understand that it would cause us no problem if King chose British or American tanks; whatever his decision, it is fine with us. Hussein said that, frankly, there are problems with U.S. offer: lead time is very long and tanks would not be equipped with sights which others (read Israelis) already have. In any case, deal with U.K. probably will be completed in a week or ten days. Saunders asked how many British tanks might be purchased. Hussein said one division at least. Veliotes noted that this might mean a U.S. purchase of about one hundred M–60s. King agreed. Veliotes added that an early decision of chieftains will help us with the Hill since the rather vague number we have been using has given some congressmen the impression that we do not know what we really want to do. Hussein, Sharaf and Veliotes agreed that it would be useful if all this was settled by time of October joint military commission meeting. 14. Newsom asked for King’s views of Jordanian-Saudi cooperation in Yemen and of situation there. Hussein said there had been no real change in Yemen since situation there rather static. He had discussed it with Prince Sultan in Geneva enroute to New York. King said contingency planning is needed and that SAG and GOJ should look ahead to potential dangers and plan together how to meet them. Hussein said he shared Saudi doubts about Salih and felt his regime disorganized particularly in comparison with much better organized government in Aden. Veliotes said that King’s officials had responded positively to Doug Bennet’s discussions in Amman re need to strengthen North Yemen’s institutions and that Jordan could play a helpful role. Hussein and Newsom agreed that much would depend on Saudi view of Salah which is not good at the moment. Hussein turned to broader aspects of regional security and said that Syria is not yet ready to participate and Iraqis feeling squeezed between events in Iran and Israeli threat. They are increasingly anti-communist, however, and this is to the good. Noting he realized he sounded like the late King Faisal, Hussein said Arabs felt themselves at present under pressure from Communists and Zionists. 15. Secretary wondered what King planned to say to the General Assembly.4 Hussein said he felt it would be positive and, hopefully, 4 King Hussein addressed the United Nations General Assembly on September 25. During his speech, he accused Israel of refusing to treat Arabs as human beings “but as a human barrier which it must seek to demolish.” The King also rejected calls for autonomy for the Palestinians as described in the Camp David Accords, insisting that the Palestinians must be given their own state. He noted: “Autonomy for the people but not the land” was a principle the Palestinians would not accept. (Bernard D. Nossiter, “Gromyko, at U.N., Calls Concern Over Soviet Units in Cuba Artificial,” The New York Times, September 26, 1979, p. A1)
