252
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
The Secretary said that there was another area he would at least
like to flag. We all need to look at the longer-term options. It was
certainly possible that Khomeini might not endure. We had to see what
are the real alternatives. We very much appreciate the exchanges of
views that have already taken place and we think it would be a good
idea to continue these exchanges about future developments. For exam-
ple, are you in touch with any of these forces and how do you evaluate
them? We know that none of them seems to be perfect, but on the
other hand, some may be worse than others. Should we try to influence
the situation or not? We ought to put these things on the table.
Francois-Poncet said that the Secretary would be getting an authori-
tative response from the President at dinner in the evening. We could
be sure of French Government sympathy and support. They have been
looking at the various alternatives. Legally, on the question of the
freezing action by US banks, there was every chance that a court would
decide that the US could not apply its order to American banks in
France. They recognize that this decision would have importance, but
their researches had led them to the conclusion that on the straight
legal point, there could be no doubt about how the case would go.
They were, however, looking into the question and also the possibility
of delays. He said that they would also look at the question of outstand-
ing loans, the possibility of a French freeze and the cross-default clause
situation. They would have to examine French law to see if there was
a basis.
Francois-Poncet said that they had great understanding for the
situation that we face and they recognize that this is of concern to all
of us. What is at stake here is the whole international order. We should
be in no doubt about their basic philosophy. “We want,” he said, “to
take the most effective action and to help avoid reactions in other parts
of the world.” He wondered whether Chapter 7 action might not be
the next step. If we decided to move in that direction, France would
have a positive attitude and that would then give them the legal basis
for action on their part. The problem as they saw it now was that they
needed some UN decision as they did, for example, in the case of
Rhodesia. He then made a side reference to the Mozambique situation
in which the “no answer” was a “yes answer.” He said they would
continue to look into the legal situation.
Francois-Poncet went on to say that there was a link here to the
internal Iranian situation. Was it disintegrating and how fast? We don’t
want to do anything that would prevent this disintegration, e.g., taking
action that might unify internal forces and, therefore, we had to weigh
that against the bad effects of inaction. Clearly, international action is
most desirable. In answer to a question, the Secretary said that he
had been in contact with Dobrynin on the Soviet response. He had
