800.51 W 89Belgium/40: Telegram [Document 61] The Ambassador in Belgium (Phillips) to the Secretary of State BRUSSELS, June 2, 1925—6 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.] 65. The following note has just been received from the Foreign Office: “Mr. Ambassador: Your Excellency’s memorandum of May 31 has received the attention of the Government of the King. In reply I ask Your Excellency to be so good as to communicate to your Government the following: The Government of the King has confirmed several times its determination to honor its engagements contracted with the United States. 1. As far as concerns the advances granted to Belgium by the Allied and Associated Governments before November 11th, 1918 the Belgian Government considers it its duty to remark that according to the terms of article 232 of the Treaty of Versailles3 Germany is obliged to carry out their reimbursement. This treaty having become a Belgian law, the arrangements agreed to by the Government of the King in order to replace the clause of the Treaty of Versailles which has become void as far as concerns the Government of the United States by reason of its nonratification, will require the approval of the legislative powers. The Belgian Government cannot help but recall that it only accepted to sign the Treaty of Versailles notably because of the advantages which article 232 accorded to it. Had it been able to foresee that this treaty would not be ratified by all the signatory powers it would have taken measures to have Belgium freed entirely from the sums which she had been required to spend during the hostilities as a result of violation of the treaties of 1839. The United States not having ratified the Treaty of Versailles the Belgian Government cannot legally make a point of article 232 vis-à-vis the United States. The elements of fact however and the moral and juridical considerations which in 1919 determined the Allied and Associated Powers to accord special advantages to Belgium by reason of her particular situation still retain all their value.
