204 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX their transmission time twice during the past year and a half: in February 1978andagaininJune1979.Bothputoutahighlyagitational,anti-American line. The main Soviet clandestine station directed at Iran continues the same mendacious, inflammatory commentary that exacerbated the situation there last winter, broadcasting in both Persian and Azerbaijani. It probably uses the same transmitters as Radio Baku, which also broadcasts in Kurdish. Another Soviet-backed station transmitting from Libya to Iran echoes similar agitational themes. The Soviets also seem to have a hand in several clandestine stations in Arabic that broadcast from places such as Aden. (C) In view of the continuing expansion and intensification of Soviet broadcasting efforts, we need to consider further expansion of our own. Given the modest costs, it is money well spent. Both VOA and RFE/ RL are preparing proposals for more broadcasts directed at the Middle East and the Muslim areas of the Soviet Union. (C) 66. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to the Director of the International Communication Agency (Reinhardt)1 Washington, October 1, 1979 SUBJECT Broadcasts to USSR and Eastern Europe (U) In my view, one of the most important themes that we should be conveying to VOA audiences in the USSR and Eastern Europe, particularly at this time when there is considerable focus on Soviet/ Cuban activities throughout the world, is the fact that the resources spent by the Soviets in Cuba, Vietnam and elsewhere are coming right out of the pockets of consumers in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 112, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Voice of America: 10–12/79. Confidential. In a September 25 Evening Report to Brzezinski, Brement reported that Ambassador Dick Davis, who was running a task force looking at overseas reporting, told him that the U.S. Government was “not doing nearly enough to get across to our VOA audiences in the USSR and Eastern Europe that the dollars spent by the Soviets in Cuba, Vietnam, and elsewhere are coming out of the pockets of Soviet and Eastern European consumers.” Brzezinski marked the paragraph and wrote in the margin “Give me a clear tasking memo to ICA.” (Ibid.) Brement forwarded a draft to Brzezinski on September 29. (Ibid.)
