768 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX the U.S. can play a role as a mediator when it is so committed to the support of the Zionists. If they have everything, why should they consider giving anything up? Always they have had the strategy of separating Egypt from the Arab world. They have always wanted to turn this problem into an East-West problem. At times like this, Jordan becomes an embarrassment. In the regional security plan, where does Israel fit? The holocaust did occur. Although this area had nothing to do with it, this city has suffered the most, receiving the victims of another kind of holocaust. Should we tell our people to cooperate with Israel? Here is the greatest threat to stability. I have known no President to take as many risks for peace; however, it is not like ’48, which was a disaster from our point of view, but like 1956. No one here is discussing the existence of Israel, but we are wondering what about the rights of others. Jordan could be an embarrassment if it relies totally on its friends. But I want to come back to the great problem. Arab unity and coordination have always been resisted by our friends. The problem has been Israel. It must be addressed before it is too late. With regard to the precedent, the facts and figures that we have regarding the West Bank and the occupied territories, we have to bring before the Security Council. We were asked to postpone it for the third time; however, we went ahead because there were serious changes taking place on the ground. We saw postponement as being worse. What is the alternative to bringing it up? Could our friends prevent this? You may be right that the treaty will cement U.S.-Arab relations, but it is contrary to all of my expectations and experience. Mr. Christopher said that he had listened intently to the eloquent and somber presentation by King Hussein. It seems that events in the last month may assist to achieve the rights of the Palestinians. This is your goal and we share it. It has given the U.S. a new sense of authority. A timetable has been agreed upon. There is a new sense of confidence in carrying out provisions leading to providing a homeland for the Palestinians. Before you act, we hope you will ask if it is in our interests and your own self-interests. Leave the door open to the possibility that we may be right. Do not take an irrevocable act or close doors. This is the thought I would like to leave with you. King Hussein responded that he would not act on personal whim. His fears are genuine, even for Sadat. Dr. Brzezinski thanked the King for the time he had given us and indicated that he would convey his views to the President. I think we understand each other. We will persist because we think it best. It would not be good for us or you if the problem were reduced to an East-West conflict. That is all the more important that we not be alone in what we are doing. There are different ways of being helpful, or un-
