504 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement reporters substance of talks. His press, radio, and public officials have been making statements on aspects of national policy some of which impinge on substance of talks. I did not raise question in that regard. I considered that quite different from publishing specifics of talks between us here. 5. I said my government’s officials also make statements concern­ ing national policies but they carefully refrained from making available to press substance of discussion in this room. He should note that Sec­ retary Dulles, in October 18 press conference Wang had referred to in his letter, carefully avoided discussion substance talks. 6. I then read excerpts from Secretary’s October 18 press conference dealing with talks. 7. I said Secretary had said absolutely nothing but what was known or made available by Wang’s side. Fact trade embargo and higher level meeting had been raised was made public by his side September 14. It was well-known fact even before talks started that US desired dis­ cussion renunciation of force. Secretary merely confirmed these were subjects of talks and refused enter into substance of meetings. 8. I said I cited this because I wanted him to understand how care­ fully we tried keep agreement concerning privacy of talks. We were dis­ turbed by last sentence Wang’s letter, in which he apparently indicated intent make farther information available to press. I asked whether this was in fact intended. 9. Wang replied he had made his position clear in his letter. He could not accept charges I had made. In fact, it was his side that was dissatisfied regarding secrecy of talks. 10. Wang said at beginning of talks he had taken stand talks should be open. I had proposed secrecy, and as concession his side had accepted. Subsequently understanding reached that prior to public statement either side, other side should be informed. Thus it would be possible have full exchange of views to find solution to disputed matters. 11. Wang said his side has always followed this line. Chinese press has commented only matters on which agreement reached or which were made public. Has never gone into substance of talks. 12. Wang said members of his group engaged in talks have had no contacts with press. Nevertheless there had been disclosures to press. He wished to cite a few cases. Following meeting of October 27, at which his side put forward draft agreed announcement, press began to talk about important statement by Chinese side in which Foreign Ministers conference was envisaged. 13. Wang said that even this morning he had noted story in Novem­ ber 8 New York Times quoting official American sources and reporting
