February 1951–February 1952
93
cally, he has urged that the Shah be stripped of power and that the
Majlis become the dominant factor in the government. However, he
does not believe that the present members of the Majlis truly represent
the interests of the Iranian people and advocates electoral reform.
2. Mossadeq is at present in a strong political position, despite the
facts that he has few personal followers in the Majlis or in the tradi-
tional ruling class as a whole and that he is disliked and distrusted by
the Shah. Unlike his predecessors, he is not dependent on the Shah’s
favor or on factional politics in the Majlis. He has come to power as the
leader of a national movement which has aroused intense popular sup-
port. This circumstance has caused the Majlis to nominate him to the
Shah and compelled the Shah to appoint him to office. Fundamentally
his strength derives from, and is in direct proportion to, the intensity of
feeling against the British over the oil issue. Although other critical
problems will plague his administration, they are not likely to cause his
downfall so long as the oil crisis remains a burning issue. Mossadeq’s
campaign against the AIOC has had the support not only of his Na-
tional Front group but also of the Fedayan Islam (the small terrorist
group of religious fanatics who were responsible for Razmara’s assassi-
nation), the illegal Tudeh (Communist) Party, and probably the great
majority of Iran’s laborers, trades-men, and students, who can signifi-
cantly affect political developments in Iran through strikes, demonstra-
tions, and violence. Both the Fedayan Islam and the Tudeh Party, how-
ever, are constantly attempting to coerce Mossadeq into adopting more
extreme measures against Western interests. Fedayan Islam has appar-
ently unseated its more moderate leader and has threatened Mos-
sadeq’s life. Meanwhile, the Tudeh Party has gone beyond nationaliza-
tion of the oil industry to demand ousting of the US military mission,
refusal of US arms assistance, and closer relations with the USSR.
3. Because of the wide support for Mossadeq’s chauvinistic cru-
sade, few Iranian leaders dared oppose him publicly. His influence in
the Majlis was largely responsible for Razmara’s failure to obtain a re-
vised AIOC agreement and loans from the Export-Import Bank and the
IBRD. He condoned the assassination of Razmara on the grounds that
the latter was traitorously lenient in his negotiations with the AIOC. Fi-
nally, he pushed the oil nationalization bills through the Majlis against
the wishes of the Shah and Prime Minister Ala. Many of the Majlis dep-
uties probably voted for the measures against their better judgment,
succumbing to the emotionalism of Mossadeq’s appeal or fearing the
consequences (possibly including assassination) of opposing the
measure.
4. When Hussein Ala was Prime Minister, Mossadeq was
chairman of the Majlis Oil Commission appointed to draw up recom-
mendations for taking over the AIOC installations. The Shah, Prime
