470
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
ments which would assure your country and world at large that you
proceeding abroad for purposes not (rpt not) connected with Iran in-
ternal situation. Rumors now afloat that you leaving in order prevent
Prime Minister from issuing public statement denouncing you and
your family. No (rpt no) one would believe that your departure entirely
voluntary. Shah replied, “I not (rpt not) leaving under duress. Prime
Minister insists that I do not (rpt not) have to go unless I desire do so.
He says, however, that if I remain he will be compelled issue proclama-
tion attacking me and my family. In such circumstances I prefer to
leave.” I said I quite prepared to take this matter up with Prime Min-
ister personally. He replied, “it will be useless. He will tell you I am
leaving on my own volition and he cannot stop me.” I said “not (rpt
not) only US Government and American people in my opinion will be
shocked at your departure in present situation but many other friends
of yourself and Iran throughout world.” I pointed out that rumors of
his impending departure had already penetrated other countries. In in-
direct way I gave him understand views regarding his departure of
person referred to in reference telegram. Shah expressed appreciation,
but insisted he must go. He said he wished to thank US Government
and myself personally for friendship and support. He would now (rpt
now) bid me farewell. He hoped and expected to return.
5. After this conversation Ala said “you see how hopeless it is”. He
expressed hope despite Shah’s negative attitude my conversation
might still have some effect. I told him I prepared go at once to Prime
Minister. Did he perceive any objection? Ala replied not (repeat not) in-
sofar as court was concerned. He not (repeat not) sure that Prime Min-
ister would appreciate my intervention. At that moment messenger in-
formed Ala that Bureau of Majlis had arrived with request that Ala
arrange for it deliver urgent message to Shah. I returned to Embassy.
6. On my arrival I learned that members Majlis in secret session
had decided send message to Shah to effect that his departure from
country at this time would be inadvisable. I was also told by acting Air
Attache´ that Chief Air Staff had just informed him that General Bahar-
mast Chief of Staff was en route Palace to inform Shah that whole Gen-
eral Staff had decided to resign in case Shah should leave country. Thus
far unable to obtain confirmation firmness of resolve General Staff in
this respect.
Baharmast not (repeat not) strong character and he might well wilt
in delivering General Staff message to Shah. General Zimmerman
thinks Baharmast rather weak character.
7. I decided make endeavor see Prime Minister at once and asked
Saleh Embassy Iranian Adviser seek appointment. Saleh learned from
Mosadeq Secretary that Prime Minister in Palace with Shah. At Saleh’s
