Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII very limited in parts of the country. The new regime faces rebellion from some Pathan tribes and strong opposition from Islamic conservatives. The survival of the Taraki government will depend almost entirely on the military, and its loyalties are uncertain. One or more attempted countercoups are probable, but it is not clear that any will have organized the degree of military support necessary for success. The Soviets’ expanded presence in Afghanistan and the establishment in Kabul by the Soviets of a secure communications facility will provide the USSR with an increased capability to intervene militarily on short notice if it should decide to do so in the future to protect a pro-Soviet government in Kabul.2 We believe, however, that the USSR will seek to avoid sending its own troops to Afghanistan. The domestic policies announced by the new regime, if implemented, would increase substantially the role of government throughout the society, but they would not turn Afghanistan into a Sovietstyle state. Priorities include the redistribution of land and water rights, nationalization of industry, and basic reforms in education and health services. Afghanistan’s relations with its anti-Communist neighbors, Pakistan and Iran, will deteriorate under the Taraki government, but in the near term probably not to the point of armed conflict. The Afghans and Soviets will exercise restraint with these states to avoid jeopardizing the security of the Taraki regime; the Iranians and Pakistanis for the time being will seek continued correct relations in the hope of limiting the growth of Soviet influence in the area. Iran and Pakistan will remain prepared to provide covert assistance to dissident elements in Afghanistan, however, if they see a reasonable chance to undermine the Taraki government or in response to any future Afghan involvement in Iran’s or Pakistan’s own tribal problems. US-Afghan relations are likely to remain correct but cool for the foreseeable future. The Afghans will want to preserve some tie to Washington as an appearance of balance in their relations with the USSR, but Soviet influence and the certainty that US assistance will 2 Unconfirmed CIA reports led to this assessment. On June 7, the CIA passed along source reporting that “the 160 Soviet military advisors who arrived in Afghanistan in mid-May 1978 have been deployed to Afghan military units throughout the country.” The report further noted that “the Soviet advisors have considerable authority; no Afghan commander, department head, or staff officer will take any important action without first consulting with his assigned Soviet advisor.” (Department of Defense, Afghan War
