1142  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
they have been received and I and other officers in the Embassy have 
studied them carefully and are very happy to note that progress appar-
ently has been made in Washington with respect to the assistance, or at 
least offer of assistance, we might be able to grant Uruguay economi-
cally and financially. I think that the possibilities offered by the Ex-Im 
Bank, the DLF and possibly PL 480 are most constructive. May I say 
here that we also understand and in fact reported as our concurrent 
view that a stabilization loan to Uruguay would be imprudent if not 
harmful at the moment without this country at the same time defi-
nitely and precisely committing itself to certain actions on its part. The 
likelihood is that it won’t do so, or at least not until after the national 
elections of November of this year. May I return to this subject a little 
later in this letter.
As you will see from our telegram 374 of April 1,2 the Government 
here through the Foreign Minister, Oscar Secco Ellauri, has expressed 
its agreement to the visit of Vice President Nixon from April 28–30.3 We 
hope that both the President and the Foreign Minister will be here, at 
least long enough in the morning of April 28 to receive Mr. Nixon, but 
if not, the Acting President and the acting Foreign Minister will do so 
on their behalf.
In my telegram 373 of March 31 I set forth some ideas which I have 
been thinking over for some weeks time.4 I would like to take the lib-
erty to explain them to you more fully, hoping in doing so I am add-
ing something constructive and helpful. I mentioned Bob Woodward’s 
mission here and I meant it personally for him but at the same time I 
think that the same criterion would apply to any other new and experi-
enced ambassador arriving at this post.
You know the situation here very well and so what I may be saying 
might not, in its entirety, be necessary. Yet I do believe I should write it 
down as best I can. As you will have observed from our Despatch 683 of 
January 30,5 on the crisis in Uruguay and again from our conversations 
with officials of the First National City Bank of New York who visited 
Uruguay about 10 days ago and which were reported in our Despatch 
844 of March 28,6 the situation here is rather perilous and there has been 
little or no improvement in the two months interval of time. If anything, 
indeed, it has worsened because Uruguay has only been able to move half 
of its wool crop. Where the money will come to pay for essential petro-
leum supplies and other necessary imports still remains to be seen. What 
2 Not printed.
3 See Document UR–3.
4 Not printed.
5 Not printed.
6 Not printed.
