1084 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement or Andean high-­land lying parallel to the coast is an important producer of copper, lead, zinc, and other minerals and contributes some wheat, wool, and other products to the cash economy, most of its six million inhabitants carry on subsistence agriculture and herding, much in the manner of their pre-Hispanic ancestors. The sparsely populated Montaña, a region of tropical forest east of the Andes and including over 60 percent of the area of the country, is also for the most part economically and socially backward. 9. These social and economic disparities have helped perpetuate a traditional political society from which the Indians have been largely excluded and in which high political and military office has been a near-­ monopoly of the upper class of the coastal region (less than one percent of the population). Revolutions have been frequent during Peru’s 138 years of independence, with only about a quarter of the governments resting on a constitutional basis. Such revolutions have almost always reflected struggles for power within the ruling politico-­military elite. Political parties, often no more than working alliances among individual politicians, have generally been short-­lived. Regional parties reflecting the middle class interests of the provinces have been consistently overshadowed by the powerful political interests of the coast and have not been able to overcome the latter’s neglect of other sections. 10. However, traditional military-­upper class dominance has been progressively challenged by the economic and social changes which have taken place over the past generation. Increasing numbers of Indians have migrated to the coastal cities and farms over the years, there to be assimilated into the modern economy or left on its fringes as a body of partially employed unskilled workers. As a result the traditional elite is being confronted with increasingly serious competition from liberal and radical elements which draw on middle class and provincial dissatisfaction but derive their strength primarily from labor support. 11. The most important and broadly representative manifestation of this popular pressure is APRA.5 APRA, Peru’s largest and best organized party, is a moderately leftist and anti-Communist organization led by middle class intellectuals. Over the last decade or two, Peruvian politics have largely centered around the efforts of the elite (and particularly the military) to cope with APRA—­with the Communists and other forces playing secondary though sometimes important roles. 12. After 12 years of official suppression, APRA was legalized as a political party in 1945, by outgoing President Prado. His successor, 5 For further details on the party, see Appendix A, “Major Political Parties in Peru.” [Footnote is in the source text; Appendix A is not printed.]
