372  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
START treaty on the basis of reciprocal obligations. While reiterating its 
willingness to study the Soviet ideas, the U.S. side, for its part, empha-
sized its doubts about the feasibility of a workable verification system 
for SLCMs and noted its longstanding view that there are serious prob-
lems involved in any discussion of the limitation of naval arms.
“The Soviet side responded positively to President Bush’s June ini-
tiative on verification and stability measures. In this regard, the Secretary 
and the Foreign Minister had a thorough exchange on the details of the 
initiative and signed an agreement encouraging the development of such 
measures and outlining principles for implementing them. They also 
completed an agreement on the advance notification of major strategic 
exercises. The sides examined the other verification and stability mea-
sures and agreed to explore these further in Geneva.
“The sides also agreed that, for purposes of the 1,600 START limit, 
ballistic missiles will be defined in terms of missiles and their associ-
ated launchers, thus resolving a longstanding issue.
“New instructions will be issued to negotiators to take account of 
the exchanges on these and other START issues.” (Department of State 
Bulletin, November 1989, pp. 5–6).
52.	
Memorandum From Richard Davis of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, September 27, 1989
SUBJECT
U.S. Position on Mobile ICBMs in START
We need your decision urgently on how to implement in Geneva 
Secretary Baker’s announcement last week that we will “lift our ban 
on mobile ICBMs in START, contingent upon Congressional funding 
of our mobile ICBMs.”2 Baker’s statement follows closely the language 
you and he worked out earlier with Secretary Cheney.
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, Brent Scowcroft 
Collection, Scowcroft Close-Hold Files, Box WI–13, NSC Original Files—IF—Brent 
Scowcroft Folder #3 [8920647–8921233]. Secret. Sent for action. Sent through Kanter. A 
stamped notation indicates Gates saw the memorandum.
2 See Document 51.
