1955  53
direction. Carl McCardle apparently feels that you should have gone 
ahead and held the backgrounder when you were authorized, espe­
cially since it was pretty clear that Wang was talking to the Communist 
correspondents. He believes that the attitude of American correspond­
ents would have been improved and there would have been no net 
loss as to the privacy of the conversations, since so much was leaking 
any way. I believe he still thinks you should hold the backgrounder, as 
indicated in our follow-up telegram of August 6 which of course was 
largely a reflection of his view. If you feel you need a Departmental 
press officer to help you, in addition to Garnish, Carl is ready to give 
sympathetic consideration to the matter.
The question of leaks is indeed a trying and baffling one. We feel 
very badly about the New York Times Washington dateline article of 
August 4 which you rightly complained about in your 334 of August 6. 
We were particularly pained since we wanted your limited represen­
tation proposal to have maximum impact on Wang, which cannot be 
obtained when there is no element of surprise. McCardle and Suydam 
say the information did not come from the P area. I did not talk to the 
correspondents at all. Dana Schmidt was getting around the Department 
quite actively about that time and it may be conceivable that he may 
have picked something up although I have no idea how or from whom.
The Denny item which obviously was based in part at least on a 
leak also mystifies us. It seems that some of it, particularly the informa­
tion about the number of repatriated Chinese students who received 
travel funds from the U.S. Government, might have been based on U.S. 
official sources.
We have an additional information problem with the foreign 
Embassies here which are closest to us, namely the British, Canadian, 
Australian and New Zealand, and to some extent the French. So far we 
have been telling them in confidence about what has already come out 
in the papers, but they are pressing for fuller and more timely informa­
tion. This is something of a dilemma for us, . . . .
Let us know what you need which you are not getting, and any 
ways in which we can help you. The meetings of this week should be 
fairly decisive. If you think you will need Martin for a few days longer 
than planned, let us know. It would be unfortunate and difficult if he 
should have to miss a few days at the beginning of the War College, but 
I do not say it would be impossible to arrange, if his presence in Geneva 
is important to you. All the best to Ed, Ralph and Col. Ekvall. Our feel­
ing toward you and your staff is a mixture of admiration and sympathy. 
Regards and good wishes.
Sincerely,
Walter P. McConaughy
