Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Neither of us should entertain the notion that military supremacy can be attained, or that transient military advantage can be politically exploited. Our principal goal is to help shape a world which is more responsive to the desire of people everywhere for economic well-being, social justice, political self-determination, and basic human rights. We seek a world of peace. But such a world must accommodate diversity—social, political, and ideological. Only then can there be a genuine cooperation among nations and among cultures. We desire to dominate no one. We will continue to widen our cooperation with the positive new forces in the world. We want to increase our collaboration with the Soviet Union, but also with the emerging nations, with the nations of Eastern Europe, and with the People’s Republic of China. We are particularly dedicated to genuine self-determination and majority rule in those areas of the world where these goals have not yet been attained. Our long-term objective must be to convince the Soviet Union of the advantages of cooperation and of the costs of disruptive behavior. We remember that the United States and the Soviet Union were allies in the Second World War. One of the great historical accomplishments of the U.S. Navy was to guide and protect the tremendous shipments of armaments and supplies from our country to Murmansk and to other Soviet ports in support of a joint effort to meet the Nazi threat. In the agony of that massive conflict, 20 million Soviet lives were lost. Millions more who live in the Soviet Union still recall the horror and the hunger of that time. I’m convinced that the people of the Soviet Union want peace. I cannot believe that they could possibly want war. Through the years, our Nation has sought accommodation with the Soviet Union, as demonstrated by the Austrian Peace Treaty,2 the Quadripartite Agreement concerning Berlin,3 the termination of nuclear testing in the atmosphere, joint scientific explorations in space,4 2 Reference is to the Austrian State Treaty, signed by representatives of the governments of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States, and France on May 15, 1955. The treaty granted Austria independence and arranged for the withdrawal of all occupation forces. 3 The Quadripartite Agreement, ratified by the West German Bundestag in 1972, and signed by representatives of the governments of the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, the United States, and France, regularized relations between the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic within the context of the Four-Power relationship.
