84  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Mr. McElroy said that the unified commanders who had appeared 
before his group had said that they did not wish to take on the court mar­
tial responsibility for personnel of the other services. The President said 
that the requirements in war and peace are quite different. Negotiation 
and action through cooperation is all right in peacetime where time is 
not of the essence, but would not work in war. He did not think the sys­
tem should be subjected to change at the onset of war; consequently, 
we should have in peace what we need in war. Mr. Coolidge said that 
General Twining is now making a study to assure that the unified com­
mander is given the same authority over personnel of the other services 
that he has over his own component.
Mr. Coolidge said that the group has found a great deal of diffi­
culty in deciding where to put research. One alternative is to set up a 
Defense Research Institute at the same level as the JCS. Another would 
be to set up a fourth department, paralleling the Army, Navy, Air Force. 
In any case, a Director of Research would allocate tasks to the services 
and control the funds available to them. The President said the weak­
ness today is decentralized authority resulting from provision of law or 
seizure through having money voted directly to the services.
Mr. Coolidge said that the group had not settled on titles for the 
heads of the services but are inclined to favor a title of Deputy Secretary 
of Defense for the Army, etc. They were strongly of the view that the 
Vice Chief of Staff of each service should take on added responsibilities 
of his own. The President indicated he had had some question about 
the “Deputy Secretary” solution, but that the idea of putting the Chief 
of Staff in the JCS and having service operations performed by the suc­
cessor to the Vice Chief of Staff gave some desirability to the use of the 
“Deputy Secretary” title. He said that there is substantial reason why 
the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff should have some control over 
their respective services.
Mr. Coolidge said that there is probably a lot to be gained through 
straightening out the organization within the respective services but 
the present group feels that they should not try to get into this. The 
President indicated general agreement with this view.
The President advised Mr. McElroy and Mr. Coolidge to be very 
careful on the research arrangement. Mr. Coolidge said they are 
thinking of having all research funds appropriated to the Secretary of 
Defense. Mr. McElroy added that they may decide to recommend hav­
ing all funds appropriated to the Secretary of Defense.
Mr. Coolidge reported that the group agreed the Chairman of the 
JCS should be in charge of the assignment of work to the Joint Staff. 
The President spoke in favor of making the staff an integrated staff. Mr. 
Coolidge said that, at least for the operations section, this would be done. 
The President also said that he thought the lower level committees in the
