Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1978 405 84. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, May 31, 1978 SUBJECT Reflections at Midweek: The US and the USSR I believe this has been an important and potentially very constructive week. It has involved the conjunction of four important developments: 1. NATO countries displayed more unity on vital matters than expected, and I have not the slightest doubt that they also gained a great deal of personal confidence in your leadership. In fact, I think the Summit has been an important personal success for you;2 2. For the first time, the Soviets and the Cubans are beginning to take our concerns about their African policies seriously. Till now, they have dismissed them; they are now beginning to show signs of genuine concern; 3. Similarly for the first time, the Chinese are beginning to take us seriously, and this could pay dividends in the longer run. In part, this is due to my visit; more importantly, to your public statements and posture; 4. The public is beginning to perceive this Administration as realistically prepared to face the realities of global power. I consider Tuesday’s editorial in The Washington Post to be particularly significant,3 as was Meg Greenfield’s column in Newsweek. I believe you will be hearing significant echoes of Congressional support in the days to come, and this will not be without its domestic political effects. It is essential that these benefits not be dissipated but be exploited towards positive ends. Let me specifically suggest the following: 1. That you take advantage of an early opportunity to stress that detente has to be reciprocal and comprehensive. The issue is not detente itself, but the Soviet violation of the code of detente. This lesson has to be driven home in a responsible and persistent way. 2. It is essential that we do not convey the impression of uncertainty or anxiety. Premature whispers to the Russians about our desire 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 79, Brzezinski Chron—To/From President: 5–6/78. Secret. The President initialed the top right-hand corner of the memorandum. 2 See Document 83. 3 “A Long-Haul Foreign Policy,” The Washington Post, May 30, 1978, p. A–16.
