January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1341 Camp David process, the Secretary continued, is to concentrate on the negotiations and discourage those who seek to undermine them through unhelpful Security Council resolutions or through unilateral actions, which pose a great danger to the Camp David process. The Secretary said that when he spoke of unilateral actions he was not seeking to deny Israel’s sovereign rights. Israel has the sovereign right to go to war or to accommodate its interests to those of other nations. The Secretary said he did not contest the right of any country to determine where its capital should be. The problem, however, is that the Jerusalem issue must be resolved through negotiations. Speaking then in a more general vein, the Secretary commented that he realized that all these are hard questions. He wanted to make clear that our decision to abstain had not been an easy one. We had taken all of the elements into consideration. It is in the United States’ national interest to see the Camp David process succeed. We have invested much time and energy in Camp David, but we have other interests as well and we have to protect them. The Secretary said he could understand that Jerusalem is an emotional issue in Israel and it is very difficult to vote against any law on it. He wanted to make clear, however, that in his view the Cohen bill did not add anything to Israel’s bargaining position in the negotiations— not one iota. The only effect of the bill had been to cause the Camp David talks to be suspended. In this regard the Secretary commented that he could not recall when his first class in physics had been, but he remembered clearly learning the law that for every action there is an equal reaction. This is what has occurred. The Secretary emphasized that the position he took at the Security Council was not hostile to Israel. In fact, his remarks had been supportive of Israel, and they were condemned by many Arab countries. The Secretary asked Evron to tell the Prime Minister that there was nothing personal in the position we had taken at the UN. He had had to give the President his best judgment, and abstention had been his recommendation. He did believe, however, that his remarks about the unhelpful nature of the repeated Security Council resolutions had had an impact on his listeners in the Security Council. The Secretary said that as long as people think that by introducing UN resolutions that can interrupt the Camp David process and provoke Israel into steps that will further disrupt it, they will continue to do so. The objective of Israel and the United States must be to keep the negotiations going and maintain their credibility. The Secretary added that his only doubt about going to the Security Council was that his arguments in favor of Camp David might not seem credible in view of the fact that the talks were suspended. Ambassador Evron said there should be no doubt in anybody’s mind about Israel’s dedication to the continuation of the Camp David
