84
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Council of Experts with his own radical Islamic followers, headed by
Beheshti, and directed them to rewrite the original draft according to
his own vision of an Islamic Republic. To support this effort, he used
the crisis with the Kurds to proclaim himself commander in chief of
the armed forces, to shut down press opposition and criticism, and to
ban independent political organization.
This initial coup successfully rallied the people around his own
leadership and threw the incipient opposition off balance. The show
of force was sufficient to convince Iranians inside and outside the
country that it was futile to oppose Khomeini, and it solidified fickle
Iranian political opinion behind him as the apparent winner. The Coun-
cil of Experts proceeded to redraft the constitution systematically, plac-
ing the clergy at the center of power and creating a special role for
Khomeini personally as a sort of President for Life. Once this was well
underway, Khomeini’s interest in the Kurdish conflict waned. Recently
he has shown willingness to negotiate an accommodation providing
for considerable cultural autonomy.
Bazargan and his cohorts in the “government” opposed the super-
Islamic constitution, and they began to press more and more openly
for a more democratic model. Shortly before Bazargan, Yazdi and
Chamran left for Algiers,2 they presented a petition to Khomeini asking
that the Council of Experts be disbanded on the grounds that they had
exceeded their mandate. Khomeini refused. This may have been the
final straw. In addition, Khomeini was probably aware that the Bazar-
gan faction had begun [less than 1 line not declassified] establishing the
potential for eventual opposition to his personal rule.
The arrival of the Shah in New York and the absence of Bazargan
et al. in Algiers provided the opportunity for the second coup. The
focus of propaganda attacks shifted from the Kurds to the United
States, and Bazargan suddenly came under attack for his meeting with
you. The attack on the embassy was carefully organized. Not only did
the attackers come prepared with detailed information and equipment
(gas masks and acetylene torches), but the coincidence of the attack
with a massive (diversionary) demonstration at Tehran University and
the absence of all responsible government officials insured that police
protection would be unavailable during the critical first hours.
The incident provided the opportunity to remove the Bazargan
government and replace it with the Revolutionary Council. It also
solidified support from the students who were an unpredictable ele-
ment in the anticipated debate on the constitution. Thus, Khomeini
further consolidated his personal control of effective power and elimi-
2 They met with Brzezinski in Algiers on November 1. See footnote 2, Document 4.
