436 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI sured even if the location of a covert test were known within ten meters. For these reasons, the interagency study concluded that the value of an OSI provision in a CTB was largely political. Any state rejecting a demonstrably reasonable OSI request would create the impression internationally that it had something to hide and would give another state grounds for withdrawal. This would be the case whether the rejection was prohibited under the terms of the treaty (i.e., mandatory approach) or legally permitted (i.e., voluntary approach). Practical/Legal Problems of Mandatory OSIs. Even under a nominally “mandatory” system, neither we nor the Soviets could tolerate OSIs at sensitive locations, such as missile sites. The attempt to work out criteria for exempted locations would be very difficult, and any criteria that the Soviets could support—given their broad definition of sensitive facilities—might well be so general as to raise domestic concerns about OSI “sanctuaries” in the USSR. In addition to the question of national security exemptions, serious legal problems would arise in seeking to grant the USSR mandatory inspection rights on privatelyheld territory in the U.S. Given constitutional and statutory protections of U.S. citizens and their property, the U.S. Government’s ability to accede to a Soviet OSI request could well depend, in a number of circumstances, on judicial determinations. Both of these legal dilemmas would be minimized under a voluntary OSI system. In the case of a sensitive area, an OSI request could either be turned down for valid national security reasons or the area to be inspected could be altered through negotiations to exclude the sensitive facility. In the case of a privately-held area, the U.S. Government either could turn down the request on the basis of the landowner’s and judge’s objections or could negotiate with the Soviets and the landowner to restrict the scope of the OSI visit to a mutually acceptable level. Domestic Considerations. If we were to propose mandatory OSIs, it is only realistic to assume we would have to fall back at a later stage in order to reach an agreement. When our “concession” became public, as it certainly would, it would be characterized by critics as a major U.S. retreat and could even affect prospects for ratification. It seems far preferable, in my view, to make a determination now, based on the limited technical utility of OSIs, that a mandatory OSI provision would contribute little, if anything, to adequate verification of a CTB and that therefore there is no good reason to seek such a provision. Critics of a CTB will no doubt try to make an issue of verifiability. However, I believe that the verification measures that are likely to be achievable—including authenticated data from seismic stations in the Soviet Union, challenge OSIs, as well as enhanced national technical
