436
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
sured even if the location of a covert test were known within ten
meters.
For these reasons, the interagency study concluded that the value
of an OSI provision in a CTB was largely political. Any state rejecting a
demonstrably reasonable OSI request would create the impression in-
ternationally that it had something to hide and would give another
state grounds for withdrawal. This would be the case whether the rejec-
tion was prohibited under the terms of the treaty (i.e., mandatory ap-
proach) or legally permitted (i.e., voluntary approach).
Practical/Legal Problems of Mandatory OSIs. Even under a nominally
“mandatory” system, neither we nor the Soviets could tolerate OSIs at
sensitive locations, such as missile sites. The attempt to work out cri-
teria for exempted locations would be very difficult, and any criteria
that the Soviets could support—given their broad definition of sensi-
tive facilities—might well be so general as to raise domestic concerns
about OSI “sanctuaries” in the USSR. In addition to the question of
national security exemptions, serious legal problems would arise in
seeking to grant the USSR mandatory inspection rights on privately-
held territory in the U.S. Given constitutional and statutory protections
of U.S. citizens and their property, the U.S. Government’s ability to ac-
cede to a Soviet OSI request could well depend, in a number of circum-
stances, on judicial determinations.
Both of these legal dilemmas would be minimized under a volun-
tary OSI system. In the case of a sensitive area, an OSI request could ei-
ther be turned down for valid national security reasons or the area to be
inspected could be altered through negotiations to exclude the sensi-
tive facility. In the case of a privately-held area, the U.S. Government ei-
ther could turn down the request on the basis of the landowner’s and
judge’s objections or could negotiate with the Soviets and the land-
owner to restrict the scope of the OSI visit to a mutually acceptable
level.
Domestic Considerations. If we were to propose mandatory OSIs, it
is only realistic to assume we would have to fall back at a later stage in
order to reach an agreement. When our “concession” became public, as
it certainly would, it would be characterized by critics as a major U.S.
retreat and could even affect prospects for ratification. It seems far pref-
erable, in my view, to make a determination now, based on the limited
technical utility of OSIs, that a mandatory OSI provision would con-
tribute little, if anything, to adequate verification of a CTB and that
therefore there is no good reason to seek such a provision.
Critics of a CTB will no doubt try to make an issue of verifiability.
However, I believe that the verification measures that are likely to be
achievable—including authenticated data from seismic stations in the
Soviet Union, challenge OSIs, as well as enhanced national technical
