464
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Begin said he would try, noting that he had strong message from
the Cabinet to the contrary. He then asked if the idea was that President
Carter would send this letter to him and Sadat.
The Secretary said the suggestion had been made that it would be
better for President Carter to write the letter if this would be easier than
a joint letter or an exchange of notes. The President was prepared to do
this if it would help the parties, but he preferred an exchange of letters
between them. Begin said he agreed with President Carter. He asked
what is the rationale for a third country to write about the views of two
other countries. The Secretary said the idea would be to record views
we had heard from those countries, if this would help. Barak interjected
that this had been the Israeli Delegation’s idea. Begin reiterated his
question: why should the President of the United States write his views
about elections in a third country? The Secretary recalled that at Camp
David it had sometimes been easier and moved things forward when
the President wrote on behalf of the other two. Begin said there was a
difference. At Camp David they had dealt with specific issues—e.g., Je-
rusalem, Palestinian people or Palestinian Arabs of Judea and Samaria.
Those were concrete problems different from the present issue.
Begin said he had heard the first draft8 of the letter included a
clause saying the treaty would be carried out independently of the
West Bank/Gaza negotiations, but this had been deleted. The Secretary
responded that this point was already in the treaty. Begin said that the
“noting” paragraph in the preamble was already in the Camp David
Framework but had not been deleted; therefore why delete the “inde-
pendently” phrase. The Secretary replied that this was President
Carter’s letter, and he preferred simpler language. But the parties must
accept it, Begin said. The Secretary replied that he agreed it was up to
the parties. Begin commented that he understood that Israel should
change things when Egypt demanded it. The Secretary responded that
the language deleted from the letter had never been seen by the Egyp-
tians. Begin responded that he had never said that; he had made a gen-
eral comment that, when Egypt demands something be taken out, it is
taken out.
8 See footnote 2, Document 83.
