Chapter 5, May–June 1990  727
— For better or worse, almost all of the statement is agreed. There 
are only three brackets, and no more than two of them are of any 
consequence.
— One of the issues that is not bracketed concerns whether the 
object of START II is “stability” or “reductions.” Our draft made clear 
that the right answer is “stability.” Rick claims the Soviets insist that 
reductions lead to increased stability. He therefore compromised 
by resorting to the phrase “stabilizing reductions.” You will need to 
decide whether that is good enough as well as whether you can live 
with the statement that the two sides will “seek to reduce their strategic 
offensive arms in a way consistent with enhancing strategic stability.” 
I personally don’t like, but don’t feel compelled to make a federal case 
out of it.
— The Soviets bracketed the sentence in our draft that calls for “a 
ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs, looking to the elimination of all land-­
based MIRVed ICBMs [and, Rick added], especially heavy ICBMs].” 
Rick thinks we can get the Soviets ultimately to accept our deMIRVing 
sentence in exchange for dropping our SDI reference to a “cooperative 
transition.” I would be willing to make that trade, but Cheney, among 
others, may not be.
— The Soviets bracketed our call for a “cooperative transition” to 
the proper balance between offensive and defensive arms. I am sur-
prised that the Soviets have accepted as many of our SDI codewords 
as they have, and believe that we have enough such hooks in the state-
ment without the “cooperative transition” phrase. I know, however, 
that the strong SDI supporters place great weight on the “cooperative 
transition” reference and will use its presence or absence as one more 
gauge of this Administration’s commitment to SDI. A possible alterna-
tive to deleting “cooperative transition” is to accept Soviet buzz words 
including an explicit incorporation of ASAT arms control into these fol-
low-­on negotiations.
— There are a few troubling references to “ABM and Space” instead 
of “Defense and Space” sprinkled through the text. This could be seen 
by some as an implicit relinking of START and the ABM Treaty. If others 
see the same pitfall, then this may be something we will need to fix.
More on all this tomorrow.3
Arnie
3 No minutes were found.
