392 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 3. Armao began by complaining that Ambler Moss’ cable reporting Armao’s recent meeting with Moss,2 had been leaked, and had led to unfortunate press stories about the Shah’s dissatisfaction with conditions in Panama. Armao claimed that an ABC representative, who was in Panama in connection with the David Frost interview of the Shah,3 told him that the cable had leaked to ABC’s bureau in Washington. Armao said the Shah was very upset by the news stories that resulted from this alleged leak. Armao requested that our meeting today be kept completely confidential. 4. Lloyd responded that he doubted very much that the cable had been leaked and that of course our meeting today would be kept confidential. 5. Armao asserted that the conditions under which the Shah and his party were living in are generally unsatisfactory. He said all of their phone calls are listened to by Panamanian security personnel. (The phone system the U.S. Government had helped install is still in place, Armao said, but it is a VHF radio phone and therefore is not secure). Further, Armao complained that the bills that have been presented to him by the Panamanian security personnel are excessively high and that when he complained about them, the security personnel have, in general, rudely rejected his questions and requests. He asserted the security personnel, from the lowest to the highest levels, have been “nasty” to him and the other Americans in the Shah’s party. He conceded that the Shah and his wife have been treated extremely cordially in all respects by all of the involved Panamanians. 6. Armao seemed particularly upset that the Panamanians had recently prevailed upon the Shah to travel to Panama City at 10:00 pm at night for the purpose of staying overnight at the Panama Hilton before looking at houses around Panama City the next day. Armao claimed he had insisted on accompanying the Shah but that his request had been rejected. He conceded that the Shah ultimately decided that he would go alone. 7. Armao claimed that Col. Noriega, the head of the Intelligence Service in Panama, had complained to the Shah about Armao and his two assistants. They were agents of the State Department, were disloyal, were security risks, and ought to be asked to leave. Armao asserted that Noriega has been trying to drive a wedge probably because he 2 See footnote 7, Document 139. 3 Portions of Frost’s interview with the Shah in Panama aired January 17. The Shah attributed his ouster from power to two U.S. oil companies, to an international conspiracy to increase oil prices, and to personal betrayal and intrigue by close friends and Huyser. He also rejected allegations his regime engaged in torture. (Dusko Doder, “Shah Calls Ouster Part of a Scheme To Lift Oil Prices,”Washington Post, January 18, 1980, p. A1)
