her debt and intends to pay. While the United States does not wish to be oppressive, we recognize no grounds in law or equity, (there can of course be no question of our legal position), why the debt should be reduced or cancelled. The attitude of the American Government has been made clear again and again in official pronouncements. These statements had been made by the President himself. This Government had always opposed the cancellation or an international conference which would bring our debt into discussion. An analysis of the manner in which the debt was incurred would show that our position was entirely equitable. After our army went to Europe there were vast purchases in France and large obligations incurred by our Government to France which were set off against the indebtedness owed by France to us. Besides enormous sums lent France during the war an additional billion dollars was lent her after the Armistice, exclusive of the $400,000,000 for purchase of surplus army supplies after the war. It would be a very serious mistake not to recognize our debt and provide for its discharge as international credit should be maintained. The United States would not consent to any arrangement for the pooling of our debt. This Government regards the debt question as a matter for Congress, and a Commission was formed for funding the debts owed to the United States.” [Paraphrase.] 4) While this Government has not received an official communication of the Clémentel statement, it has nevertheless been widely published and cannot, therefore, be ignored. In order to make clear our position and to remove any misunderstanding in regard to a proposal for partial or entire cancellation of the debt, you will please find an early occasion to take up the matter informally with the Premier and the Minister of Finance in the light of the foregoing. They should understand that public opinion in this country reacts promptly and definitely to statements such as those of M. Clémentel which raise a question as to the French Government’s intention to pay its debt or as to the equity of such payment, and the United States Government must expect that the French Government will take an early occasion to give evidence of its intention to pay and make proper provision for refunding of its debt. Results of your conversations should be cabled and please advise also as to desirability of making formal written communication of our views. [End paraphrase.] HUGHES 21 Inventaire de la Situation Financière de la France au Début de la Treizième Législature, présenté par M. Clémentel, Ministre des Finances (Paris, Imprimerie
