Chapter 5, May–June 1990  747
Bartholomew: I understand this is your position. The targets we 
are talking about—­a ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs, elimination of all 
land-­based MIRVs, the specific problem of heavy ICBMs—­a strong case 
can be made that these are the core of the problem of stability. That is 
the place to begin.
MIRV mobiles can be captured now. We have not deployed any, 
you haven’t deployed that many. We can catch relatively early a certain 
capability. There are advantagee in catching at that point.
I am not going to go through the arguments about the rationale 
for focussing on fixed MIRVed land-­based ICBMs. That stands out in 
any analysis. We have crafted the language to focus the attention of the 
negotiations. It also tells outside audiences how we intend to concretely 
advance the goals of stability. “Reducing concentration of warheads” 
does not give guidance and direction to the negotiations, nor does it 
inform the outside world, as our proposal does. We have a strong inter-
est in a formula that captures that objective. The strength of our view on 
this should not come as a surprize, these ideas were introduced at the 
highest levels by the President.
Karpov: We should not prescribe the future negotiations. We can 
indicate the items to be discussed, but not the decisions. That would be 
counterproductive.
Bartholomew: We are not making all the decisions, we are pointing 
in a certain direction—­to the stable situation we seek.
Karpov: We doubt elimination of mobiles stabilizes the situation. 
Mobility guarantees survivability, which contributes to stability.
Bartholomew: We are interested in getting at MIRVs.
Karpov: Why not silo based?
Bartholomew: We should begin with both.
Karpov: Silo-­based ICBMs, SLBMs, cruise missile equipped bomb-
ers. We should enumerate them all.
Barthholomew: There is no debate about the negative effect on 
stability of fixed, land-­based MIRVed ICBMs, particularly the SS-18s. 
Fixed land-­based MIRVed ICBMs are in a special category. Regarding 
mobile MIRVs, there are two distinct characteristics that promote the 
objective—­the MIRVs and the state of the program.
Karpov: Our experts have great concerns about Trident II, which 
compares with MX. And MX compares with any first strike missile. 
Why ignore Trident II? Why not start with them?
Bartholomew: There is no question about land-­based fixed MIRVed 
ICBMs. You make a comparison between mobile ICBMs and SLBMs. 
But SSBNs are the most survivable systems, and land-­based mobile 
MIRVs are capturable because of the early state of the program.
Karpov: Why not Trident II? It is mobile. I can now say these items 
are a matter for negotiation. We shoudn’t prescribe solutions.
