1978 495 The likely reactions by Moscow, Peking, and Tokyo, as well as those of states friendly to us in the Middle East and Persian Gulf, would be a perception that the trend in the balance between ourselves and the Soviet Union, already of concern, now could be depended upon certainly to worsen. They would further question U.S. resolve—­with obvious consequences for our foreign policy and our position in the world. III. Domestic Considerations The international political implications of not following through on the 3% pledge thus are obvious and dramatic. The domestic political implications may not be as immediately visible, but they probably would be significant. One reason for the success you have had in meeting criticism of the B–1 decision, the nuclear carrier veto, the Korean ground forces withdrawal, and other similar actions has been the ability to counter charges that these actions were evidence that this Administration is soft on defense. You and I have been able to counter these charges by stating consistently that you were committed to real growth in the defense budget after years of neglect. Critics were left to argue about the choices among individual programs, but not about the needed overall level of defense spending. If you now decide not to approve 3% real growth for FY 1980, these critics—­both in and out of Congress—­would have their positions considerably strengthened. Particularly distressed would be those members of Congress (of both parties) who have supported our most controversial program decisions on the basis of the commitment to overall real growth. One of the more immediate results of this would be to make it more difficult to obtain Congressional and public support for a SALT agreement with the Soviet Union. It would give ammunition to the opponents on an issue whose very complexity forces many of the public to form an opinion on it simply according to their general confidence in the judgment and commitment reflected in our national security policy. I believe it would also seriously complicate the ability of the JCS—­whose attitudes also are influenced by their perception of the quality of the commitment of defense, as evidence in tangible ways—­to support such agreements. Though (with one or two possible exceptions) they would in my judgment not declare against a SALT agreement, the quality of the support they would give under Congressional questioning would be seriously eroded. And even one defection among the Chiefs would greatly aid opponents. Every recent poll I have seen shows broad, and growing, public support for a real increase in the United States defense effort. There has been wide editorial support, lately even from commentators not usually friendly to defense. The election results earlier this month, although somewhat mixed, also I believe in general reflect this support. Your public statements have consistently recognized defense needs, avoiding adverse effects from
