September 18–December 16, 1978 441 In either of the above options, we would be very restrained in dealing with Israeli aid requests at present. In essence, we would not go much beyond a minimal commitment on the airfields. In the second scenario, we would begin talks immediately with Dayan on the draft agenda idea. He will almost certainly reject the notion and he will have no authority to agree in any case. Nonetheless, we could then go to Sadat and explain that we have begun talks on the agenda, that we support the idea of a target date for elections, and that with these assurances we expect Sadat to accept the treaty text as it now stands. Without saying so explicitly, we would be rejecting the idea of getting the Israelis to committing themselves to specific unilateral gestures according to a fixed timetable and we would ignore his suggestion that the practical implementation of any agreement should begin first in Gaza. In brief, we would be picking up one of Sadat’s demands that fits closely with what most of us feel is already implicit in Camp David— namely, an agenda for the next round of negotiations—and we would press the Israelis to accept a target date for the holding of elections (subject to agreement having been reached by that time). Politically this should be defensible as consistent with Camp David. It could delay the talks, but it also might give Sadat enough to justify accepting the Treaty as it now stands. In any case, this is the recommended strategy which will go to the Secretary at noon today. If you have any reactions, I will try to get them into the final memo. 129. Memorandum From Ambassador-at-Large Alfred L. Atherton, Jr. to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, November 9, 1978 MR. SECRETARY: Boutros Ghali called tonight to report on his and Ghorbal’s threehour meeting2 with Dayan, Weizman and Rubenstein. I record below in some detail what he reported because it is clearly relevant to your 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Subject File, Box 15, Egypt-Israel Negotiations: 11/6–13/78. Secret; Nodis. 2 In his memoir of the treaty negotiations, Boutros Ghali recalled that his November 9 meeting with the Israelis “was perhaps the most important work session on negotiations so far.” (Boutros Ghali, Egypt’s Road to Jerusalem, p. 173)
