1374 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX and by free negotiations with the three nations. We should continue with these efforts. He will wait for the President to decide on a summit. If the President will let him know what he decides, he will accept it. The President said that, in the meantime, we should not discuss it publicly. He does not want it thought that we are taking a unilateral decision. He will talk with Sadat and Reagan. It is likely there will not be a summit, but maybe there could be one, if it is appropriate. The Prime Minister agreed. The President said he wants to find out what Reagan thinks of an early meeting with the Prime Minister and Sadat (post-Inauguration). If he (Reagan) reacts positively, this would be the best alternative. He (the President) will explore this quietly. Secretary Muskie said that he wanted to express his own appreciation for the opportunity to be involved, for a few months, with efforts to keep Camp David going, under difficult circumstances. He appreciates all the cooperation he has received. He compliments both leaders on their historical achievement, and expressed his thanks to both of them—and especially to the Prime Minister—for their understanding. The Prime Minister said thank you. Dr. Brzezinski said that he will soon be a private citizen, and hopes to visit Israel, and play a decisive game of chess with the Prime Minister! The President said he understood that Dr. Brzezinski and the Prime Minister are still tied! The Prime Minister said that Dr. Brzezinski could come to Israel to play chess with him. But why only one decisive game? (laughter) At Camp David, the score was two-to-two, and was inconclusive. They were interesting games; but he (the Prime Minister) needs more training! (laughter) The games that Dr. Brzezinski and he had played were the first he had played since he was arrested by the Russian Secret Service in 1940. It had been 38 years since he had played chess. Dr. Brzezinski said that the Prime Minister had said this at the beginning of their first chess game at Camp David, and he (Dr. Brzezinski) had been suitably unnerved by the historic significance of it. But at the end, Mrs. Begin had said to him (Dr. Brzezinski) that it was wonderful that they were playing, because Menachem loves to play chess! The Prime Minister said that that is right, but he hadn’t! It had been a hobby when he was a boy. You don’t forget how to play. But he needs training—a fact demonstrated because Dr. Brzezinski had beaten him twice! (laughter). Dr. Brzezinski does play very well. Ambassador Linowitz said that he wanted to join in expressing personal gratitude for the chance to serve the President on these issues.
