868
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Vance: Would you include just the threshold countries or just those
with reactors?
Andreotti: Two comments. First, I am convinced of the need for
non-proliferation. I saw this as urgent when we signed the NPT. We
signed it with conviction. Article IV of the NPT gives the assurance that
we will use nuclear technology for peaceful purposes.4 I agree that we
should have two months to consider the issue. But what is in Article IV
should remain valid in its entirety. The Conference should restate the
importance of Article IV. It should restate that enriched uranium
should be used for reactors and for industrial development and scien-
tific research. Second, in the last few days we have read that French sci-
entists have developed a process without the risks of use of uranium
for military purposes. I would like President Giscard to comment.
Giscard: For my part France is aware of the dangers of nuclear pro-
liferation. We believe in the need to share responsibility and address
this problem. I agree with President Carter and Prime Minister Tru-
deau on this. We have not signed the NPT for a variety of reasons.
Where we depart from the US is that we consider nuclear energy
unavoidable. There will be reduced energy causing slower industriali-
zation unless we have nuclear sources, particularly in view of the
coming oil shortage. It is a valid source of energy for countries without
military technology. We were entitled to provide ourselves with nu-
clear energy.
Certain factors are essential in operating plants. Enrichment is now
done primarily by the US and 20% by Britain, Germany, France and
Italy. At present, enrichment is a probable factor in proliferation. But
the construction of international plants is difficult and expensive and
small countries cannot do it. Reprocessing involves creation of pluto-
nium from nuclear fuel elements after their use. We feel that it is not re-
alistic to think of medium-size countries storing non-processed nuclear
waste. Therefore, the waste should be destroyed. But this is difficult in
that plutonium is a byproduct of reprocessing. It is impossible for
medium-size countries to have nuclear industry without reprocessing.
With respect to the breeder, it is possible that between 1985 and
1990 there will be a shortage of natural uranium. The producers will be
the US, Canada, Australia and France. France will be knocking on the
door of the uranium producers monopoly. But we will have to ensure
that maximum benefits are derived from uranium. The breeder gives
you 50 times more electricity from the same amount of uranium. It is
4 Article IV of the Non-Proliferation Treaty stipulates that “Nothing in this Treaty
shall be interpreted as affecting the inalienable right of all the Parties of the Treaty to de-
velop research, production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without dis-
crimination.” (Documents on Disarmament, 1968, pp. 461–465)
