626 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II cipient country to restructure a project so that it meets BHN. The fact that the U.S. intended to oppose a loan project has also been responsible for loans being delayed or indefinitely deferred. In situations where the U.S. has opposed MDB loans on the basis of human rights considerations, we have been joined by one or more donors in 10 IDB votes involving four countries (Argentina, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay), and in 2 IBRD votes involving Chile. Note: The United States continues to consult widely with other governments to explain in detail our views on human rights and basic human needs and our position that the MDBs are appropriate and effective instruments for furthering these objectives. Achieving an international consensus on human rights will, however, be a long and difficult process. The Issue of an MDB Charter Amendment in Human Rights In 1978, Congressman C.W. Bill Young (Fla.) proposed an amendment to the FY 1979 Foreign Assistance Appropriations (Sec. 611 of Public Law 95–481) instructing the U.S. Governor to propose and seek adoption of an amendment to the charters of the multilateral development banks, which would specifically provide that human rights should be taken into account in loan decisions. In informal discussions with other members we have sought support for the adoption of such an amendment. The reactions of other countries to our initiative were negative. Adoption of amendments to the charters of the MDB’s requires from 75–85% of the votes. Because of the high percentage of affirmative votes required, we believe that it unlikely such an amendment would attract sufficient support for passage. Moreover, other countries pointed out that if such an amendment were defeated, it would undermine our argument that the MDB charters already allow consideration of human rights performance in bank discussions. The recently passed Authorization Bill for the regional banks4 also directs the U.S. Governor of the banks to consult with the other governors concerning the adoption of an amendment to the articles of agreement to establish human rights standards for assistance. 4 Presumable reference to H.R. 3829, which Representative Henry Gonzales (D–Texas) introduced in the House on May 1, 1979. The bill passed the House on March 6, 1980; however, the passage was vacated and S. 662, introduced in the Senate by Church on March 14, 1979, was passed in lieu. The President signed P.L. 96–259 (94 Stat. 429–434) into law on June 3, 1980.
