1316  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
should continue and that you should know that he approves the way in 
which you have conducted the talks.
Undoubtedly the talks continue to cause us some embarrassment, 
and lead to some misunderstanding of our posture vis-a-vis Communist 
China, especially in the Far East. Also the continuance of the talks 
makes it difficult for us to manifest the full extent of our dissatisfac­
tion at Chinese Communist violation of the Agreed Announcement. On 
the other hand, we still have the Chinese Communists tied up in talks 
which may make it more difficult for them to start any hostilities in the 
Taiwan area. If they should initiate any such action while conversations 
are going on, the risk they would run of general world condemnation 
and possible multilateral sanctions against them would be appreciably 
increased. While the Chinese Communists obviously estimate at this 
stage that their interests are best served by continuing the talks, they 
are probably not happy over the negotiating situation in which they 
find themselves and would be delighted if we broke off the talks. An 
onus would attach to the side which took the initiative to break off the 
talks, and this the Chinese Communists want to avoid. We have them 
in a situation where they are on the defensive on both of the principal 
points at issue, and unable to improve their negotiating position. As 
one officer put it, if we broke off the talks now we would in a sense be 
letting the Chinese Communists off the hook and would be giving up 
just at a time when we for once are beating them at their own game by 
out-sitting and out-talking them. As Mr. Phleger put it, “Alex is doing 
fine, and should carry on along the lines that he has already developed 
so well”. You don’t need to worry about repetition, or lack of new top­
ics. It may be a dreary, boring business but it is serving a purpose which 
is more apparent here than it can be in the front line. The talks undoubt­
edly are reducing the pressures from European quarters for other U.S. 
contacts with the Chinese Communists and they make it much easier 
to refute the arguments advanced for a Foreign Minister level meeting.
2. We were quite interested in the record of the last meeting. Wang’s 
argumentation was of some significance, even though there was noth­
ing new in it. It was all right to send the full report by pouch. It arrived 
in four days.
3. We were somewhat taken aback at the New York Times despatch 
of January 19 from Geneva quoting you as feeling that your negotiating 
position had been seriously weakened by the visits of the three news­
men to Communist China. While your negotiating position certainly 
was not helped by the visits, we do not see that it was helped by the 
public attribution of this feeling to you either.
4. We are sending you herewith a full report of O’Neill’s inter­
view with Huang Hua on December 28, 1956. In this conversation, 
Huang Hua explicitly denies that the Agreed Announcement applies
