German Democratic Republic the smooth political succession from an aging and increasingly nationalistic Ulbricht to Erich Honecker. Honecker, while working within a leadership group virtually identical to that over which Ulbricht had presided, introduced some notable changes of emphasis. Honecker’s less strident, more down-to-earth, and increasingly consumer-oriented approach proved to be reassuring to both his domestic and his foreign audiences. While many of his changes were more of style than of substance, a further lowering of tensions was evident. After several years of Honecker’s leadership, US observers noted further improvement in the GDR’s domestic stability—most East Germans had come to terms with the Communist regime and accepted the reality of Communist rule. Political analysts saw the trend of recent years toward accommodation between the ruled and the rulers as having given the regime increased confidence in its legitimacy and as having strengthened the faction in the party which favored securing the cooperation of the people by tactics of persuasion and reward instead of relying on the discredited policies of coercion and arbitrary rule. New Challenges Arise In the mid-1970s, however, signs of new strains in the East German body politic began to accumulate. While the results of West Germany’s Ostpolitik, superpower detente, and the series of international agreements that followed in their wake permitted the GDR to achieve its long-sought goal of diplomatic recognition by the Western powers, the ferment that they caused within East Germany turned out to be substantial. The developments that appear to have had the strongest domestic impact included: —the GDR’s heavily publicized adherence to the Helsinki Final Act and to other international human rights covenants; —the vast increase in West German travel to the GDR and in the audience for FRG television broadcasts in East Germany following the conclusion of the Basic Treaty between the two German states in 1973; and —the ideological challenge to orthodoxy posed by the Eurocommunist parties. By the summer of 1976 the symptoms of the unrest provoked by these events and trends were unmistakable: —Requests by East Germans to emigrate to the FRG, many explicitly citing the Helsinki Final Act, reached more than 100,000. —Critical intellectuals, such as physicist Robert Havemann and songwriter Wolf Biermann, became more outspoken and received greater attention in Western, including Eurocommunist, media. —Church-state relations underwent their sharpest decline since the 1950s after the suicide of an East German clergyman. The political tensions raised by these developments did not constitute an immediate threat to the GDR’s internal stability. Even before
