have no assurance that any modifications would be acceptable to France. He talked quite awhile on this subject and emphasized the fact that Sir Austen was willing to sign the treaty in its present form. The Ambassador then said that the New York World had made a suggestion in which he thought there was considerable merit. Suppose, he said, some country should wish to lease a naval station near the United States and Egypt should wish to lease Alexandria to Italy. I replied that if we were going to undertake to meet every possible contingency which might arise in the world, we might as well abandon the treaty; that so far as the United States is concerned, we have no fear that any country is going to lease a naval station near the United States; that if it did, we would have the right to protect ourselves on the ground of self-defense. I added that Great Britain has the same right to protect whatever Dominions or interests it has which are national in their character just the same as it would have the right to protect the British Isles. He said that he thought that was so. I said that so far as Egypt is concerned, he knew that it was as unlikely that Egypt would grant its territory to any foreign country as it was that any of the South American countries would grant their territory and, on the other hand, no country could take any South American or Central American territory without going to war since no country in this hemisphere would grant it; that time, I pointed out, has passed. I said that the chance is so remote that it is not worth while trying specifically to guard against it in a treaty because if we should, Japan would want to protect its Manchurian, Korean and Chinese interests as everyone knows and France would want to do the same, and we did not know where it would end. I added that it would certainly destroy the efficacy of any treaty. I told the Ambassador that he would understand that the position of the New York World is dictated largely by politics. I said that so far as the United States is concerned, it is willing to take its chances about other countries leasing naval stations near the Panama Canal or near the United States. I certainly gave him to understand that I was not going to enter into any treaty covered over with all sorts of reservations and understandings and exchanges of notes that would be made a part of the treaty. I then brought up a question which the Ambassador had raised in one of our discussions recently in connection with the treaty as to whether the other
