394  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
3. While using it as a peg on which to hang his criticism of US 
policy, Wang’s presentation today shows a disposition to acquiesce in 
discussion around our renunciation of force proposal which we should 
try to explain.
4. His reply today was to be expected. Stripped of propaganda 
verbiage one of his theses appears to be that presence of US forces in 
Taiwan is in itself “threat of force.” He is taking an obviously extreme 
bargaining position in asking for withdrawal US forces from Taiwan 
and one of our problems will be to probe for their real position for as 
long as possible while at same time not running into a deadlock or in 
any way sacrificing our position on renunciation of force or scope these 
talks.
5. Parliamentary situation is such that he will be expecting fairly 
comprehensive statement from me at next meeting. Believe statement 
must include at least some refutation his charges on “American aggres­
sion against Taiwan.”
Gowen
287.	 Telegram 869 from Geneva1
Geneva, October 14, 1955, 4 p.m.
869. From Johnson.
1. During today’s Ambassadorial talks Chen Shih-­wu of NCNA 
talked with several correspondents, particularly agency men and about 
half British, individually or in groups. Gist his comments as reported to 
Garnish by participants follows:
2. Said Wang going to tell me today they cannot discuss renunci­
ation of use of force until these other questions settled: Seventh Fleet, 
blockade, Formosa, embargo. Said these are subjects for FonMins and 
their settlement would make question of renunciation of force timely.
3. According to another correspondent, Chen referred to Chou state­
ment that question has international and national aspects. Under former 
he mentioned UniStates interference, Seventh Fleet, blockade, embargo 
and UniStates military advisors on Formosa. Said must remove this 
interference. Under national aspect he mentioned liberation Taiwan by 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–1455. Official Use Only.
