1174  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
(b) If it should be decided to conduct military operations in 
Southeast Asia, communications planning will have to be revised to 
reflect operational requirements. The specific nature of such programs 
will depend upon the concept of operations, the magnitude of forces 
employed, and the location of controlling and supporting headquar­
ters. Communications for such purposes are not available in the exist­
ing system nor contemplated in scheduled improvements. Basically, 
communications would have to be expanded to include the provision 
of voice and data transmission between elements of the combat forces 
and high quality circuits capable of direct extension to command cen­
ters in the United States. Included would be measures for increasing 
the capacity and improving the reliability of the fixed strategic commu­
nications system, and for providing extensions from strategic networks 
into contiguous areas by the use of transportable tactical equipment.
(c) Over-­the-­Beach Supply Operations.
(1) Army
(a) These operations, which are an important part of the resupply 
capability of U.S. Army Forces, are periodically tested and improved 
through the conduct of realistic exercises, and the development and 
adjustment of doctrine based on lessons learned. One of the most 
recent exercises was conducted in total darkness with complete suc­
cess at Fort Story, Virginia, on 17, 18 and 19 October 1960. Another 
exercise (NODEX–25) was conducted on the coast of France 26–28 
October 1960.
(b) Present plans call for a partial shift from landing craft to 
amphibians as equipment becomes available. For example, four (4) 
platoons equipped with Barge, Amphibious Resupply Cargo (BARC), 
will be in operation in CONUS and the Far East (Okinawa) by the 
end of FY 61, an increase of two over present strength. Also, exist­
ing equipment in amphibious truck companies, consisting at pres­
ent of WW II DUKWs, will be placed in the future with the Lighter, 
Amphibious Resupply Cargo (LARC–­5) thus, greatly increasing the 
capability of these units.
(c) The present capability to support combat forces in Southeast 
Asia by over-­the-­beach resupply operations, if required, is deemed ade­
quate for the forces to be deployed to this area under existing limited 
war plans.
(2) Navy
(a) The Navy has, under continuous study and development, pro­
grams and projects to improve logistic support of landing forces in 
amphibious operations which include evaluation of various over-­the-­
beach supply support systems. Each system is analyzed with respect 
to inter-­relationship and combined productivity of packaging, mate­
rials handling and transportation procedures and techniques. These 
studies result in continued improvement in the hardware utilized and
