Options Identified 323 in finding a solution acceptable to Khomeini and the students. Reverend Coffin was critical of American policy and urged statements which would “transcend” the present stalemate and respond to the Iranian need for understanding of their grievances. Reverend Howard did not believe that any dramatic proposals by the U.S. would yield results. All three agreed that additional U.S. pressures through sanctions would only harden the Iranian position. I. The Hostages: The three clergymen believe they saw 43 hostages: Mr. Howard saw 21, Mr. Coffin 16 and Bishop Gumbleton 6. They were not allowed to take any notes and therefore have had to work on identification from memory and scanning of pictures. They found the hostages in good physical condition but some were showing obvious signs of stress. The two women were in especially good spirits and were very pleased to see each other after a month’s separation. Some remarks by various hostages led the clergy to believe that they were resisting or defying their captors in small ways. The presentation of the message read by Plotkin was obviously staged and two of the hostages took pains to tell Bishop Gumbleton so. One hostage, Joe Hall, came in rubbing his wrists and seemed almost disoriented, although his spirits picked up during the evening. Ode was described as “cranky” and complained about the lack of fruit, all of which Coffin interpreted as a sign of psychological health. One hostage noted that while they had been treated well they were subjected to “a lot of interrogation.” Coffin noted that captivity was particularly tough on the Marines who were supposed to be guards rather than guarded. Golacinski noted to one of the clergy that the hostages were being “treated like animals.” The clergy believed that the experience of the Christmas service was a tremendous lift for the hostages and the results were worth the manipulation which accompanied it. II. The Students: Coffin described the students as in complete control, intelligent, tough, with a religious conviction best described in terms of fervor and intensity, not charity. Coffin compared them to American students of the 60’s but felt they were more personally controlled and had a greater sense of purpose than their American counterparts. Coffin said he had argued that their holding of the hostages was in complete contradiction to their stated purpose of defeating Carter and would only result in his re-election. He found it impossible to put that kind of message across to them. They were totally absorbed with the Shah’s crimes and with their conviction that the U.S. could extradite him. Their organization was thorough, and they noted that even police were disarmed before they were allowed to come in the compound. The clergy described the difficulties they had in arranging services as they desired. They found the students absolutely rigid and unwilling to negotiate any changes in their pre-arranged plans, which they justi-
