Yugoslavia 967 he had ever seen—simple, tasteful and solemn, but not depressing. It well reflected President Tito’s life. (C) In this connection, President Carter remarked that he was pleased to accept the invitation to come to Yugoslavia even after Tito’s death and was gratified by the warm welcome he had received. President Tito’s own life had exemplified his commitment to freedom and independence, values which were deeply imbedded in the hearts of all the peoples of Yugoslavia. (C) Turning to his discussions at Venice, President Carter noted that the discussions had reflected a common commitment on the part of the countries represented at the meeting that they stood united in support of the independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yugoslavia. He wanted the Yugoslav leadership to know that the United States was Yugoslavia’s friend and that we stood ready to help in any way that the leadership might require. In this connection, he underscored the importance of the non-aligned status of Yugoslavia, noting that Yugoslavia had maintained a position of genuine non-alignment despite efforts by Cuba and others to distort the charter of the NAM. The United States considered the actions of President Tito at Havana to be a triumph for the NAM. (C) Turning again to the discussions at Venice, President Carter said that one of the most important topics discussed had been the economic problems created by the dramatic increase in the price of oil. All nations needed to face the challenge presented by this increase in the spirit of cooperation and mutual assistance. Unemployment and inflation had been created by the rapid increase in the price of oil. The United States was eager to help Yugoslavia alleviate these problems by pursuing credit through its private banks. Secretary Miller and Under Secretary Cooper were assisting in this effort. (C) The President noted in this connection that he was aware that David Rockefeller had recently been in Yugoslavia as a representative of the private banks. While the banks were independent of government control, the Administration was eager to work with Yugoslavia on economic matters, both now and in the future. He noted that the developed countries presently had a net deficit of $70 billion per year; the less developed countries had a net deficit of $50 billion per year. OPEC, on the other hand, had a surplus of $120 billion. This created problems both for the United States and for Yugoslavia, and underscored the importance of close consultations. (C) Turning to the question of the non-aligned movement, the President emphasized the need for strengthening the movement, particularly in the wake of the invasion of Afghanistan. This had been discussed at Venice. The common position of the countries represented there was that the Soviet troops had to be totally withdrawn from Afghanistan.
