January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1201
The President began by saying that so far the meetings had been
constructive.2 We had an enjoyable evening at the White House last
night,3 and he hopes that our Israeli guests enjoyed themselves. There
are several important issues to be resolved. Egypt has replied4 to our
message that it is all right if the intensive negotiations be in Egypt and
Israel. However, Egypt very much wants the establishment of a secu-
rity committee, as an integral part of the Camp David Accords. They
told us that General Ali will represent Egypt if and when the committee
is set up to carry out this provision of Camp David. We had alleviated
the problem of the Continuing Committee in a way gratifying to Egypt.
It is important under the Camp David Accords for it to function. For the
U.S., we need to discuss alternatives if the Israeli position on East Jeru-
salem Arabs is that they can not vote in any elections that are carried
out. If so, then we need Israeli suggestions for Egypt on alternatives to
elections. We see only two such alternatives: to establish a procedure
involving the mayors; or (less acceptable) to implement an agreement
in Gaza first. As Prime Minister Begin has pointed out, Sadat is likely to
insist on gaining agreement on both the West Bank and Gaza before im-
plementing it in Gaza first. These are his (the President’s) items for dis-
cussion in this group. He will also have a couple of items to discuss
with Prime Minister Begin privately.
Prime Minister Begin said he wanted to be clear in his mind. Did
Egypt agree on the venue for the intensive talks?
The President said yes. Khalil said he would devote full time to
them; but he made strongly the point on the need for the security com-
mittee. Also, he (Khalil) would like to keep the option open, near the
2 In an April 16 memorandum to Carter, Brzezinski commented that during the pre-
vious day’s meetings the President, “achieved more than our minimum objectives with
Begin, including a commitment to work towards May 26; continuous talks (though not
here); and a Continuing Committee that will have both negotiating and coordinating au-
thority. We can be on the Committee in fact, provided that [it] is not made to appear to be
a change to Camp David. And Egypt, Israel, and the U.S. can continue to work on unre-
solved issues in the current format until the Continuing Committee comes into being.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory
Board, Box 77, Visits: Box 10)
3 President and Mrs. Carter hosted a State Dinner in honor of Prime Minister and
Mrs. Begin at the White House from 7:32 p.m. to 11:13 p.m., April 15. (Carter Library,
President’s Daily Diary) During the dinner, both Carter and Begin delivered short
speeches to toast the occasion. The texts of these remarks are printed in Public Papers:
Carter, 1980–81, Book I, pp. 686–693.
4 Atherton met with Khalil on April 16 to discuss the proposal for continuous talks
to take place in Egypt and Israel. (Telegram 8395 from Cairo, April 16; Carter Library, Na-
tional Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Presidential Advisory Board, Box 77, Visits:
Box 10) On the meeting, Brzezinski reported to Carter in an April 16 memorandum that
Khalil felt that without the creation of security committee, the talks would have “no
value.” Brzezinski continued: “Khalil would also like for the negotiators to meet for a few
days in Washington near May 26—if enough progress had been made—to wrap up the
heads of agreement approach.” (Ibid.)
