1980  943
I set forth U.S. National Strategy in 1977 in Presidential Directive/
NSC–18. It remains our strategy, but in light of increased projection of 
Soviet power which threatens U.S. vital interests in the Persian Gulf 
region, it has become necessary through a series of individual direc-
tives to modify emphasis and priority in the strategy. This Directive 
will elaborate and codify our progress in building a security framework 
for the Persian Gulf. (S)
Greater Readiness Required
Given the increased risk of major local or regional conflict involv-
ing key U.S. interests in the 1980s we must increase the priority given 
to readiness in defense resource allocations. (C)
Shifts in Priority for General Purpose Forces
Presidential Directive/NSC–18 put the focus for our general pur-
pose forces on Europe but also called for capabilities for contingencies in 
Korea and the Persian Gulf region. Soviet actions in the Horn of Africa 
and Afghanistan have, in the interim, increased substantially the threat 
to our vital interests in the Persian Gulf region. Moreover, the chaotic 
situation following the Iranian revolution, the Iraq-Iran war and the 
intensifying intra-Arab and Israeli-Arab tensions have increased the 
instability in the region. This has also increased the risk to U.S. and 
Allied interests, both directly and by giving the Soviets added oppor-
tunities for interference. At the same time, our success in normalizing 
relations with the People’s Republic of China has improved our strate-
gic position in East Asia. Given the danger that Soviet success in assert-
ing influence over the oil producing status of the Persian Gulf region 
could undermine the viability of NATO and Japan, cause enormous 
economic disruptions in Europe, Japan, and the United States, higher 
priority must be given to developing adequate strategic lift, general 
purpose forces and facilities access for Persian Gulf contingencies. (S)
While NATO will retain first call on force deployments in peace-
time for wartime operations, the Persian Gulf shall have highest priority 
for improvement of strategic lift and general purpose forces in the Five 
Year Defense Program. This priority calls for continued improvement 
of relations with the People’s Republic of China, accelerated growth of 
Japan’s defense capabilities as a contribution to U.S.-Japanese security 
ties, improved relations with the ASEAN states, and greater progress in 
getting our NATO Allies to bear a larger share of the burden of defense 
in Europe.2 (S)
Soviet projection of power in the Caribbean region with Cuba’s 
assistance over the past two years has created another area of increased 
security concern. In support of the objectives of Presidential Directive/
2 Carter drew a checkmark in the left margin next to this paragraph.
