Human Rights
233
The legislative history of our statutory provisions does not indi-
cate the meaning Congress attached to the concept of a “consistent pat-
tern,” and there are no judicial decisions interpreting the phrase. By its
terms the language excludes isolated events and incorporates the di-
mensions of time as well as repetition. Thus, frequently repeated ac-
tions over a relatively short period of time would appear to be covered
as would somewhat less frequent but regular violations over a rela-
tively long period of time.
While “internationally recognized human rights” would include,
inter alia, all of the rights in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
it appears from the legislative history that in using the phrase and com-
bining it with the concept of “gross violations,” Congress intended to
cover mainly the right to be free from governmental violation of the in-
tegrity of the person, i.e., the first group of rights discussed above.
Once a determination is made that a country has engaged in a con-
sistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human
rights, certain important questions arise. For example, is the determina-
tion binding as to future decisions with respect to that country? If that
would depend on whether there had been substantial intervening
events, by what standard ought those events be judged? Further,
would a determination as to one country have precedential effect as to
other countries?
These are not easy questions. While answers can no doubt be de-
vised, the questions point up the limitations in the human rights con-
text of requiring uniform actions pursuant to a statutorily-prescribed
standard of conduct. There are vast differences among human rights
conditions in various countries, and what may rise to the level of offen-
sive conduct in one country may not be properly so characterized in the
setting of another country with different circumstances, a different his-
tory, and a different trend. To be realistic and effective, our policy must
take account of such differences. That will therefore be difficult if we
are required to take the same action—e.g., a “no” vote on an IFI loan—
with respect to different countries, even though our own best assess-
ment of the circumstances in such countries might indicate that the
mandated action would be inappropriate or that other actions should
be taken instead.
III. Evaluate Actions Which U.S. Could Take to Improve Human
Rights Conditions.
The range of actions we can take to advance our human rights ob-
jectives is examined below. Of primary importance is the need to eval-
uate the human rights situation in individual countries and to consider
the various policy instruments at our disposal in the light of our own
foreign policy objectives in those countries. These evaluations, which
