Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  367
Cooper asked whether the Soviet side still supported a separate 
agreement.
Karpov said a separate agreement was no longer necessary and 
could be dropped.
Cooper inquired about the three-­year period of discussions on stra-
tegic stability at the end of which each side would be free to choose its 
own course of action if the two had not agreed otherwise.
Karpov said the three-­year period also was no longer necessary. 
Now the Soviet side believed that strategic stability discussions could 
begin right after the signing of START. All problems not solved by that 
time could be discussed.
Cooper pointed out that each side’s freedom to choose its own 
course of action, which was agreed in the WSJS, was not contentious. 
He did not understand the argument that it should be dropped along 
with the idea of the non-­withdrawal period.
Karpov responded that, if the non-­withdrawal period is dropped, 
then all elements dependent on it must also drop. We must find a new 
approach.
Burt asked whether discussions on what is and isn’t permitted 
would begin right away, and also whether there was anything new in 
the Soviet position on this issue.
Karpov recalled that the U.S. had called the 1987 “list” proposal 
more restrictive than the ABM Treaty. Now the Soviet side wanted to 
explore another approach that enabled both sides to conduct research 
and certain kinds of space-­based testing, but that banned testing in 
space of ABM systems and components and prototypes of those sys-
tems and components. If the U.S. agreed with this general approach, we 
could go deeper into the issue and see whether more concrete elements 
could be listed in a general way defining the frontiers of what is possi-
ble. Or we could list devices that correspond to the ABM Treaty’s pro-
visions. The Soviet side was prepared to look for a common solution.
Cooper said that this is what he recalled from 1987. The Soviet side 
then was prepared to permit some testing in space. But we studied the 
specific parameters that were proposed and found them complicated, 
unverifiable, and more restrictive than the ABM Treaty.
Karpov said the two sides should look forward and asked what the 
U.S. suggested in this area.
Cooper replied that the initiatives tabled by the U.S. in 1988 regard-
ing testing in space and sensors should be built upon. Also progress 
had been made on the predictability.3
3 One page is missing from the copy on file.
