Chapter 6, June–December 1990  855
157.	 Memorandum From Arnold Kanter of the National Security 
Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for National Security 
Affairs (Scowcroft)1
Washington, September 18, 1990
SUBJECT
Your September 19 Meeting on START
Objectives
As the President wrote to Gorbachev,2 Shevardnadze’s presence 
in the U.S. next week probably is the make-­or-­break opportunity 
to complete START and CFE this year. We do not know whether the 
Soviets will come ready to do business. This meeting on START and 
the September 20 meeting on CFE are intended to put us in the position 
to drive for agreements on all of the remaining issues if the Soviets are 
prepared to do so.
Assuming you and your counterparts agree that we are in the end 
of the end-­game, the goal of your two meetings should be to identify 
the bottom-­line U.S. positions that distinguish between treaties we 
will and won’t sign. A let’s-­see-­what-­the-Soviets-have perspective or 
other moves to defer decisions (e.g., we need more analysis) will virtu-
ally guarantee that START and CFE will drift into next year and, quite 
likely, an MBFR-­like existence.
Later this week, the President will need to approve whatever con-
sensus emerges from your group as well as resolve any differences. 
Armed with the President’s decisions and authority to close the deal, 
Secretary Baker will then need to engage Shevardnadze intensively 
next week on the remaining issues, supported by the Bartholomew-
Karpov working group. (There is the separate, but related, matter of 
persuading Baker to be willing to use all of the flexibility the President 
gives him so that the President does not find himself in a detailed nego-
tiating session with Shevardnadze.)
Attached at Tab A are brief papers on the START issues listed 
below. Copies have been distributed to the other principals to help 
them prepare for the meeting. All of these issues are essentially political 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF00953–021, START—September 
1990. Secret. A stamped notation indicates Scowcroft saw the memorandum.
2 See Document 156.
