1978  213
47.	
Memorandum From the Director of the Office of  
Management and Budget (McIntyre) to President Carter1
Washington, January 10, 1978
SUBJECT
Navy Shipbuilding Plans
In the 1979 Defense budget, you deleted advance funding for a 
medium-­sized aircraft carrier (CVV). Further, you deferred a decision 
on whether any carrier should be built in the next five years, pending 
the completion of a Defense study of the issue. That study is to be com-
pleted by the Navy in February or March, 1978.
We recommend that you call Senator Stennis and Representative 
Price this week to obtain their support for your 1979 shipbuilding pro-
gram and their advice on longer-­range shipbuilding plans. Word of 
your decisions is leaking out, and some people may try an end run 
to the Committees to get a larger shipbuilding program. The House 
Armed Services Committee is especially likely to add a nuclear carrier 
(CVN), costing $2 billion and maybe the nuclear AEGIS ship (CGN) 
costing $1.1 billion. The Senate Committee may also be leaning toward 
adding a carrier.
To head off this potential budget threat, a commitment from Sten-
nis and Price to await the results of the study would be useful. They 
should be made aware that final decisions for aircraft carriers have not 
been made. Further, they could be informed that after you review the 
Defense study with Secretary Brown, you will inform them of your 
decision. Without your personal commitment to these two gentlemen, 
the Congress is likely to develop its own five-­year shipbuilding plan 
which will include one or more new nuclear carriers. If they believe the 
program is unacceptably low, you might want to consider adding $700 
million and 2 DD–963 class destroyers to the 1979 program. These ships 
would be useful anti-­submarine warfare assets. In addition, the Ingalls 
Shipyard in Mississippi, where they are built, is running out of work.
Because a carrier decision will not be made prior to completion of 
the Defense study, specific outyear shipbuilding plans should not be 
provided to the Congress with the 1979 budget. Current law, however, 
requires submission to Congress of:
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Agency File, 
Box 11, Navy Department: 6/77–12/79. No classification marking. Carter wrote at the top 
of the memorandum: “Jim—Price: ‘ok’ Stennis ‘ok’ J.” A stamped notation at the top of 
the memorandum reads: “The President Has Seen.”
