World Hunger and Food Policy
755
—Developing flexible policies to deal with the wide range of
problems and situations faced by developing countries in meeting their
food requirements. Some developing countries already have sufficient
supplies and expected foreign exchange earnings to purchase all the
food imports they are likely to need. Another group of countries can at-
tain this position with a modicum of help. For some, increased agricul-
tural development assistance can expand food production, others
would benefit most from reduced trade barriers, while still others need
help such as liberal credits to finance imports in short supply years. An
effective U.S. and international food strategy must deal meaningfully
with all these varied situations and needs.
—Finally, continuing efforts to deal intelligently and effectively
with other factors affecting world hunger such as accelerating world-
wide losses of arable land from mismanagement of the resource base
(deforestation, over-grazing, soil erosion, salination etc.), the rising cost
of chemicals and raw materials required by agriculture, and limitations
on water for agriculture imposed by growing competition among na-
tions and regions for surface and ground water.
Section III
Future Policy Evolution
We believe the broad thrust of the food policies we initiated sev-
eral years ago remains valid. If the third world is to feed itself and ac-
celerate its development through agriculture, the course followed must
concentrate on a mix of agricultural development programs, increased
Official Development Assistance and trade liberalization. These pol-
icies must be dynamic ones, however, adjusting to present conditions
and responding effectively to contemporary problems. The future di-
rection of our food policies is designed to do this.
Reserves
We continue to seek a viable international reserve system to stabi-
lize prices and promote supply security. In the London talks, the
United States has proposed the establishment of an internationally
coordinated system of nationally-held reserve stocks, shared among all
major grain trading countries.7 The reserve system operations, acti-
vated by movements of world wheat prices, would stabilize interna-
tional prices and improve food security by shifting grain supplies for-
7 In testimony submitted to the Subcommittee on International Trade of the Senate
Committee on Finance on July 13, Katz indicated that the U.S. delegation to the June 1977
International Wheat Council (IWC) meeting in London had proposed a “coordinated
system” of grain reserves. For Katz’ complete statement, see Department of State Bulletin,
August 22, 1977, pp. 265–267.
