1184  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
by your May 11 draft and to moving ahead from area agreement and 
broad concession to your point view exemplified my April 19 draft. As 
I many times pointed out that draft accepted your December 1 draft 
as reasonable starting point for negotiation and introduced only min­
imum revisions essential to demonstrate to world both our countries 
sincerely willing renounce use force Taiwan area and pursue objectives 
by peaceful means only.
B. On basis your explanations here I had taken this be intent your 
December 1 draft and that your concern with respect my January 12 
draft arose from fear it was intent U.S. trick your government into aban­
doning position respect merits dispute that area. It in order remove all 
possible basis for such claim I successively offered my revision April 
19. Have continuously and carefully reviewed that draft in light your 
stated objections during these meetings but still feel if your side gen­
uinely sincerely willing renounce use force in that as well as our other 
disputes there can be no valid objection that draft.
C. If your side not willing in fact renounce use force it of course 
obvious no form of words can be devised that will meet your objections 
as I not willing be party to perpetrating upon world fraud of form of 
words that attempts give appearance having renounced force while in 
fact failing do so.
D. This connection I been concerned note during last few days 
high government and party officials your country are reiterating threat 
resort war if necessary to achieve objective of bringing Taiwan under 
its domination. I particularly noted even such authoritative spokesman 
as Liu Shao-­chi in speech September 15, as reported by your radio, reit­
erates intention use any means necessary, including force, to achieve 
objectives this area. This deeply disturbing and if continues be policy 
your government, of course cannot be reconciled with professions of 
desire use only peaceful means settle disputes. I find that policy par­
ticularly hard reconcile with explanations of intent of your December 1 
draft. However, it again explains persistent rejection through months of 
discussion here of all formulae that my side has proposed to make clear 
that use of force being renounced. Continuation of such indefensible 
policy would of course mean further attempts arrive at agreement on 
meaningful renunciation force may be foredoomed failure. However, 
I reluctant arrive at such pessimistic conclusion for peace of Far East 
and world.
E. I welcomed your statements here on sharing my desire arrive 
at agreement on meaningful renunciation force and steps such as your 
December 1 draft that appeared be in that direction. However, cannot 
reconcile this with statements such as that of Liu September 15 that 
appear only reiteration of old position of threatening force. Would be
