688 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX 202. Summary of Meetings1 Washington, undated March 8, 1979: 7:00 to 9:00 p.m., Abdin Palace, Cairo American Side Egyptian Side President Carter President Sadat Secretary Vance Vice President Mubarak Dr. Brzezinski Prime Minister Khalil President Carter and Sadat one-on-one, followed by President Carter, Vance, Brzezinski/Sadat, Mubarak, Khalil. President Carter assured Sadat that he would represent his interests as well as our own. Sadat responded by stressing the gratitude of his people and repeated his “two directives”2 (which were previously communicated by Brzezinski to the President). The Egyptian people admire you. We are not governed for the first time in 2,000 years by foreigners. We want friendship with the United States. I shall always be proud of your friendship and brotherhood. President Carter: I hope we will never let you down. You are probably the most admired statesman in the United States. I hope to conclude the peace process during this trip. The Israelis will be very difficult with implementation of the accords. Sadat: Proposes an Egyptian-U.S. economic board under Prime Minister Khalil to cut through red tape in U.S.-Egyptian economic relations. President Carter agrees in principle and stresses the importance of U.S. private enterprise having access to Egypt. This is followed by detailed review of all negotiating issues and basic U.S.-Egyptian agreement. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 66, Middle East: President Carter’s Trip to Jerusalem and Cairo: 2–4/79. Secret. The summary of meetings was found attached to a March 15 covering memorandum from Brzezinski to Carter in which Brzezinski pointed out to the President, “You will note that for some of them we have full memcons, and for some of them only you have any record since no one else was present. At some meetings, for example your last one with Begin, no record was taken because the format was conversational.” (Ibid.) 2 See Document 198.
