World Hunger and Food Policy ment (IWA) of 1971.6 The proposed agreement represents a substantial departure in concept from earlier ones, which had no provisions for price stabilization or buffer stocks. The emphasis in the current discussion is on specific obligations regarding reserve stocks or other measures to influence supply and demand on international markets, such as production adjustments and assurance that export markets remain open. Such measures are intended to meet the primary objectives of price stabilization and food security. So far, about the only concurrence of views in these discussions has been on a target for food aid of 10 million tons of wheat and other grains annually and on the desirability of a wheat buffer stock. The Interim Committee of the Negotiating Conference, which met in June in London and in July in Geneva, has been trying to redraft the substantive economic provisions of the wheat trade convention and coarse grain trade convention; no substantive work on the food aid convention has been undertaken since the Negotiating Conference. Some progress has been made with the wheat trade convention on “trigger” price mechanisms by which decisions to release from, or add to, reserves are made, but no further progress has been made on target size and appropriate allocation of reserve stocks. The Interim Committee will reconvene on 16 October, and a full Negotiating Conference is planned for November in London, unless the Interim Committee decides further progress is not possible. Food Aid Food aid is a vital but relatively small element in the global food situation. Large-scale dependence on food aid is considered an inhibition to agricultural development, although there are cases, as in Bangladesh and some Sahelian countries, where food aid is necessary regardless of its effect on development. The logistics of emergency food aid are complicated by the location of cereal stocks (which are concentrated mainly in a few grain-exporting countries), by donor delay in responding to requests for food aid, by weak delivery and distribution infrastructures in poor countries, and by a tendency on the part of governments to delay official announcement of emergency situations. The UN World Food Program seeks to stimulate economic and social development through aid in the form of food that may, for example, be used as a partial substitute for cash wages paid to workers in development projects. It also tries to meet emergency food needs. Allocations to the international emergency food reserve scheme, operated through the World Food Program, increased substantially in the last year, reaching a level of 421,000 tons of cereals, reasonably close to the 6 See Document 243.
