782 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 143. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, June 1, 1990, 11:49 a.m.–12: 58 p.m. SUBJECT Meeting with President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union (U) PARTICIPANTS The President James A. Baker, Secretary of State John H. Sununu, Chief of Staff Brent Scowcroft, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs Reginald Bartholemew, Under Secretary of State Dennis Ross, Condoleezza Rice, Senior Director for Soviet Affairs, NSC Staff Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev, President Eduard Shevardnadze, Foreign Minister Sergey Akhromeyev, Viktor Karpov, Deputy Foreign Minister Aleksey Obukhov, Deputy Foreign Minister The President. I understand that you want to begin with arms control. Please, the floor is yours. (U) President Gorbachev: I want to turn this over for the moment to Mr. Karpov to outline what has been done—­where we are. (U) Ambassador Karpov: As a part of the preparations for this Summit, we have been meeting to prepare documents that encompass agreement on several arms control issues. On strategic arms there are two: (1) A paper on limitations on strategic offensive arms which would summarize the major points of agreement on START; (2) A statement on future negotiations. There are already many agreed for this second effort but others remain including the approach to heavy missiles; the question of the elimination of MIRVed systems. We believe that we could record the already agreed progress without second guessing these other issues. The U.S. side insists on the elimination of systems—­heavy missiles and a ban on MIRVed ICBMs. These are subjects for serious discussion and it is premature to try to close them out. (S) On CFE, there is an agreed statement that states the intentions of the two sides to progress and in connection with this statement we have also discussed the matters of limitation on aviation; manpower limits 1 Source: Department of State, Policy Planning Staff, Lot 03D012, Dennis Ross Files, US/Soviet Memos of Conversation—1989/1990. Secret. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. The complete memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post-Soviet States: High-Level Contacts.
