SUPERVISION OF THE PLEBISCITE It is obvious that the holding of the plebiscite should be appropriately supervised by competent and impartial authority, and in the negotiations of the Parties considerable attention has been given to the constitution of such authority. As one of the conditions of the plebiscite, the Arbitrator decides that there shall be constituted a Plebiscitary Commission, and Registration and Election Boards with the following organization, powers and duties: PLEBISCITARY COMMISSION A. Constitution. A Plebiscitary Commission shall be constituted consisting of three members, one to be appointed by the Government of Chile, one to be appointed by the Government of Peru, and the third member, who shall act as President of the Commission, to be appointed by the President of the United States. In case one party to the arbitration appoints a member of the Plebiscitary Commission but the other party fails to appoint a member for thirty days after the time hereafter provided in this Award, it shall thereupon become the duty of the President of the Plebiscitary Commission to appoint a member to fill the vacancy thus existing. In making this appointment the President of the Commission is not limited as to nationality except that no more than one member of the Plebiscitary Commission may be a national of either Chile or Peru. Vacancies shall be filled according to the manner of the original appointment. B. Procedure. The Plebiscitary Commission shall act by a majority vote and shall establish its own rules of procedure subject to the provisions of this Award. C. Powers. 1. The Plebiscitary Commission shall have in general complete control over the plebiscite and shall have authority to determine all questions as to the registration of voters, the casting and counting of the vote and whether the persons claiming the right to register and vote are qualified to do so, subject only to the provisions of this Opinion and Award. 2. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Plebiscitary Commission shall have the power and duty to promulgate rules and regulations for the plebiscite which shall provide as follows: (1) For the procedure of Registration and Election Boards; (2) For public notice of the time and places of registration and the time and places of voting; (3) For the registration of voters;
