434 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III been limited, and the market may go either way depending on the results of the meeting. A summit “failure” has not been discounted. Heavy dollar selling is possible if: (a) the President is unable to offer reasonable assurance on limiting oil imports, either by Congress or administrative action, (b) Schmidt does not announce his intent to stimulate the German economy, and (c) the Europeans announce a regional arrangement for “monetary stability” which is perceived as a means of insulating themselves from a falling dollar. Obviously, an appearance of a breakdown in cooperation between the U.S. and Europe could cause heavy dollar selling. The market is probably not expecting the President to announce further actions against inflation, and if significant new measures were revealed, the market would tend to react positively. The President’s position on European currency arrangements will be closely observed. A blanket endorsement, without qualifications, is likely to be taken as a sign of U.S. weakness and lead to an effort to shift out of dollars. If a Presidential endorsement of the general effort to improve EC cooperation were carefully qualified, however, to demonstrate U.S. concern about the implications of possible detailed arrangements for the global monetary system and the dollar, such a reaction could be minimized. 143. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Schultze) to President Carter1 Washington, July 11, 1978 SUBJECT Assessment of Proposals for a New European Monetary System You asked if I would prepare an assessment of the new European Monetary System. We labor under the disadvantage that the outline 1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 53, Memos to President, 7/78–8/78. Confidential. Under cover of a July 11 memorandum, Owen forwarded to Carter a July 7 message from Schmidt that described the decisions on EMS taken by the EC Heads of Government at the July 6–7 meeting in Bremen. Owen noted that Treasury, State, and CEA would prepare “a memorandum analyzing the scheme.” Carter wrote at the top of Owen’s memorandum: “ZB—I have a good memo from CEA—will study before Bonn.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Country Chron File, Box 12, Europe: 1978) Under cover of a July 15 memorandum, Owen for-
