National Security Policy  1011
agent had had a chance to take effect (three days), parachutists would be 
flown in to take over the area.
Turning to Example No. 2, General Lemnitzer asked the Council 
to assume that the Communists had organized a movement in Panama 
designed to take over the Panama Canal. Stimulated by Communist 
agitation, mobs had marched on the Canal and had halted operations 
at two of the locks. It had been decided to disperse the crowd by order­
ing helicopters to spread tear gas. All persons subjected to the tear gas 
would eventually recover after breathing fresh air for a sufficient length 
of time, but immediately on being subjected to tear gas they would be 
impelled to seek fresh air in the shortest time possible. One helicopter 
could cover a circle of a thousand yards in diameter in this manner. The 
apparatus necessary for this use of chemical agents was under devel­
opment and would soon be available. This procedure would enable 
friendly forces to regain and maintain control of the Panama Canal 
locks without bloodshed.
Example No. 3 concerned the Kuwait area. It was assumed that 
strong insurgent guerrilla forces had seized the oil facilities in the area 
and had rounded up as hostages several thousand US and UK civil­
ians. Friendly forces were required to regain control of the area before 
the oil facilities were destroyed and to recapture the hostages before 
they were executed. A chemical agent sprayed from an aircraft could 
within five minutes prostrate all personnel in the area for twelve hours, 
during which time friendly forces could move in and regain control. 
2600 pounds of the agent would cover a square mile and there would 
be no physical damage.
General Lemnitzer said his examples had been confined to inca­
pacitating agents but lethal agents could be used in the same way. The 
examples had also been examples of catching the enemy by surprise. 
He had illustrated only an offensive use of chemical and biological 
agents; however, before using such agents offensively it was necessary 
to develop a strong capability to defend against them.
Dr. York, concluding the presentation, said that he had been 
impressed by the development of possibilities in the field of controlled 
temporary incapacitation over the last several years. He thought it was 
possible the researchers were on the trail of something revolutionary. 
The use of chemical and biological incapacitating agents extended 
from mild control up to effects comparable to those of tactical atomic 
weapons. The Defense Department proposed to expand the budget for 
chemical and biological warfare, which was now $50 million a year, by 
a factor of three by 1965.
Dr. Kistiakowsky said that the Science Advisory Committee about 
a year ago had looked into the question of chemical and biological war­
fare and had concluded that research and development in this field 
should be continued since the prospects were definitely bright. He
