September 18–December 16, 1978
461
The Secretary continued his status report as follows:
—U.S. commitments letter—okay.
—Airfields letter—complete.
—Interpretive minute—Egyptians still have a question about the
second paragraph.
—The minute to Annex I—okay.
—Letter on unilateral Israeli steps in the West Bank/Gaza—dis-
cussed among the parties but not resolved.
—Oil—discussed between the parties but not resolved.
The Prime Minister then turned to financial issues. He had origi-
nally spoken of a U.S. loan,2 for which he had almost been stoned in Is-
rael. He had subsequently corrected his mistake. Israel’s needs should
have been clearer from Camp David, although the discussion there had
singled out the issue of the airfields. The Minister of Finance has a
memorandum on this subject. Israel’s problem is that, if it is to evacuate
Sinai in three years, moving army installations and civilian settlements
will involve great costs which Israel has no way of covering.
Begin recalled that the Secretary had told him at the Regency Hotel
(November 2)3 that he would discuss this question with the President
who would consult Congress. Begin said he had read our letter on the
airfields which also hints at other financial issues. It is so general that
Israel still knows nothing. The letter contains no pledge. Israel does not
want peace with bankruptcy. Israel needs to know before the next Cab-
inet meeting—today or tomorrow—what the President will suggest to
Congress. The Finance Minister had wanted to see high U.S. Treasury
officials; he had been told he would be welcome but could not discuss
this subject. The Finance Minister will see Blumenthal on Tuesday, and
the Prime Minister wanted to know if he could now discuss the ques-
tion of financial assistance.
The Secretary said we are studying Israel’s request as part of our
regular budgetary process covering economic assistance for FY ’80. We
must proceed in a constitutional way. We need to complete the budget
by December. In arriving at a figure, we always take into account Israeli
security requirements.
There are two new items, the Secretary said:
1. The airfields on which Secretary Brown had written what we
were prepared to do.4 We need information in order to decide what we
2 See Document 123.
3 Ibid.
4 Reference is to Brown’s September 28 Camp David side letter to Weizman. See
Document 57.
