596
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
Hungarians in Romania, such as restrictions on schooling in the
Hungarian language, employment discrimination, and strong efforts
to assimilate Hungarians into the Romanian culture. American-
Hungarian organizations are sensitive to this issue. Sixty-six Members
of Congress wrote to President Carter on March 22 stating their concern
and specifically asking that he raise the matter with Ceausescu.
Recent media attention has focused on detailed written criticism
of the official Romanian policy towards ethnic Hungarians. The author
was Karoly Kiraly, an ethnic Hungarian still in Romania who formerly
held a high position in the Romanian Communist Party.
For Romania, the Hungarian minority issue raises sensitive territo-
rial questions. Most ethnic Hungarians live in Transylvania which was
not incorporated into modern Romania until after World War I. Roman-
ian authorities fear that the real motivation behind the recent public
debate in Hungary over this issue is an irredentist attempt. They are
also concerned that the USSR may be stirring it up to pressure Romania
because of its independent foreign policy. It has assumed increasing
importance in Romanian-Hungarian relations since Ceausescu and
Kadar referred to it publicly for the first time in June 1977. It continues
to be discussed at high levels between the two governments. In a
speech March 16, Ceausescu criticized shortcomings and deficiencies
in Romanian policy toward the Hungarian and German minorities and
put forward specific remedial actions.
Department officials (Nimetz et al) have raised the issue with visit-
ing Romanian officials, most recently with Deputy Foreign Minister
Gliga on March 17.2 We put the issue in the context of our global
support for minority rights, reiterated our firm support for Romanian
territorial integrity, and made clear that we are not proposing specific
solutions but felt we had to raise the matter because of Administration,
public and Congressional interest in humanitarian matters set down
in the Helsinki Final Act.
Ceausescu may well preempt the issue by raising it with the Presi-
dent and explaining the situation as he sees it. If so, it would be an
opportunity for the President to express his satisfaction that the issue
has come up and to explain the concern which exists in the United
States in this regard.
OPTIONS
1. The President Raises Issue with Ceausescu
Should Ceausescu not raise the issue, the President on his own
would raise it to make clear at the highest level the seriousness with
which the U.S. views this aspect of human rights.
2 In telegram 74362 to Bucharest, March 22, the Department informed the Embassy
of the Nimetz-Gliga conversation on the treatment of the Hungarian minority in Romania.
(National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780127–0309)
