Afghanistan 9 5. Intelligence Memorandum Prepared in the Central Intelligence Agency1 ER M 77–10790 Washington, undated THE SOVIET PRESENCE IN AFGHANISTAN Introduction Soviet economic assistance and trade have become dominant external forces in Afghan development, and military assistance is virtually the exclusive province of the USSR. In the 23 years since Moscow’s first commitment to Kabul—also its first to an LDC—the Soviet presence has become pervasive and the Soviet role in Afghan development critical. Despite Kabul’s efforts to maintain a non-aligned position by balancing Western and Communist interests, we see no major change in Afghanistan’s reliance on the USSR for military or economic aid in the short term. This is particularly true for the military supply relationship, since Kabul would be hard put to find alternate sources for modern weapons on terms as favorable as Moscow’s. The Soviets have given Kabul aid on unusually easy terms to ensure a special Soviet-Afghan relationship which Moscow believes is important to its security interests. This assistance has always been far more concessional and has included more grant aid than Moscow’s aid to its other clients. Moscow also has agreed to frequent rescheduling of Kabul’s debt and has covered most of Afghanistan’s local project costs, a concession rarely allowed other aid recipients. Soviet military contracts generally have allowed a 75 percent discount from list prices and are payable over 15 to 25 years at two percent interest. Large economic credits have allowed up to 25 years for amortization, after as much as 25 years grace, with interest at 2–2.5 percent. These compare with the usual Soviet terms of 10 years repayment at 2 percent for military contracts and 12 years at 2.5 percent for economic aid. Military Aid Afghanistan’s 1956 border dispute with Pakistan led to the signing of a $100 million arms agreement with the USSR, the first of a series of accords that have made Moscow responsible for all modern arma- 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Directorate of Intelligence, Office of Support Services, Job 80T00071A: Production Copy Files (1976–1979), Box 6, The Soviet Presence in Afghanistan. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. Attached but not printed is a covering memorandum from Cooper to Limberg, December 6, in response to Vance’s request for information on Soviet involvement in Afghanistan. Vance’s request was not found.
