Chapter 4, February–April 1990 525 — Their position of “if you propose it we’ll consider it” leaves all their options open, and positions them to fix a price if we come asking for a ban. — In any event, we also hear from the Soviets that a MIRVed mobile ban may be a good idea for START II. • Nevertheless, if the President decides to propose a ban on mobile MIRVs now, my suggestion would be to proceed as follows: — Propose in START to ban MIRVed mobile ICBMs, and permit 500 single-RV mobile ICBMs. (This is about what we project for SS–25s, and gives ample room for US Small ICBMs.) — Propose as an objective for START II that we aim to eliminate over a period of years all ICBM MIRVs. — Consistent with this goal, propose in START not to increase the numbers of fixed ICBM MIRVs (implement by a ceiling of 2100 warheads on fixed MIRVd ICBMs, our estimate of what the Soviets plan to deploy on fixed SS–18s and SS–24s under START). We could then argue that the rail SS–24s are being eliminated, not shifted to silos. — Consistent with this goal, propose that flight tests of MIRVed ICBMs be limited to three per year, that no new types of MIRVed ICBMs be developed, and no MIRVed ICBMs be produced after Jan. 1 1992. These constraints would apply to the SS–18, SS–24, MX, and MM III. (They would replace our proposed ban on heavy ICBM testing and production, which would be dropped, as would the US proposed 3300 ICBM warhead limit.) — Adjust the US program to put most of the money into an accelerated Small ICBM program, for deployment initially in Minuteman silos with the option to deploy later on mobile launchers. • Obviously this package would hit the Soviets hard—­abandoning their big investment in survivable rail SS–24s, capping silo SS–18s and SS–24s, curtailing flight testing of SS–18s and SS–24s, and halting production of the new SS–18 Mod 5. They would, to be sure, see some pluses—­no rail MX, constraints on MX and MM III testing, and relaxation of US proposed constraints on heavy ICBMs. • It would be a hard sell, and we would probably have to make adjustments and contend with some sort of counterproposal before such a deal could be closed. If it can be sold, the package has the virtue of settling the heavy issue as well as mobiles. • As a final point, as we focus on putting in place the last provisions of START, we should remember that the provisions that are already agreed would bring Soviet ICBM warheads down from 6600 to 3200, Soviet heavy ICBM warheads down from 3080 to 1540, and Soviet fixed ICBM MIRVs down from 5500 to 2100. So what we are doing is further turning the screws on an agreement that already squeezes the Soviets hard.
