532
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
1.74 to 1.85, and during the same time the yen/dollar rate moved from
178 to 187. The pound sterling on the London Exchange plummetted
from $2.11 to $1.97. Wall Street welcomed the new measures and
within two hours after the announcement the Dow Jones Industrial Av-
erage was up 20 points. The price of U.S. Treasury Bills increased no-
ticeably as investors attempted to shift their portfolios into dollar de-
nominated assets.
The price of gold immediately fell after the announcement of the
Administration’s intention to intervene in exchange markets in order to
support the dollar. The London gold fixing closed today at $225.00 per
ounce compared to a price of $242.60 yesterday afternoon.
Most traders agree that the new measures were announced at the
right psychological moment. The sudden move caught many traders
off guard and as a result they have realized exchange losses from going
short on dollars. The announcement has also caused severe foreign ex-
change fluctuations in forward markets.
The Deutsche Bundesbank has publicly endorsed the Administra-
tion’s new measures and announced that it stands ready to cooperate
with the Federal Reserve in market interventions. The Japanese Gov-
ernment welcomed the actions to support the dollar and the Finance
Minister expects that they will help stabilize the international monetary
system. The Swiss National Bank has expressed its great satisfaction of
the measures to strengthen the dollar and feels that the U.S. program
will have the intended effect.
The U.K. will have no direct involvement in the support of the
dollar, but the Prime Minister has expressed his approval of the pro-
gram and his belief that it will dampen speculative capital movements.
The Administration’s complete package and its effects on ex-
change markets will take time to evaluate. The use of foreign currency
denominated securities is a major innovation and a sure signal that we
are dead serious. The Administration’s strong and decisive action has
caused exchange losses for people who thought that the dollar could
only continue its decline. Speculators will likely be more cautious in the
future, which may help moderate exchange rate movements.
The Department of State played virtually no role in the developing
and assembling of the Administration package.3 Treasury informed us
that the Secretary was informed at some point, but Under Secretary
3 In his November 1 memorandum to Cooper (see footnote 1 above), Forbord noted
that developments in the foreign exchange market just before the announcement of the
dollar support program, “largely reflecting disappointment over the Administration’s
anti-inflation program, precipitated the forceful U.S. response. Advance notice (about a
half hour) of the U.S. announcement was given to the French and British Governments.”
