September 18–December 16, 1978 329 a self-governing body in Gaza. He reiterated that Egypt is prepared to negotiate a Gaza settlement under the comprehensive framework, but that the establishment of the self-governing body in Gaza and related matters must be synchronized in point of time with the completion of the first phase of Sinai withdrawal. 4. Comment: Sadat and the Egyptians are feeling the heat at home and from other Arabs about the lack of any linkage between the two framework documents. Even Mubarak did not seem to know that Sadat had agreed that there need be no legal linkage between the two documents, which suggests to me that Sadat has done the predictable: he has suggested to his intimates that an understood relationship exists between the two. Since neither Hussein nor the PLO seems about to play on the West Bank, Sadat has concluded Gaza should be tackled separately if he is to proceed with Sinai without doing irreparable damage to GOE’s position in Arab world. As Mubarak had said earlier in the day (ref B), a Gaza settlement would help to put pressure on Hussein and the West Bankers. 5. Mubarak said that he will be meeting Usama al Baz on Sunday, October 22, in London for a report. He will at that time give the above instructions to al Baz for use by the Egyptian delegation. (Note: He will not rpt not tell al Baz of Sadat’s willingness to announce at the time of the conclusion of the treaty, in response to a request from President Carter, that diplomatic relations can be established at the Ambassadorial level.) Mubarak had no rpt no objection to our mentioning the above points (with the exception of the Ambassadorial level point) to the Egyptian delegation even before he meets with al Baz in London later this week. This would allow time to discuss Sadat’s ideas in depth with Egyptian delegation so that Usama al Baz can go to London with our thinking for use in his talk with Mubarak there. The point at issue seems to be that Sadat wants the “parallelism” that he spoke about in Rabat (after leaving Washington) to be concurrent in the case of Sinai and Gaza rather than sequential. Eilts
