32
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
On the other hand, our trading partners are worried about rising
protectionism in the US and would find it difficult to resist similar de-
mands from their own industries if we show them the way. We could
be opening a Pandora’s Box of protectionism—which would have ex-
tremely adverse political repercussions. More specifically, key friends
and allies such as Italy, Spain, Korea, Taiwan and Brazil are major shoe
exporters to the US. And, a decision to restrain imports would clearly
have an adverse impact on the London Summit and the North-South
dialogue.
Options
The US International Trade Commission (ITC) has unanimously
recommended that the President establish a “tariff rate quota” system
calling for a stiff (40%) increase in duties on all imports above 1974
levels.4 In 1974, the US imported 266 million pairs of shoes; in 1976, im-
ports totalled 370 million, so the potential trade impact is significant.
The STR memo outlines three broad policy options:
I. Adjustment assistance (to help workers who have lost jobs as the
result of imports, to help those businesses either become more competi-
tive or move into some other line, or to help communities attract new
industries) but no import restrictions.
II. The ITC recommendation.
III. A modified (more liberal) version of the ITC tariff rate quota. It
also mentions several other possible options including an increase in
duties and orderly marketing arrangements. STR recommends Option
III (modified tariff rate quota). This option would call for use of a
three-year base period (1974–76) rather than the one (1974) recom-
mended by the ITC. The effect would be to enlarge country allocations
and give newer suppliers (Taiwan and Korea) a larger share of the
market that better reflects the recent increase in imports from these
countries.
Previous interagency meetings on this subject have been inconclu-
sive—with much needless debate about the intricacies of various op-
tions. Aside from CEA, which favors adjustment assistance and no im-
port relief, no other agency has yet been willing to reveal its hand. State
and, perhaps, Treasury might be prepared at this meeting to table pro-
posals for a comprehensive and expanded program of adjustment
assistance, which will be a significant departure from the old, ineffec-
4 On January 6, the USITC decided by a 4 to 2 vote in favor of recommending the
imposition of a tariff rate quota on shoe imports. The Commission forwarded its recom-
mendation to Carter on February 8. (Edwin L. Dale, Jr., “New Curbs Asked on Shoe Im-
ports; Move Is Least Costly for Consumer,” The New York Times, January 7, 1977, p. D1;
Jane Hinkle, “Shoe Industry Seeks Carter’s Protection,” The Washington Post, March 9,
1977, p. E1)
