484  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
vehicles) have been provided, and communications equipment has 
been augmented. Our evidence on these developments relates primar­
ily to the Group of Soviet Forces, Germany, but we believe they are 
proceeding throughout the Soviet field forces.
120. All these changes are in line with revised Soviet tactical doc­
trine, which emphasizes the need to supplement standard ground 
force tactics and training with those designed to meet the conditions of 
nuclear warfare. This doctrine stresses firepower, mobility and maneu­
verability, greater initiative, deeper objectives, intensified reconnais­
sance, and the protection of individuals and units against the effects 
of atomic and chemical weapons. It also envisages the use of tactical 
nuclear weapons and guided missiles in support of Soviet field force 
operations. Thus far, however, both the revised tactical doctrine and the 
reorganization of ground force elements reflect evolutionary changes 
without basic alteration in the field force structure.
121. The order of battle of Soviet Army ground forces is still esti­
mated at about 175 line divisions plus supporting units.17 Present 
evidence suggests that the actual strengths of comparable units vary 
widely according to their locations. First category units, with the best 
equipment and highest manning levels, are believed to be those near 
the borders of the USSR, with second category units in occupied areas 
abroad and lowest category units in the interior of the USSR. The 
average is probably about 70 percent of authorized wartime strength; 
in border areas actual strength probably exceeds 70 percent, in East 
Germany and other occupied areas it is 70 percent or slightly less, and 
in remote interior districts it may be as low as 30 percent. All units 
probably have a high proportion of authorized officer strength, how­
ever, and full equipment is believed to be kept locally available. These 
peacetime manning practices, together with standard conscription and 
stockpiling programs, would probably enable all Soviet line divisions 
to be brought to full strength by M+10 and permit the activation of 
about 125 additional line divisions by M+30.
122. During 1958–62 further improvements in the firepower and 
mobility of Soviet ground forces are likely, and there may be further 
gradual alterations in organization to permit greater dispersion and 
flexibility of control. Nuclear weapons and guided missiles—­with both 
nuclear and non-­nuclear warheads—­will probably become available 
in significant quantities during the period. The USSR will probably 
employ those weapons for relatively long-­range support of tactical 
operations, however, and conventional field artillery and unguided 
rockets will continue to provide the major direct fire support for units 
in close combat. Anti-­aircraft artillery, on the other hand, will tend to 
17 For detailed estimates of the strength of Soviet and other Bloc ground forces in 
line divisions as of mid-1957, see Annex, Table 2. [Footnote is in the original.]
