190
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Israel wishes peace and recognition. Territory is tangible and once
ceded difficult to regain short of war. Peace, on the other hand, can be
ephemeral. Peaceful intentions can change overnight unless a solid
foundation of cooperation and a firm pattern of reinforcing relation-
ships can be established to insure that all have a stake in continuing
tranquillity.
We believe that separating the imperatives of security from the re-
quirement of recognized borders is an important advance toward
reconciling the differences between the two sides. It is in this way that
Israel could return to approximately the borders that existed prior to
the war of 1967, albeit with minor modifications as negotiated among
the parties, and yet retain security lines or other arrangements that
would insure Israel’s safety as full confidence developed in a compre-
hensive peace. Thus, with borders explicitly recognized and buttressed
by security measures and with the process of peace unfolding, Israel’s
security would be greater than it is today.
Future of the Palestinians
A further major issue is that of the future of the Palestinian people.
It has been the source of continuing tragedy in the Middle East. There
are two prerequisites for a lasting peace in this regard.
—First, there must be a demonstrated willingness on the part of
the Palestinians to live in peace alongside Israel.
—Second, the Palestinians must be given a stake in peace so that
they will turn away from the violence of the past and toward a future in
which they can express their legitimate political aspirations peacefully.
Thus, if the Palestinians are willing to exist in peace and are pre-
pared to demonstrate that willingness by recognizing Israel’s right to
exist in peace, the President has made clear that, in the context of a
peace settlement, we believe the Palestinians should be given a chance
to shed their status as homeless refugees and to partake fully of the
benefits of peace in the Middle East, including the possibility of some
arrangement for a Palestinian homeland or entity—preferably in asso-
ciation with Jordan.
How this would be accomplished and the exact character of such
an entity is, of course, something that would have to be decided by the
parties themselves in the course of negotiation. However, the President
has suggested that the viability of this concept and the security of the
region might be enhanced if this involved an association with Jordan.
But I emphasize that the specifics are for the parties themselves to
decide.
Necessity of Negotiating
This leads me to a further crucial aspect of our approach—the ne-
cessity of direct negotiations among the parties concerned. We cannot
