602
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
175.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Egypt1
Washington, February 6, 1979, 1753Z
31594. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Subject: (S) Mes-
sage From President Carter to President Sadat on Resuming Middle
East Negotiations.
1. (S-entire text).
2. Please deliver following message from President Carter to Presi-
dent Sadat at the earliest opportunity.2
3. Begin text:
Dear Mr. President:
I have been giving much attention to how [we] can move forward
in the peace negotiations and want to share my thoughts with you. In
my judgment, the more time that passes, the less favorable will be the
prospects for success. I believe we should now make a major, deter-
mined effort to complete the task we started with such high hopes at
Camp David in September.
As you have clearly perceived, forces hostile to peace in the
Middle East are active in your area. Developments in Iran have drama-
tized the need for a strong common front to achieve peace and security
in the region. Secretary Brown will soon be in Cairo3 to discuss with
you, among other things, the strategic situation we face together in this
period of challenge to stability and moderation. I am sure you will
agree that the achievement of peace between Egypt and Israel would
eliminate one important source of uncertainty and insecurity, and
would in the long run have a stabilizing effect in the area as a whole.
I am convinced that Prime Minister Begin still wants to complete
the treaty and move on to the next stage of negotiations. I know that
you also want to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion.
Despite the difficulties which have prevented completion of the
negotiations so far, I believe that we can achieve the objectives we set
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–0723. Se-
cret; Niact Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Atherton; cleared by Quandt, Sterner, Hansell,
and Stanislaus R.P. Valerga (S/S–O); approved by Vance. Sent for information Imme-
diate to Tel Aviv and the White House. A draft version of this letter, bearing Carter’s
handwritten amendments, and an attached, undated covering memorandum from Brze-
zinski to Carter upon which Carter initialed his approval is in the Carter Library, Brze-
zinski Donated Material, Subject File, Box 36, Serial Xs—(1/79–2/79).
2 Eilts delivered Carter’s letter to Sadat on February 8. Upon receiving the letter,
Sadat verbally informed Eilts of his acceptance of the invitation. (Telegram 2882 from
Cairo, February 8; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P840163–0858)
3 See Document 178.
