880 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII —The Kabul government does not control the provinces. —The Afghan Army continues to deteriorate. Conscription schemes and local defense plans have failed. —Soviet equipment and personnel losses have been relatively heavy, considering the poorly equipped and unorganized state of the resistance. —Roads and cities are still vulnerable to attack, and logistical supply is still a major problem. The Soviets, however, have chosen not to increase the size of their force. Rather, they are adopting new tactics built around more mobile ground forces and the heavy use of helicopter and aircraft strikes. The country has been divided into eight zones of responsibility, each with a senior commander and a combination of airborne, infantry, artillery, and air support. In addition, the Soviets are building housing, stronger defense positions, and permanent logistic and support bases. During Babrak Karmal’s recent visit to Moscow, the Soviets pledged continued military support.2 The joint statement issued at the end of the visit reaffirmed that Moscow would not discuss the question of Soviet withdrawals until 1) hostilities had ceased and 2) guarantees that they would not resume were in place. We conclude, therefore, that the Soviet military intends to support the Marxist regime and pursue the suppression of the resistance for an extended period of time. Recent Soviet emphasis on the time when the situation in Afghanistan returns to “normal” suggests that, for the moment at least, Moscow is not planning any major increase in its force in Afghanistan. At some point, however, perhaps next year, they may decide to increase the size of their force or mount a more aggressive campaign to seal the borders with Iran and Pakistan. We also do not rule out another cosmetic withdrawal for propaganda purposes. The Domestic Scene Since the coup in April 1978 that toppled Daoud, the Soviets have advised Kabul to build up its political base and infrastructure. Taraki’s and Amin’s failures or inability to implement this advice were largely responsible for the increase in the Soviet military presence and, ultimately, for the invasion last December. Over the last eight months, numerous CPSU, Komsomol, and government delegations have visited Afghanistan to help train their Afghan counterparts at the provisional and national level in party and government work. During the Karmal visit, the Soviets again emphasized the need to broaden the Afghan communist party’s base. 2 See Document 320.
