{ Some, however, may wish to reopen the agreed limit on heavy ICBMs (which only the Soviets have) and push for a ban (vice 50% cut). This would eliminate the main threat to our silos (only for a while, however, as other Soviet missiles improve). But the Soviets would either say no or demand a huge quid, and the move could be interpreted as throwing a monkey wrench into the talks.

{ High-­level interest could conceivably develop in raising the 1600 delivery vehicle limit. Scowcroft has said a higher number would encourage desirable de-MIRVing (more single-­warhead ICBMs, thus more “aim points” and lower Soviet incentives to strike). But we’d be reluctant to raise the level if only the Soviets would exploit it. Once the ICBM basing decision is taken, we’ll be better able to judge the merits of keeping or raising the 1600. — There clearly is interest in modifying U.S. proposals on some issues not yet resolved with the Soviets.

{ If we can gain a domestic consensus on a U.S. mobile ICBM program (or programs), there will presumably be agreement on dropping our mobile ban.

{ State has called for dropping our proposed 3000-3300 sublimit on ICBM warheads (because, with Soviet SLBMs approaching ICBMs in silo-­killing capability, it is not worth paying much for). OSD staff has favored lowering it. Probably we’ll keep it for now and Rick Burt will be authorized to explore what we can get for it. — There’s also interest in putting a distinctly “Bush stamp” on our START position. Prompted by concerns (whether justified or not) that the Reagan approach focused on reductions per se rather than stability and was out of step with our strategic programs, consideration is being given to modifying or supplementing our position in ways that promote stability and the survivability of our deterrent. Given his past statements, Scowcroft may well support such efforts.

{ Adopting stability and survivability as themes of the Bush START approach would require that, by the time of resumption, we have the makings of a widely supported plan for mobile ICBM basing and a START posture consistent with that plan (new position on mobiles).
