Arms Control and Disarmament  1567
deterrent capabilities as already having raised the threshold at which 
the West would react in such a manner. Thus, they probably believe 
that the opportunities for pressures against Western positions and for 
bluff have been enhanced.
47. The Chinese Communist leaders were among the first to pro­
claim that Sputnik shifted the strategic balance of power decisively in 
favor of the Bloc and they have been calling for a more assertive policy 
to exploit this alleged shift. Moreover, their propaganda line has been 
that a nuclear war would mean only the final defeat of capitalism. Nev­
ertheless, we believe that Chinese Communist conduct in the Taiwan 
Straits situation is evidence that they are sensitive to the nuclear power 
of the US.
IV. PROBABLE TRENDS IN ATTITUDES AND POLICIES
48. Barring an effective disarmament agreement, the people and 
governments of the world will almost certainly be confronted with 
a continued growth in nuclear weapons capabilities. Technological 
advances will bring a further diversification of weapons types and 
some reduction in the costs of production of certain nuclear weapon 
systems. In this situation there will probably be a gradual spread of 
nuclear capabilities to “fourth countries.”
49. The continuation of the nuclear armaments race and the devel­
opment of nuclear capabilities by “fourth countries” will occasion 
fresh outbursts of concern throughout the world. There will almost 
certainly be, from time to time, renewed and vigorous demands for 
a cessation of nuclear tests and for measures to control the deploy­
ment and use of nuclear weapons. But the dominant trend in public 
attitudes will probably be one of apathy or resigned acceptance of 
the existence and development of nuclear capabilities. In the main, 
peoples and governments are conditioned to living with the threat 
inherent in the existence of modern nuclear weapons, and we believe 
that future developments in the nuclear weapons situation are not 
likely to produce any sudden or marked changes in present attitudes 
or policies over the next few years.
50. Nevertheless the development of nuclear weapon systems of 
increasing range, accuracy, and sophistication will continue to influ­
ence strongly the conduct of foreign policies. There will probably be a 
tendency to caution, and if possible to compromise, in disputes which 
might involve the interests of the great powers and precipitate nuclear 
war. Neutralism may become increasingly attractive as a means of 
escaping responsibility for and involvement in the great power struggle 
between the US and the Sino-­Soviet Bloc, although the extent to which 
this will occur will depend upon a number of contingent developments.
