26  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
to the Central American area to give advice to the various countries 
in connection with the possible diversification of agricultural crops in 
each country in an effort to broaden the economic base and to lessen the 
degree of dependence on coffee.
I also feel that the development of a common market in the Central 
American area is a highly desirable and constructive step. An organiza-
tion, namely ODECA, has already been created for this purpose, 
but progress is being made very slowly. The creation of a common 
market, with the elimination of customs barriers, free movement of 
labor between countries, the possible establishment of a single com-
mon currency, the allocation of industries to specific countries, and 
other necessary steps can only be brought about by the efforts of the 
Central American countries themselves, but I feel we should give 
them all possible encouragement and assistance. Perhaps new loans 
and technical assistance can be extended in such a manner as to sup-
port these regional efforts. Further in this connection, I suggest that the 
State Department contact the OAS (Organization of American States) and 
suggest the possibility of the OAS sending one or more qualified persons to 
Central America to work with and advise the present ODECA staff so that 
more rapid progress may be made in bringing about a common market in the 
Central American area.
I trust that the above suggestions may be of some value. Let me 
take this opportunity to tell you how such I appreciated the honor of 
accompanying you on your mission to the Central American countries 
and how much I enjoyed the opportunity of serving under your direc-
tion. The trip was both interesting to me and valuable to the Fund, 
and was an experience which I will always recall with a great deal of 
pleasure.
Sincerely yours,
Dempster McIntosh
Managing Director
Copies to:  Hon. C. Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary, State
Hon. J. H. Smith, Jr., ICA
Hon. Roy R. Rubottom, ARA, State
Mr. Henry Hoyt, ARA, State
Mr. Bayard King, MID, State
Mr. Rollin Atwood, C/LA, ICA
