Chemical and Biological Weapons
233
C. The reported use of Chemical Weapons in Laos, Kampuchea
and Afghanistan, including possibilities for further diplomatic action
(guidance para 7).
5. Bilateral Negotiations.
A. The Delegation should begin by giving our reasons for having
rescheduled the start of CW round eleven.6
B. The Delegation should review at an appropriate level of detail
the state-of play in the bilateral negotiations, drawing on the wrap-up
cable from round ten (79 Geneva 14533).7
C. During round eleven the US will:
(1) Continue to give priority attention to major unresolved issues,
particularly verification; and
(2) Continue drafting in order to nail down points thought to be
agreed.
D. In view of past allied interest in these topics, the Delegation
should indicate to the allies that the round eleven guidance authorizes
the Delegation:
—To discuss possible mutually agreed procedures for mothballing
declared facilities. Our objective is to facilitate verification by eventu-
ally specifying which actions can and cannot be taken.
—To be prepared to agree to a scaled-down version of the Soviet
proposal on declaration of past transfers. We will attempt to trade US
agreement on this proposal for Soviet willingness to accommodate the
US proposal for exchange of information on CW protective activities.
—To explore, in the event the current US effort to keep safe riot
control agents and herbicides out of the convention entirely is rejected,
the possibility of adopting legally binding constraints consistent with
our policy on permitted uses in return for more explicit recognition of
those permitted uses.
E. The US Delegation will continue to brief allied representatives
in Geneva during the course of the negotiations. In addition, we would
be willing to hold consultations with the UK, FRG and France at the
end of the round.
6. The role of the CD on the CW issue. Guidance on the question of
a working group will be provided septel. In connection with the discus-
sion of the working group proposal, Delegation might also explore
briefly allied views on the Australian proposal to hold small informal
technical seminars on CW to acquaint working level members of inter-
6 Telegram 4614 from the Department of State, undated, asked for the postpone-
ment of the talks until February 6. (Telegram 14321 to Moscow, January 19, 1980; Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800032–0105)
7 Not found.
