3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
672
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
self had troops in Cuba, that it maintained a military base on that island
against the wishes of the Cuban government. Under these conditions
the U.S. Administration had nevertheless chosen the path of upholding
a legend whose sharp edge was aimed against the interests of the So-
viet Union. Why such a legend? Who invented it? Why is all this being
done?
Gromyko said that he and his colleagues do not believe that this
was the way to increase the prestige of the United States or respect for
American foreign policy. The Secretary might believe otherwise, but
the Soviets did not, and he thought that they did know a few things
about foreign policy. Did Washington really believe that its prestige
would be boosted as a result of its current stand? He did not think so,
nor did he think that this was any way to cure any harm that had been
done to the prestige of U.S. foreign policy. He would ask the Secretary
to reflect on all this with a cool head and make an effort to free himself
of emotions, keeping in mind the fundamental interests of our respec-
tive governments, the world situation as a whole and the fundamental
interests of peace.
Gromyko recounted the numerous occasions when President
Carter and the Secretary personally had stated that everything had to
be done to prevent the outbreak of another war. Those statements had
certainly been fully in line with Soviet views. Should, then, this artifi-
cial issue be allowed to poison the international atmosphere every-
where, in the UN and here in the U.S. as well as in other parts of the
world? This was something that he could not understand and could not
accept.
Gromyko recalled that during their last conversation he had men-
tioned that there was a way out of the situation. He had tried to put
himself in the Secretary’s shoes. What would the U.S. Administration
lose if it were to say that a certain matter had come up requiring clarifi-
cation, and that after appropriate study and coupled with an appro-
priate statement by the Soviet side, which had helped to clarify the situ-
ation, the Administration had concluded that no threat of any kind
existed for the United States or any other country as a result of the pres-
ence of Soviet training personnel in Cuba who had been there many
years, that there was no question of any sort of threat to the security of
the U.S. The Administration could state that that statement by the So-
viet government, which had not been made before, had made it pos-
sible for the United States government and for President Carter to get
to the bottom of the facts and find a solution to this matter. Thus, the
solution would be based on unilateral statements by the governments
of the Soviet Union and of the United States.
Gromyko had still another consideration that he wanted to bring
to the Secretary’s attention. In his remarks the Secretary had expressed
