National Security Policy  401
that about two-­thirds of those analyzed might be liquidated. The tre­
mendous stock of material involved might be of great significance for 
underdeveloped nations. The President said he had earlier opposed 
the “packaged plant” idea. He had been told by business that the 
material involved in this concept could not be suddenly thrown on 
the market but would have to continue to be held by the Government.
Governor Hoegh wondered whether the machine tools in the 
“packaged plants” could be used in the recovery period after a 
nuclear attack on the U.S. when the industrial capacity of the country 
would be impaired. He felt this matter should be examined before 
the plants were “unloaded.” The President pointed out that, while 
machine tools were very hard to destroy, the labor force which would 
use them and the buildings in which they would be used were easier 
to destroy. Governor Hoegh, while admitting the importance of man­
power, felt the problem should be studied. The President agreed; and 
added that the potential value of the plants to Latin America should 
also be studied.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed the subject in the light of an oral report 
by the Department of Defense, presented by Assistant Secretary of 
Defense McGuire.
b. Noted the President’s statement that he concurred in the general 
direction being taken by the Department of Defense in its Mobilization 
Base planning, and that it should:
(1) Keep under study whether its Mobilization Base planning 
should continue to assume a mobilization period of six months prior 
to D-­day.
(2) Continue its efforts to find a means of taking bomb damage into 
account in its Mobilization Base Planning, while keeping the assump­
tions as to the extent of damage within limits which provide a basis for 
feasible planning.
c. Noted the President’s directive that the Department of Defense 
should, in its study of the disposition of Defense package plants:
(1) Consult with the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization as to 
the possible need for such plants or equipment during the recovery and 
rehabilitation phase if there were nuclear attack upon the United States.
(2) Consult with the Department of State as to the possible use of 
such plants or equipment in assisting the economic development of 
under-­developed Free World nations.
NOTE: The action in b above, as approved by the President, subse­
quently transmitted to the Secretary of Defense for appropriate imple­
mentation, and report back to the NSC on developments within the 
next three months.
