International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978
339
2. Then, immediately assess the prospects for COET;
3. If it appears either that a long delay will occur or that the chances
are against getting COETat all, we should be prepared to impose a fee on
oil imports as a means of seizing the initiative on energy.
The import fee should be set so as to imitate as closely as possible
the effect of COET on petroleum prices and consumer incomes. Too
large a fee would raise prices sharply, and drain income from con-
sumers, thereby raising inflation and reducing economic growth. We
should also be prepared to modify our tax proposals to return the pro-
ceeds of the fee back to consumers, as we promised to do with the net
proceeds of COET. (Unfortunately, we can’t begin returning the funds
until October—the effective date of the tax bill.)
Several other considerations have to be taken into account.
• Before we move we should inform the Saudis; we need to be sure
they won’t react the wrong way—i.e. “why shouldn’t we get the higher
prices instead of the U.S. Treasury.” With the proper explanation they
will, I believe, react favorably.
• Blumenthal and Solomon think there is at least an outside chance
we can use such an action to influence the Germans—i.e. we take
strong action, via the fee, to help the dollar; they take some action to
promote greater German economic growth.
Much technical work needs to be done: What is the proper size of
the fee; should it apply to petroleum product imports as well as crude
oil; etc.? We also need to think through the political ramifications, the
timing, the specific conditions under which it should be invoked, and
how we sound out the Germans without a leak.
Recommendations
I suggest you ask Eizenstat, Schlesinger, Moore, Blumenthal,
Vance, and Schultze to submit to you, by Tuesday, March 7, a paper
which spells out:
• a specific scheme for an import fee;
• an assessment of the conditions under which it would be desir-
able to impose one and the timing of the action;
• an evaluation of the political, legislative, and economic
consequences;
• a scenario for international consultation, including an assess-
ment of the possibility of a German “deal.”
I am attaching a draft directive to the above-named people.3 Either
Schlesinger, Blumenthal, or I could chair the group. The draft names
Schlesinger, but it’s a close call.
3 Attached but not printed is an undated draft memorandum. Carter signed a re-
typed version of the memorandum, which is dated February 27. (Carter Library, Records
of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential File, Box 74, 2/27/78 [2])
