March 27–December 31, 1979
831
some respects could pose potential problems for the continuation of
moderate rule in Egypt over the coming critical months in which nego-
tiations for a comprehensive peace will have to be pursued. The peace
is overwhelmingly popular among Egyptians, but it has been bought at
the price of near-total political isolation in the Arab world, with all that
connotes for the continuation of economic support from the oil-rich,
formerly “moderate” Arabs, and for the ingrained Egyptian claim to
leadership in the Arab world.
13. Egypt’s economy is improved; growth rates are up. But peace
brings its own additional demands in the form of rising popular ex-
pectations on the standard of living, and built-in distortions in the
economy limit the government’s maneuverability in policy terms. (It
would be a reckless policy maker, indeed, who would advocate at-
tacking head-on the enormously costly subsidy burden.)
14. Continued stability in this potentially unstable setting depends
greatly on the political and economic momentum Sadat is able to gen-
erate in the conduct of Egypt’s affairs, and thus is subject to virtually
continual reassessment by the Embassy. Sadat has just pulled off an
historic political coup, and his Economic Ministers are able to point to
significant, identifiable economic advances in some areas of their re-
sponsibility. The question now is: what follows? A brief pause of some
few months in which negotiations remain inconclusive may be accept-
able. After that, if forward movement is not maintained in Egypt’s ex-
ternal and domestic economic problem areas, now quiescent destabi-
lizing forces indoubtedly will surface and pose to Sadat’s government
basic questions of survival.
15. The above arguments are predicated on Sadat’s remaining
around and in power for the immediate future. As indicated earlier,
should he leave office suddenly, the stability problem could become
acute. There is no clear precedent for succession. According to the con-
stitution, if Sadat dies in office the Speaker of the People’s Assembly
would become acting President, until Parliament nominates, and the
electorate endorses, his successor.
16. At the moment, Vice President Mubarak appears to be the clear
favorite, and Sadat’s choice, for this office. His role in vetting the na-
tional Democratic Party’s candidates for the coming election should
give him considerable control over this body. Many, however, would
oppose Mubarak’s assumption of the presidency, undoubtedly em-
boldened by recognition of the fact that the Vice President lacks an in-
dependent power base. Up to now Mubarak is Sadat’s creation.
Without his mentor in the presidency, he would be a much weakened
man. Some suggest, however that Mubarak is ambitious, and with his
man Kamal Hassan Ali as Min Defense, might at some time decide to
make a power play of his own. It is possible in this society, but there is
