Czechoslovakia
335
such a reaction is narrow and chauvinistic, the Charter’s establishment
in Prague undoubtedly is a factor in the Slovak reaction to it.
Political dissidence in Slovakia has not been as marked as in the
Czech lands of Bohemia and Moravia—at least, as far as is known.
This may reflect the somewhat more moderate treatment of former
Dubcek reformers and supporters in Slovakia. Children of Slovaks
purged from the Party since the invasion, for instance, appear to have
more opportunities to higher education than those elsewhere, particu-
larly in Prague. Given their minority status in Czechoslovakia, the
Slovaks may also feel the need to band together against the Czechs
and, therefore, Slovak officials may be less inclined to take harsh actions
toward their bretheren. The purges which followed the 1968 invasion
and the fall of Dubcek in April 1969 appear to have been less severe
in Slovakia than in the Czech lands.
The Slovaks may also feel that their political and economic status
within Czechoslovakia has improved since 1968, when federalization
was enacted—the only surviving major feature of the Dubcek reform
period. Accordingly, they would seem to have less reason to oppose
a regime headed by a Slovak. On the other hand, many Czechs are
known to resent bitterly the present federal structure, which they feel
has the minority Slovaks in dominant Party-Government positions.
Other Shortcomings
Some non-communists reportedly question the motives of various
leading activists in the movement. Particularly the ex-communists are
distrusted and viewed as using the Charter movement as a vehicle
from which to attack those communists in power. The ex-communists
are criticized as opportunistic and insincere, since they now espouse
the civil and human rights which they had ignored while holding
Party positions.
Although some factionalism evidently existed within the Charter
movement in its early stages (e.g., between ex-communists and anti-
communists, Catholics and atheists), the divisions deepened as the
membership grew and became more diverse. The first three spokes-
men—philosopher-professor Jan Patocka, playwright Vaclav Havel,
and former Foreign Minister Jiri Hajek—were well known in Czecho-
slovakia and abroad, and commanded respect and authority. (Neither
Patocka nor Havel was communist; both in fact had been persecuted
by the regime. Hajek, a professor, served as Foreign Minister under
Dubcek; he was among the first of the reformers to be purged after
the invasion.)
Factionalism became more of a problem for leaders of the Charter
after Patocka’s death in March 1977. Younger members were said to
favor more aggressive, confrontational tactics, while Hajek and others
