1060  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Dr. York said that 1958 was marked by further progress on solid 
propellants, progress which led to the initiation of MINUTEMAN. 
Dr. York then pointed to the figures on the chart which indicated the 
funds spent or obligated for various missile programs through FY 1960. 
He pointed out that practically all the funds spent by the U.S. on long-­
range missiles, amounting to between $9 and $10 billion dollars, had 
been spent since 1953.
The President asked whether the figures given by Dr. York included 
short-­range missiles. Dr. York said he had given the figures for long-­
range missiles only. Mr. Stans asked why the SNARK was not shown on 
the chart as operational. Dr. York said SNARK was not operational at 
the end of 1959; and Secretary Gates added that SNARK was just now 
becoming operational.
Secretary Gates said that the development of a U.S. long-­range 
missile program, most of which had taken place since 1953, was a 
remarkable achievement when compared with the development of 
other weapons systems, e.g. fighter aircraft. The President agreed that 
the achievement was indeed remarkable but said that it was difficult to 
explain to the Russians that we had virtually lost the years 1945–1953 so 
far as the development of long-­range missiles was concerned. Dr. York 
felt that our decisions in the years 1945–1953, not to give the highest 
priority to long-­range missile development, had been based on the fact 
that we had the nucleus of a strategic air force with bases near enough 
to the USSR to reach vital targets in that country. By contrast, during this 
period, the Soviet Union did not have the bases or the means of delivery 
to place atomic weapons on the U.S.
Dr. Kistiakowsky, noting that he had been associated with some 
of the early studies, including the Von Neumann Committees, said 
that in 1953 when a survey of the ATLAS program was made, all the 
plans provided that ATLAS would carry a Nagasaki-­type bomb. Since 
that time, of course, the yield of the ATLAS warhead has been con­
stantly increased. Secretary Gates thought the concept of the ATLAS 
had once been the same as the concept of the present Russian ICBM. 
Dr. York agreed that ATLAS had been through the phase mentioned 
by Secretary Gates but noted that ATLAS had achieved its present con­
figuration in 1955. Dr. Kistiakowsky said that in addition to the two 
Von Neumann Committees mentioned by Dr. York there had been a 
third Von Neumann Committee which had produced information on 
the new possibilities of achieving high yields in relation to weight of 
warhead. Dr. York said the seven-­engine and five-­engine concepts for 
ATLAS would have made the gross weight of ATLAS about the same 
gross weight of the present Soviet ICBM.
The President felt the discussion explained why the Soviets had 
produced such large missiles. Dr. York agreed, adding that the Soviets
