Arms Control and Disarmament 1489 approved by the Commission. The amount of the contributions by states shall be determined by special agreement. Ground Control Posts 7. The tasks of the ground control posts shall include the following: (A) The arranging for a continuous round-­the-­clock, observation over nuclear explosions by means of technical facilities recommended by the Geneva Conference of technical experts. (B) Regular, original processing of documentary data obtained by means of all types of equipment of the posts to detect signals character­ istic of a nuclear explosion. (C) Submission, under an established procedure, of reports to the Commission and to the government of the state on whose territory the control post is located on observation data and nuclear explosions. (D) Timely carrying out of calibration and maintenance work ensuring that all technical equipment of the posts is in continuous oper­ ating condition and the maintenance of accurate relative time and of accurate measuring equipment. 8. Each ground control post shall be equipped with seismic and accoustic apparatus, with equipment for registering radiation from nuclear explosions, and instruments for sampling radioactive debris in accordance with the recommendations of the Geneva Conference of technical experts. Certain coastal posts shall also be equipped with hydro-­accoustic equipment. In this connection, the personnel of the control posts may not use measurement instruments which have not been provided for the equipment of such posts. 9. The personnel of a control post shall consist of no more than thirty specialists and of several supporting personnel. With the excep­ tion of controllers from either side, the personnel of the control posts shall be selected from among the nationals of the country on whose territory the post is located. Each post shall include controllers designated by the founder states of the Control Organization on the basis of the two sides, with one or two persons from either side. The post shall be directed by a Chief of Post, a representative of the country on whose territory the post is located, and by a Chief Controller, representing the other side. In countries which are not members of NATO, SEATO and the Warsaw Pact organization, the posts shall have two Chief Controllers, repre­ senting both sides. Foreign controllers shall enjoy diplomatic immunity equal to that of personnel of foreign embassies and missions. Controllers shall place their seals on all self-­recording registering instruments and on means of access to instrument data records, shall
