Afghanistan 335 Afghanistan at the request of Kabul to help repel “armed interference from the outside.”2 Elaborating on this theme, the article states that the regime in Kabul was threatened by insurgents based in Pakistan who have received “unlimited backing” from the US and China. It even claims that Egyptian “specialists” have joined Chinese and American instructors in training the insurgents. US involvement with the insurgents, the article alleges, reflects the efforts of “figures in Washington” to shore up a “strategic arc” in the region, which was “cracked” by the Shah’s ouster. 2 Text of the December 30 TASS release is excerpted in Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XXXII (February 6, 1980), pp. 1–3. According to Anthony Austin, “Soviet Says It Sent a Limited Force to Help Afghans Repel Aggression,” New York Times, December 31, 1979, p. A1, the TASS statement was not only the first media commentary on events in Afghanistan, it was also the Soviets’ first acknowledgement of the invasion in Afghanistan. The Embassy in Kabul received the first diplomatic note from the new regime on December 31, as reported in telegram 8730. The note read: “The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan presents its compliments to the U.S. Embassy in Kabul and has the honor to state: ‘On the evening of Jadi 6, 1358 (December 27, 1979), the usurping and tyrannical regime of Hafizullah Amin collapsed as a result of corruption and anti-Khalq actions. In this sensitive moment, comprehending its grave national and historic responsibility, the Revolutionary Council of the DRA took over the ruling power of government and appointed Babrak Karmal as the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA).” The note stated that Karmal had declared Amin’s rule “obliterated forever” and identified the 11 members of the new Presidium of the Revolutionary Council. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Cables File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 12/31/79)
