414  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
the Middle East, and Latin America. As a result, the overall U.S. lead in 
the diplomatic balance has improved (Table 4).
PRM–10 pointed out that while the U.S. was the most powerful 
country in the world and the USSR was second, of the next five stron-
gest countries, four were allies of the U.S. and one (the PRC) was the 
enemy of the Soviet Union. The significance of U.S. allies in the global 
balance is underlined in Table 5. Although in three of these four power 
resources, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., in all four the U.S. together 
with its allies and friends (not including the PRC) is ahead of the USSR 
and its associates, often by a substantial margin.
The PRM–10 assessment suggested that the initiative in terms of 
political and ideological appeal might be shifting to the U.S. Newly 
analyzed evidence on trends in world opinion supports this hypothe-
sis. From the early 1960s to the mid-1970s, the favorable gap between 
Soviet and U.S. standing narrowed dramatically, with U.S. popularity 
being eroded by Vietnam, racial strife, and Watergate, while the unpop-
ularity of the Soviet Union was eroded by detente. Since 1976, how-
ever, scattered evidence suggests that these trends have been reversed. 
American popularity is clearly on the rise, though it still remains well 
below the highs of the early 1960s. Soviet standing in world opinion, 
in contrast, has plummeted to depths unequalled since the late 1950s. 
These preliminary findings will be tested and hopefully confirmed by 
more comprehensive ICA polling in November 1978.
E. Intensified contrasting trends in economic and technology. The trend 
in overall economic resources and productivity is now more clearly 
favorable to the U.S. than it was 18 months ago. The trend in technol-
ogy remains strongly favorable to the Soviet Union, although the U.S. 
still retains a substantial overall advantage. During the past year, the 
U.S. has attempted to increase its potential gains from U.S.-Soviet eco-
nomic interaction.
It now appears that during 1976–79, for the first four-­year period 
since World War II, the real U.S. economic growth rate (4.6%) will 
exceed both the Soviet economic growth rate (3.5–4.0%) and the aver-
age growth rate of the other OECD states (3.5%). Soviet industry grew 
at its lowest rate since World War II in 1976 and its second lowest rate 
in 1977. The problems of coordinating U.S. economic policies with our 
allies have, however, become more apparent than they were two years 
ago, and overall international economic prospects seem gloomier than 
they did then. Nonetheless, at present, the energy picture for the U.S. is 
less threatening than it was previously, due to slower world economic 
recovery, increased conservation, and the short-­term effects of North 
Sea and North Slope supplies. During 1977, on the other hand, Soviet 
oil production grew by its lowest rate in 30 years, and this past year 
the Soviets launched various measures to attempt quickly to increase
