Dominican Republic  527
The Commerce Department has indicated its willingness to apply 
the necessary export controls.3
Christian A. Herter
[Enclosure]
Suggested Statement to be made in Special Committee of the 
Council of the OAS on Resolution I of the Sixth Meeting of 
Foreign Ministers
My Delegation is now prepared to present for the consideration 
of this Special Committee its views with respect to the mandate given 
the Council of the Organization of American States by Resolution I of 
the Sixth Meeting of Foreign Ministers to study the feasibility and 
desirability of extending the suspension in trade with the Dominican 
Republic to articles in addition to arms.
Some time ago this Committee was informed that the United States 
was preparing a study on Dominican foreign trade by commodity and 
country in an attempt to assess the feasibility of an embargo by the 
American States on specific items of Dominican commerce. As a first 
result of this study, petroleum and petroleum products and trucks and 
spare parts, which are not produced in the Dominican Republic, appear 
to the United States Government to be examples of items the export of 
which to the Dominican Republic it would be feasible to suspend at 
this time.
With respect to petroleum and its products, in 1959 62% of 
Dominican imports by value came from the Netherlands Antilles 
directly and from Venezuela indirectly, 14% from the United States, 
and 13% from Venezuela. During the past year, Caribbean sources of 
Dominican petroleum imports have been largely out off. There are 
indications, however, that the Dominican Republic has started to tap 
other sources of petroleum supply, namely in Canada, Europe and 
perhaps the Middle East. This, of course, would tend to reduce the 
effectiveness of a total suspension in the exports of the OAS member 
states. Any effective embargo on all or most of the Dominican sup-
ply of petroleum would undoubtedly have a serious adverse effect 
on the Dominican people as inevitably would any measures taken 
which would have an impact on the Dominican economy. Dominican 
internal transport and over one-­half of Dominican production of 
3 A handwritten notation on the source text reads: “9 December 60, State informed 
of President’s approval.”
