1400  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
out, represented an unfortunate retrogression in the progress of our 
negotiations we have made no progress on this subject, and I have felt 
that you have not been sincerely interested in reaching agreement on 
it, but rather have attempted to obscure our discussions by bringing up 
subsidiary side issues. This tactic will not get us anywhere, for only by 
resolving satisfactorily the issue of renunciation of force can we expect 
to make progress on other topics under item two of our agenda. As 
I said at our last meeting I am prepared to discuss this vital issue as 
long as necessary to reach agreement, and when this has been accom­
plished we can go on to discuss other topics under agenda item two.
h. Mr. Ambassador, it is unfortunate that nearly two years after we 
had reached an agreement under agenda item one I should still find it 
necessary to come back to that item in these meetings. It is difficult for 
the American people and I must confess for me, Mr. Ambassador, to 
understand how six of the Americans whose cases we came here two 
years ago specifically to discuss can still remain in prison in spite of 
our agreement. Once again let me stress, too, that it is not only a mat­
ter of American inability to understand how this situation can exist, 
but a matter of strong and deeply felt indignation on the part of all 
Americans that it does exist.
i. As far as I can see, Mr. Ambassador, if there have been any 
measures taken by your government since the agreed announcement 
respecting the Americans who remain imprisoned in your country, they 
would seem to have had an effect opposite to that which was clearly 
set out as your intention in the agreed announcement. Otherwise, how 
can it be explained that during the whole year of 1956 and up to the 
present in the year 1957, not a single imprisoned American citizen has 
been released by the authorities of your country until his full sentence 
was completed? Is this by any stretch of the imagination an indication 
that measures have been taken to help these unfortunate citizens return 
to their country? Is it possible that not one American who remained in 
your jails after December 1955 could be credited with good behaviour 
which might have enabled the authorities in the normal course of events 
(regardless of the agreed announcement or of these discussions) to 
have released the prisoner a few weeks or months before the expiration 
of his sentence? On the record of the past year and a half, it is difficult 
to escape the conclusion, Mr. Ambassador, that the agreed announce­
ment solemnly made between us has in no way expedited the release 
of the imprisoned Americans. If this is not so, I would appreciate it if 
you could cite one single measure taken by the authorities of your gov­
ernment to carry out the agreed announcement with respect to Messrs. 
Downey, Redmond, Fecteau, McCann, Wagner or MacCormack.
j. Release of these imprisoned Americans, all of whom have served 
many years in jail already, would have been an action not only in keep­
ing with the letter and spirit of this agreed announcement but also a
