National Security Policy  393
the concept of shelter, namely, to provide fall-­out shelters by modifica­
tion of existing Federal buildings on a selected basis. Governor Hoegh’s 
recommendation envisaged a cost of this procedure of approximately 
$5 million during the next fiscal year.
After Governor Hoegh had explained the reasons for making this 
recommendation and the great need for a Federal example, he pointed 
out that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had signified their approval of the rec­
ommendation. General Taylor, the Acting Chairman, Joint Chiefs of 
Staff, indicated that the approval of the Joint Chiefs was to be inter­
preted in terms of the principle but not the dollar costs.
The President referred to the fact that in the course of his remarks 
earlier, Governor Hoegh had referred to an individual who had built 
an extremely confortable, commodious, and safe blast shelter at a cost 
of only $15,000. The President inquired how deep this shelter was and 
how it was possible to build one for as little as $15,000. Governor Hoegh 
replied by pointing out that the shelter in question was built only to with­
stand blast pressures of 30 psi. although it did qualify as a blast shelter.
The President said that the reason he had asked this question was 
that he himself had long been undecided as to whether or not it would 
be a good thing for the President to build such a shelter and thus set 
an example to other people or whether if he went ahead and built such 
a shelter, the effect would be to scare other people to death. But all his 
calculations had added up to a cost much larger than $15,000. Governor 
Hoegh said he would undertake to get plans for the $15,000 shelter to 
which he had referred for the President and the President said that he 
would very much like to see them.
The President then asked if there were any other comments. The 
Director, Bureau of the Budget said that he would like to make four 
points regarding Governor Hoegh’s recommendation for a $5 million 
appropriation to provide fall-­out shelters on a selected basis in existing 
Federal buildings. The first point, said Mr. Stans, was to warn that the 
proposed $5 million program might end up by becoming only the down 
payment on a much larger program. He reminded the members of the 
Council of an earlier $90 million estimate for providing fall-­out shelter 
in U.S. post offices over the country. He therefore doubted whether this 
program would stop with an expenditure of $5 million.
Secondly, Mr. Stans said, he wished to raise a question as to timing. 
He pointed out that Governor Hoegh had already referred to research 
prototype programs which were being undertaken in order to deter­
mine the best type of shelter. Five million dollars had been allocated to 
this program. Would it not be premature to proceed to build shelters in 
existing Federal buildings until the results of the research and proto­
type programs had come in?
Mr. Stans’ third point related to the nation-­wide survey now under­
way to determine what existed by way of shelter in existing buildings.
