1980 853 the “moderate” estimates of Soviet forces contained in the most recent National Intelligence Estimate (NIE).3 The moderate Soviet force with a new 10–RV ICBM is compared with currently programmed U.S. forces for SALT-­limited cases. For the No-SALT cases, projected Soviet forces are compared with two U.S. force alternatives: (1) a minimum U.S. reaction that expands MX and retains all older systems; and (2) a larger U.S. force buildup that includes extensive bomber force modernization. With SALT • Our current plans would retain the U.S. lead in warhead numbers and arrest the negative trends in other static indicators such as equivalent megatons and hard target kill. • When compared with the static indicators, the U.S. position would be somewhat more favorable in the balance of forces that survive an initial counterforce exchange, particularly if forces are on generated alert when the strategic conflict begins. • The capability of surviving U.S. forces to retaliate against economic and non-­silo military targets in the Soviet Union would increase steadily after 1981, due primarily to programmed improvements in the submarine and bomber forces. Without SALT • The Soviets are projected to increase their strategic forces substantially if SALT II limits are not observed. In the absence of a U.S. response, the pre-­exchange balance indicators would continue their current adverse trend. The post-­exchange balance would also shift to the Soviets’ advantage. However, our capability to devastate Soviet economic and non-­silo military targets would degrade only modestly from the SALT case. • The U.S. could add to its planned strategic forces to deny the Soviets a clear advantage in the strategic balance. However, such programs would require substantial new funding for increased strategic forces and production of nuclear materials, just as would the Soviet increases beyond SALT levels. MX • Deployment of MX in multiple protective shelters (MPS) would reverse currently unfavorable trends in the strategic balance, with or without a SALT II agreement. In the No-SALT case, however, this reversal would require a larger and more costly MX program. 3 See the attachment to Document 184.
