1955  367
I would reply in detail at next meeting. I would hope at next meeting 
question implementation would be satisfactorily resolved so not neces­
sary to spend time on that.
53. I said I had made suggestion last meeting regarding subjects we 
might discuss and order in which we might discuss them. It seemed me 
it would contribute to orderly progress our discussion if we had some 
understanding regarding order we would discuss questions. Regarding 
item on accounting for US personnel I had in mind question of military 
personnel still missing from Korean hostilities concerning whom my 
government had reason believe authorities in his country might have 
some information. However I considered problem of renunciation of 
force as most important and most fundamental subject with which we 
had to deal. Therefore, I considered we should discuss that first and we 
would be prepared at next meeting to go into that subject.
54. I said I welcomed his statement that he shared my hope we 
could make progress in dealing with some of these problems here. I 
believed we could. It seemed to me, only after we saw what progress 
we were able to make here, that question of what would happen after 
these meetings would arise. I had given my thoughts regarding dis­
cussion of meeting at higher level and what he had said in that regard 
did not change my view previously expressed that this was procedural 
matter. I honestly did not see how question of where or in what forum 
we discussed these issues between us was an issue in itself. These were 
two different matters. First was practical questions between two coun­
tries. Entirely apart from these was where they should be discussed and 
by whom. My government had agreed to our discussing these practical 
questions here. I could not see how proposal of another place to discuss 
these questions was in itself a practical matter, and nothing he had said 
had served to change my mind on this. I desired to make a careful reply 
to rest of his statement at next meeting.
55. Wang said by item “accounting for personnel” had I in mind 
personnel in Korea conflict?
56. I said American personnel.
57. Wang said he thought there was no reason for raising this ques­
tion which had already become famous because of discussions regard­
ing it at Kaesong and Panmunjom. He felt it regrettable that questions 
of Korean War which had already been discussed were being put for­
ward at this meeting. If there was to be any talk about accounting for 
personnel it was for United States to account for personnel it detained 
in Korean War. If I wanted to raise this question he would also reserve 
right raise similar question of this nature.
58. Wang said he could not accept our contention that discussion 
preparations for higher level meeting was merely procedural matter. 
He had in mind that issues outstanding importance between China
