316
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
sadors in South Korea and Bangladesh have refused thus far to raise it
with the host government.4
—Evidently new contracts must be signed next Monday.5 Thus we
must either press ahead to secure these amendments in the contracts,
thereby risking a repetition of our experience with Indonesia in other
countries, or seek less offensive new reporting requirements, or drop
for at least this round of PL–480 shipments any effort to change the con-
tracts with recipient governments.
—This effort—which Agriculture leaked to the Washington Post
last week—has encountered a frosty reception from the Hill.6 Senator
Inouye is livid about it and has indicated his belief that the Executive
Branch is over-interpreting the Congressional intent embodied in Sec-
tion 112–A. Senator Humphrey, we are told, is disturbed that the
enormous effort that he put into the development of the PL–480 pro-
gram over the years may be jeopardized by this ill-considered move.
Twelve Senators have written to express their dismay that the United
States would withhold food from less developed countries as a lever on
human rights.7
—Bob Bergland evidently is eager to repeal Section 112–A of the
law. But that will take time and will not resolve our immediate
problem.
—The continued delays in shipments that have resulted from this
confusion are costly to the recipients. For example, in the seven weeks
shipments have been held up, the cost of commodities desired by In-
donesia has increased by $17 million.
A reasonable interpretation of the law does not require us to with-
hold shipments from any of the intended recipients. We believe it
would be desirable to expedite early dispatch of the commodities. Since
this has become a public issue, however, it would be prudent to consult
with the Congressional leadership and secure their understanding that
for this round of shipments we will not attempt to add new amend-
ments to PL–480 contracts, while leaving open the future of Section
4 In telegram 9871 from Seoul, November 22, Sneider indicated that while he would
carry out the Department’s instructions regarding the P.L. 480 negotiations, he wanted to
express his “personal reservations” concerning the policy and its potential negative im-
pact on U.S. relations with the ROK Government. (National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, P840084–2025)
5 December 5. Inderfurth underlined this sentence beginning with the word
“contracts.”
6 Presumable reference to Washington Post reporter Dan Morgan’s November 22
and 23 articles; see footnote 9, Document 90.
7 Brzezinski placed a vertical line in the margin next to the portion of the paragraph
that begins with “effort” and ends with “rights.” Fourteen Senators signed the November
16 letter to Talmadge; see footnote 5, Document 92.
