discussed at the Sixth International Conference of American States at Habana, and it is desired that with respect to this subject you shall be guided primarily by the counsel of your Technical Adviser, Dr. John D. Long. Your especial attention is, however, invited to the resolution relative to the creation of Ministries of Health, and to the resolutions permitting the calling together of the Board of Directors and the creation of the position of Traveling Representative. With respect to the former, it is believed that the creation of a Ministry of Health is a matter of national rather than of international concern; and with respect to the latter, the approval of which presumably would entail larger appropriations toward the upkeep of the Pan American Sanitary Bureau, you should bear in mind the necessity for action by the Congress of the United States on all matters involving the expenditure of public funds. Topic 5. Consideration of the action taken by the countries of America for the organization and development of national Red Cross Societies, and the results of the Pan American Red Cross Conference referred to in the resolution adopted by the Fifth International Conference of American States on April 12, 1923. In conformity with a resolution proposed by the American Delegates at the Fifth International Conference of American States, successful Pan American Red Cross Conferences were held at Buenos Aires in 1923 and at Washington in 1926. To the results of those conferences, contained in their Final Acts (Appendix No. 34),46 you may lend your approval. It is probable that one of the other nations represented at the Conference will present the following resolution approving of the Red Cross work: “The Sixth International Conference of American States, Notes with satisfaction that, in pursuance to a resolution of the Fifth International Conference of American States at Santiago, successful Pan-American Red Cross conferences have been held in Buenos Aires in 1923 and in Washington in 1926, under the auspices of the League of Red Cross Societies.
