National Security Policy 591 retaliatory and other essential targets will still face great difficulties of timing and distribution of attack against widely deployed, mobile, and ready Western strengths. The USSR’s missile-­carrying submarines will contribute further to its capabilities, but the scale of their use in an ini­ tial attack would depend upon the Soviet judgment of the risk of pre­ mature disclosure of intent. Air Defense Forces 157. All Bloc forces useful for air defense are organized for partici­ pation in an integrated system which places primary emphasis on pro­ viding defense in depth for key administrative, industrial, and military centers within the USSR. We believe that air defense will continue to be given high priority. 158. Air defense weapons. The principal current weapon system for defense of Sino-Soviet Bloc targets against high-­altitude attack is the high-­performance jet fighter, of which there are over 14,000 in oper­ ational units throughout the Bloc. More than 10,000 of these fighters are in Soviet units, about 4,200 of them in units whose sole mission is air defense and the remainder in units with air defense as one of their primary missions. The principal day fighter in Soviet forces is the sub­ sonic FRESCO, although about 1,200 supersonic FARMER day fighters were in units as of 1 October 1958. Also in service are the FLASHLIGHT all-­weather fighter, as well as the FRESCO “D” and FARMER “B” with limited all-­weather capabilities, but their introduction has proceeded at a relatively slow pace. Total Soviet strength in the FLASHLIGHT and FRESCO “D” types was about 1,730 as of 1 October 1958, with some FARMER “B” types also in operational units. 159. Most Bloc jet fighters in operational units have combat ceil­ ings of 50,000–55,000 feet; FARMER and certain FRESCO versions probably have combat ceilings on the order of 60,000 feet. During 1959–1963 the USSR will probably introduce new day and all-­weather fighter types, whose characteristics will emphasize speed and altitude at the expense of combat radius. By 1962 the latest operational Soviet fighters will probably be capable of operating at altitudes up to 67,000 feet, and of climbing to 40,000 feet in less than two minutes.21 Air-­to-­air missiles are probably now available to improve the kill capabilities of Soviet interceptors, although we have no evidence that they have as yet been supplied to operational units. Total numerical strength in fighters will probably decrease after another year or two, because of the grow­ ing destructive power of individual interceptors, greater demands on industrial capacity resulting from the advent of more complex fighters, 21 For estimated performance characteristics of Soviet fighter aircraft, see Annex, Table 9. [Footnote is in the original.]
