238
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
implementation and the inevitable negotiations which will follow the
Vance mission. (S)
4. Oil Purchase. Secretary Miller reported that Treasury had been
requested to license purchase of Iranian oil at a contractual price of
$16 per barrel by a Japanese company which is half owned by U.S.
companies. The SCC agreed that such a purchase at a low price would
be in our interest and that such a license should be issued.5 (C)
5. Iranian Diplomats. State will call in the Iranian Chargé, Mr. Agah,
today and notify him that the Iranian embassy in Washington should
be reduced to 15 people and the consulates reduced to five persons
each, for a total representation of 35 people.6 An announcement will
be made by State. State will reexamine the question of closing one or
more consulates entirely. (S)
6. Immigration. A total of 46,000 Iranian students have been inter-
viewed thus far, of which 37,000 are in status. Fewer than 1,000 have
chosen voluntary departures; the remaining 8,000 or so face deportation
hearings. Many of those will choose asylum or plead extenuating cir-
cumstances. Justice is preparing a public announcement on the status
of the program within the next few days, which will be coordinated
with Jody Powell. (C)
7. IEA. According to preliminary reports, Lamsdorff is resisting
our efforts at import quotas and tough controls. He told Mr. Solomon
that the IEA meeting was going to produce nothing meaningful. We
will have more detail when Secretary Duncan returns. (C)
8. Espionage Tribunal. State, CIA, Defense and Mr. Cutler are to
consult on the best approach to deal with charges of U.S. interference
in Iranian domestic affairs which we could anticipate coming out of a
tribunal. State is extending its White Paper to cover the period since
Mossadeq. In the first instance, all agreed that we would focus on
abuse of the hostages and the fact that convening such a tribunal while
they are being held was an additional form of abuse. If the hostages
are released, interest in the tribunal will decline. Mr. Cutler will take
the lead in examining legal steps we could take to obstruct participation
in such a panel by respected American or European figures.7 (S)
5 Carter approved this item with a checkmark and initialed in the right margin.
6 On a December 6 memorandum from Vance, next to an item suggesting that
Iranian diplomatic and consular representation in the United States could be reduced
from 188 to 35, Carter wrote: “This is excessively generous, but ok. Have them cut to these
numbers. You didn’t say what they can do re student funds without the consulates.
How do they take care of students in Miami? LA?” (Carter Library, Plains File, Box 14)
7 Carter wrote in the left margin: “I want an excellent White Paper. Post-hostage
inquiries and criticisms must be assessed immediately & accurately.”
