Human Rights The Group is aided significantly by its staff-level working group. The working group screens all upcoming bilateral and multilateral programs and loans for their human rights implications, including whether they would benefit the needy. The working group recommends approval of the vast majority of the matters it reviews, either because of the proposed recipient’s favorable or improving human rights record or because the proposed assistance would benefit the needy. When there is disagreement on these issues or where there is consensus that the human rights record of a proposed recipient is so bad as to warrant opposing or deferring the assistance in question, the working group refers the matter for review by the Interagency Group. (The Interagency Group also has the option of reviewing matters which the working group has recommended for approval.) Prior to each of its meetings, the Group receives extensive agenda materials. These materials include detailed descriptions of the loans or grants to be considered, including consideration of whether the proposed assistance would benefit the needy. The agenda materials also include extensive information on human rights conditions in the countries proposed as recipients of assistance. In addition, other fundamental U.S. interests with respect to the country in question are described since the Group pays close attention to the relationship of our human rights concerns to other critical U.S. objectives. The agenda materials also include a list of other U.S. or multilateral assistance to the proposed recipient which is likely to be presented for decision in the near future, as well as a description of previous U.S. actions concerning the human rights situation in the country in question. At the Group’s meetings, each loan or grant on the agenda is separately considered. The representative of the relevant State Department regional bureau leads off the discussion with an assessment of our bilateral relationship with the recipient country, of the human rights situation there, of our human rights and other objectives, and of the role our position on the loan or grant under consideration might play. In short, the regional bureau representative sets forth a strategy for dealing with the country in question and suggests tactics that would carry out that strategy. Comments are then called for by other participants. Typically, the discussion will focus not only on the current situation but also on whether there is a genuine trend toward or away from improvements in human rights conditions. After discussion, the Group frequently recommends that the loan or grant should be approved: because human rights conditions in the recipient country are good or are authentically improving; because other means can and should be used for the time being to indicate our human rights concerns; or because the assistance will benefit the needy. When appropriate, the Group may advise that the approval should be
