Human Rights
453
The Group is aided significantly by its staff-level working group.
The working group screens all upcoming bilateral and multilateral pro-
grams and loans for their human rights implications, including
whether they would benefit the needy. The working group recom-
mends approval of the vast majority of the matters it reviews, either be-
cause of the proposed recipient’s favorable or improving human rights
record or because the proposed assistance would benefit the needy.
When there is disagreement on these issues or where there is consensus
that the human rights record of a proposed recipient is so bad as to war-
rant opposing or deferring the assistance in question, the working
group refers the matter for review by the Interagency Group. (The In-
teragency Group also has the option of reviewing matters which the
working group has recommended for approval.)
Prior to each of its meetings, the Group receives extensive agenda
materials. These materials include detailed descriptions of the loans or
grants to be considered, including consideration of whether the pro-
posed assistance would benefit the needy. The agenda materials also
include extensive information on human rights conditions in the coun-
tries proposed as recipients of assistance. In addition, other funda-
mental U.S. interests with respect to the country in question are de-
scribed since the Group pays close attention to the relationship of our
human rights concerns to other critical U.S. objectives. The agenda ma-
terials also include a list of other U.S. or multilateral assistance to the
proposed recipient which is likely to be presented for decision in the
near future, as well as a description of previous U.S. actions concerning
the human rights situation in the country in question.
At the Group’s meetings, each loan or grant on the agenda is sepa-
rately considered. The representative of the relevant State Department
regional bureau leads off the discussion with an assessment of our bi-
lateral relationship with the recipient country, of the human rights situ-
ation there, of our human rights and other objectives, and of the role
our position on the loan or grant under consideration might play. In
short, the regional bureau representative sets forth a strategy for
dealing with the country in question and suggests tactics that would
carry out that strategy. Comments are then called for by other partici-
pants. Typically, the discussion will focus not only on the current situa-
tion but also on whether there is a genuine trend toward or away from
improvements in human rights conditions.
After discussion, the Group frequently recommends that the loan
or grant should be approved: because human rights conditions in the
recipient country are good or are authentically improving; because
other means can and should be used for the time being to indicate our
human rights concerns; or because the assistance will benefit the needy.
When appropriate, the Group may advise that the approval should be
