In the memorandum of the Honorable Secretary of State it is stated that he has to deal with a question which turns upon a point of national honor. Now, he adds, national honor is a very real thing, and in this particular case, it is perfectly clear that national susceptibilities in this regard are peculiarly sensitive in both countries and must be fully protected. This statement is of importance and we should congratulate ourselves that it has been inserted in the document on the [under] consideration. Indeed, the controversy regarding Tacna and Arica is intimately and closely related to the honor and dignity of Peru. Tacna and Arica were always since colonial times until the present, an integral part of our territory. These provinces which constitute a part of the national heart, cannot be transferred to a third power in times of peace without impairing the national honor, affecting the dignity of the country and destroying the most cherished expectations of Peru. It is deserving of praise that the Honorable Secretary of State should have taken as a point of inspiration in his proposal not to wound the national honor and dignity of any country. Those good intentions, unfortunately, would not materialize with the cession of Tacna and Arica to Bolivia. And if to this is added that the cession is neither gratuitous nor founded on right, but it is to be placed on the basis of pecuniary compensations, then it will be necessary to conclude that by that cession the honor and dignity of Peru would not only suffer but would be irretrievably outraged. The Bolivian Government itself in its note of December 8th [7th],54 in answer to the Chilean Memorandum55 regarding the proposal of the Honorable Secretary of State makes the following illustrative declaration: If the Government of Bolivia should ever acquire sovereignty of these territories, Tacna and Arica, it is understood that it will fulfill all duties which devolve upon it for the defense and support of those dominions; those provinces cannot be made the subject of a bargain nor can they be transferred any more than any other part of the national territory. As it can be seen, Bolivia must regard her territory as sacred. She cannot sell it or transfer it. This is no doubt true; therefore if Bolivia is required thus to consider the nature of the territory which is sold to her, it is only reasonable to expect that Peru should consider it with the same respect and that it shall
