Chile  255
draining foreign exchange reserves. The new Minister of Finance ini-
tially took a strong position for a sizeable devaluation of the peso but he 
agreed to accept only about half of the depreciation he had requested 
when the opposition took advantage of the Government’s indecisive-
ness. Since then, the Government has unified the dual exchange market 
in accordance with IMF recommendations but it is now too early to 
assess the impact of this measure on the reserve position since there is 
no assurance that the rate of exchange will be permitted to move with 
the market.
In a series of radio speeches and in its submission to Congress, 
the Alessandri Government indicated that it expected to request bud-
getary and balance of payments loans from abroad and showed little 
liking for fiscal and credit restraint. The budget now before Congress 
envisages a global deficit of about 210 billion pesos ($210 million) of 
which 60 billion pesos is requested to cover unpaid bills from the previ-
ous Administration, 75 billion for public works including housing, and 
70 billion for wage increases. The Government expects to finance 100 
billion pesos of this total by increased tax revenues and has indicated 
that it wishes to obtain the remainder through foreign loans. President 
Alessandri has written a letter to President Eisenhower requesting 
him to use his influence with U.S. institutions in regard to prospec-
tive Chilean loan applications. On February 16, Special Assistant to the 
Minister of Finance, Figueroa, is expected in Washington to hold dis-
cussions with the IMF and with the U. S. Government agencies on these 
loan possibilities.
The IMF discussions will be necessary since Chile is not now eli-
gible to draw the $6 million for the first quarter of 1959 remaining in 
the standby arrangements largely because no agreement was reached 
on a satisfactory rate of foreign exchange sales by the Central Bank. It 
is now hoped that a revised one-­year extension of the standby agree-
ment expiring in March, can be worked out between Chile and the IMF 
which would require Chile to maintain budgetary, monetary, and for-
eign exchange policies aimed at achieving financial stability.
During 1958 the Ibánez Administration used about $40 million 
of balance of payments loans from abroad. For 1959 it is anticipated 
that the average price of copper will be about 30 cents compared 
with 25 cents for 1958, which would give Chile an increase of about 
$30 million in dollar earnings. In addition, there remains the $6 mil-
lion undrawn under the standby for the first quarter of 1959. Then fur-
ther resources of $12.5 million may be available from the IMF and the 
private U.S. banks, if the Chileans reach agreement with the IMF on 
renewal of the standby. Therefore, Chile will have available in 1959 in 
additional foreign finances about the equivalent of the balance of pay-
ments loans made to the previous Government in 1958. Foreign debt
