International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1978 Appendix Paper2 Washington, undated Key Objectives on Critical Issues The following is a discussion of key issues in the MTN, including those points which may require political-level resolution early in July. Agriculture.—Agricultural issues are the most difficult in the MTN. We are committed to Congress and the U.S. agricultural community to conclude agreement of substantial benefit for U.S. agricultural trade. The primary interest of our agricultural community is to achieve improved market access for specific U.S. commodities. It has become apparent, however, that even modest results in this area will require a major negotiating effort. Another objective of the United States is to achieve a better basis for international cooperation on issues involving agricultural trade. Since the GATT has been totally ineffective in this area, and since disputes over agricultural policy usually involve powerful political interests, we see progress in this area as vital for a harmonious relationship between the U.S. and Europe in the future. However, our agricultural community does not see progress in this area as an adequate substitute for improved market access. The basic interest of the European Community in agriculture is to achieve, in addition to market access for EC exports, greater price stability in world markets in order to reduce the pressure exerted by the world markets on the common agricultural policy. In the EC, some share our desire to establish a better basis for cooperation on agricultural issues, most notably Finn Gundelach, EC Commission Vice President in charge of agriculture. However, as in the United States, this is not a popular issue politically. The following are major agricultural policy issues which remain to be resolved. They are listed in order of priority and negotiating difficulty. (1) Response by the EC, Japan and Canada for improved access for U.S. exports of key commodities. (2) Nature of discipline to be developed on the use of agricultural export subsidies. 2 No classification marking. An unknown person made several marginal notations throughout this paper.
