1548  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
negotiators were holding firm against the veto and self-inspection. The 
position is awkward because of the new U.S. technical data indicating 
uncertainties in detection procedures for underground nuclear explo­
sions. If there is a breakdown in the negotiations, however, we want it to 
come as a result of an unreasonable Soviet attitude toward sound control 
procedures, not as a result of a shift in the U.S.–U.K. objective of suspend­
ing nuclear weapons tests under effective control. If we were to abandon 
the Geneva experts’ report, agreed to this summer after technical discus­
sions held at the initiative of the United States, we would be in a very 
bad posture.
Mr. Lovett observed that the technical basis on which the U.S. was 
negotiating appeared to be undermined and it might be desirable to clar­
ify and change the U.S. position rather than rely on our ability to handle 
the negotiations in a way which would lead to a Soviet break. Mr. Foster 
said that he understood the U.S. scientists believed that the capabilities 
of the Geneva control system could be restored. Mr. McCloy said that it 
appeared to be a case of normal scientific chance and uncertainty rather 
than error in fact or judgement. The Secretary said that the problem was 
under active study and that after the scientific restudy is completed any 
necessary Presidential review of our position would be made. 
Mr. Lovett said that he felt there was a growing concern among the 
sophisticated public that we might be in an untenable and possibly dan­
gerous position and that any control system which could be negotiated 
might have unacceptable risks and loopholes. Mr. Dulles said that unfor­
tunately this public impression was difficult to deal with since the real 
answer to it had to be given by explaining our negotiating position and 
tactics with the Soviet Union, which in turn would prejudice the position 
of our negotiators as it became public. We are presently in the position 
of a poker player with someone standing behind him holding up a mir­
ror to show his hand to the opposition. However, our situation is sound 
and we will play out the negotiation despite the criticism. Mr. Farley 
pointed out that we were not relying merely on the likely Soviet rejec­
tion of effective control and inspection procedures. The Geneva experts’ 
report provides a basic principle which has not been challenged: namely, 
that seismic events which cannot be recognized as earthquakes through 
scientific equipment alone must be checked on-the-spot by inspection 
teams. The only thing that has been questioned is their estimate of the 
number of seismic events which scientific instruments could identify as 
earthquakes, an estimate which apparently was too optimistic. How­
ever, that factual estimate, which was accurate on the basis of the then 
available information, has no binding force; the binding principle is 
that on-the-spot inspection must decide the cases which are unresolved 
by reading the instrument. Thus we are protected and the Russians if 
anything are under greater pressure arising from the greater number of 
on-the-spot inspections.
