French position in this connection was explained by the French Minister in
a letter transmitted with Diplomatic Circular No. 41, of February 16, 1925,
a copy of which was sent to the Department on March 19, 1925, without
covering despatch.16
Those persons who hold the view that the Mixed Court at Shanghai has
always been conducted on the earlier rather than the later principle are not
without certain arguments to support their contention. They point to the
early formation of the Court (1869) and to the Chinese name it has always
borne (which the Chinese Government now proposes to change) “hui shen
kung t’ang” which may be translated “Court of Joint Adjudication”. They
point, also, to the presence of the Assessor on the bench and the power he
wields, in practice superior to that of the Chinese Magistrate, in the
formulation of the judgment. They contrast these prerogatives and power
with the strictly defined and limited powers of the foreign assessor in the
trial of mixed cases under the procedure prescribed by the Treaty of 1880,
which obtains elsewhere than at Shanghai.
I would respectfully point out, therefore, that while the powers of the
foreign Assessors in the International Mixed Court at Shanghai are
undoubtedly greater than the powers of Assessors elsewhere, those powers
are actually exercised in a judicial capacity and must on that account be
wielded with the strictest impartiality.
Further to illustrate the difference in practice between the functions of the
American Assessor in other ports and at Shanghai I have the honor to recall
that the Treaty of 1880 authorizes the Assessor to “present witnesses”.
Since he appears on behalf of the American plaintiff it follows that he
concerns himself solely with securing the attendance of witnesses who
support the plaintiff’s pleading. He also demands the production of
evidence for a similar purpose. American lawyers are not permitted to
practice in Chinese courts and the Assessor consequently appears as the
plaintiff’s advocate. Were the American Assessor in the Mixed Court at
Shanghai to concern himself solely with witnesses and evidence favorable
to the American plaintiff he would at once afford solid ground for the
complaint now made by Chinese and non-extraterritorial foreigners that the
“interested Assessor” is not an impartial judge, and the result of his one-
