World Hunger and Food Policy
875
countries to acknowledge the problem. Of critical importance is the prevention
of relief assistance for political or military reasons, thereby using hunger and
famine as a weapon of armed conflict or political repression.
• The outcome of the war on hunger, by the year 2000 and beyond, will be
determined not by forces beyond human control, but by decisions and actions
well within the capability of nations and people working individually and
together.
C. Preliminary Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger
In formulating its recommendations, the Commission has quite
deliberately not restricted itself to those which are the most politically
attractive and feasible. We have recommended actions which flow
from an analysis that is by no means new, but which—though accepted
in the context of international conferences and pronouncements—has
not yet emerged in the decisions and actions of governments.
These recommendations are broad in scope and will require many
implementing actions. In presenting its recommendations, the Com-
mission has avoided a listing of detailed actions; rather, it has focused
on the need for major decisions and policy changes. In this preliminary
Report, the Commission presents only recommendations affecting the
organization of our own Government, levels of development assist-
ance, alleviation of famine caused by war, and domestic feeding pro-
grams. However, the Commission emphasizes that the focus of these
initial recommendations is only a beginning. Later recommendations
dealing with world food security, trade and corporate relationships,
and other U.S. policies and approaches are equally essential to a strong
and balanced effort to eliminate hunger.
In this context, the Commission’s major recommendation bears
repetition, particularly in a world where the self-reliance goals of the
“South” continue to challenge the policies of the “North” and as the
United Nations embarks upon its Third Decade of Development. The
United States is an integral part of these processes; accordingly:
The Commission recommends that the United States make the elimina-
tion of hunger the primary focus of its relationships with the developing coun-
tries, beginning with the decade of the 1980s.
The Commission believes that the 1980s, the United Nations Third
Development Decade, can be a time of unparalleled opportunity for
more constructive cooperation between the industrialized nations of
the “North” and the developing countries of the “South.” A world part-
nership is essential to solve such global problems as hunger, energy
needs and environmental concerns, whose ramifications span national
boundaries and in which the entire world has an interest.
