721.2315/260
[Document 309]
The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State
LIMA, November 30, 1925.
[Received December 16.]
No. 477
SIR:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
… I called at the Palace on November 23d, according to appointment, and expressed to
President Leguía the gratification of the United States Government at the favorable
action which had been taken by the Congress of Colombia in the ratification of the
Boundary Treaty and suggested to the President that it would likewise be a source of
gratification to my Government if like favorable action should be taken by the Peruvian
Congress, especially in view of the active share which the former Secretary of State
had, at the request of the three interested governments, in the formulation and
agreement to the Procès Verbal which had been celebrated by Brazil, Colombia, and
Perú on the 4th of March, 1925, and on account of the deep interest which the United
States, as a friendly American power, feels in the solution of questions which give rise
to controversies and disagreements between its neighboring American Republics.
President Leguía informed me that he had just had a conversation with Señor
Mariategui, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, and Señor Piedra, the President
of the Senate, on this subject, and that he was advised by them that it would be
difficult, if not impossible, to secure the favorable action of the Peruvian Congress on
the treaty until the Tacna-Arica Plebiscite had been disposed of. However, the President
stated to me that in view of the representation which I had just made and of the friendly
and neutral interest of the American Government in the matter, he would see the
presiding officer of each House of Congress again, and that he would bring whatever
pressure to bear he was able to, looking towards favorable action by Congress upon the
treaty. He stated, however, that he was far from convinced that it was feasible to secure
such favorable action at this time. I expressed to the President my appreciation of his
offer to bring the matter forward and took the liberty of suggesting to him that in my
personal opinion the ratification of the treaty by Perú, thus settling in one act long-
standing subjects of controversy with two of her neighboring nations,—namely; Brazil
and Colombia,—would create a very widespread favorable impression throughout
America as an indication of the substantial progress which Perú would be making in
