354 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 sion, revenge, and collapse. Bakhtiar is hopeless. At the present time, the great weakness of opposition politics is that each one of them sees himself as the future President/Prime Minister and all of their actions are related to that vision. Hence, no cooperation. —The alternative is to articulate a set of broader principles on which all these groups can agree—at least in part. The objective is to define the shape of the Iran of the future in terms which Khomeini cannot reject out of hand but which are recognized as very different from a narrow Seventh Century Islamic state which Khomeini represents. —He believes that such a set of principles could be built around the concepts of national sovereignty, rule by law as provided under the 1906 Constitution, and a willingness to face problems directly rather than sweeping them under the rug. The objective should be a political system which is responsive to the people, a social system which lets national groups and religious minorities live “more comfortably” within the society, and an economic system which promotes more equitable distribution of national wealth and its products. He believes that the concept of a constitutional monarchy should not be discounted, although that certainly does not mean the return of the Shah. He notes that the Iranian people throughout their history have killed 126 kings, but they always come back to the need for the institution. They are now doing to Khomeini what they did to the Shah. —As a first step, he would discuss privately with key opposition leaders some of these ideas and see whether they could be persuaded to accept some or all of them as their own. Ideally, he would like to have these same general ideas appear as spontaneously as possible from a number of different political sources. —Later, after the basic ideas have been introduced, he is putting together a list of about 200 Iranians inside and outside the country who could jointly sponsor a new political movement based on these principles. If the moment can be captured, he believes that this will propel the political situation in a new direction and outflank the left in two ways: (1) by providing an alternative to a leftist-dominated program; and (2) by coopting many of the leftists’ most appealing arguments. —This new political movement could provide a rallying point for the various opposition groups in which they could express their particular concepts within the context of a political system, rather than referring everything to specific individuals. He is confident that he can identify 200 individuals from various interest groups who will be absolutely clean. I encouraged him to proceed with constructing such a list and to try his hand at a political manifesto which would summarize the basic principles he wishes to
