Afghanistan 367 b. Economic —Major German financing for Turkey in exchange for Turkish cooperation in Iran.5 —An EC review of East-West trade and credit policy. —Renewed public commitment to COCOM. —An early economic summit this spring to discuss coordination of East-West trade and energy policy, particularly Allied support of U.S. bilateral economic measures toward the USSR. c. Political —Ask all NATO states to reduce their level of diplomatic and cultural relations with the USSR in a demonstrable fashion.6 —NATO and other U.S. military allies withhold participation in the Moscow Olympics pending Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. —Ask the North Atlantic Council to recommend other political steps for the alliance such as approaches to the neutrals, to Yugoslavia, tactics in CSCE, and relations with China. d. The PRC. Harold Brown’s trip to China, of course, provides a ready basis for discussing with the Chinese our policy toward Afghanistan. In addition to the agenda he already has planned, Harold should seek PRC views on actions that might be useful in connection with Afghanistan.7 The key choice with respect to the PRC is how far to go toward a military relationship with China. I would recommend going no farther now than to let the communique show that Afghanistan was discussed as a threat to peace which may require actions by both parties. We will not be backing off the Vice President’s disclaimer about seeking a military tie, but we will make more vivid the specter of such a tie. We can add substance to the specter by degrees later this year. III. Bilateral Actions They fall into the following categories: (a) political/diplomatic; (b) arms control; (c) economic; (d) military. The following actions should be spread over the next several weeks, maybe months, depending on Soviet reactions: a. Political/Diplomatic —Reduce social participation at Soviet embassy functions worldwide for the next several months. —Restrict Soviet diplomatic access in Washington, making it noticeably less than at present. 5 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. XXI, Cyprus; Turkey; Greece, Document 158. 6 See Document 146. 7 See Documents 149 and 150.
