Comprehensive Test Ban 161. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 28, 1977 SUBJECT Underground Nuclear Weapon Test Program for the Second Half of FY 1977 (FULCRUM II) ERDA has requested approval of its nuclear weapons test program for the second half of FY 1977 (FULCRUM II). As proposed, FULCRUM II includes tests related to the development of warheads for new strategic and tactical bombs, the M–X, cruise missile, and improved eight-inch artillery shell and other tactical systems, together with several related advanced development tests for R&D purposes. (An ERDA summary of FULCRUM II is at Tab A.)2 This program was not designed to implement an accelerated test schedule, and it is recognized that it might have to be modified or terminated depending on your decisions regarding cessation of testing and negotiation of a CTB agreement. All agencies agree that FULCRUM II should be approved, subject to resolution of three disputed issues: Proximity of Test Yields to the 150 Kiloton Threshold. The design yields of two tests in FULCRUM II are at or near the Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT) limit, and State and ACDA have recommended that you defer approval of these two tests pending completion of a review of our policy regarding tests near the 150 kt limit. Harold Brown objects to deferral of these tests, arguing that our current testing policy is consistent with our TTBT obligations. He notes that this policy provides for further interagency review, as warranted, of each test near the threshold prior to granting final detonation authority. This matter was exhaustively reviewed on an interagency basis under the previous administration, and a testing policy was adopted which permits ERDA to test at design yields up to 150 kt by establishing stringent review procedures in order to reduce the probability of actual yields in excess of this limit. (Additional details are provided at Tab B.)3 We have reviewed this policy and feel that it reduces this risk to an acceptably low level while ensuring against asymmetries with regard to the Soviet testing program. This issue is peculiar to a 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 145,
