Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990 435 so forth. To add de-MIRVing would add tremendous difficulties. Let’s resolve the issues and get the deal. We can do the rest in START II. Scowcroft: There are two reasons to add on. First, we have zero chance to get through another budget year with two ICBM programs in the absence of arms control. Second the Soviets are rapidly deploying. In two years these new systems will be deployed and we’ll have no leverage to stop them. Baker: I agree with Dick Cheney. First, we need to articulate our goal for START II at the Summit. We’ve gone too far to reopen START I now. We should have done it earlier. Political dynamics are more important than the strategic. If we had it all to do over again, we probably should never have said we’d try to get a treaty in 1990. At Malta, we said here’s what we should conclude at the Ministerial so we can get a Treaty done by June. Then in June we can put out a new proposal. General Powell: I’m with Dick and Jim. Let’s complete what’s on the table. We don’t have so much leverage that you can get a Treaty quickly. The Soviets aren’t that hungry. The President: Is there concern about the Congress? Baker: I believe we should put forward Brent’s proposal in June. The President: There’s a lot of water between now and June. Cheney: The strategic environment is changing but the changes in Eastern Europe don’t affect our strategic programs. It changes our forces in Europe but nothing in START. The President: Well, peoples’ views of the Soviets have changed. Cheney: The Soviets are changing their conventional forces structure, not the SS–24s and 25s or their SSBN deployments. There’s less rationale to change strategic forces than the conventional. Baker: Congressional pressure will be alleviated if we’re at the edge of getting an agreement. The President: I see two tracks—­a public one and a secret one. Maybe we can move forward on the other. Get together with Gorbachev on the side—­conclude the existing treaty and talk about something more dramatic. Sununu: How close are we to a treaty? Can we get it in June? Scowcroft: It’s doable. Sununu: Five years from now, would you want to have gotten the treaty and then have the grand gambit or do both simultaneously? Baker: You can never predict. We don’t know what a new proposal would unleash on the Hill. Scowcroft: You could announce in principle that our goal is to deMIRV the force and that the first step will be to freeze deployments and no modernization.
