474 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement Generalissimo, that the United States appreciates the important role played by the Dominican Government in the development of the Caracas anti-­communist pact.6 The Minister expressed his appreciation for the Secretary’s statement and said he would transmit the Secretary’s comment to his government. - - - - - - - - It was agreed during the conversation that no publicity would be given to the Dominicans’ intention to terminate the two military agreements and as the Minister left the Secretary’s reception room he explained to waiting newsmen that he had come to Washington only to pay a courtesy call on the Secretary. After leaving the Secretary’s office, the Minister stated to Mr. Rubottom that he hoped to be able to meet later with Mr. Rubottom to learn the reaction of our government to the Dominican request prior to returning to Ciudad Trujillo. Mr. Rubottom replied that we would wish to discuss the matter with interested officials of the Departments of State and Defense and suggested the possibility of a meeting Saturday morning. The Minister agreed and Mr. Rubottom said that we would advise Ambassador de Moya later in the day if such a meeting could be worked out. 6 Reference is to Resolution XCIII, titled, “Declaration of Solidarity for the Preservation the Political Integrity of the American States Against the Intervention of International Communism,” approved on March 28, 1954 at the Tenth Inter-American Conference which met at Caracas, March 1–28, 1954. For the text of the resolution, see Tenth Inter-American Conference: Report of the Delegation of the United States of America with Related Documents (Department of State Publication 5692, Washington, 1955), pp.156–158. DR–6. Telegram from the Ambassador in the Dominican Republic (Farland) to the Department of State1  Ciudad Trujillo, December 3, 1958, noon. 210. Have had lengthy meeting with Generalisimo. Advised him I had been called to the Department for consultation as result GODR memorandum given by Foreign Minister to Secretary Dulles, and that on basis this memorandum U.S. in spirit cooperation is now prepared honor request. However, pointed out that Ambassador De Moya had 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.5-MCP/12–358. Secret; Priority.
