132
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
on human rights.10 It is rooted in a strong commitment to domestic so-
cialism and a desire to win favor with the Soviets.
Several black African countries have applauded the US stand
largely because they believe it implies US support for majority rule in
southern Africa. Some have also quietly welcomed US criticism of the
situation in Uganda. US initiatives have been warmly received in Ni-
geria, Cameroon, and Gambia.11 Senegal, the Central African Empire,
Zambia, and—in a recent shift—Ghana have also endorsed the US
stand. Togo recently released some political prisoners partly out of a
desire to improve relations with the US, but another group of persons
was arrested for political reasons shortly thereafter.
Middle East
The Arab states tend to define human rights strictly in terms of
concern over Israel’s settlement policy in occupied territories, the fate
of Arab prisoners in Israeli jails, and recognition of the “legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people.” They will react positively to the US
stand so long as its principal effect in the Middle East is the focusing of
US attention on such issues, rather than on human rights practices (es-
pecially the treatment of minorities) in Arab countries.
The Israelis, of course, are concerned over the possible implica-
tions of increased US interest in their treatment of Arabs in the occu-
pied territories. On the other hand, the Israelis apparently believe the
US will be inclined to support initiatives they may take to focus interna-
tional attention on Soviet harassment of Jews who have asked to leave
the USSR.
10 On April 23, the Ethiopian Government ordered the closure of five U.S. installa-
tions in Ethiopia and Eritrea—including the Consulate General in Asmara, the communi-
cations station in Kagnew, and the USIS office, Military Assistance Advisory Group, and
Navy Medical Research Unit, all in Addis Ababa—and repatriation of American staff
members. The United States subsequently ended weapons shipments to Ethiopia. See
“Ethiopia Orders Five U.S. Facilities Shut, Staff Out,” The Los Angeles Times, April 24,
1977, p. A–1; Geoffrey Godsell, “Soviet Ethiopian gain could be short-lived,” The Chris-
tian Science Monitor, April, 25, 1977, p. 1; and Peter Osnos, “Ethiopia Forms Alliance With
Soviets, Capping Visit,” The Washington Post, May 7, 1977, p. A–9. During his May 4 news
conference, Vance noted: “As you all know, the Ethiopians have asked us to withdraw a
number of our people and from a number of facilities, which we have done. We had pre-
viously indicated to the Ethiopians that we had already decided that we were going to
close down our communications facility at Asmara and, at the same time, to reduce our
military assistance mission in Ethiopia.” (Department of State Bulletin, May 23, 1977,
p. 519)
11 The NSC Global Issues Cluster’s March 22 evening report to Brzezinski reported:
“Some good news: Gambia has expressed its ‘genuine pleasure’ with Carter’s stand.”
(Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—Oplinger/
Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 2–4/77)
