Human Rights
583
186.
Memorandum From the Counselor of the Department of
State (Nimetz) to the Special Adviser to the Secretary of State
(Shulman)1
Washington, June 8, 1979
SUBJECT
CSCE, Human Rights and the Summit
I have reviewed the talking points paper on these subjects for the
Summit.2 I fear if the President does not approach the human rights
issue more straightforwardly, he will look weak in the eyes of the So-
viets and will find it harder rather than easier to manage a sustained re-
lationship,3 especially in so far as CSCE is concerned. Moreover, you
should not underestimate the public impact of factors related to
CSCE—including human rights and military security—both for impor-
tant domestic groups and abroad.
The President came into office with human rights as the “soul” of
his foreign policy. He has sent us all out to pursue it vigorously. If, in
his one chance in four years to talk to the Soviet leadership personally,
he does not mention it officially, he will demonstrate inconsistency and
give the Soviets the impression that he lacks the courage of his convic-
tions.4 I do not want the President to moralize or launch a propaganda
attack against the foundations of the Soviet system. I do believe, how-
ever, that the President should in a plenary session, with others
present, offer a non-defensive explanation of his human rights policy
which ties it to a balanced approach to CSCE,5 including improved im-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of
Warren Christopher, 1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 9, Memos from WC to Offices/
Bureaus—1979. Confidential; Sensitive. Copies were sent to Christopher and Vest.
Dworkin initialed the memorandum. Christopher subsequently transmitted a copy of
Nimetz’s memorandum, various briefing papers, and a June 6 action memorandum from
Derian to Vance to Shulman under a June 11 handwritten note, commenting: “I think
Matt has a good point. Let’s discuss. Chris.” (Ibid.)
2 Reference is to the summit meeting between Carter and Brezhnev scheduled to
take place in Vienna June 15–18. Documentation is scheduled for publication in Foreign
Relations, 1977–1980, volume VI, Soviet Union. The talking points paper is in the National
Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary: Records of Warren Christopher,
1977–1980, Lot 81D113, Box 9, Memos from WC to Offices/Bureaus—1979.
3 Dworkin underlined the part of the sentence that begins with “I fear” and ends
with “sustained relationship.”
4 Dworkin underlined this sentence, placed an asterisk in the right-hand margin,
and added an illegible comment next to the asterisk.
5 Dworkin underlined the part of the sentence that begins with “I do believe” and
ends with “to CSCE.”
