686 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement 466. Telegram 1422 from Geneva1 Geneva, January 25, 1956, 11 p.m. 1422. From Johnson. 1. I opened 34th meeting today with prepared statement as fols: A. I have given considerable thought since our last meeting to nature and origin of difficulty which confronts us in present stage our talks. I do not mean to minimize significance of issues involved in our area of disagreement, but I am encouraged to believe if we are sincerely determined to seek with perseverance meaningful renunciation force, which will also unmistakably be applicable to Taiwan area, we can find way out this difficulty. B. I believe to some extent our difficulty lies in fact that we may have gotten away from underlying principles and purposes of pro­ posed declaration. In my Oct. 8 statement to you, proposed declaration was clearly identified as preliminary step towards peaceful settlement our disputes. It was to be—and I quote—“an essential foundation and preliminary to success of discussions under item two”. This I regard fundamental principle. As I plainly said there should be no question of attempting to settle or prejudge, in this declaration, issues in dispute between us. C. I can honestly say I have carefully endeavored to be guided by this principle. My draft Nov. 10, I believe, was completely consis­ tent with my statement Oct. 8, in that it was not suggested either of us should renounce any policy objectives which we considered we were legitimately entitled to achieve, but only that we renounce use of force to implement these policies. I have since on many occasions given you similar assurances. D. Another fundamental requirement of proposed declaration was necessity it be clearly applicable Taiwan area. If declaration was to be useful preliminary to free discussion of our differences and their fair and equitable solution, it obviously had to apply Taiwan area, precisely area in which our differences are most acute, and where danger of hostilities is greatest. I believe my drafts and statements in these meet­ ings have all recognized this requirement that our declaration be fully responsive to situation in which confrontation of policies of our two countries is most immediate. 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/1–2556. Confidential; Priority; Limited Distribution.
