Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission 599 226. Message From the Swiss Chargé d’Affaires in Iran (Kaiser) to the Department of State1 Tehran, March 27, 1980 (Text of letter intended for Khomeini and attributed to President Carter)2 Excellency: I have read your message to the Iranian people dated March 21.3 I consider it to be a key document for the future of your country. In that message you also defined your international policy choice. This concerns us. I agree that the peace of the world requires new relations between States, especially respect for the sovereignty of nations and the right of peoples to self-determination. I wish to say to you that these two principles often expressed by you and by President Bani-Sadr are my principles, and we have proved to the world our decision to implement them, in Nicaragua, in Pakistan, and in the face of a probable threat to the sovereignty of Yugoslavia. I wish to say to you that my Government inherited a very delicate international situation—the product of another policy, of other circumstances which have led us all to commit errors in the past. The great advantage of American democracy is that it has always been able to recognize or condemn its mistakes. We agreed to the Congressional Commission of Inquiry to clarify the truth of serious acts of American intervention such as in the case of Chile, and that Commission of Inquiry made very important decisions condemning that intervention and taking very important measures against those responsible for those acts. President Bani-Sadr has been informed by us that we are prepared to establish this Commission of Inquiry in the United States within the framework of a program which would allow the settlement of this crisis between our two nations. 1 Source: Carter Library, Office of the Chief of Staff, Jordan’s Confidential Files, Box 34, Iran 3/80. Secret; Sensitive. 2 Jordan recognized that the letter took some material from the March 13 letter he had sent to Bani-Sadr. See Document 209. (Jordan, Crisis, p. 242) In his memoir, Sick directly attributed Villalon as the author of this March 27 counterfeit letter, which was written in a misguided attempt to lessen the pressure coming from the United States, and noted that Villalon delivered the letter to Ghotbzadeh. “Although Ghotbzadeh apparently was aware of the dubious origins of the letter, he delivered it directly to Khomeini—without even briefing Bani-Sadr.” Khomeini immediately published the letter. (Sick, All Fall Down, pp. 320–321) According to Jordan, Villalon called from Tehran on March 29, begging that the United States not deny the letter since Khomeini had released it; Saunders told him to “forget it,” that the letter was “bogus.” (Jordan, Crisis, pp. 240–242). 3 Presumably a reference to the March 24 message; see Document 220.
