3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
57
issue would be facilitated by the arms control agreement we might
achieve here.
Brezhnev remarked that he had now heard about that issue from
three U.S. Presidents, and yet nothing has been accomplished.
The Secretary repeated that we were working with Congress in that
direction, but some time would be required to achieve its resolution.
Turning to our economic relations, the Secretary expressed the
hope that the Joint Commercial Commission could become more ac-
tive. Secretary Blumenthal was ready to discuss dates with Soviet rep-
resentatives for reconvening the Commission soon in Washington. The
Secretary said we were pleased that scientific/technical and cultural/
educational cooperation was going forward in many fields. These pro-
vided both immediate benefits to both sides and a favorable climate for
improved relations. We were ready, if the Soviet side was, to agree
in principle on the extension of two cooperative agreements which
were signed in 1972 and which expire in May of this year—Space and
Science/Technology.12 The Secretary said that he had to say one word
on the human rights issue which had been raised by Brezhnev. He had
listened carefully to what Brezhnev had said and would point out that
we had not in any way embarked on an anti-Soviet campaign. Our
stand involved matters of principle, and we had no intention of taking
advantage of the situation to single out the Soviet Union. The Secretary
would simply suggest that we agree to disagree on our respective
values, and then go on to discuss the urgent problems before us.
Brezhnev pointed out that President Carter had written a kind letter
to Sakharov, praising him in every way, etc., encouraging and em-
bracing him, without knowing what Sakharov was doing in the Soviet
Union, with whom he was connected. Or, another example—he had re-
ceived Bukovskiy, a man who was a crook, a thorough crook. Was this
really suitable?
Gromyko interrupted to remark that if the Secretary were to run
into Bukovskiy, he better put his watch in a safe place.
Secretary Vance said he did not think it would be useful to debate
this issue, but recalled that there had been times in the past when
people who had attacked the U.S. government had been received and
honored in the Soviet Union.
Gromyko said he would point out the simple circumstance that
President Carter had sent a letter to Sakharov at the same time that he
had also sent a letter to General Secretary Brezhnev. This was a dis-
turbing event.
12 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XIV, Soviet Union, October 1971–May 1972,
Document 227.
