International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 113 structural surplus nor a structural deficit is good. We need a maximum of symmetry in rights and obligations. Carter: I agree that we should have a briefer paper. We should ensure that people know that an increase in trade is a prerequisite for internal prosperity. We want to discourage protectionism and to expedite the Tokyo Round by establishing its priorities. I am aware of the complications which unemployment poses for trade negotiations. In the US, the unions used to openly advocate free trade and now they advocate protectionism. I have withstood their pressures and not without a certain degree of pressure. Labor deplores my actions. We need to avoid any evasion on this subject. I prefer the strongest possible language. I have no objection to mention of the OECD pledge but it is important that it be seen as only one mechanism. Blumenthal: I also want to stress the need to give impetus to the trade negotiations. It is important to go beyond the mere affirmations of the past. There are three key areas—a tariff-cutting plan, agriculture and non-tariff barriers. In the first two the deadlock is on the rules of the negotiation rather than on the negotiation itself. On agriculture there is a need to break the deadlock and agree on how to negotiate—to break the deadlock on the rules of the game. We can have a compromise between expansion and stabilization. There should also be an effort to develop stocking arrangements. MacDonald: We have to be concerned about balanced results, which Mr. Stammati raised. We should convince people to expect benefits through additional trade rather than just costs in terms of jobs. I disagree with President Giscard that we should have a symmetrical pattern of trade. We in Canada have a limited number of exports in primary problems [products?]. We must take account of the job issue and the asymmetry of our economies. We also agree on the need to stress non-tariff barriers, such as government procurement. Our problems are caused as much by non-tariff barriers as by tariffs. Giscard: The communique should express the content of our discussions. Callaghan: We should confront the realities of the problem. Free trade and the removal of trade barriers are best for the Free World. Our levels of unemployment are around 5%, but the men out of work are 100% unemployed. If we want to keep to a system which is in the best interests for all of us, we will have to pay attention to adjusting workers to new jobs. Strauss: I understand that what goes on at the MTN is not likely to reduce unemployment. But a failure to do something positive will add to our unemployment problems. We need a positive and firm thrust in behalf of movement in the MTN without prejudicing the positions of
