558  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
beyond scope present talks. This would complicate problem between 
us and would amount to creating difficulties in talks.
21. Wang said draft he had presented can in no way be described 
as an “apparent” form. He agreed anything we declared should have 
practical bearing. Difference of policies our two countries in Taiwan 
area has led to extremely tense situation over which people of world 
most concerned. Demonstrating our desire settle disputes by peaceful 
means without resort to use of force meets with desire people of world. 
This action in interests both sides.
22. I said I would put my question very bluntly, if this or simi­
lar statement were issued tomorrow, would his government have said 
anything that would prevent it on next day from saying that it consid­
ered situation Taiwan area domestic matter and was therefore initiating 
hostilities there?
23. Wang said my question went precisely beyond scope of talks. 
As he had repeatedly stated, question of Taiwan is an internal matter of 
China, which his side also willing settle by peaceful means. To follow 
line I had taken, if we were to issue announcement tomorrow, then our 
discussions have created same result. That, is, two countries henceforth 
willing settle any dispute by peaceful means. That would certainly be 
welcomed by all. It would demonstrate to world that China and US 
have made contribution to relaxing tension Taiwan area.
24. Wang said following issuance of announcement, we would 
continue discussion to find settlement disputes, such as question 
embargoes and higher level conference between two countries. Then if 
I wanted discuss further ways and means relax tension Taiwan area, his 
side prepared join me and continue discussion in this direction. I said 
would this mean discussions would not be held under threat that one 
side would reserve right initiate hostilities if its desires not fully met?
26. Wang said it has always been stand his side that negotiations 
should be carried on in peaceful atmosphere. If one were to mention 
threats, it is his side that felt itself being threatened.
27. I said I had nothing further on this subject. I would study draft 
and reply more fully at next meeting. Before passing to another matter, 
did he have anything further?
28. Wang said we had talked a great deal on this subject and new 
effort his side was being made on basis of what I had said at last meet­
ing. He believed draft is within interest of both of us, and hoped we 
would progress smoothly on this subject.
29. I said I agreed, and felt our discussion this morning had been 
most useful. I hoped he would meanwhile consider question I had 
raised this morning. Amplification of his answers would be most 
helpful.
