662
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
terms of two conflicting interpretations of what is basically involved
in the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan: some see it as an aberration
from, and others as symptomatic of, Soviet behavior.
Aberration
Those who see it as an aberration tend to feel that the primary
motive for the Soviet action was defensive, that the Soviets do not have
longer-term regional ambitions beyond Afghanistan, and that they are
likely to consider seriously some mutually acceptable formula for a
solution to the problem generated by their invasion of Afghanistan.
Proponents of this school of thought do not deny that the Soviet Union
occasionally acts aggressively, but see that largely as an expedient
reaction to opportunities rather than as a manifestation of a more
sustained trend. Because of that, one is entitled to nurture hopes of a
relatively early return to more normal East-West relations, including
genuine progress on some of the more important bilateral U.S.-
Soviet issues.
Symptom
Those who argue otherwise feel that the Soviet Union is currently
in an assertive phase of its history, with the acquisition of military
power giving its foreign policy both greater scope and more frequent
temptations to use its power to advance policy goals. Soviet behavior
is still prudent, but it does involve a gradual shift from political encour-
agement of often geographically remote ideological sympathizers, to
more direct support of them through the use of Cuban proxies in the
mid-’70s, to even more direct projection of Soviet military power itself
currently. In other words, Soviet behavior is symptomatic of a long-
term historical drive, with military power supplanting Marxist ideology
as its basic dynamic source.
As you can probably anticipate, I lean to the second school of
thought. I would also argue additionally that there are certain constants
in Soviet foreign policy, and the drive toward the Persian Gulf is one
of them. I am struck by the fact that the draft agreement between the
Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, which was being negotiated secretly
between Molotov and Ribbentrop in 1940, included the following pas-
sage: “The Soviet Union declares that its territorial aspirations center
south of the national territory of the Soviet Union in the direction of
the Indian Ocean.” Moreover, the German Ambassador reported on
November 25, 1940, that Molotov told him that the Soviet Union would
associate itself with the Axis powers, “provided that the area south of
Batum and Baku in the general direction of the Persian Gulf is recog-
nized as the center of the aspirations of the Soviet Union.”
The argument between those who think that Afghanistan is an
aberration and those who think it is a symptom is not merely an
