198
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
current account deficits—especially that of the U.S.—is unsustainable
in the face of protectionist pressures ultimately engendered by stub-
bornly weak global demand. But despite our persistent, if polite, ex-
pressions of doubt, and admitting that previous forecasts had been
very wide of the mark, the Japanese (Deputy Foreign Minister Yoshino
and EPA Director General for Coordination Miyazaki) stuck to his fore-
cast that the recently announced package of stimulative measures will
reverse the trend in Japan’s current account and hold the surplus to
$6.5 billion for end of the current Japanese fiscal year (ending March 31,
1978).
3. The Japanese called on the weaker economies to place their own
houses in order and asserted that by stimulating Japanese domestic de-
mand without igniting the fires of inflation, Japan would make a major
contribution to world recovery. Miyazaki identified the lack of Japa-
nese investor and consumer confidence as the toughest impediments to
full recovery. Yet further government expenditures would, he asserted,
risk inflation.
4. Matsukawa (MOF) noted that the rise in the value of the yen had
begun to cut into Japan’s exports quantitively but that a “J curve” effect
could be observed. Matsukawa declined to offer an estimate as to when
the exchange rate effects would begin to show up in the trade account,
but asserted that, on a yen basis, the role of exports in recovery had al-
ready begun to diminish. Recognizing that there had been some re-
markably large errors in previous forecasting, Miyazaki and Matsu-
kawa agreed to the establishment of an informal joint working group
on the technical level to monitor forecasts.4
5. Assuming a characteristically aggressive stance, Masuda of
MITI5 asserted that the dramatic rise in the importation of oil accounts
in the main for the U.S. current account deficit and this deficit had in
turn led to a weakening of confidence in the dollar. Cooper replied that
increases in U.S. energy consumption were below historical trends, that
imports reflected the decline in domestic oil production as well as in-
creased consumption and that the President’s energy package will at-
tempt to bring import levels down to 7.5 million B/D by 1985—below
4 Bergsten and Matsukawa discussed Japan’s policy on foreign exchange market in-
tervention on September 13. (Memorandum of conversation, September 13; National Ar-
chives, RG 56, Records of Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs
C. Fred Bergsten, 1977–1979, Box 1, RPTS–3–3 Memcons 1977) Bergsten reported to Blu-
menthal and Solomon that he had “made clear our concerns re heavy intervention April
and July which braked steady appreciations. MOF pointed with pride to relative infre-
quency of recent intervention but retreated ultimately to view that appreciation was ‘too
fast.’ They indicated plan to check any significant yen depreciation might occur in near
future thereby reducing net dollar accumulation.” (Telegram 14116 from Tokyo, Sep-
tember 13; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770331–0584)
5 Minoru Masuda was a MITI Vice Minister.
