she insists that she has always claimed the Chaspaya as the true source of the Sama. Peru at once protested against occupation under the treaty of any portion of the Province of Tarata and has always maintained this position. Chile, under her claim of right, proceeded to establish a Chilean Province of Tacna, including a sub-delegation of Tarata. In a dispatch of July 14, 1886, from the Peruvian Consul in Iquique to the Peruvian Foreign Minister, it is stated that Chile had assumed jurisdiction in three of the districts of the Peruvian Province of Tarata, that is, the districts of Tarata, Tarucachi and Estique. It is quite apparent that the representatives of the Parties who negotiated the treaty, had little exact knowledge of the geography of the region to the east and wrote into the treaty an inaccurate description. It should also be said that there has not been furnished to the Arbitrator satisfactory evidence as to the exact line of the old Peruvian provincial boundaries. The record is strikingly deficient in appropriate maps and geographical information bearing upon these questions. Despite these difficulties, the Arbitrator finds certain controlling considerations in the construction of the treaty. The fundamental question is the intention of the Parties and any artificial construction is to be avoided. The Peruvian Provinces of Tacna and Arica were well known political divisions with their respective capitals of like names, and the Peruvian Province of Tarata was also a well known political division with its capital of the same name. It is difficult to believe that representatives of Governments who, however lacking in exact geographical information, knew of these political divisions, and the jurisdictions they denoted, and particularly the most important towns they embraced, would have used the expression—“the territory of the provinces of Tacna and Arica” when they intended to embrace not only such territory but also a portion of the territory of a distinct political division known as Tarata. The argument that this reference to political divisions should yield to a described geographical boundary assumes that there is a definite geographical boundary laid down, which is not the case, or that the description of a geographical boundary indicates an intention to include territory lying outside the provinces of Tacna and Arica, when in truth the description of a geographical boundary which did not exist serves to indicate that they did not know where the geographical boundary lay which they were attempting to describe. The reference to the political divisions known as the provinces of Tacna and Arica cannot, in the judgment of the Arbitrator, be overridden by a description of a line which it is impossible to lay down as described. Some light is thrown upon the question by the history of the negotiations leading to the Treaty of Ancon. In the conference of October 28, 1880, Chile stated as one of the conditions of peace:—“Retention on the part of Chile of the territory of Moquegua, Tacna, and Arica, occupied by Chilean forces.” In the protocol of February 11, 1882,39 Chile made the condition: “Occupation of the region of Tacna and Arica for ten years.” Reference is made by Chile in her Counter Case to a proposal of the Minister of the
