Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Bush’s remarks on the subject);3 from a diplomatic (i.e., relations with the Allies and with the Third World); and from a strictly US-Soviet (Moscow should be getting a clear and simple message from us) point Unfortunately, this is not happening. There has been a stream of Government-originated analysis and public testimony which has muddied the waters with regard to (a) the motivations that impelled the Soviets to attack Afghanistan, (b) the prospects which the Soviets face in Afghanistan, and (c) the length of time that we are prepared to maintain the current series of punitive actions vis-à-vis the Soviets. The line propounded has directly undercut the President’s message. Whether this is intentional or unintentional, I do not know. But what is clear to me is that our interests are being damaged in the process. The harmful line which has emerged, and which has been consciously abetted by the Soviets, is as follows: Why Did the Soviets Attack? According to one school of thought, the Soviets felt impelled to move into Afghanistan because of legitimate defensive concerns to avert chaos in a neighboring Communist state and because the penalties which such a move would normally trigger in terms of US-Soviet relations and world opinion were no longer operative. Moscow was thus, allegedly influenced by the overall downturn in US-Soviet relations, as exemplified by the Cuban brigade crisis, the TNF dispute, friction over Southeast Asian relief and security matters, US defense increases, SALT II delay, etc. The obvious assumption behind this argument is that the Soviet invasion only has implications for Afghanistan itself, is not connected with the strategic importance of the Persian Gulf and Iranian oil, and that making a US-Soviet or East-West issue out of it is a big mistake. The further implication is that if SALT had passed and we had not decided on TNF deployment, the Soviets would not have invaded Afghanistan. Almost all genuine experts on the USSR would argue that this last assertion is highly implausible; that the Czechoslovakia decision in 1968 was a hard one for Brezhnev, but that given his outlook and that of his colleagues, the decision to invade Afghanistan caused little if any internal dissent among the leadership; and that the Soviets would have gone into Afghanistan no matter what the state of US-Soviet relations had been in December 1979. (In fact, it might be useful for Carter partisans to ponder the fact that had SALT passed on schedule in November, and 3 The reference to Bush’s remarks likely comes from Robert Scheer, “Bush Assails
