1957  1387
to solve this question should be based on respect of sovereign rights. 
He had made this fully clear in course our discussion and in propos­
als his side put forth on renunciation force. Method of dragging out 
talks could not settle these problems between us. Now it remained for 
us to see what action U.S. would take to bring about genuine settle­
ment this dispute.
22. I replied, first problem not question settling one way or other 
sovereign rights nor settling formulae or forums in which this matter 
may be discussed. I had tried to make it clear first question was to agree 
we were not going to fight—­that is, that the threat to use force had 
been withdrawn. I had offered him various formulae for draft declara­
tions which would enable him fully to preserve his position and enable 
him to pursue his policies without using threat of force. He had come 
back with various formulae and drafts which in themselves in the light 
of discussions here, and of public statements, made it clear he preserved 
right threaten and use force. He asked that I negotiate substance of ques­
tion itself under that threat. I had tried make it as clear as I could this is 
what I could not and would not do. However, once that threat removed 
in clear and unequivocal statement we could then in that atmosphere 
discuss further steps to be taken.
23. Wang replied, in settlement tension in Taiwan area, the question 
of sovereign rights could not be put aside. If sovereign rights were dis­
carded, then a state could no longer be considered a state. I had stated 
the central problem was avoiding war between us. But China not pro­
posing to start a war with U.S. They were prepared to settle problems 
between us by just methods but this did not mean surrender to any 
side. It would not serve useful purpose to repeat old words which had 
been repeated many times. Repetition of old words and remarks did 
not constitute new departure. With respect my remarks this morning 
concerning Chinese civilians in U.S. he could not be satisfied with those 
remarks. He reserved comments for next meeting.
24. I had nothing more and suggested next meeting August 8. He 
agreed.
Gowen
