Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I Earlier, on December 29, Carter had sent a hotline message to Soviet General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev regarding the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. For additional information about this message, and Brezhnev’s response, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, volume VI, Soviet Union, Document 248. Reynolds devoted a portion of the interview to this development: “Mr. Reynolds. Mr. President, you’ve mentioned Afghanistan. Could you tell us what was Brezhnev’s response to your message to him? “The President. He responded in what I consider to be an inadequate way. He claimed that he had been invited by the Afghan government to come in and protect Afghanistan from some outside third nation threat. This was obviously false. Because the person that he claimed invited him in, President Amin, was murdered or assassinated after the Soviets pulled their coup. “The leader that’s presently been imposed upon the Afghan people was apparently brought in by the Soviet Union or either has not yet come into Afghanistan—He’s not been seen since he was anointed to be the leader by the Soviets and their cohorts in Afghanistan. He also claimed that they would remove their forces from Afghanistan as soon as the situation should be stabilized and the outside threat to Afghanistan was eliminated. “So that was the tone of his message to me, which as I say, was completely inadequate and completely misleading. “Mr. Reynolds. Well, he’s lying, isn’t he, Mr. President? “The President. He’s not telling the facts accurately, that’s correct. “Mr. Reynolds. Have you changed your perceptions of the Russians in the time that you’ve been here? You started out it seemed to a great many people believing that if you expressed your good will and demonstrated it that they would reciprocate it. “The President. My opinion of the Russians has changed most [more] drastically in the last week than even the previous two and onehalf years before that. It is only now dawning upon the world that the magnitude of the action that the Soviets undertook in invading Afghanistan. . . . This is a circumstance that I think is now causing even former close friends and allies of the Soviet Union to re-examine their opinion of what the Soviets might have in mind. . . . I think it is imperative that within the next few days, after we consult with one another that the leaders of the world make it clear to the Soviets that they cannot have taken this action to violate world peace not only in that region, but throughout the world without paying severe consequences. . . . “What we will do about it, I cannot say. But, to repeat myself, the action of the Soviets has made a more dramatic change in my opinion
