December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979
633
Exchange of
Egyptians propose letter
Khalil agrees to withdraw
Ambassadors
stating that exchange of
letter and make no men-
Ambassadors will take
tion of timing of ex-
place one month after
change of Ambassadors.
the establishment of
Substantive position,
self-governing author-
however, would not be
ity, at least in Gaza.
changed.
Letter on West
Target date: “goal of
Target date: “goal of com-
Bank/Gaza
holding elections not
pleting the negotiations
Negotiations
later than the end of
so that elections can be
1979.”
held within one year of
the start of those
negotiations.”
Reference to “Egypt’s
Deleted reference to
former administrative
Egypt’s former adminis-
responsibility in Gaza.”
trative role in Gaza. (S)
The net result of the Camp David II talks was to modify the negoti-
ating documents only modestly. Compared to the December proposals
which were rejected by Israel, some of the current proposals are better
from Israel’s point of view and some are basically unchanged. Israel has
reason to view the changes in the letter on the West Bank/Gaza as generally fa-
vorable. The formulation on Article VI is no better from the Israeli point
of view, and Begin probably reacted badly to the factually correct state-
ment that nothing in the Treaty establishes any other priority than that
of the U.N. Charter. (During Atherton’s last trip,4 however, Begin indi-
cated that he might accept such language.) On bilateral issues, we also
indicated a willingness to discuss how the U.S. might “guarantee” the
Treaty through a memorandum of understanding with Israel. We also
said that we would be prepared to discuss aid. On oil, Khalil said he
would discuss this after agreement on the Treaty was reached but be-
fore it was signed. From Dayan’s point of view, these were positive de-
velopments. (S)
In brief, there is no basis for Begin’s statement5 that new proposals were
made which are inconsistent with the Camp David agreements and which nul-
lify the meaning of the peace treaty between the two countries. (S)
4 See Document 168.
5 See Document 185.
