1080 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II priorities of the office have changed. Luke is no longer being encouraged to take a broad range view of the causes and less conventional cures of over population. He plans to return to academic life but would prefer to stay on at State and continue the work he has begun. Ambassador Green believes that if you speak with Tom Pickering there is a chance that he could transfer Lee’s current position in OES to HA. Another possibility lies in convincing the Inspectors of the need for such a slot in HA. I do not believe that our current staffing would enable us to take on this additional responsibility in a meaningful way. The following two recommendations are probably not feasible if this position is not created. 2. HA should recommend the creation of an Inter-Agency Group on the Status of Women and Children Internationally. Discussion: There is a need to coordinate the various programs carried out by USG agencies domestically and overseas which affect the status of women and children. A Task Force composed of representatives of State (HA and IO), AID (Women in Development), Treasury (International Development Banks), The Census Bureau, Labor and HEW could be assigned this task. Its mandate could be linked to U.S. participation in the International Year of the Child and the UN Decade for Women. In order to work it would need dynamic and experienced leadership. I believe Marshall Green would be willing to assume this task. I am certain he would do an excellent job. Sara Weddington at the White House would probably lend her support. 3. In conjunction with PA, HA should issue a booklet similar to the “Silent Explosion” (attached)4 which deals with women’s and children’s rights and needs in an international setting. This booklet would be disseminated to all our missions and used domestically to encourage outside support and other USG agency attention to the problems raised. The booklet could be sent to our missions under a covering message from you to our Ambassadors highlighting U.S. participation in the International Year of the Child and the UN Decade for Women. 4. Next year’s human rights reports should give more detailed and much more sophisticated attention to the rights of women and children. Discussion: This year’s reports mention that problems exist in general terms. We do not, however, have the data base to describe those problems in a serious and detailed fashion. This year we were able to give greater attention to social and economic rights. Next year let’s add women and children. By encouraging our posts to become better informed on these issues and helping them by providing scarce informa- 4 Not attached. See Document 320.
