1080
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
priorities of the office have changed. Luke is no longer being encour-
aged to take a broad range view of the causes and less conventional
cures of over population. He plans to return to academic life but would
prefer to stay on at State and continue the work he has begun. Ambas-
sador Green believes that if you speak with Tom Pickering there is a
chance that he could transfer Lee’s current position in OES to HA. An-
other possibility lies in convincing the Inspectors of the need for such a
slot in HA. I do not believe that our current staffing would enable us to
take on this additional responsibility in a meaningful way. The fol-
lowing two recommendations are probably not feasible if this position
is not created.
2. HA should recommend the creation of an Inter-Agency Group
on the Status of Women and Children Internationally. Discussion: There
is a need to coordinate the various programs carried out by USG
agencies domestically and overseas which affect the status of women
and children. A Task Force composed of representatives of State (HA
and IO), AID (Women in Development), Treasury (International Devel-
opment Banks), The Census Bureau, Labor and HEW could be assigned
this task. Its mandate could be linked to U.S. participation in the Inter-
national Year of the Child and the UN Decade for Women. In order to
work it would need dynamic and experienced leadership. I believe
Marshall Green would be willing to assume this task. I am certain he
would do an excellent job. Sara Weddington at the White House would
probably lend her support.
3. In conjunction with PA, HA should issue a booklet similar to the
“Silent Explosion” (attached)4 which deals with women’s and chil-
dren’s rights and needs in an international setting. This booklet would
be disseminated to all our missions and used domestically to en-
courage outside support and other USG agency attention to the
problems raised. The booklet could be sent to our missions under a cov-
ering message from you to our Ambassadors highlighting U.S. partici-
pation in the International Year of the Child and the UN Decade for
Women.
4. Next year’s human rights reports should give more detailed and
much more sophisticated attention to the rights of women and chil-
dren. Discussion: This year’s reports mention that problems exist in gen-
eral terms. We do not, however, have the data base to describe those
problems in a serious and detailed fashion. This year we were able to
give greater attention to social and economic rights. Next year let’s add
women and children. By encouraging our posts to become better in-
formed on these issues and helping them by providing scarce informa-
4 Not attached. See Document 320.
