1574 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement softening in the Russian position on the questions at issue and we felt there should be no softening in our own position. He wanted to emphasize that the U.S. could not consider compromises in its posi­ tion on the basic control questions, since to do so would run the risk of producing a treaty which the Senate would not consent to ratify. There was also a strong feeling on our part that the inspection provi­ sions which might be adopted in the present negotiations would serve as a precedent for future arms control arrangements and thus bore an importance beyond the immediate situation. He thought it well to re-­emphasize this position prior to Mr. Macmillan’s visit to Moscow. Ambassador Caccia said that the subject would undoubtedly be raised by the Soviets with the Prime Minister and that he would trans­ mit Mr. Herter’s views, which he thought were sound and represented the approach agreed upon between the Secretary and the Prime Minis­ ter during the former’s recent visit to London. Sir ­Harold then raised the question of the Department’s reactions to the memorandum which Mr. Roper had delivered to Mr. Farley on February 10 containing U.K. suggestions on how to deal with two of the points in the Soviet veto list. Without getting into the details of the British suggestions, Mr. Herter observed that he felt generally we should not advance proposals for get­ ting around the current impasse but rather should see if the Soviets were prepared to moderate their own position in any respect. (After the meeting Mr. Herter authorized Mr. Spiers to discuss our detailed comments on the British memorandum with the U.K. Embassy.) 426. Letter From Macmillan to Eisenhower1 London, February 20, 1959 TEXT OF MESSAGE My dear Friend, Before I leave for Moscow, I want to tell you once again how much importance I attach to the conference at Geneva on nuclear tests, and how much I hope it may prove possible for us to reach an agreement on this subject with the Russians. 1 Source: Extols virtue of agreement on suspension of nuclear testing. Secret. 4 pp. NARA, RG 59, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 64 D 204, Macmillan to Eisenhower.
