apply, with only minor modifications, to the proposed certificate for
Armenian refugees.
In response to a communication enquiring whether, in the event of an inter-
governmental conference being convened to consider the present question,
it would be willing to send a representative, the Turkish Government has
stated that there is no reason for it to take part in any arrangements
concerning Armenian refugees as there are no such refugees from other
countries in Turkey.
Dr. Nansen has prepared, and at his request I forward to you for
consideration by your Government, a plan for the introduction, by
agreement between interested governments, of an identity certificate for
Armenian refugees.67
The plan contains similar rules to those laid down in the Geneva
Arrangement relating to Russian refugees and the certificate is substantially
identical with the certificate now employed for the latter. The only
modification made is the insertion on the certificate of a space authorising
its use for the purpose of returning to the country issuing it and the
inclusion in the plan of a recommendation that such authorisation should be
given if possible. This modification, which in no way binds the hands of
any government which may participate in the plan, is made because Dr.
Nansen’s experience has convinced him of the great importance of
facilitating, as far as possible, free movement by refugees.
It has been found that if the refugee certificate authorises return to the
issuing country, the economic position of the holder is improved by the
facilities which he thus obtains for visiting temporarily other countries,
which may offer him opportunities for employment or business, and his
ultimate emigration to another country is in fact encouraged. It is thought
that it would be very advantageous if governments felt themselves able to
agree in principle to grant the right of return when issuing the refugee
certificate. Dr. Nansen has not, however, ventured to make the certificate
available for return in all cases.
The plan has been framed in a form which makes it possible for it to be
brought into operation, without the convening of a special conference,
