National Security Policy 107 29. Briefing Note for the 359th NSC Meeting1 Washington, March 20, 1958 ITEM 1—MEASURES TO CARRY OUT THE CONCEPT OF SHELTER The Council’s attention today is again directed to the question of providing shelter for the population against the hazard of radio­active fallout. This matter will be considered at two successive Council meet­ ings. Today we shall first hear a factual presentation by FCDA on radio­ active fallout and on types of protective measures against it. Following that, the Director of Central Intelligence will present a new estimate of the Soviet civil defense program, including shelter construction. Then at next week’s meeting, we shall discuss the excellent report by the Interdepartmental Committee on “Measures to Carry Out the Concept of Shelter” (circulated on March 14). A brief word on the history of civilian shelter as it has been dis­ cussed by the Council. You will recall that on December 21, 1956, in the Indian Treaty Room, Governor Peterson presented a proposed nation-­wide shelter program which would have cost $32 billion over an 8-­year period. As an out­ growth of that proposal, in April 1957 the Council called for four stud­ ies on various aspects of shelter which culminated in the Gaither Report last November 7. The Gaither Panel, although placing shelter in a second priority, nevertheless recommended a nation-­wide fallout shelter pro­ gram estimated to cost $22.5 billion over a 5-­year period. At its meeting on January 16, 1958, the Council agreed that existing civil defense policy should be modified to incorporate the concept of fallout shelter, but that the U.S. should not initiate a nation-­wide fallout shelter program of the type recommended by the Gaither Panel, and that implementation of the shelter concept should be deferred pending Council consideration of the Interdepartmental Committee report, which we shall take up next week. First, then, let us hear the factual presentation. GOVERNOR HOEGH ITEM 2—SOVIET CIVIL DEFENSE AND AIR-RAID SHELTER CONSTRUCTION We shall now hear the intelligence estimate of what the Soviets are doing in the way of civil defense and the extent to which they are believed to have shelters for the civil population. 1 Source: Civil defense and civilian fallout shelters. Top Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records.
