Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 124. Memorandum From the Deputy Secretary of State (Christopher) to Secretary of State Vance1 Washington, August 9, 1979 SUBJECT The Next 18 Months We are in a new period. There will be no more foreign policy extravaganzas requiring long planning and negotiation, sustained Presidential involvement, and extensive Congressional debate (such as the Panama Canal Treaties, China normalization, and SALT). Thus, before discussing the ten goals, I want to describe some of the constraints of the new context in which we will be operating in the remainder of the Term. (a) The time is short, more like a year than 18 months. In the immediate future, the focus will be on SALT. If SALT is approved by Thanksgiving, that leaves less than a year until the 1980 Presidential elections. (b) Priority for domestic issues will preclude the President’s personal involvement in foreign policy initiatives requiring a major commitment of his time. Existing commitments (e.g., Middle East negotiations), the day-to-day flow of foreign “crises”, and unavoidable state visits will continue to occupy an important place on the President’s calendar, but he will not be able to make substantial time for new initiatives. And probably he shouldn’t. It is also realistic to note that the President does not have a large store of political capital that he can draw on to manage foreign policy initiatives. (c) After SALT, the Congress will be unable to give foreign policy issues the major chunks of time which it has given such issues in the first three years. Of course, Congress will spend a substantial amount of time in 1980 dealing with unavoidable foreign policy items (such as trade agreements and appropriations), but in the main the Congress will want to spend its time focusing on energy and the economy. And probably it should. (d) Our goals will be constricted by election year politics. This does not mean that we should step back from projects which are in the national interest, but we must recognize that our ability to initiate and accomplish must reckon with political factors. The President’s political 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Deputy Secretary, Records of
