70 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI 19. Memorandum of Conversation1 Moscow, May 11, 1989, 11 a.m.–12:45 p.m. The Secretary’s May 10–11 Visit to Moscow: Plenary Meeting with Gorbachev SUBJECTS U.S.-Soviet Relations, Perestroyka, Nuclear and Space Talks, Short-Range Nuclear Forces, Conventional Arms Control PARTICIPANTS 1 Department of State, Executive Secretariat, S/S-IRM Records, Lot 93D187, Secretary James A. Baker III’s Classified Papers, JAB Papers May 1989. Secret; Nodis. Drafted by Vershbow and Ridgway; cleared by Ross and Zoellick. The meeting took place in St. Catherine’s Hall, the Kremlin. The full memorandum of conversation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, vol. III, Soviet Union, Russia, and Post- Soviet States: High-Level Contacts. After this meeting, Baker flew to Brussels to brief NATO Foreign Ministers before returning to Washington the following day. U.S. James A. Baker III, Secretary of State Jack F. Matlock, U.S. Ambassador to the USSR Robert Gates, Deputy National Security Advisor to President Robert Zoellick, Counselor, Department of State Rozanne L. Ridgway, Assistant Secretary of State, EUR Margaret DeB. Tutwiler, Assistant Secretary of State, PA Dennis B. Ross, Director, Policy Planning Staff, State Dept. Dimitri Zarechnak, interpreter USSR Mikhail S. Gorbachev, General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee, Chairman of the Presidium of the USSR Supreme Soviet Eduard A. Shevardnadze, Minister of Foreign Affairs Aleksandr A. Bessmertnykh, 1st Deputy Foreign Minister Anatoliy F. Dobrynin, Advisor to Chairman Gorbachev Marshal Sergey F. Akhromeyev, Advisor to Chairman Gorbachev Yuriy F. Dubinin, USSR Ambassador to the United States Anatoliy S. Chernyayev, Assistant to the General Secretary Sergey P. Tarasenko, Assistant to the Foreign Minister Pavel Palazhchenko, interpreter Following his private meeting with the Secretary and Shevardnadze, Chairman Gorbachev welcomed the other members of the U.S. delegation. He noted that the Secretary’s visit was very timely. The Soviets believed that the U.S.-Soviet dialogue must continue, that it must be raised to a higher level and proceed toward real interaction and cooperation in all areas. Based on recent experience, he was optimistic about our countries’ ability to do so. We had begun cooperation and we saw that our
