772
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
Harry Chapin—Rock Singer, who was largely responsible for
lobbying the resolution through the Congress.
Peter Bourne
Richard Harden
Frank Moore
Charles O’Keeffe
Bill Cable
Gerald Fill
Dan Tate4
b. Background
During the last session, the Congress passed resolutions calling on
you to establish a Commission. Passage was unanimous in the Senate
and 364–38 in the House.
On January 14 you received a letter from 114 members of the
House requesting you to take action by establishing the Commission.5
Senator Humphrey wrote to you on December 56 urging you to estab-
lish it.
The Commission they seek would:
1. Examine existing programs and studies related to hunger.
2. Develop policy and legislative recommendations.
3. Stimulate public awareness of the problem
Our position during the last Congress was that we had “no
objection.”
c. Press—photo opportunity
III. Talking Points7
—The U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization estimates 1/2 bil-
lion people lack minimum nourishment.8
4 The President placed check marks next to Leahy’s and Nolan’s names and placed
an arrow in the margin next to Chapin’s. According to the Digest of Other White House
Announcements, Chapin also attended the February 3 meeting. (Public Papers: Carter,
1978, Book I, p. 277)
5 Presumable reference to a January 24 letter from Nolan and Gilman to the Presi-
dent, in which they emphasized congressional initiatives regarding establishment of a
Commission on Domestic and International Hunger and Nutrition and stressed their dis-
pleasure regarding what they considered to be insufficient White House attention to the
issue. They, and their 112 bipartisan House cosponsors, encouraged Carter to “give full
personal consideration to why the House (and the Senate) passed the resolution by an
overwhelming margin” and encouraged the President to meet with the major sponsors
and the congressional leadership. (Carter Library, White House Central Files, Subject
Files, Box FG–224, Executive, FG–311, 1/20/77–10/31/79)
6 See Document 238.
7 The President wrote in the right-hand margin: “Harry Chapin.”
8 The President underlined “1/2 billion” and “lack minimum nourishment.”
