Conventional Arms Transfers/Talks 695 will emphasize our mutual interest in restraining these kinds of arms transfers. While not amounting to a formal US proposal, these issues will be raised explicitly enough to give the Soviets something to think about and to respond to. 4. [1 paragraph (11 lines) not declassified] 282. Telegram From the Department of State to the Liaison Office in Peking1 Washington, December 9, 1977, 2330Z 294655. Subject: Briefing the PRC on U.S.-Soviet Talks on Conventional Arms Transfers. 1. U.S. and Soviet officials will meet in Washington on December 14 to discuss prospects for cooperation in limiting conventional arms transfers. The U.S. side will be represented by PM Director, Leslie Gelb, and the Soviet side by Ambassador Khlestov, Chief of MFA’s Treaty and Legal Department. Talks will be taking place at U.S. initiative and are motivated by our concern that U.S. efforts to limit arms transfers abroad will be undercut unless the USSR and other major international suppliers also agree to restrain their transfers. The Soviets appear to appreciate that this question has a bearing on U.S.–Soviet relations, but they are approaching the subject with great caution and we cannot predict whether they can be drawn into a constructive dialogue. 2. Given the PRC’s suspicions that the U.S. is all too prone to deal with the USSR, at the expense of others, we think it important to give the Chinese advance notice of the talks and their purpose. In particular, we wish to stress that the talks are an obvious corollary to our own arms transfer policy and, if successful, would limit the potential for Soviet opportunism. In addition, we want to make clear that the talks with the Soviets, and possibly with other powers, will not be used to pressure the PRC to join an international arms control regime. Obviously, we would welcome Chinese cooperation, but we do not expect it at this stage. 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850056–1764. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Sent for information Priority to the White House. Drafted by William Gleysteen (EA); cleared by Harry Thayer (EA/PRCM), Alan Romberg (S/P), Priscilla Clapp (PM), Shulman (S/MS), William Luers (EUR), and Lowell Fleischer (S/S–O); and approved by Richard Holbrooke (EA).
