International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 171 48. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Cooper) to Vice President Mondale1 Washington, August 1, 1977 Dear Fritz: You asked me recently about the role of monetary policy in dealing with our balance of payments problem.2 As you know, the U.S. merchandise trade deficit has increased sharply to a projected $25 billion in 1977, due to higher oil imports, sustained economic expansion at home, and weak economic growth abroad. Our $11 billion surplus on service transactions has offset a sizable portion of the trade deficit. Voluntary capital inflows, largely from the placement of OPEC surplus funds, have provided financing for the rest of the deficit. Administration strategy to deal with this problem has two major components: (1) press for the energy program to deal with the high cost of oil imports; (2) wait for changes in the business cycle at home and abroad to improve our exports relative to our imports, while pressing OECD countries to meet their growth targets. To the extent that these factors do not achieve a satisfactory result, the dollar will tend to fall in exchange markets and slowly produce a further improvement in our current account. A key component of this strategy is continued reliance on voluntary capital inflows to finance the deficit. So far this year, these flows have been forthcoming in sufficient volume to finance the deficit without much decline in the value of the dollar. Obviously, the level of interest rates in the United States relative to those abroad can influence those capital flows. And foreign interest rates have been declining this year while U.S. rates have remained steady or risen somewhat, reflecting the differences in economic activity here and abroad. Thus the present course of monetary policy appears adequate to deal with the problem of assuring that our current account deficit will be financed. Over the longer run, the rate of inflation in the United States relative to foreign inflation is a prime determinant of the value of the dollar. Clearly, monetary policy has a role to play in this area as well. Both our present and projected inflation rates and our monetary growth targets are on the low side of foreign experience at present. Thus monetary policy is already making its appropriate contribution to the longer-run stability of the dollar. 1 Source: Carter Library, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Security Issues, Box 82, National Security Issues—Economic [2/5/1977–8/14/1977]. No classification marking. A handwritten notation reads: “Seen. File.” 2 Not further identified.
