648
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
We must also be cognizant about the impact on international and
domestic opinion. We should try to insure that our people will support
us on unpopular policies by indicating the importance of such policies
to our futures. We need to change attitudes toward conservation. We
are a high energy using country. We need to look at the alternatives
very carefully. For instance, acidic rain results from the burning of coal.
A number of alternatives have environmental consequences.
The Summit should take account of different circumstances in our
countries. We anticipate a shortfall in domestic production of crude
and conventional sources of energy because of our declining well pro-
duction over the next five years. But we will have significant produc-
tion of non-traditional fuels after 1985. Also, there are major regional
differences in Canada. There is wealth where there is energy but there
is less wealth in energy importing areas. This limits the use of price in
influencing
demand.
Our
priority
national
goal
in
energy
is
self-sufficiency by 1990 through substituting for oil, natural gas and
other sources. This effort can be helped by the Tokyo Summit
communique.
OHIRA: We coped with the oil situation last year, but we were
naive on the Middle East. On long-term energy development, our em-
phasis was inadequate. We should be firm in coping with OPEC price
increases and should seriously pursue long-term research in energy.
The impact of energy on our economic structure should be pointed
out. But the big question is have we achieved results. Since the first oil
price increase we have diminished the impact on payments imbalances
and cooled off inflation, but unemployment and inflation are still with
us. In improving productivity, we must make a major effort at positive
adjustment—structural adjustment.
With respect to Japan we are undertaking fundamental changes in
our lifestyle. Our trends are toward qualitative improvements with af-
fluence. Since I took office I have tried to produce qualitative improve-
ments in daily life bringing the country to the city and the benefits of
the city to the country. I am also interested in discussing the circum-
stances of city life. We must take a look at our lifestyles in responding
to the energy problem. We must also pay attention to relations with the
developing countries and look at the global community.
[This section of the discussion concluded at 11:10, and a coffee
break took place. The discussion resumed at 11:35.]9
OHIRA: Let us now turn to macro-economic issues. In our com-
ments this morning we touched on the relationship between macro-
economic issues and energy. Who would like to begin?
9 Brackets in the original.
