Special Session on Disarmament
1179
gation the trend in our thinking and the general nature of our assess-
ment of the document, and only in a very preliminary way.
The Yugoslav delegation thanked Mr. Weiler for his comments
and said they were extremely valuable as an indication of US interest
and of US thinking on the SSOD. Mujezinovic said he would not take
the time to answer the individual points made by Mr. Weiler at this
time, but rather, he said, would address the question of how we might
proceed in the drafting exercise. The Yugoslav Government, he noted,
had sought and continued to seek more governmental points of view as
to the eventual shape of the final documents. Ideally they would like to
see the US views set forth, but still, based in part on the existence of sev-
eral drafts of the declaration, they felt in a rather good position from
which to proceed. The Soviet/Eastern European papers (USUN 27114
and UN Documents A/AC.187/81 and 82), the Romanian papers (UN
Documents A/AC.187/77, 78, and 79), the paper submitted informally
by several Western delegations (USUN 2942),5 Australian and Norwe-
gian drafts, and Japanese and UK comments on earlier papers all re-
flected various governmental positions. He said his delegation would
continue to seek grounds for a final document, but cautioned that they,
as was the case with most of the nonaligned, did not have the great ex-
pertise in disarmament matters possessed by the larger powers. He
said the nonaligned would now have to produce a new draft, of the
type produced by others, and try also to arrange the text according to
what would appear to be an acceptable format.
Turning to some comments in general on the thrust of Mr. Weiler’s
presentation, Mujezinovic said his government wished the special ses-
sion to “dramatize” the lack of progress in disarmament over the past
three decades, and to generate both a common policy toward stimu-
lating negotiations, and also political will to enter serious negotiations.
They sincerely hoped to produce an outcome which would be accept-
able by consensus, but he was doubtful whether this would be possible,
particularly on some contentious issues such as the need for continuing
alliance systems and the question of the peaceful uses of nuclear en-
ergy. He recalled Mr. Weiler’s emphasis on non-proliferation and said
that, in the view of his government, what was needed was a “new
system” to prevent nuclear proliferation, and he saw the SSOD as a nec-
essary first step in this field. His government felt it was ironic that the
very states which were committed to nonproliferation were accused in
fact and by implication of endangering the nonproliferation regime.
Most nonaligned agreed that nuclear weapons and proliferation were
4 Telegram 2711 from USUN, August 24, is in National Archives, RG 59, Central
Foreign Policy File, D770306–0503.
5 Not found.
