Technical Committee to Draw up a List of Luxuries, Second Meeting,
March 2, 1926.
At the second meeting on March 2 of the Technical Committee to Draw up
a List of Luxuries, Admiral Tsai submitted a list of all the articles on which
reservations had been made by the different members of the Technical
Committee, together with a table showing the rates of import duties in
foreign countries on the goods on which reservations had been made, and
also a list of the revised terms in Classes “A”, “B” and “C”. These
documents may be found on page 2 et seq of the Minutes of March 2, 1926.
Mr. Saburi read from the Minutes of the Washington Conference, in
connection with the inquiry made by Mr. Stewart at the last meeting as to
the amount of revenues expected from the Washington surtaxes, showing
that Senator Underwood’s estimate was $46,167,000.5 Mr. Saburi pointed
out that this figure differed greatly from the figure named at the last
meeting. Admiral Tsai remarked that the situation in China was now quite
different from what it was at the time of the Washington Conference. Mr.
Stewart emphasized the need of disposing of the Washington surtax
question with as little delay as possible as the American Delegation had
originally proposed, so that the Conference would be free to deal with the
new situation which had arisen since the Washington Conference. He
expressed the, hope that everyone would show the same liberal spirit and
open-mindedness which would help matters along.
 
The chairman proceeded to read out the list of reservations item by item and
in a considerable number of cases the reservations were maintained, but in
others they were withdrawn. The few reservations made by the American
Advisers at the previous meeting were withdrawn and Mr. Hornbeck
announced that the American Advisers were willing to accept the “A”, “B”
and “C” lists in their entirety. As a possible means of speeding up the work,
Mr. Hornbeck expressed the hope that other Delegations would also
withdraw their reservations on at least some items. Following this
suggestion several individual reservations were withdrawn and the
Portuguese, Norwegian, Swedish and Danish representatives all, in turn,
