the injury of the Chinese people. Both Chinese and Americans
would however oppose an unconditional grant of the balance of
the Boxer Indemnity funds to the Peking Government.
4. The time is inopportune for the enactment of the proposed
legislation. Not only does the Chinese Government persist in its
refusal to pay loans and debts to American citizens, not only were
American ships engaged in lawful traffic last season on the
Yangtze fired on, but today American treaty rights in regard to
trade and commerce are violated in several provinces and 6
American missionaries within the last 60 days have been attacked
or carried off or murdered by bandits or soldiers. Against these
enormities the American Government has protested. The display
at this juncture of the generosity and friendship towards China
contemplated in the joint resolution introduced in the Senate
December 6, 1923, could not fail seriously to weaken the force of
these protests both with the Chinese Government and the Chinese
public opinion.
5. If the passage of the joint resolution involves the
relinquishment by the United States of the position it has
maintained in relation to the Chinese Maritime Customs since the
indemnity was imposed upon China in 1901, I should consider
this result under existing conditions in China gravely detrimental
to Chinese interests. China must soon face the great issues of
unification, stabilization of government, financial rehabilitation,
disbandment of troops, etc., and she will need the help of
America. Until these questions are disposed of America, should
not either in her own interest or in the interest of China part with
any of the leverage she now enjoys in common with other
nations. In comparison with the British, French and Japanese our
diplomatic position has already been impaired by our
nonparticipation in the control of the salt revenues. To turn over
to these nations the power and influence we now share with them
in connection with the customs revenues would be a fatal mistake.
