1358
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
(2) lower the price criterion (on Israel’s average oil import pay-
ments) from the highest 10% of US oil imports to the highest 20% (Israel
proposes the top 30%);
State and DOE propose to make these concessions provided Israel
agrees to a substantially longer period of meeting these tests than it has
thus far. (We want at least a 90-day measurement period, Israel has
moved up from 30 days to 60 days.) (S)
We would, under the State-DOE proposal, continue to insist that
both criteria must be met. (Israel wants to be able to call for US supply
when either criterion has been met; State and DOE believe Israel could
manipulate the spot market test and trigger the agreement almost at
will.) (S)
In addition, our present proposal assures Israel that its loss of a
major supplier (Mexico or Egypt) would, in and of itself, create a
“strong presumption” in favor of activation. (S)
Cooper and Duncan believe this offer would be a forthcoming, rea-
sonable response to Israeli dissatisfaction with our present position.
Coupled with the substantial concessions that we made in the Sep-
tember negotiations, it constitutes a fair interpretation of our supply as-
surance. It continues to protect us from Israeli triggering in other than
critical supply situations; thus it incurs a relatively low risk of ad-
versely affecting our current efforts to get increased Arabian oil pro-
duction to offset the Iraq-Iran curtailment. (S)
This position falls short of what is likely to be required to get
agreement. While we cannot be sure of how firmly Modai will cling to
his prior demands, he almost certainly will insist that compliance with
either market criterion, rather than both tests, should be sufficient, and
he probably will demand softer price and spot market tests than the re-
vised offer proposed by State and Energy. (S)
An intermediate position that would not jeopardize our principles
or risk unwarranted triggering of the agreement would be to lower the
spot market purchase percentage to 60% and, if this did not produce
agreement, to indicate that we were prepared to review our position, so
as to keep the negotiations going. (S)
State and DOE believe, as do I and others concerned, that key con-
siderations involved in this issue cannot be adequately covered in a
memorandum. I strongly recommend that you meet with the Vice Pres-
ident, Stu Eizenstat, Charles Duncan, Dick Cooper, and me before
making your decision.5 (S)
5 See Document 407.
