Chapter 6, June–December 1990  871
Both would also attempt to count simulations of RV releases, but would 
do so in different ways. The U.S. position would simply count the num-
ber of “simulated releases” which is not further defined in the treaty. 
The Soviets have proposed the phrase “procedures for releasing and 
dispensing,” which they define as the maneuvers of a missile associ-
ated with targeting or dispensing RVs.
Technical experts in the USG have studied this issue extensively 
and have been unable to identify a definition of simulated release that 
would both: 1) capture all Soviet test practices that would give the 
Soviets confidence that additional RVs could be carried and released 
from a particular PBV, and 2) [2 lines not declassified] Under SALT the 
Soviets have never raised questions about U.S. practices. [2 lines not 
declassified]
Given the importance in START of accurately attributing RVs to 
missiles, the Senate will likely examine the definition—­or absence of 
definition—­of the term “simulated releases.” Although “simulated 
releases” is a technical detail, not a central concept in the treaty as is 
“RV,” we would have to be prepared during ratification to defend the 
utility of any definition we negotiate. Either a weak definition or an 
absence of a definition could attract criticism.
There are 2 options:
1. Accept the Soviet language and elaborate on it to ensure that 
1) U.S. PBV maneuvers are not captured and 2) any mass at least 80% of 
the weight of the lightest RV is counted as a RV.
2. Do not propose a definition.
ACDA favors option 1, arguing that clarity and precision in the 
definition will clarify U.S. undertakings in the treaty and will minimize 
future compliance questions.
OSD, JCS, DOE, and the DCI’s Rep oppose any definition of sim-
ulated release. They argue that a specific definition could stimulate 
Soviet questions about specific U.S. practices that are unrelated to RV 
releases, and that no realistic definition could close off plausible Soviet 
circumvention opportunities.
State believes the term “simulated release” should be defined but 
has not identified a definition that is acceptable.
NSC staff agree that a substantively useful definition has not been 
found. In the end, we may have to compromise with the Soviet defini-
tion, but no definition should be our preferred outcome. In an inherently 
gray area, this gives us the necessary latitude in our own programs and 
maximizes our flexibility to raise questions with the Soviets. We espe-
cially want to avoid a situation in which we sanction questionable Soviet 
practices by excluding them from the definition. [less than 3 lines not
