X
Preface
arms control policy. Carter’s emphasis on the promotion of human
rights, which the Nixon and Ford administrations had chosen to down-
play, also impacted his arms control policy. Carter wanted to reduce
conventional arms sales and transfers to U.S. allies who did not place a
high value on human rights. At the same time, Carter’s experience as
an engineer who studied nuclear physics allowed him to take a per-
sonal interest in many of these new initiatives, in particular the Non-
Proliferation and INFCE discussions, from 1977 through the early part
of 1979. However, after Carter was drawn into the Iran Hostage and Af-
ghanistan crises, and as de´tente faltered, many of these non-SALT arms
control initiatives waned in importance. His personal involvement no-
tably decreased, and he began to act in ways similar to the Nixon
administration, most noticeably when he began to approve nearly all
conventional arms sales requests.
Unlike Nixon and Ford, who met regularly with Soviet General
Secretary Leonid Brezhnev, Carter and Brezhnev only met once, in
Vienna in 1979. Thus, they communicated most frequently by letter,
and proposed arms control initiatives such as ASAT negotiations and
the general issue of non-proliferation in outer space, CBW discussions,
the CTB and PNE talks, and general nuclear non-proliferation initia-
tives. The ASAT negotiations were hampered not only by technical def-
initions of anti-satellite capabilities, but also Moscow’s insistence that
the U.S. space shuttle program be subject to any ASAT agreement. The
CBW talks, just like in the Nixon and Ford administrations, got set back
over the issue of how to identify incapacitants as well as how a treaty
would be verified. The United States insisted that a treaty could only be
verified by on-site inspections (OSIs), but the Soviets balked at al-
lowing such visits of their facilities. The CBW talks were also particu-
larly affected by accusations that the Soviets and their allies were using
chemical weapons in Afghanistan and Southeast Asia, and especially
by the belated discovery in 1980 of a 1979 outbreak of anthrax in a So-
viet biological weapons factory in Sverdlovsk, which violated the Bio-
logical Convention signed by Nixon and Brezhnev at the 1972 Moscow
Summit.
The CTB/PNE negotiations also involved the United Kingdom,
and were affected by the Labour government’s fall in 1979, the rise of
Margaret Thatcher’s conservative rule, and British opposition to the
construction of multiple National Seismic Stations on its soil. Verifica-
tion of a potential CTB treaty remained a sore point, as the Soviets re-
fused to allow OSIs. In the fall of 1980, the U.S. repeatedly accused the
Soviet Union of conducting high-yield nuclear tests in violation of the
1976 Threshold Test-Ban Treaty (TTBT). Coming on the heels of the So-
viet invasion of, and the charges of their use of chemical weapons in,
Afghanistan, and the Sverdlovsk incident, the alleged TTBT violations
further chilled U.S.-Soviet relations.
