September 18–December 16, 1978 423 $800 million for the airfields and $300 million for resettling the settlers. Begin apologized again to the President for mentioning that cost but said Israel had to do something in developing new homes for the settlers who will leave the Sinai. Parenthetically, he acknowledged that President Carter had “never used any pressure” on Israel about the settlers in the Sinai. Begin said he had weighed their continued presence against the opportunity of peace and made his decision. Begin suggested that “we agree today” that Israeli Finance Minister Simcha Ehrlich meet with Secretary Blumenthal on November 6, when Ehrlich could pass through Washington on his way to a speech in California.8 Secretary Vance said that he would have to discuss this with the President. The President in turn would have to discuss the subject with the Congressional leadership before responding to Prime Minister Begin’s request. The Secretary noted that the President would not be able to focus on this until he returns to Washington late November 4. The Secretary said he would report to the President then. Meanwhile, he said it would be a mistake to discuss this publicly at this point until the President has a chance to mention it to the Congressional leadership since the leadership could be offended by public discussion of an issue of which they had not been informed. Foreign Minister Dayan said he hoped that Secretary Vance could at least agree that the Israeli Finance Minister should deal with this matter so that he could get it off his own agenda. Secretary Vance repeated that he did not want to make any commitment until he had talked with the President. If we get to such a point, he said, then we could agree that the Finance Minister would handle the issue. Defense Minister Weizman intervened to note that, when we sign the treaty there will be other issues to discuss like MATMON C.9 Secretary Vance suggested that we not try to solve that now. Begin returned to the subject of the airfields, saying they would have to be operational in three years. Secretary Vance responded by 8 Ehrlich and Blumenthal met at the Department of the Treasury on November 14. A summary of their meeting was transmitted in telegram 295850 to Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, and Cairo, November 22. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780481–0844) The meeting followed a meeting of the U.S.-Israel Joint Committee for Investment and Trade in which the two officials participated. At the conclusion of the Joint Committee meeting Ehrlich and Blumenthal signed a summary statement of the meeting’s proceedings, the text of which was transmitted in telegram 292425 to Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, November 17. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780475–0012) 9 See footnote 7, Document 24.
