100 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement (10) Shelters for commercial buildings 6 prototypes, ranging in size from 1000–5000 person shelters -----$2.3 Millions (11) Single and multi-­family residence adaptations to provide shelter 16 prototypes, including bathroom shelters, basement recreation areas, farm storage areas, basement work areas, and enlarged basements under porches for storage, and larger shelters for multi-­family use. -----$0.8 Million $Millions 2. Surveys and Pilot Studies $75 (3 year program) a. Development of estimated availability of existing shelter on a sampling basis As a basis for national planning, definitive information is needed regarding the capability of existing structures to provide fallout shelter, particularly in large cities. The Committee recommends that a survey of existing structures be conducted on a sampling basis to yield such information. This would be handled through direct Federal contract, and would be completed in one year. -----$2.0 Millions 3b. Survey of Existing Shelter The Committee recommends that priority attention be given to a systematic survey of the potential of existing buildings and other struc­ tures such as mines and subways to provide fallout shelter with little or no modification. Such areas should be identified for immediate use. Property owners should be urged to modify their buildings to provide fallout shelters where feasible, and assisted in plans and designs inci­ dent thereto. The survey would require approximately two years for comple­ tion and would start after completion of the sample survey of existing structures. It would be conducted as an extension of the survival plan­ ning program through Federal contracts with States and cities, with the Federal Government providing the money. Costs are estimated as 3 The Department of Defense and Bureau of the Budget members believe that the survey and pilot studies described under 2b and 2c should require an appropriate per­ centage of State and/or local participation. They believe that this procedure would be more effective in stimulating locally financed shelter construction and would avoid estab­ lishing a precedent which might preclude local financial support of subsequent shelter construction. The other members believe that such a requirement would delay unduly an effort which gives promise of identifying quickly a substantial amount of effective fallout shelter at very little cost. [Footnote is in the original.]
