1036  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
against ships or land targets, and the range of the other (SS–13) could be 
increased to 60–80 n.m.
29. The Soviets are also constructing a new class of motor patrol 
craft which may be equipped with guided missiles or free rockets. We 
continue to believe that Soviet ground-­launched surface-­to-­air missiles 
can be adapted for use by surface ships, but there is no indication that 
this has yet been done. Although there is no evidence, we estimate that 
the USSR will probably also develop missile systems for antisubmarine 
warfare. Such a system (SS–10) could probably enter service between 
1962 and 1965.
Space Program
(See paragraphs 107–132, NIE 11–5–59)
30. The USSR’s space program to date has been characterized by 
a series of spectacular “firsts,” demonstrating a high degree of techni­
cal competence and capitalizing on Soviet possession of very powerful 
propulsion systems. Nevertheless, the number of launchings to date 
has been less than we previously expected, and the Soviets do not seem 
to have followed a systematic program designed to achieve maximum 
progress toward clearly-­defined scientific goals. Partly for this reason 
we are unable to predict with confidence the future course of the Soviet 
program.
31. The Soviets could at any time undertake a variety of new 
ventures, including, for example, the launching of very large satel­
lites containing instrumentation or animals. Such attempts would be 
useful for scientific purposes, and would undoubtedly be exploited 
by the Soviets to serve general purposes of policy and propaganda. 
Other projects, however, and especially that of putting a man in space, 
would require more preparation and preliminary experimentation 
than we believe the Soviets have accomplished. We believe the Soviets 
capable of achieving, within about the next year, one or more of the 
following:
a. vertical or downrange flight and recovery of a manned capsule;
b. unmanned lunar satellite or soft landing on the moon;
c. probe to the vicinity of Mars or Venus;
d. orbiting and recovery of capsules containing instruments, ani­
mals, and thereafter, perhaps a man.
