Non-Proliferation
797
324.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
France1
Washington, February 25, 1977, 0023Z
42053. Subject: U.S.-French Nuclear Policy Review. Ref: Paris
4591,2 Paris 4693.3
1. U.S.-French talks on nuclear non-proliferation policy on Feb-
ruary 19–20 included thorough and informal exchange of views on
major non-proliferation issues and opportunity consult on sensitive
nuclear projects in Brazil and Pakistan. Atmosphere of talks was very
open and constructive.
2. A. Policy toward sensitive nuclear transfers—both sides agreed
that it essential to avoid states backing into nuclear weapons capability
due to spread of sensitive technology and materials. U.S. suggested
that next step is to gain time to permit evaluation of further controls
and possible bilateral and multilateral incentives which could include
assured fuel supply, spent-fuel storage, exploration of alternative nu-
clear technologies. French suggested that offer of fuel cycle services on
economic basis could help to compensate for denial of technology,
were receptive to concept of multilateralizing such services, and of-
fered to consider how to effect this. They stressed that it is important
that suppliers of fuel services not be seen as a bloc opposed to techno-
logical cooperation, and that if a country chooses to develop indige-
nously an independent nuclear fuel cycle capability, it is not French
policy to prohibit them from doing so.
B. Fuel assurances—U.S. stressed that we do not propose new
regime resulting in commercial disadvantage for any supplier. Fuel as-
surances would maximize economic disincentive for go-it-alone pro-
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P850056–2027. Se-
cret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent for information Immediate to Bonn, Brasilia, and Islamabad.
Drafted by John Adsens (EUR/RPE) and Oplinger (PM/NPO); cleared by Nye, John Kal-
icki (S/P), Denis Lamb (D), Louis Nosenzo (OES/NET), Charles Van Doren (ACDA),
Edgar Beigel (EUR/WE), and Peter Bridges (S/S); and approved by James Lowenstein
(EUR).
2 Telegram 4591 from Paris, February 25, reported that France “is committed to nu-
clear electrical power and needs to export” and “breeder reactors are considered essential
and their export will be strongly pursued.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign
Policy File, D770053–0997)
3 Telegram 4693 from Paris, February 16, reported that the French Government
seemed to believe that “some form of international agreement is necessary for providing
necessary fuel cycle services to nuclear reactor customers to eliminate any quasi-
economically justified transfer technology.” Furthermore, the French believed that
“breeder reactors are a necessary thing of the future and their success will depend in part
on a successful international arrangement for coping with nonproliferation.” (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770055–0515)
