792  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
Bartholomew: The point is this has been a major issue in strategic 
arms negotiations for more than a decade in the US. This aircraft has 
intercontinental potential without saying what kind of aircraft it is.
Shevardnadze: But we can guarantee that to you. This aircraft has 
no intercontinental capability.
Bartholomew: To lay this issue to rest, we need to be able to say we 
have two forms of assurance with respect to intercontinental potential. 
We need to be able to say you will not give this aircraft intercontinental 
capability, and this you have done. We also need to say, because many 
critics will say intercontinental capability can be changed quickly, that 
the Soviet Union has also offered an assurance on the number. Here you 
have been willing to give us half of what we want—­the number 400 
but only for the air force. But if Secretary Baker goes before the Senate 
with only this they will say that is some insurance, there could be 1000 
Backfire painted with the colors of the Soviet Navy. They will say you 
have left a major loophole. We want to be able to say the Soviet Union 
told us the number of air force Backfire will not exceed X, and as for the 
navy Backfire they have assured us they will freeze that level.
Shevardnadze: You mention that you may be entrapped. The ques-
tion that we keep getting from our people concerns the number of naval 
aircraft. The answer we get from you is not going to calm our people. 
Since we are now on this very sensitive ground, this is not something 
we should discuss now. We should confine our effort to this statement 
on range and in-­air refueling. We can debate the rest of the ideas in 
Vienna.
Akhromeyev: Amb. Bartholomew was emphatic that what the 
United States wants is two types of checks on the number of naval 
TU–22M airplanes. But at the same time you are rejecting altogether 
negotiations on naval forces. You mentioned difficulties you face in 
Congress. But what is it we could tell the Soviet people by way of expla-
nation that while strategic forces and land forces are limited, talks on 
naval arms are rejected?
Baker: With no disrespect Marshal, that is a phony argument. We 
have been willing all along to discuss naval arms. The naval arms we 
won’t talk about are on carriers. What you can tell the Soviet people is 
the US went along with your repeated requests to deal with SLCMs in a 
politically binding deal. Just so we understand each other here, SLCMs 
are sea-­launched cruise missiles, launched from the sea. We are asking 
you to do on Backfire what you asked us to do on SLCMs—­put an over-
all limit on them to meet a political need, because there were concerns. 
We are asking nothing more of you than we have given on SLCMs, we 
gave you what you needed on SLCMs. We ask that you meet us half-­
way on Backfire. Naval aircraft is not the issue here, any more than it 
was when you asked us for the same thing on SLCMs. Some of you are
