National Security Policy  269
through using identifiable Soviet forces to attack US bases and forces. 
They would probably prefer covertly to provide the necessary weap­
ons and support to the Chinese Communists or possibly the North 
Koreans. We believe they would also calculate that the limited US base 
structure in the Far East would be highly vulnerable even to attack by 
Chinese Communist forces alone. But the Soviets would provide exten­
sive aid and support, extending possibly to “volunteers.” They would 
almost certainly provide Soviet forces to participate in the air defense 
of Communist China. Moreover, in event of widespread US attacks on 
Communist China, we cannot exclude the possibility of open Soviet 
intervention in the Far East.
19. Peiping and Moscow’s desire to limit the risks of general war 
also would probably lead them to confine their nuclear attacks within 
limits comparable to those observed by the US. If US use of these weap­
ons was confined to the immediate combat area, we believe that the 
Communists would similarly limit their response. However, the pos­
sibility cannot be excluded that even if US use of these weapons were 
confined to the immediate combat area, the Communists might also 
launch nuclear attacks against US bases in the Western Pacific selected 
so as to minimize the danger of general war. If the US attacked targets 
deep in Communist China, the enemy would probably react by attack­
ing selected US bases in the Western Pacific.
II. GENERAL FREE WORLD REACTIONS
20. Free World reactions to a US response with nuclear weapons 
to Communist aggression in the Far East would vary widely. Provided 
that the aggression were clearly identifiable, most of our allies, and 
probably some neutral opinion, would be inclined at least initially 
to view with approval our prompt and forthright aid to the victim 
of attack. However, this feeling would be overshadowed by fear that 
nuclear war in the Far East would spread into general war. Such appre­
hension would rise greatly if the US nuclear counterattack were of such 
a nature—­including for example strikes deep into Communist China—­
that it appeared to be in excess of the force required, and particularly if 
the Communists employed nuclear weapons in retaliation. Even if the 
war were localized there would be fear that one side or the other might 
subsequently broaden it. These developments would lead to strong 
pressures on the part of other governments to seek a prompt end to 
hostilities.
21. Along with Free World fear of expanding hostilities would be 
a widespread adverse emotional reaction to US use of nuclear weap­
ons. Should these weapons inflict large casualties, particularly among 
civilians, it would intensify this feeling. If, however, US use of nuclear 
weapons led to a quick victory without large civilian casualties this
