September 18–December 16, 1978 473 West Bank and Gaza to improve the political atmosphere for negotiations such as allowing freedom of political expression for the Palestinians during the negotiating period, moving Israel’s military government from their present locations in Gaza and Nablus outside the Arab municipalities and granting amnesty to certain prisoners and detainees who are inhabitants of the two areas. Dayan and Weizman said they would support such steps personally but would have to discuss them with the Cabinet first. I am keenly aware of the importance—to Egypt, to the United States, and to the peace process—of moving promptly to achieve concrete progress for the Palestinians in both the West Bank and Gaza. I firmly believe that the best way to do this is to move promptly into the negotiations dealing with both of these Palestinian areas. Progress in those negotiations is the best way to ensure the earliest feasible elections. We can make our best effort to hold those elections before the interim Israeli withdrawal from Sinai. However, I do not believe it will be possible to establish a commitment now to the exact date. The Israeli agreement which we now have is to the objective of completing the negotiations and holding the elections as soon as feasible but in any case no later than the end of 1979. I believe what has been achieved in these negotiations with respect to both the West Bank and Gaza can be regarded as an important accomplishment for Egypt as a realistic promise of progress for the Palestinians. The language firmly establishes that this treaty is the first step toward a comprehensive peace and that such a peace cannot be complete unless [missing text] solves the Palestinian problem. The letter which Ambassador Eilts will show you sets a firm date for the beginning of negotiations and a realistic timeframe for the subsequent steps envisioned in the Camp David framework. In those negotiations, we will be defining powers and responsibilities for the Palestinian self-governing body that will make it autonomous and indeed worthy of the name of self-government. As soon as we complete those negotiations, you can be justifiably proud that the first Palestinian self-governing body would be brought into existence well before the full exercise of Egyptian authority is restored in the Sinai. Your government will be able to stand by this achievement in the eyes of the world with pride. I know from our talk, Mr. President, that you feel strongly that the interim withdrawal should not be completed before the establishment of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza, or at least in Gaza. I also want to see parallel progress on the Palestinian issues. By continuing our efforts in the next phase of negotiations, we can establish a practical linkage between stages of withdrawal and steps on the West Bank and Gaza, but to modify the texts of the agreement now
