September 18–December 16, 1978
473
West Bank and Gaza to improve the political atmosphere for negotia-
tions such as allowing freedom of political expression for the Pales-
tinians during the negotiating period, moving Israel’s military gov-
ernment from their present locations in Gaza and Nablus outside the
Arab municipalities and granting amnesty to certain prisoners and de-
tainees who are inhabitants of the two areas. Dayan and Weizman said
they would support such steps personally but would have to discuss
them with the Cabinet first.
I am keenly aware of the importance—to Egypt, to the United
States, and to the peace process—of moving promptly to achieve con-
crete progress for the Palestinians in both the West Bank and Gaza. I
firmly believe that the best way to do this is to move promptly into the
negotiations dealing with both of these Palestinian areas. Progress in
those negotiations is the best way to ensure the earliest feasible elec-
tions. We can make our best effort to hold those elections before the in-
terim Israeli withdrawal from Sinai. However, I do not believe it will be
possible to establish a commitment now to the exact date. The Israeli
agreement which we now have is to the objective of completing the ne-
gotiations and holding the elections as soon as feasible but in any case
no later than the end of 1979.
I believe what has been achieved in these negotiations with respect
to both the West Bank and Gaza can be regarded as an important ac-
complishment for Egypt as a realistic promise of progress for the Pales-
tinians. The language firmly establishes that this treaty is the first step
toward a comprehensive peace and that such a peace cannot be com-
plete unless [missing text] solves the Palestinian problem. The letter
which Ambassador Eilts will show you sets a firm date for the begin-
ning of negotiations and a realistic timeframe for the subsequent steps
envisioned in the Camp David framework. In those negotiations, we
will be defining powers and responsibilities for the Palestinian
self-governing body that will make it autonomous and indeed worthy
of the name of self-government. As soon as we complete those negotia-
tions, you can be justifiably proud that the first Palestinian self-gov-
erning body would be brought into existence well before the full exer-
cise of Egyptian authority is restored in the Sinai. Your government
will be able to stand by this achievement in the eyes of the world with
pride.
I know from our talk, Mr. President, that you feel strongly that the
interim withdrawal should not be completed before the establishment
of the self-governing authority in the West Bank and Gaza, or at least in
Gaza. I also want to see parallel progress on the Palestinian issues. By
continuing our efforts in the next phase of negotiations, we can estab-
lish a practical linkage between stages of withdrawal and steps on the
West Bank and Gaza, but to modify the texts of the agreement now
