1977 115 did not need to be so specific at this stage and that more work needed to be done on this question. Dr. Brzezinski indicated that paragraph 2B would be more acceptable if it were more specific: for example, it should state the sorts of targets that the Secretary of Defense should investigate; also, we should examine the utility of attacking [less than 1 line not declassified]. Mr. Gelb pointed out that NSDM 2422 does not call for [2 lines not declassified] targets. Dr. Brzezinski stated that the NSDM 242 guidance was exactly what he wanted to reexamine. Secretary Brown pointed out that while in the past [2 lines not declassified]. Dr. Brzezinski said that, while we are all uncomfortable about this problem, we cannot avoid thinking about it. He also felt that paragraph 2B should contain language specifying illustrative percents of damage that should be studied. The language should not be restrictive, rather it should provide examples. The Secretary of Defense should consider the relative strategic advantages of targeting say 70% of the economic targets, [less than 1 line not declassified] and so forth. Secretary Brown stated that he was willing to look at soft military targets as well. Dr. Brzezinski and Secretary Brown agreed that this work would be completed on about January 1, 1978. Dr. Brzezinski indicated that the NSC would provide more guidance on this study. The discussion then turned to paragraph III B3. Secretary Brown proposed that the last sentence of the paragraph, the one reading “additional forces should not be acquired for this purpose,” should be scrapped. General Smith and Dr. Brzezinski agreed; and there were no objections to its elimination. On paragraph III B4, Mr. Jayne pointed out that the last sentence, about maintaining “at least the current level of time urgent hard target kill capability,” was ambiguous. Secretary Brown interpreted the sentence to mean that if the Soviets can harden their targets more, then we will be forced to increase our capability to knock them out. In essence he thought the sentence said “don’t dismantle what you have got, but don’t make any big increases either.” Dr. Huntington indicated that that was the intent. When the discussion turned to paragraph III B5, Dr. Brown objected to the language of the first sentence, which he felt would keep us from defending against air attack from Cuba. We want to do more than surveillance; we want to deny the Soviets a free ride. He proposed the addition of the words “and control” after surveillance and before “of US air space.” Mr. Keeny felt the statement was open-­ended. But all agreed to insert the phrase. 2 National Security Decision Memorandum 242, “Policy for Planning the Employment of Nuclear Weapons,” was signed by President Gerald Ford on January 17, 1974. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXV, National Security Policy, 1973–1976, Document 31.
