Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1155
(ii)  9150, for warheads attributed to deployed ICBMs, deployed 
SLBMs, and deployed heavy bombers;
(iii)  8050, for warheads attributed to deployed ICBMs and 
deployed SLBMs;
(b) by the end of the second phase, that is, no later than 60 months 
after entry into force of this Treaty, and thereafter, the following aggre-
gate numbers:
(i)  1900, for deployed ICBMs and their associated launchers, 
deployed SLBMs and their associated launchers, and deployed 
heavy bombers;
(ii)  7950, for warheads attributed to deployed ICBMs, deployed 
SLBMs, and deployed heavy bombers;
(iii)  6750, for warheads attributed to deployed ICBMs and deployed 
SLBMs;
(c) by the end of the third phase, that is, no later than 84 months 
after entry into force of this Treaty: the aggregate numbers provided for 
in paragraph 1 of this Article.
3. Each Party shall limit the aggregate throw-weight of its deployed 
ICBMs and deployed SLBMs so that seven years after entry into force of 
this Treaty and thereafter such aggregate throw-weight does not exceed 
3600 metric tons.
ARTICLE III
1. For the purposes of counting toward the maximum aggregate 
limits provided for in subparagraphs 1(a), 2(a)(i), and 2(b)(i) of Article II 
of this Treaty:
(a) Each deployed ICBM and its associated launcher shall be 
counted as one unit; each deployed SLBM and its associated launcher 
shall be counted as one unit.
(b) Each deployed heavy bomber shall be counted as one unit.
2. For the purposes of counting deployed ICBMs and their asso-
ciated launchers and deployed SLBMs and their associated launchers:
(a) Each deployed launcher of ICBMs and each deployed launcher 
of SLBMs shall be considered to contain one deployed ICBM or one 
deployed SLBM, respectively.
(b) If a deployed ICBM has been removed from its launcher and 
another missile has not been installed in that launcher, such an ICBM 
removed from its launcher and located at that ICBM base shall continue 
to be considered to be contained in that launcher.
(c) If a deployed SLBM has been removed from its launcher and 
another missile has not been installed in that launcher, such an SLBM 
removed from its launcher shall be considered to be contained in that 
launcher. Such an SLBM removed from its launcher shall be located
