These committees or offices shall have the following duties: (a) To cooperate with their respective Governments to obtain ratification of treaties and conventions, and to give effect to the resolutions adopted by the International Conferences of American States. (b) To furnish the, Pan American Union promptly with the information it may need in the preparation of its work. (c) To present to the Union through the proper channels such projects as they may consider adapted to the purposes of the Union. The establishment of a committee, such as that described above, would seem unnecessarily to expand the organization of the Pan American Union and its affiliated organizations. In a large measure such a committee would appear to duplicate the work of the national committees of the Inter- American High Commission. It is thought that the committees of the Inter- American High Commission, already organized, could well undertake the functions which it is intended the committee described in this Article shall undertake, and it is believed that if practicable the Inter-American High Commission might even be merged into the Pan American Union. If other nations members of the Pan American Union desire to establish such a new committee, there would of course be no objection on the part of the United States, but you should be careful not to commit the United States to follow their example. Neither does this Government feel the necessity for creating a new office attached to the Department of State and entrusted with affairs connected with the Pan American Union. This function is already fulfilled by the Division of Latin American Affairs, which acts as a liaison office between the Department of State and the Pan American Union. It is thought that the Division of Latin American Affairs of the Department of State can fulfill all the functions set forth in clauses a, b and c of Article XV quoted above. Article XVI provides for the formation of a pension and retirement fund. The United States is disposed to encourage this plan, although, of course,
