International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1031 food production has been only 2.3 percent over the past 15 years, somewhat less than their average increase in population. Per capita consumption has not increased at all, and in Africa, it has decreased by 10 percent. About half of the present and expected future deficits are in higher income LDC’s, including a few countries without foreign exchange constraints, able to import commercially sufficient food to meet expected domestic demand. A number of other developing countries usually can do so provided they can continue to have increasing access to OECD markets for their export products. The more intractable part of the food problem is the expanding deficit in developing countries with a GNP of less than $300 per capita. During the period 1971–1975, their annual food production increased by only 1.8 percent per year. This is well below their annual population growth of 2.4 percent. While recent harvests have improved, long-range prospects show many developing countries becoming increasingly dependent on food imports. If these deficits are to be even partially satisfied by imports, many developing nations will be forced deeper into debt, limiting their ability to finance economic development efforts, including the increase of food production. Many views of the world food situation focus on immutable forces or circumstances (such as the limited surface of the earth, changed climatic patterns, or the fixed nature of consumption patterns) which are thought to be beyond control. However, much of what has happened in the development of the world food situation can be traced to government policies and basic human conditions (such as income distribution and poverty), and suggests that governmental and individual choices will continue to be critical in the future. The world food situation can be changed to the extent that governments and individuals see needs for change and are willing to modify those policies and conditions that influence food production and consumption. Increasing food production in the developing countries will require improvements in basic agricultural technology and infrastructure, favorable policies, and better resource management. There is, however, no practical solution to long-term food production problems that does not prominently include accelerated declines in population growth rates. Longer-term demographic prospects. There are some hopeful signs, but intensified action in policies and programs aimed at encouraging small families and providing the means of achieving them is required. Progress has been made in reducing fertility, but the gains are still too localized and some are too fragile. Changes in governments can upset programs’ efficiency. Much greater efforts will be required (1) to institutionalize small family norms (through reduction of poverty, ex-
