International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1031
food production has been only 2.3 percent over the past 15 years, some-
what less than their average increase in population. Per capita con-
sumption has not increased at all, and in Africa, it has decreased by 10
percent.
About half of the present and expected future deficits are in higher
income LDC’s, including a few countries without foreign exchange
constraints, able to import commercially sufficient food to meet ex-
pected domestic demand. A number of other developing countries usu-
ally can do so provided they can continue to have increasing access to
OECD markets for their export products.
The more intractable part of the food problem is the expanding
deficit in developing countries with a GNP of less than $300 per capita.
During the period 1971–1975, their annual food production increased
by only 1.8 percent per year. This is well below their annual population
growth
of
2.4
percent.
While
recent
harvests
have
improved,
long-range prospects show many developing countries becoming in-
creasingly dependent on food imports. If these deficits are to be even
partially satisfied by imports, many developing nations will be forced
deeper into debt, limiting their ability to finance economic develop-
ment efforts, including the increase of food production.
Many views of the world food situation focus on immutable forces
or circumstances (such as the limited surface of the earth, changed cli-
matic patterns, or the fixed nature of consumption patterns) which are
thought to be beyond control. However, much of what has happened in
the development of the world food situation can be traced to gov-
ernment policies and basic human conditions (such as income distribu-
tion and poverty), and suggests that governmental and individual
choices will continue to be critical in the future. The world food situa-
tion can be changed to the extent that governments and individuals see
needs for change and are willing to modify those policies and condi-
tions that influence food production and consumption.
Increasing food production in the developing countries will re-
quire improvements in basic agricultural technology and infrastruc-
ture, favorable policies, and better resource management. There is,
however, no practical solution to long-term food production problems
that does not prominently include accelerated declines in population
growth rates.
Longer-term demographic prospects. There are some hopeful signs,
but intensified action in policies and programs aimed at encouraging
small families and providing the means of achieving them is required.
Progress has been made in reducing fertility, but the gains are still too
localized and some are too fragile. Changes in governments can upset
programs’ efficiency. Much greater efforts will be required (1) to insti-
tutionalize small family norms (through reduction of poverty, ex-
