Arms Control and Disarmament 1531 accepting plutonium for our U–235. Mr. McCone said we are propos­ ing a ratio of 1 to 1, and the British are proposing a ratio of 2½ to 1; he thought we could, and should, settle out for a ratio of 2 to 1. The Pres­ ident asked if this appeared to be a good trade from the standpoint of availability of the two products, and Mr. McCone said it is very defi­ nitely so, inasmuch as our needs for plutonium are rising, with small weapons. He added that State and Defense agree on this. The President said the proposition looked generally satisfactory to him. Mr. McCone added that there had been some talk by the British regarding obtaining weapons; this would have involved the need to seek a change in our law, which is better avoided, since problems would then arise with the French and Italians. Mr. McCone said that, the President having approved this action, he would take it up with the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. The President raised the question whether the Executive Branch is becom­ ing too subservient to that Committee. Mr. McCone said that so far the relationship is satisfactory. He assured the President that he is not going to let them invade Executive prerogatives and asked the President to have confidence in him that he will not let the Joint Committee push him around. The President indicated agreement on this basis. Mr. McCone said he would then pursue the matter of exchange with the British. The President asked that, in writing up the agreement, Mr. McCone make sure that State, Defense, Budget and the Attorney General are in concurrence. Mr. McCone said this would be done inas­ much as a change in the bilateral agreement would be necessary. Mr. McCone next raised the matter of the new production reactor at Hanford; since his last talk with the President Defense has submit­ ted ten-­year requirements for atomic weapons. To meet the need it first seemed there would be necessity to build two new reactors in addi­ tion to the receipts from the United Kingdom. However, by raising the power level at Hanford, the need will be reduced to one reactor. The President stated strongly that he would not accept these requirements as the basis for any actions until he had seen them. Mr. McCone said that the requirements as submitted by Secretary Quarles, on the scale of 100, corresponded to a figure of 110 recommended by General Twining and between 125 and 200 recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The President said that the requirements are not authoritative until he had approved them. He challenged the Defense thinking, saying they are trying to get themselves into an incredible position—of having enough to destroy every conceivable target all over the world, plus a three-­ fold reserve. The patterns of target destruction are fantastic. So many ground bursts are included as to bring certain damage to the United States. He recalled that the determination for many years was that there
