1250  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
ceremonies. I had received his messages via Ambassador Falcón, 
Assistant Secretary Mann, and Mr. Proudfit. The problem of setting the 
date had been difficult, all the more so because of the uncertainty of the 
Venezuelan inaugural date which had been changed twice. He laughed 
and said that this had been hard on him, too, and that it was the fault of 
the Venezuelan Congress.
The President said that the date of February 27 was all right. 
They would send a fitting delegation, possibly headed by the Foreign 
Minister, or maybe the President of the Congress, Dr. Leoni. He reas-
sured me that our problem was understood. He made no reference 
whatever to Admiral Larrazábal.
Ambassador Sparks asked the President to tell us how he felt about 
the presence of Perez Jimenez in the United States. The President said 
he understood the technical and legal points involved – ­that the man 
had a Venezuelan diplomatic passport, and that the Junta Government 
had requested a visa. Nevertheless, he said, United States relations with 
the people of Venezuela would remain “below zero” as long as he stays 
in our country. The man has no future anywhere; he is no problem in 
Venezuela to the President, but he is an impediment to good relations. 
I asked whether, at this time, he would prefer to see Perez Jimenez in 
the Dominican Republic. The President replied affirmatively. I said I 
would look into the matter. He didn’t mention extradition and I didn’t 
suggest it.
After expressing our appreciation to the President and 
Mrs. Betancourt and Ambassador Falcón, we departed at 9:40.
VE–21.	
Editorial Note
On March 10, 1959, President Eisenhower signed Proclamation 
3279, “Adjusting imports of petroleum and petroleum products into 
the United States.” This proclamation made the voluntary import sys-
tem mandatory. The new program, like the voluntary program, was 
based on national security requirements and was intended to insure 
a stable, healthy industry in the United States capable of exploring 
for and developing new hemisphere reserves. Proclamation 3290 of 
April 30, 1958, amended Proclamation 3279 by exempting Canadian 
and Mexican crude oil from mandatory restriction. For the text of 
Proclamation 3279, see 24 Foreign Relations 1781; and for Proclamation 
3290, see 24 Foreign Relations 3527.
