594
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
create a European Coal and Steel community. Pat Caddell tells me that
there is enough domestic interest in proliferation to make such an
agreement politically rewarding, as well as substantively useful. Very
serious obstacles exist, which may prevent us from getting the agree-
ment, but we will try to gear our actions between now and then to this
goal.3 (C)
3 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph.
203.
Memorandum From the Special Representative for Economic
Summits (Owen) to President Carter1
Washington, March 1, 1979
SUBJECT
US Economic Policy Toward Japan (U)
You asked that I work out with interested US officials an economic
strategy regarding Japan. This memo reports the results. Mike Blumen-
thal, Bob Strauss, Tony Solomon, Dick Cooper, Jules Katz, Dick Hol-
brooke’s staff, Fred Bergsten, and others have been involved in these
discussions. I have tried to take account of helpful views that we have
received from Mike Mansfield2—and also from Pat Caddell, who has
recently returned from Japan. (U)
1. The Problem. Because of Japan’s moderate growth policy and,
more importantly, because of the various Japanese domestic practices
that inhibit access to the Japanese market, Japan’s current account
surplus is substantial. Recent CIA estimates suggest that the surplus
may be declining more rapidly than we had expected, partly because of
the effects of yen appreciation—which have not yet been fully felt. Our
economic experts who recently visited Japan estimate that the surplus
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Country Chron File, Box 24, Japan: 1–3/79. Confidential. Sent for information.
Carter wrote at the top of the page: “Good memo. J.” The memorandum was sent to
Brzezinski for forwarding to Carter under cover of a February 27 note from Owen, who
noted that he had checked the memorandum with Platt. (Ibid.)
2 Between November 1978 and March 1979, Owen and Mansfield exchanged a
series of letters on U.S.-Japanese economic relations; the letters are in the Carter Library,
National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects File, Henry Owen, Box 22, Japan
Bilateral 3/79 in Tokyo: 3/79 [II].
