1978  221
In December, 1977, the allies also agreed to improve war reserve 
stocks, increase readiness, and strengthen reinforcement capabilities. 
These measures, along with greater anti-­armor effectiveness, will 
enhance NATO’s capability against the possibility of a Warsaw Pact 
short-­warning attack.
At the same time, we and our allies are working toward a greater 
integration of NATO doctrine, tactics, procedures, and equipment. The 
more that equipment, munitions, and their logistic support are inter-­
operable, the more effectively allied forces can contain a coordinated 
attack. Standardized or interoperable command, control and commu-
nications and interchangeable munitions are particularly essential for 
this purpose.
B. East Asia
There is a rather clear dividing line in Europe between friends 
and adversaries. The dangers are less sharply defined in Asia. Soviet 
forces in Asia are directed primarily at China. North Korea continues to 
improve its military capabilities relative to South Korea, but the long-­
term overall trends clearly favor the South. The situation in Southeast 
Asia remains obscure, and the ultimate intentions of Vietnam continue 
to be uncertain.
In these circumstances, the President has reaffirmed the commit-
ment of the United States to a position of strength in the Western Pacific. 
We will continue to protect our interests in Northeast Asia and fulfill all 
our treaty obligations. The planned withdrawal of the 2nd U.S. Infantry 
Division from South Korea in no way alters that commitment.
We shall continue to oppose aggression in Korea. With Congressio-
nal approval of the necessary legislation, we plan to augment the com-
bat capability of the South Korean ground forces. The major portion of 
the 2nd Division will remain deployed in Korea until after 1980. The 
Seventh Fleet, a Marine Amphibious Force with its organic air wing, 
and three USAF land-­based tactical fighter wings will continue on sta-
tion in the Western Pacific, including one in Korea.
Continuation of the close U.S.-Japanese defense relationship will 
further strengthen stability in Asia. We support Japanese efforts to 
improve their self-­defense forces, particularly their recently announced 
plans to augment their air defense and ASW capabilities.
C. Other Contingencies
There are, in addition, a number of other regions where the United 
States and its allies have vital interests and where serious and poten-
tially explosive rivalries exist. The Middle East, despite the hope
