1955  493
I hope to get off a longer letter to you by pouch tomorrow, but am 
preparing this first so that it will not be delayed in case I am prevented 
from doing the other letter.
Sincerely yours,
Walter P. McConaughy
Enclosure
Communication from the British Embassy2
Washington, November 5, 1955
Message from Mr. O’Neill dated November 4 
AMERICANS IN CHINA
I am now preparing letters to the 17 prisoners. I propose enclos­
ing text of agreed announcement and to avoid danger impugning 
Chinese good faith by saying that I understand that the Chinese have 
already communicated the text to the prisoners, but I am attaching 
a copy for their convenience. The letters will then draw attention to 
my functions under the agreement and say that I am ready to help in 
any way I can, and that I hope the prisoners will not hesitate to com­
municate with me as I understand the Chinese authorities agree they 
may. The letters will end by saying that the Chinese authorities have 
agreed that members of my staff should visit the prisoners and that I 
hope to arrange this soon.
2. With reference to paragraph 3 of my telegram of October 27, 
the Chinese were not complaining of any restrictions placed on the 
Indian Ambassador. I think that, before implementing a concession 
which went rather beyond the letter of the agreement (in not insisting 
on some initiative by the American prisoners before I could contact 
them) [they will require a formal assurance of reciprocity?]. If the Chi­
nese raise this again I shall say that I understand that no restrictions 
are imposed on the Indian Ambassador in carrying out his functions 
under the agreement. But they may yet require a more specific assur­
ance before they deliver the letter or authorise visits. The Vice Min­
ister for Foreign Affairs on October 26 was particularly insistent that 
the arrangements he proposed were subject to reciprocity.
3. My chief reason for suggesting that I should not arrange imme­
diate visit to Downey was that which the State Department give in ask­
ing me to do so: namely that no distinction should be made between 
any of the detained Americans. Moreover, if I now ask to visit Downey 
2 Confidential. Brackets are in the original.
