September 18–December 16, 1978 477 had just come from speaking to a labor group, was tired and was still suffering from a bad cold.) Rather wearily, he said his first reaction is that we are “speaking different languages.” It is out of the question, Sadat said with some show of emotion, that he would sign a treaty with Israel and put himself at the Israelis “mercy” with respect to the West Bank/Gaza, regardless of what the extent of USG involvement may be. He asked rhetorically how Egyptians and Arabs will receive his exchanging ambassadors with Israel one month after the Israeli interim withdrawal is completed when part of the Sinai remains occupied and no meaningful negotiations have yet been begun re West Bank/Gaza. I reminded him that the parties are commited under the West Bank/ Gaza letter to begin negotiations within one month of ratification of an Egyptian/Israeli treaty. Sadat responded that this does not mean much, especially since the Israelis have made it very clear that they are in no hurry to specify when elections will be held, troop redeployment dates, etc., in West Bank/Gaza. They will simply spin out talks. The Israelis are up to their old tricks and he was not prepared to mortgage his position to Begin’s good intentions. Such a development would hurt not only him, but President Carter in the area. As a “friend and a partner,” he wanted President Carter to know his view that “we must play it fair.” I said that this is precisely what we want and are trying to do. Sadat would have none of it. He did not question President Carter’s desire to be fair, but insisted that the present treaty package amounts to a separate Egyptian/Israeli agreement. He could not take the Israelis on faith re their West Bank/Gaza intentions. 5. The minimum that GOE will accept, Sadat stated, is a Gaza arrangement. There should be self-government in Gaza during the first phase of Israeli withdrawal from Sinai even if completion of that phase has to be delayed for several months—perhaps to November of next year. VP Mubarak interjected to note Egypt also still objects to item 5 of article 6 re priority of obligations. Sadat firmly endorsed Mubarak’s comment and said Egypt will not, under any circumstances, agree to giving priority to the Egyptian/Israeli treaty obligations. 6. Sadat reiterated that his preliminary reaction is negative. He said that he will meet with VP Mubarak and PriMin Khalil later today to study President Carter’s letter and the proposed draft West Bank/ Gaza letter (which he insisted that I give him). He would then instruct VP Mubarak, who leaves for Washington tomorrow, to carry an answer to President Carter. In my presence, he instructed Mubarak to give all the time necessary to President Carter in order, as Sadat put it, “to search for a way out of this situation.” Mubarak would explain the whole thing to President Carter and could decide to remain in Washington as long as the Vice President desired. Mubarak’s future movements should be agreed upon by President Carter and Mubarak. Mubarak could also decide what other actions might be necessary.
