United States Regional Economic and Technical Assistance Policy 111 Eximbank during the past twenty-six years has authorized in excess of $4 billion of loans in Latin America and at the present time has outstanding loans and commitments of approximately $2 billion. It is assumed that there is no intention to displace Eximbank in its historic activity in Latin America. It is further assumed that it would be advantageous to the realization of the ultimate goals of the new program that uncommitted funds now available to Eximbank be utilized directly in the program in situations in which loans repayable in dollars for United States equipment, materials and services may be justified from an economic and banking point of view. For the purposes of this memorandum we are assuming that an appropriation for the new program would be made to the President and thereafter allocations would be made in each case to the agency best suited to carry out the particular purpose of the allocation. It is the suggestion of the Directors of the Export-Import Bank that in those instances in which foreign equipment and services are required for a project in Latin America and a credit to acquire the same can be appropriately authorized out of funds of Eximbank, any monies to be loaned for local costs in connection with the same project be allocated to and administrated by Eximbank. An example of such type of project would be a highway or access road construction where as much as 30 or 40 percent of the cost may be in foreign purchases and where the United States is prepared to make a loan on a soft basis to defray at least a portion of the local cost involved. On the other hand, in the case of a project—­such as one for housing or for educational purposes—­involving solely soft loan arrangements, the funds would be allocated to an agency normally operating in such a field. The suggested procedure offers a number of benefits: 1. The lone experience and success of Eximbank in Latin America and particularly its experience in road construction which appears to be an important part of any program for the opening up and settling of new areas. Eximbank has financed road construction in nearly every country of Latin America. It has also financed flood control and irrigation projects and other similar programs requiring substantial amounts of equipment, materials and technical services from abroad. 2. Eximbank has broad powers under its legislative charter.2 Furthermore, its record of operations has acquired for it the support of the Congress and, particularly, the Banking and Currency Committees, to the extent that it has been permitted to operate with a minimum of restrictions relative to the establishment and implementation of credits. These facts have enabled Eximbank on many occasions over the years 2 Apparent reference to the Export-Import Bank Act (Public Law 173), approved July 31, 1945; for text, see 59 Stat. 526.
