24 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement review the need for changes in this policy on an emergency basis, as, for example, recommending that the Export-Import Bank extend credits to United States exporters of petroleum equipment, including refineries and pipelines. Only if it later becomes necessary would we wish to reconsider financing petroleum exploration and development by foreign governments. ETA–7. Letter from the Managing Director of the Development Loan Fund (McIntosh) to Milton S. Eisenhower1 Washington, August 7, 1958. Dear Dr. Eisenhower: In response to your request that those of us who had the honor of accompanying you on your recent mission to the Central American countries2 give you a memorandum with our comments regarding U. S. programs and policies in any of the countries visited, I am very glad to submit some comments of mine with the hope that they may be helpful. It seems unnecessary for me to refer to the present political and economic situations in the various countries, both because you are personally well informed in this connection, and also because you already have rather complete information contained in the reports submitted to you and to the other members of the mission by the various governments and by our Embassies and our ICA Missions. Instead, I am pleased to submit the following suggestions regarding possible courses of action which I feel we should consider in connection with certain of the problems we are facing in the Central American area. Incidentally, for ease of reference in this letter, I am including Panama among the Central American countries. 1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Development Loan Fund 1958.” Copies of this letter were also sent to Under Secretary Dillon, James H. Smith, Jr., Director of the International Cooperation Administration (ICA), Assistant Secretary Rubottom, Rollin S. Atwood, Regional Director for Latin American Operations, ICA, Henry A. Hoyt, Special Assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, and Bayard King of the Office of Middle American Affairs. The source text is unsigned. 2 Milton Eisenhower visited the countries of Central America between July 12 and August 1, 1958, as the personal representative of the President; for documentation, see Documents ETA–7; CO–1; CR–6–9; ES–2, 5–6; GT–8; HO–3; NI–4, 7–9; PM–3; PA–7.
