1979  597
128.	 Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the 
Department of State (Tarnoff) to the President’s Assistant for 
National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, May 1, 1979
SUBJECT
Comprehensive Net Assessment 1978 (CNA–78)
We believe CNA–782 is a useful effort to review overall East-West 
trends and changes since the earlier PRM–10 exercise. The paper cor-
rectly confirms most of the broad lines of existing Administration pol-
icy in PD–18.3 It also identifies several important issues which deserve 
and are receiving continuing attention, including:
—US clear-­cut non-­military advantages and the need to exploit 
them fully in the on-­going competition with Moscow;
—­destabilizing Soviet military programs and the need to counter 
them through military modernization and arms control;
—­the changing situation in the Persian Gulf (and oil prices) and 
the need for an effective US strategy; and
—­the US–USSR–PRC relationship and the need to consider how 
relations with China aid and damage our relations with Moscow.
We have some problems with the CNA methodology, which appears 
to be based on zero-­sum assumptions. Scorecards of US/Soviet “gains” 
and “losses” are inherently difficult to evaluate and the CNA criteria 
seem unclear and incomplete; the study discerns two US defeats but it 
is not apparent what they (or the gains) were. Moreover, “popularity” 
is a questionable indicator of power. The focus on political and mili-
tary trends is potentially misleading without the perspective of existing 
absolute balances.
We believe that the treatment of the substantive issues is far too 
broad to allow any policy decisions to be made. Instead, we should 
continue to use the SCC and PRC for high-­level decision-­making, as we 
now are doing (for example) with MX, strategic targeting and numer-
ous regional issues.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski 
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 60, Alpha Channel: Miscellaneous: 5/79. Top Secret; 
Sensitive.
2 See Document 95.
3 See Document 31.
