124  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
small ICBM and the Soviets accept U.S. counting rules, the 6,000 limit 
will be significantly more constraining than the 1,600 limit.
The principal argument for raising the 1,600 limit is that doing so 
will enhance strategic stability by encouraging deMIRVing. Because 
this is a central element, it will be easier politically to propose a change 
now than later. Raising the 1,600 limit, with the 6,000 and 4,900 war-
head limits unchanged, would increase the attractiveness of deploying 
bombers and single RV ballistic missiles. Both contribute to strategic 
stability. Over time, therefore, a higher delivery vehicle limit could 
lead to restructuring the strategic forces of both sides in a stabilizing 
direction. A second advantage of raising the 1,600 limit is that it would 
provide the United States with greater flexibility in structuring its post-
START strategic forces.
The principal argument against altering the 1,600 limit is that is not 
in the United States interest to expend the political capital to change a 
fundamental limit, agreed to at the highest level, which may be more 
constraining on the Soviet Union than on the United States. Raising the 
1600 number could have a political downside in appearing to move 
away from deep reductions. The claim of “50 percent” reductions is 
already suspect. The President has specifically directed that the polit-
ical consequences of altering agreed positions be taken into account. 
In addition, reopening agreed fundamental limits could encourage the 
Soviets to reopen settled issues important to the United States such as 
the Reykjavik bomber counting rule.
The existing U.S. position already encourages deMIRVing to some 
extent and enhances strategic stability by reducing the number of 
warheads on fixed, land-­based ballistic missiles. We may not wish to 
increase the 1600 limit absent a decision to move toward a force struc-
ture on our part which requires such an increase; it is not in our inter-
est to provide the Soviets latitude we do not require. Finally, current 
unresolved issues in START (downloading ballistic missiles; counting 
conventional bombers in the 1600 limit) could be significant. We may 
not have these issues resolved before our return.
Consensus—Issue 1. All agencies agree the United States should 
retain the existing 1,600 limit.
Issue 2—ICBM Sublimit. The United States has proposed a sublimit 
on warheads on ICBMs. The formal U.S. position is such a sublimit 
should be 3,000; we have also indicated a willingness to accept 3,300. 
An ICBM sublimit is intended to encourage force restructuring in a sta-
bilizing direction, that is away from ICBMs. A sublimit of either 3,000 
or 3,300 would not constrain the United States under any of the post-
START force mixes currently under discussion. The Soviets have stated 
that they do not expect to exceed 3,300 ICBM warheads under START. 
They have refused, however, to accept a formal sublimit unless there
