1955  225
ambiguous meanings to be read into it. There are no side understand­
ings or agreements whatever in relation to it.
The United States has consistently recognized in principle the right 
of Chinese in this country to return to the mainland of China if they so 
desire. During the Korean War, this right was temporarily suspended as 
to 129 Chinese students with advanced technical training which could 
be used against the United States by an enemy. The restraining orders 
against this small group of Chinese (less than 3% of the Chinese stu­
dents who have come to this country since 1945) were rescinded before 
the current Ambassadorial talks at Geneva began, and Chinese who 
wish to depart from the United States for any destination have been 
and are free to do so.
WHAT THE ANNOUNCEMENT DOES SIGNIFY
1. It commits the PRC to permit the civilians expeditiously to exer­
cise their right to return.
2. The Government of India by invitation of the U.S. Government 
plays a limited role in assisting those Chinese who of their own volition 
and on their own initiative approach the Indian Embassy in Washing­
ton for facilitation of their return to the China Mainland.
3. The Office of the Charge d’Affaires of the United Kingdom with 
the agreement of the U.S. Government likewise plays a limited role 
in assisting those Americans who approach it for facilitation of their 
return to the United States.
WHAT THE ANNOUNCEMENT DOES NOT SIGNIFY
1. The Announcement does not constitute an Agreement of any 
kind, governmental or otherwise. The Announcement is in the form 
of two parallel and interrelated unilateral announcements, the text of 
which has been mutually agreed upon. The only agreement was that 
the unilateral announcements were to be made.
2. It does not accord any degree of diplomatic recognition on the 
part of the U.S. Government to the Chinese Communist regime or 
change in any way the U.S. position in that regard. The conversations 
were conducted on the basis stated by Secretary of State Dulles at 
Berlin in February 1954 when he enunciated the principle that the 
U.S. Government would be prepared to deal with the Peiping author­
ities in regard to limited subjects where they are necessarily a party 
at interest.
3. The Announcement does not give the People’s Republic of 
China any claim to the allegiance of the Chinese in the United States. 
The Announcement covers only those Chinese in the United States who 
voluntarily express a desire to return to the China Mainland. The vast 
preponderance of the many thousands of Chinese in this country who
