National Security Policy 405 684 combat ships on M-Day, 610 are deployed. These rise to a level of 1,141 ships by D-Day, which remain on station throughout the D to D-/6 period. The Air Force increases the deployment of its total forces to 140 wings by M-/1. It remains constant through D-/1, after which attrition reduce the force by 52 wings, leaving 88 wing equivalents at D-/6. The Marine Corps starts on M-Day with one of its three divisions deployed and increases that deployment to the point where the D-Day force of 4 division/air wings is assumed to be fully deployed. This level of force remains constant during the Post D-Day period. The third chart shows the relationship of U.S. forces engaged in limited war, to the active force structure and the Post M-Day mobi­ lization of forces. An actual unified command contingency plan for resumption of hostilities in Korea is used for logistic planning pur­ poses. 2 Army divisions or 13% of its active forces are assumed in this plan to be committed on M-Day to limited war. These rise to 6 divisions or 40% of the active forces by M-/3 months. 114 combatant ships or 16.6% of those in the active forces will be committed on M-Day, increas­ ing to 245 ships or 36% of the active forces by M-/3. The Marine Corps with 1 division or 1/3 of its M-Day force, will increase its commitment of forces to 2 divisions or 2/3 of its active forces by M-/2 months. It is not planned for the Air Force to commit forces over and above the 6 wings planned for commitment on M-Day. This amounts to 6% of its active forces on that day. Not shown here, are those indigenous forces which may require support in limited war. The degree of support could be substantial, particularly for Army materiel. This chart shows the overall status of our quantitative readiness, in percent to total dollar figures. The requirement to support the total force objectives under the plan is shown as the 100% line. Assets on 1 July 1961 to meet this requirement will be 77% of this need, of which 48.5% will be comprised of aircraft, ships and strategic missiles. If we look at the active and selected reserve forces portion of the total, our estimate of assets will bring us to a readiness position of 84% of the requirement for these forces. For such capital items as aircraft, ships and strategic missiles, the requirement is based on the estimated avail­ ability of the items involved. For other hard goods, the requirement is derived from the force objective, just discussed. An evaluation of our readiness status, by Military Service, for these other hard goods which are calculated against the force objective, shows that materiel to support the active and selected reserve forces is as follows: 66% for Army 65% for Navy 81% for Air Force 40% for the Marine Corps We are faced with a qualitative as well as quantitative problem which reduces the effectiveness of our inventories, and accordingly,
