858
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
Arabs attach great significance. The statement4 which was issued a few
days ago by the U.S. Department of State on the illegality of these settle-
ments and the threat they constitute to the peace process was quite ap-
propriate and timely. You might also deem it suitable to take this issue
up with Mr. Begin in the near future.
In your forthcoming talks with President Brezhnev,5 it would be
helpful if you persuade him to be more cooperative with regard to ex-
tending the mandate of the United Nations Emergency Forces espe-
cially after having agreed to the same on the Syrian front. Their posi-
tion in this respect is rather weak and the arguments they are
presenting are unfounded. The Legal Adviser of the United Nations
Secretariat has concluded in a memorandum that the failure to extend
the mandate of the Forces would be contrary to the Charter itself, let
alone the difficulties it creates to the peace-keeping operation. If he re-
mains adamant on this point, it might be worth exploring to get his con-
sent to broadening the operation area of the United Nations Truce Su-
pervisory Organization. The mandate of this Organization does not
need to be extended and hence, a mere extension of the area of opera-
tion would be easier although the force is not equipped enough to
handle this responsibility.
In an attempt to facilitate your task of proposing the formation of a
multinational force in case your efforts to persuade the Soviet Union to
cooperate fail, we are currently considering the setting up of an all-
African force. It would be composed of friendly African nations that
have a genuine interest in the maintenance of security and stability in
this vital approach to their continent.
I am seizing this opportunity also to write to you about a matter of
major concern to us. Undoubtedly, you know the importance we attach
to the modernization of our armed forces with a view to enabling them
to discharge their awesome responsibilities. You are also aware of the
central role I assigned to them in the crucial field of transfer of tech-
nology in the era of reconstruction. I have emphasized the new role the
armed forces should play in adapting sophisticated technology to our
needs in the areas of housing, infrastructure, food production, agroin-
dustry and land reclamation. Hence, I reiterated before the Egyptian
4 On June 4, the Department protested in a formal statement the Israeli Cabinet’s
decision to authorize the establishment by Gush Emunim of a settlement, Elon Moreh,
near Nablus, describing it as “harmful to the peace process and particularly regrettable at
this time.” (Jim Hoagland, “U.S. Protests Israeli Plan for Settlement on West Bank,” The
Washington Post, June 5, 1979, p. A10) Elon Moreh was formally established as an Israeli
settlement with construction commencing on June 7. (William Claiborne, “Israel Quickly
Erects West Bank Settlement,” The Washington Post, June 8, 1979, p. A1)
5 Carter met with Brezhnev in Vienna June 16–18 to sign the SALT II Treaty. The
two leaders discussed the situation in the Middle East in the fourth plenary session on
June 17. See Document 265.
