National Security Policy  223
Allen Dulles was presently thinking about a study of the covert capa­
bilities the US had in this field.
Mr. Brucker recalled that in 1953 a study was made of the Volunteer 
Freedom Corps idea and recommended that it be reviewed.
Secretary McElroy said that what we needed was a force some­
where between the covert type of force and the US Marines. The ques­
tion of whether or not such a force would be directly managed by the 
Pentagon was not important. It was felt that the US could do a good 
deal to help train and equip such a force. He recognized that such a 
force would obviously be ascribed to the US and its non-­national char­
acter would be a fiction, but we would have to learn to deny these 
things as does the USSR. It was decided that the matter would not be 
pursued with the UK until we had a US position clarified.
Secretary McElroy said in regard to the strategic concept, the DOD 
would have another go at preparation of the statement.
Secretary Dulles felt that it was not so much a matter of formally 
modifying the statement of the present strategic concept or of changing 
our defense budgets. Rather it was “the way these things are presented.” 
We must find a way to let our allies feel that there is some “intermediate 
cushion” between unconditional surrender and total war.
Secretary Dulles recalled the “trip wire” theory put forward by 
the UK which had proved shocking to Europe and had been rejected. 
We have more than a “trip wire”. There can be intermediate stages in 
the application of our military force. Let us learn to become somewhat 
more articulate about these possibilities.
Secretary McElroy said that he would like to direct more of our allies’ 
attention to our limited war capabilities—­to show them some of our new 
equipment and our reconnaissance and surveillance capabilities.
Secretary Dulles said that it was a matter of psychology—to get 
away from the “nuclear death” neurosis that has appeared in Europe. 
There are other ways of defending ourselves and we must get across 
to the Europeans that we are not neglecting to develop these ways. 
However, Secretary Dulles said, if a war comes in Europe he believes 
that it cannot be kept limited.
Mr. Quarles said that is the most important and the most danger­
ous problem, and that is why we are so sensitive to any changes in 
our strategic concept. The dilemma is how to improve our allies’ con­
fidence and yet at the same time keep the Soviet certain that any sub­
stantial attack by them in Europe will lead to strategic bombardment of 
the Soviet Union.
