738  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
HA–4.	
Letter from the Ambassador in Haiti (Drew) to the 
Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs 
(Rubottom)1
Port-­au-Prince, June 11, 1958.
Dear Dick:
I am beginning to have increasingly serious qualms about the 
establishment of a Marine Corps Military Mission to Haiti.2
Until quite recently it could honestly be said that a semblance 
of democracy existed in Haiti. In the past five or six weeks, however, 
things have changed and I would now describe the existing regime as a 
“Police State” clothed in the trappings of democracy.
A convenient cut-­off date for this drastic change can be taken as 
May 2 when martial law and a brief curfew were established.
Prior to that date there was a semblance of an independent or oppo-
sition press composed of Haiti Miroir and Independance. The editors and 
some of the staff of these papers are now in jail and their plants were 
wrecked by unidentified civilian bands, obviously with the approval of 
the Military, as the incidents occurred during a period of stringent curfew 
when peaceable citizens were being shot down in cold blood for violating 
the curfew.
The two defeated candidates for the Presidency, Louis DEJOIE 
and Clement JUMELLE previously enjoyed an attenuated liberty. 
Now, however, on the flimsy pretext of involvement in the Mahotière 
bomb affair, Dejoie was hounded into exile with a price on his head 
and Jumelle and his brother Ducasse have been similarly forced into 
hiding as outlaws. The pretense that either of these men were actually 
involved in the manufacture of bombs is not taken seriously by anyone.
After Dejoie was exiled from the country, there was some thought 
that Jumelle might be tolerated. His entire family was arrested recently 
1 Source: Department of State, Rubottom Files, Lot 60 D 553, “Haiti 1958.” Secret; 
Official-Informal.
2 On April 1, 1958, Ambassador Drew had reported that during a conversation on 
March 31, President François Duvalier had stated repeatedly and categorically that Haiti 
wanted a United States military mission composed of Marine Crops officers. Duvalier 
explained that it was the Marines “who founded and trained the Haitian Army and [who] 
understand us.” (Telegram 416 from Port-­au-Prince; 738.58/4–158) Subsequently, the Haitian 
government sent a military mission to the United States with instructions to request the 
United States Government to dispatch a military mission to Haiti to reorganize the Haitian 
Army. As a result of these discussions, the Department of Defense, with concurrence of the 
Department of State, authorized the Department of the Navy to discuss with the Haiti gov-
ernment an agreement to augment the U.S. Naval Mission, currently established in Haiti, 
so as to accommodate a U.S. Marine Corps Mission. (Letter from Assistant Secretary of 
Defense for International Security Affairs Mansfield D. Sprague to Rubottom, April 29, 1958; 
738.58/4–2958)
