344
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
decision-making in recent weeks, given his presumed concern with
U.S.-Soviet relations and SALT.
9. We have no credible evidence, however, that this was not a
collective decision wholeheartedly adopted by the entire Politburo.
Brezhnev has been active at least on-and-off of late, and so far as we
know the ailing Kosygin is the only member of the top leadership who
would have been unable to take part in planning for the Afghan
operation.
10. If our theory is correct, then along with the Afghan decision
the leadership must also have taken some basic decisions on such
matters as détente and the shape of U.S.-Soviet relations in the immedi-
ate future. While we are not prepared as yet to conclude that this
represents a permanent Soviet turn away from the policy of détente,
it rather plainly suggests that Moscow does not expect any real progress
in relations with the U.S. in the months ahead.
Watson
124.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
SI 80–10001
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, a cover page, and a security informa-
tion page.]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 12, C–367, 01 Jan–30 Jun 80. Secret. A statement
attached to the cover page reads: “Information as of 16 October 1979 has been used in
preparing the major part of this report. Information concerning the recent coup is reflected
but does not change the basic judgments. The author of this paper is [name not declassified],
Center for the Analysis of Personality and Political Behavior, Office of Scientific Intelli-
gence. It has been coordinated with the Offices of Political Analysis, Geographic and
Cartographic Research, and Central Reference, the Directorate of Operations, and the
National Intelligence Officer for the Near East and South Asia.” Also attached to the
cover page is a handwritten note that reads: “[name not declassified]: This is super—I
want to get it to Pres., etc., ASAP,” signed “Stan Turner.” Turner forwarded the assess-
ment under a January 3 covering memorandum to Carter, Mondale, Vance, Brown, and
Brzezinski, in which he wrote: “I believe it provides excellent background perspective
to political events in Afghanistan today.” (Ibid.)
