1956  793
dispute, in order to leave no possibility doubt concerning that area, it 
was considered essential that we both make clear that such declaration 
would apply that area. As I had often pointed out, question is not one 
of obtaining some form of words that would give impression of agree­
ment between us, but one of genuine understanding and agreement 
between us.
15. I said his December 1 draft, the explanations with which he 
accompanied it, and public statements issued by his government did 
not make clear that there was full understanding between us that he 
would not, by interpreting situation in Taiwan area in manner that he 
did, subsequently allege that declaration did not apply there and that 
he free use force. However the dispute there was characterized, a dec­
laration which did not clearly cover that situation was certainly of little 
value. If we genuinely renounce force in settlement our disputes, that 
renunciation certainly must cover the principal and most urgent dis­
pute between us. Saying that force would not be used certainly did 
not require abandonment by either side its view regarding character 
dispute.
16. I said he had said that purpose his draft December 1 was to 
set forth desire both sides for peaceful settlement of disputes. Point I 
been trying make was that there was vast difference between, on one 
hand, setting forth pious hope for peaceful settlement and saying that 
if settlement is not satisfactory force would be employed, and on other 
hand unequivocally saying that force will not be used as means settle­
ment and only peaceful means will be used. Amendments which I had 
suggested to his draft December 1, I believed, were essential to make 
this clear.
17. I said he had again said this morning that intent my govern­
ment in including clause regarding self-­defense was to require his gov­
ernment recognize U.S. claims regard our dispute that area. He had 
stated this in face my repeated and very categorical statements this not 
our intent. I had stated this not only in meetings here, I had stated so in 
my original statement this subject October 8, and I stated it very clearly 
my draft November 10, which he had rejected.
18. I said question was who was to be master in this situation? Did 
plain words have some hidden intent of their own? Were words to be 
master in situation? Or did words simply say what we said that they 
say?
19. I said I had said this morning that if his objections to words had 
validity I would certainly be prepared recognize his objections. How­
ever I did not feel that his objections did have validity. I entirely failed 
understand why his government insisted on putting this distorted 
interpretation on these words, if in fact it the intent his government 
unconditionally to renounce force in settlement our disputes.
