560
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
November 13:
Egyptian Acting Foreign Minister Boutros
Ghali returned to Egypt to consult with Presi-
dent Sadat. Egypt did not agree to two Treaty
articles and the West Bank/Gaza letter.
November 15–18:
Egyptian Vice President Mubarak visited
Washington.
November 21:
The Israeli Cabinet approved the Treaty text
and Annexes while rejecting an Egyptian
draft of a West Bank/Gaza letter and not ap-
proving a U.S. draft.
November 30–
Egyptian Prime Minister Khalil visited
December 4:
Washington.
December 8:
Secretary Vance left for Egypt and Israel.
The Outstanding Issues
The differences between Egypt and Israel have been reduced to
very few. Both Parties are now prepared to accept the Treaty text,9 sub-
ject to Egyptian request for two clarifications, Annex I on withdrawal
and security arrangements, the maps, and Annex III with the exception
of disagreement on one sentence.
Side understandings relating to Annex I had been agreed, and ex-
tensive work had been done on a letter which would deal with the West
Bank/Gaza negotiations. Because of the sharply divergent positions
taken by Egypt and Israel on this last issue, the United States had put
forward a compromise draft calling for negotiations on the West Bank
and Gaza to begin one month after the ratification of the Egypt-Israeli
Peace Treaty with a goal of concluding those negotiations and holding
elections not later than the end of 1979. After extensive discussions on
November 11–12,10 the Israeli negotiators accepted the U.S. proposal
subject to approval by the Israeli Cabinet. The Cabinet on November 21
did not approve the U.S. draft. The Egyptians initially rejected the U.S.
draft, but accepted it during Secretary Vance’s talks in Egypt December
9 On December 15, the Israeli Cabinet issued the following statement: “The GOI is
prepared to sign without delay the draft peace treaty between Egypt and Israel, including
the annexes as formulated on the 11th of November 1978 with the approval of the United
States Government. Full responsibility for the fact that the peace treaty has not been
signed rests entirely with the GOE.” The Cabinet rejected the three new “demands” from
the Egyptians, as “inconsistent with the Camp David Framework or are not included in it
and change substantially provisions of the aforementioned peace treaty.” Moreover, the
GOI rejected “the attitude and the interpretation of the United States Government with
regard to the Egyptian proposals.” (Telegram Tosec 140109/316098 to the Secretary’s Air-
craft, December 15; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780518–0276)
At the time, Vance was en route to Washington from Israel.
10 See Documents 131–134.
