3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 June–December 1977 219 which the Secretary replied that the positions were in accordance with the Ambassador’s own judgment of the situation. 58. Letter From President Carter to Soviet General Secretary Brezhnev1 Washington, November 4, 1977 Dear Mr. President: On the eve of the 60th anniversary of the Soviet Union, I want to extend to you privately, as I will be doing more formally in a separate public message, my warm congratulations. I wish you and the Soviet people every success in the efforts to enhance the peaceful well-being of your country. Let me also take advantage of this opportunity to share with you my thoughts about our joint pursuit of better relations between our two countries. We still have some distance to go to achieve an agreement on strategic arms that would be mutually satisfactory. I hope that our negotiators will soon be able to resolve the outstanding issues. Otherwise, unnecessary delay—as was the case after February 1976—may make it increasingly difficult for us to reach accommodation. Our own major goal in seeking an agreement is to achieve the sharpest mutual reductions and to insure balanced forces, with adequate verification of compliance with agreements. I hope that as we move forward on questions of limiting and reducing strategic arms we can at the same time take useful steps in other aspects of our relations. A comprehensive ban on all nuclear testing will slow the nuclear arms race, and will also have a highly beneficial impact on opinion in my country and in the world at large. I am gratified by your statement of November 2nd.2 It is an important and constructive step which brings us closer to agreement. I would also wel- 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside the System File, Box 69, USSR: Brezhnev–Carter Correspondence: 6–12/77. No classification marking. In telegram 264784, November 5, the Department transmitted the text of the President’s letter. 2 For text of Brezhnev’s speech on the 60th Anniversary of the Soviet Union, see The Current Digest of the Soviet Press, vol. XXIX, no. 44 (November 30, 1977), pp. 1–6, 11.
