Afghanistan
585
believe what they claim, i.e., that the “sanctuary” is a major part of the
problem, then it would follow that they must destroy the “sanctuary”
in Pakistan and would have to attack Pakistan. Khan thinks the Soviets
have a more realistic understanding of the situation, however, and
therefore considers this a remote contingency.
4. Khan thought the Soviets had three options in Afghanistan. One
would be to help Babrak Karmal consolidate his position. The second
would be to change leaders. The third would be to continue their
military build up in Afghanistan to control the country. Khan thinks
that the Soviets would like to follow the second option; namely, to put
in the best moderate leaders acceptable to the tribesmen and form a
government which could manage these people and eventually establish
a political base with grassroots support in the country. Under these
circumstances, if there was some proposal put forward by a party
acceptable to the Soviets (Khan specified that it could not be the U.S.)
for an international commission which would guarantee that there
would be no threat to the Soviet Union’s southern border, then the
Soviets could withdraw their troops from Afghanistan. Khan said that
this course was not unknown in Soviet history and that they have
withdrawn militarily, while assuring the establishment of a regime
friendly to them.
5. Khan commented that the Soviets have seriously miscalculated
the local Afghanistan situation. Daoud was removed from the top and
there was no grassroots support for the regimes which followed. The
situation in Afghanistan was quite different than that which prevailed
in Iran where the Shah was hated and where he did not have deep
grassroots support. In contrast, the revolution in Afghanistan is stuck
in the mud. Tribal resistance can only be broken by working with
the tribes themselves. Nevertheless, the Soviets decided to go into
Afghanistan, encouraged by the wave of anti-American opinion in
neighboring Iran, the shakiness of Saudis and the burning of the Ameri-
can Embassy in Pakistan. All of these factors gave the Soviets the feeling
that they could pull it off. They also seriously miscalculated President
Carter and felt that the liberal foreign policy establishment in the United
States would not act, especially in order to avoid a double crisis situa-
tion. The Soviets were surprised by President Carter’s sharp turn in
foreign policy. They, also, seriously miscalculated the international
condemnation of their invasion of Afghanistan. For the past 100 years
there has been no real threat from Afghanistan. Now, the Soviets have
stirred up a hornets nest. They have accelerated events that they dread.
For example, closer relations between U.S. and China and Japan, respec-
tively. When the hostage situation in Iran is settled and there is an
improvement in Iranian/U.S. relations, the Soviets will be in an even
worse situation. In sum, the Soviet attack on Afghanistan has coalesced
many nations behind the U.S.
