1956  687
3. Despite fundamental and even obvious character these two 
requirements, you for long time persisted in your objection to their 
retention in our declaration. You have also claimed my amendments 
Jan. 12 to your draft Dec. 1 required your govt. renounce its policies or 
abandon its well-­known position with respect Taiwan area. I have given 
you repeated assurances that was not my intention. I again assure you 
it would not be in keeping with what I regard as fundamental char­
acter and high purposes of declaration for me to attempt to trick you 
into form of words that could be represented as renunciation by your 
government of its claims and peaceful pursuit its policies with respect 
­Taiwan area. First, I have too much respect for your intelligence and 
that of your Prime Minister to think such an effort would be successful. 
Secondly, it would not be intelligent on my part even if I were suc­
cessful in doing so. We would be entering into agreement that would 
mean one thing to one party, and something else to other party. While 
we would thereby be able momentarily to present to world surface 
appearance of agreement, in fact we would simply be creating further 
cause controversy and [garble] between our two countries. This would 
serve interests of no one honestly interested in reducing causes of our 
controversies.
F. I renew my plea you approach this matter in the same spirit. You 
certainly cannot reasonably expect my government can in any manner 
be forced in such declaration either explicity or implicitly to renounce 
its view with respect Taiwan area or its legitimate rights. You certainly 
cannot expect US to say if American vessel on lawful mission is fired 
upon it foregoes right to defend itself. You certainly cannot expect US 
in effect to say it renounces right of individual or collective self-­defense 
against armed attack—probably oldest, most fundamental and gener­
ally recognized right in law of nations.
G. Apparent attempt your govt. accomplish this purpose distorts 
simple and straightforward objective my Oct. 8 proposal. It can only be 
interpreted as effort on part your govt. attain in our negotiation of this 
declaration capitulation by US to demarche your govt with respect our 
controversy in Taiwan area. Your govt. cannot seriously expect it will 
be successful in this.
H. Effort to persist in this as well as continued failure your govt. 
fully to carry out agreement Sept. 10 with respect Americans impris­
oned your country can only continue to delay time when it will be 
possible for us to enter into constructive discussion other practical 
matters at issue between us. For my part, I continue to hope it will be 
possible for us to enter into such discussions without further unnec­
essary delay.
