640  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
interpretation that might well be placed on their adamant refusal to 
permit any mention of Taiwan area.
20. I then said in regard to second point—mention of individual 
and collective self-­defense—I would have considered they would have 
regarded it as important as we did. It was my understanding their gov­
ernment did not deny right of individual and collective self-­defense to 
itself or to any other country. My understanding had been that their 
side objected to form of our November 10 draft because they felt it prej­
udiced their position on Taiwan area. Again, in honest effort to meet 
their point on this, in this draft we had tried to introduce this idea in 
form that would not do so.
21. I suggested that we go over exactly what that second para said. 
What it said was we were determined to settle our disputes by peace­
ful means and that certainly neither of us objected to that. Then it said 
we would not resort to force in Taiwan area or elsewhere. This was 
certainly clear and specific and I could not see why there could be any 
objection to that language. It then said that in stating this principle both 
sides wished to make it clear it was without prejudice to right of indi­
vidual and collective self-­defense. This was stated as general principle 
and I could not see what possible objection there could be to its inclu­
sion in draft.
22. I said this second para as presently drafted would go as far as 
words could to show there was understanding between us. That if there 
was objection as to wording that revealed understanding between us 
was not as clear as I had thought.
23. I said they again this morning had discussed our dispute in 
Taiwan area and certainly our first task was to make certain this dis­
pute did not lead to hostilities. If threat of force was clearly removed 
from that dispute, there was hope questions between us could, in that 
atmosphere, be discussed and resolved. I said draft I had proposed this 
morning should accomplish this purpose and I had hoped they would 
give it further study in light of my remarks.
24. I said I was not exactly clear about what they meant by their 
proposal to make our meetings open. I understood that in normal inter­
national usage, “open” meant public would attend our meetings. Or 
was their proposal that at close of each meeting press would be given 
full account of meeting by each of us.
25. I said in either event it was difficult for me to see how this could 
contribute to progress of our discussions. It seemed to me in either of 
these events, it would tend to make our meetings platforms from which 
each would speak to his public, rather than place for our negotiating 
and reaching understanding.
26. I said I was certainly willing that our respective positions be 
laid before public. I was certainly willing that public be informed of
