540  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
—Airborne units have been placed on alert in a manner possibly 
designed to bring pressure on the belligerents as well as the United 
States.
These activities illustrate Soviet appreciation for the utility of a 
show of force and of implicit and explicit threats as a means of achiev-
ing policy goals.
Instrumentalities
9. Arms transfers are by far the most widely employed of the mili-
tary means available to the Soviets for projecting influence in the Third 
World. The Soviets have more than tripled the current dollar amount 
of agreements and deliveries of military assistance to Third World 
countries over the last five years. Where the bulk of a recipient’s mili-
tary forces become equipped with Soviet weapons, dependence on the 
USSR for advisers, spare parts, and newer equipment grows and in 
time becomes a potential means of influencing the recipient’s policies. 
In practice, Moscow’s efforts to exploit such dependence for this pur-
pose have had both successes and failures.
10. Third World nations continue to be lured by Soviet offers of 
modern military equipment not usually available from other suppliers, 
by long-­term credits at low interest rates, often by lower prices, by pay-
ment (until recently) in local rather than hard currency, and by quick 
delivery. Moscow is laying greater stress on the commercial consider-
ations of its arms sales to earn hard currency. Given these factors, the 
market for Soviet arms remains fertile, and the trend in sales is upward.
11. Through military training, advisory, and assistance programs 
the Soviets attempt to create a base of enduring influence by fostering 
extensive ties with Third World military personnel. Since 1955, some 
42,000 have been trained in the USSR. About 9,500 Soviet military 
advisers and technicians are currently stationed in Third World coun-
tries. In recent years, suspicions of some Third World leaders about the 
motives behind Soviet military assistance programs have grown and 
led to increasing reluctance by some to allow large numbers of Soviets 
into their countries. Nevertheless, the number of Soviet military advis-
ers abroad has steadily increased.
12. Emergency resupply of high-­priority military items by air and 
sea is the most widely publicized form of Soviet combat support to 
Third World states. In this regard, the USSR’s ability to provide large 
quantities of arms in a relatively short time is a major advantage. This 
service carries little risk for the USSR because few Soviet personnel are 
involved, they are not combatants, the deliveries are generally made 
to areas remote from the fighting, and other countries are reluctant to 
oppose such operations militarily. In addition, such resupply opera-
tions do not necessarily commit the Soviets to deeper involvement.
