610  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
able to establish what will undoubtedly appear as a good position “on 
the record”, I think that it has, if anything, set back the release of fur­
ther Americans, and I am at the moment not at all clear as to where we 
go from here. Yesterday’s session was a very trying one, and towards 
the end of the meeting I tried to balance myself on the knife’s edge in 
testing their reaction to the continuation of these talks. It was quite clear 
to me that they certainly did not want a break, at least at this time, but, 
as I have said in a telegram last week, I do not think that we can safely 
assume that this is going to continue indefinitely.
I hope that the Department appreciates that in practice it would be 
extremely difficult for me to carry out an instruction, such as that for 
the last meeting, to introduce our amendments on their renunciation 
of force draft if necessary to prevent a break. It would probably only 
be absolutely clear that a break was coming if Wang were to make an 
ultimatum type statement of some kind to the effect that there would be 
no point in continuing the meetings unless I negotiated on their renun­
ciation of force statement. This would, of course, be in effect an ultima­
tum, and if I were at that point suddenly to respond to his ultimatum, 
I would entirely destroy my future negotiating position.
I greatly appreciated the telegram authorizing Helenka’s employ­
ment and she is going to go to work right away. I had thought of this 
possibility but had not yet got around to talking with her when your 
telegram arrived.
Give my regards to all and an especially Merry Christmas to you 
and Dorothy from Pat and myself.
Sincerely,
U. Alexis Johnson
American Ambassador
422.	 Letter 27 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 27
Washington, December 16, 1955
Dear Alex:
I am sure you must have been concerned at the last two meetings 
as to whether the tactics being adopted might not lead to an early break 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; 
Official–­Informal.
