586
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
The Vice President asked when the Iranian Parliament would be
in place. The Secretary of State replied May.
The President said that we should send a message to our other
partners about moving to break relations. It should make clear that we
want them to invoke sanctions and, if two weeks after the Iranian
Parliament meets the hostages are not released, we would like them
to proceed. We should also tell them that we will go ahead with our
own sanctions and that if these peaceful options fail we reserve the
right to interrupt commerce to Iran. Therefore we would like our Allies
to join us in threatening a break in relations so that these other options
prove unnecessary.
The President said that even if Helmut Schmidt rejects this
approach he wants Schmidt to know that we have asked for his support.
At the same time, the President said he did not wish to impose a
deadline nor schedule military operations.
The Vice President asked when we would expel the diplomats.
The President replied right away. The Secretary of State said that we
should tell them first but we could do it as soon as next Thursday.13
Dr. Brzezinski asked whether we were breaking relations or simply
expelling the diplomats. The Secretary replied that we were expelling
the diplomats. An actual break in relations would follow the meeting
of the Iranian Parliament and the failure to secure the release of the
hostages.
Dr. Brzezinski summarized the foregoing discussion as follows:
we will ask our Allies to break relations on a coordinated basis
following two weeks after the convening of the Iranian Parliament if
the hostages had not been released; this message to the Allies would
be accompanied by a statement that if this does not work, we reserve
the right to interrupt commerce to Iran.
General Jones said that he could brief our Allies on our military
options. Harold Brown cautioned that we should be certain not to give
an impression which later would look like a bluff. The President asked
that a message along the lines outlined by Dr. Brzezinski be coordinated
for his review.
As for the possible briefing of the Allies, General Jones indicated
that he could do this in May. Dr. Brzezinski endorsed the idea saying
that it could reinforce our diplomatic message if it did not appear to
be credible. The President also thought it would be useful to let General
Jones provide his briefing before the Allies decide.
13 March 27.
