commercial current which exists today between Chile and Bolivia and
which it is to the interests of both countries to intensify.
The Chilean Government attributes capital importance to the thoughts
which the Secretary of State set forth in his Memorandum with regard for
the character of perpetual neutrality in which these territories must be
maintained. We, therefore, agree with him that the term demilitarization of
that region must be understood in its widest sense, eliminating absolutely
all possibilities that in it or in its territorial waters there may be maintained
bases of forces of land, air or sea. We must, in this respect, express to the
Secretary of State our opinion with frankness and precision. If we grant a
means of communication to the Pacific intended to develop the economic
life of Bolivia, we have the right to make sure that the sacrifice we are
making in deference to a lofty ideal, will not constitute a future danger to
our external security. As a natural corollary to this idea, it would be
indispensable to stipulate that the territory whose cession is proposed could
not be transferred, in whole or in part, to any of the contracting nations or to
any other power. The acceptance of any other view would be tantamount to
a distortion of the noble motives which inspired the Secretary of State in
formulating his proposal.
In the course of the negotiations to which this proposal may give rise we
shall present in definitive form the observations hereinbefore formulated,
we shall submit all those which may involve our interests and we shall
listen with attention to those which the other interested parties may in their
turn suggest.
The proposals of the Secretary of State and the suggestions which the
parties may formulate we shall consider as an indivisible whole, which
corresponds to the lofty aim of the Government of the United States, fully
shared by the Government of Chile, to solve definitively the question and to
insure peace and confraternity among all nations of America.
JORGE MATTE
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Chile
DECEMBER 4, 1926.
