Negotiating Channels
405
into Iran and of possible U.S. countermeasures. A draft of the current
outline is attached at Tab 4.4
7. Panama and the Shah. The two Panamanians—Gabriel Lewis and
Rory Gonzalez—are on their way to Tehran following their meeting
with Ham Jordan and Hal Saunders Wednesday.5 There have been
press stories each of the last two mornings indicating exchanges
between Royo and Ghotbzadeh, although Royo has not publicly
acknowledged that the subject is the extradition of the Shah. In two
recent conversations, Dick Cottam has expressed his concern—without
our having referred to the Panamanian track—about the increasingly
“desperate quality of Ghotbzadeh’s actions.”6 Cottam also specifically
cited Ghotbzadeh’s desire to begin the extradition trial of the Shah
before the elections and his anger that the Panamanians want the
hostages released first. Ghotbzadeh said the hostages could be released
only after the trial started. Cottam pointed out that Ghotbzadeh is
uncertain whether he will have any role in the new government if
Bani-Sadr is elected.
It looks as if chances are less than even that the Panamanians will
be able to bring off the release of the hostages in this pre-election
environment in Iran if they hold to their position. Even if Ghotbzadeh
were prepared to try, other Presidential candidates might block him
if it seemed he would reap political benefit from that step. Our only
course at the moment on this track is to wait for further word from
the Panamanians, who will be in Tehran over the weekend.
[Omitted here is information unrelated to the hostage crisis.]
4 Tab 4, draft outline, “Possible Soviet Military Moves in Iran,” January 13, is
attached but not printed.
5 According to Jordan, he, Saunders, Precht, Turner, Sick, and Kirbo met with Lewis
and Gonzales in the White House Situation Room on January 16 from 7:30 until 10 a.m.
Jordan conveyed to the Panamanians America’s “strong desire” to begin negotiations.
Lewis stated that Panama would bow out once negotiations between Iran and the United
States had begun. The two Panamanians then left for Paris to meet with Villalon and
Bourguet, and from there to Iran. (Jordan, Crisis, p. 110) No other record of this meeting
has been found.
6 Memorandum of conversation, January 17. (Carter Library, National Security
Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File, Box 31, Iran 1/11/80–1/31/80)
