Afghanistan
549
we understand why the Pakistanis would not accept this as a major
first step.
Mrs. Coon noted that the Pakistanis were anxious to reaffirm the
security commitment.
Mr. Christopher wondered if the aid was too small or too big. We
had spent six or seven hours discussing this issue at the highest levels
of the Pakistani Government and were still uncertain of what their
reasons were.5
Prince Saud said that the Pakistanis think the aid is not sufficient
to meet the challenge. They fear the Soviets and India. In order to resist
they have legitimate defense needs to defend themselves. You said
that the United States would oppose the Soviets, however, they do not
see the US as willing to enter into a direct conflict in this area. For
example, to have troops available to defend Afghanistan. Maybe this
was not mentioned by them. But they are looking for a clear view of
the extent of backing by the US Government. They have no other source
to back them. They wanted to have US aid sufficient to have the
capability to resist the Soviets.
Mr. Christopher said to Prince Saud you know our country. When
we reverse course sometimes that is done in increments. We have a
long series of problems to overcome particularly the nonproliferation
issue. We tried to persuade them that a half billion dollars is not
insubstantial. We talked ourselves blue in the face and we came
away perplexed.
Prince Saud said they are afraid the US will throw them in front
of the bear and not help them when the chips are down. They also
have a problem justifying their policy internally. They also recognize
the turnaround by the United States but they wonder if assistance will
come in time and be sufficient in quantity.
Mr. Christopher wondered if they wanted to turn off our
turnaround.
Dr. Brzezinski said he thought not. We are able to match their
commitment to fight with our willingness to assist them in case of
massive intervention by the Soviet Union in accordance with our consti-
tutional processes. Did the Islamic Conference agree to supply aid
to Pakistan?
Prince Saud said yes and there will be more when others see the
US commitment.
Dr. Brzezinski said if the Soviets intervene massively we will not
stand by. They now understand that. If intervention comes in a limited
5 See Document 193.
