500.A12/71: Telegram
[Document 19]
The Ambassador in Great Britain (Houghton) to the Secretary of State
[Paraphrase]
LONDON, October 24, 1925—1 p.m.
[Received 5:18 p.m.17 ]
332. Department’s circular telegram, October 22, 4 p.m.18 I have not felt it advisable to
discuss disarmament with other diplomatic representatives, and what information I
have comes to me either indirectly or in conversations with members of the press. I feel
sure, nevertheless, that a distinct atmosphere of hostility exists toward any attempt to
bring a conference on land armament to Washington. The feeling is that at Locarno19
the European powers reached a friendly understanding without our help and that now
they are in a position to regulate armaments among themselves without American
initiative, especially as, not being a member of the League of Nations, we have no
direct interest or concern in European affairs. I fear, therefore, that any suggestion to
bring a conference of nature intimated to Washington would meet with refusal. On
other hand, a proposition to reduce naval armaments, in which it is conceded that we
have a direct interest, would not improbably receive affirmative answer. I must
emphasize, however, fact that Locarno settlement has changed radically the mental
attitude of the powers concerned; they now feel to large extent independent of America;
and in addition, by conferring great powers on the League of Nations, they are
conscious that they have brought into existence new and very important political
machine which belongs to them.
Two days ago the Swedish Minister here came to see me, and after discussing matters
about which Mr. Sterling will report to you, he asked if America realized how strong
the League of Nations had become and if there were any likelihood that in view of the
changed situation we would now become a member. I told him that I knew of no reason
to suppose that our position would change. He then asked if President Coolidge was
thinking of calling a conference in Washington on land disarmament. I said that I was
without information. He said that he hoped the President would not, as such a request
would certainly be refused, and added that he knew whereof he spoke as he had
discussed matter with other diplomatic representatives and had just come from a talk
with Chamberlain. A naval conference would, he said, receive a favorable answer.
Doubtless you remember the Minister; he is usually well informed. Certainly he left me
with the impression that the whole matter of land disarmament had already been
discussed by Briand and Chamberlain, and that any attempt at this time on our part
