“In particular, the United States Delegation, having had no connection with the work of the Joint Commission and hence no opportunity to express its views, desires to make it clear that the views of the United States Delegation on each of the questions referred to Subcommission ‘B’ are those set forth by it on each of these questions in the report of Subcommission ‘A’.”10 Therefore, since the relation of the American Government to the report of the Joint Commission is made clear, and since all rights for either oral or written comment in the future are reserved, it does not seem to me that there is any necessity of submitting written comment on the subject matter of the Joint Commission report before December 31st. However, in the event that the Department should desire to make any observations in writing at this time and to amplify in any such document the statements of the American Delegation already contained in the report of Subcommission “B”, I am giving below, for the Department’s convenience, and as a possible basis for such a communication, specific references to the position of the American Delegation as set forth in the report of Subcommission “A” on each of the questions dealt with in the report of the Joint Commission. With reference to Sections I and II of the Joint Commission report, “with regard to the Proposal submitted by the Belgian Delegate to the Preparatory Commission” relating to the insertion in any possible convention of provisions similar to those contained in the Statute of the International Labor Office (Articles 411–420 of the Treaty of Versailles), the point of view of the American Delegation is contained in a text submitted by the delegations of Chile, Italy, Japan and the United States on page 8 of document C. P. D. C. A. 170 (f), and in a declaration by the delegations of the British Empire, Chile, United States, Italy, Japan and Sweden on the same subject on page 16 of the same document.11 In connection with Section III of the Joint Commission report “with regard to the proposal submitted by the Delegate of the British Empire to the Preparatory Commission” concerning poison gases, the position of the American Delegation is contained in document C. P. D. C. A. 170 (d) of the report on the same subject by Subcommission “A”.12
