608  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
political situation. According to him, the situation appears to have 
improved substantially. [illegible in the original] a growing realization 
of the fact that an overthrow of the Government would be a major set-­
back for the country. Major developments tending to restore calm have 
included the conciliatory efforts of the six prestigious cabinet members 
who sought to mediate the Government-­student dispute during the 
tense week following September 2 (sacrificing their own popularity to 
do so); the replacement of a [text not declassified] military officer [text not 
declassified] as the effective top police authority by a respected officer 
(Lopez Ayare), who has surrounded himself with a higher-­type staff; 
and the efforts at mediation of the other Central American University 
Rectors, as a result of which several Government Ministers called on 
the Rector of the University of El Salvador on September 20 to express 
the Government’s regrets.
As regards the attitudes of various groups, Dr. Rochac indicated 
that there were no indications of disaffection among the military; that 
some of the 14 families, however, had “unfortunately” been urging 
stronger action by the Government (at least prior to September 2); that 
the non-Communist Labor group did not appear to be in opposition 
to the Government; and that Osorio appeared to be maintaining a cor-
rect position, not intervening in the political disturbances (but that he 
would be unlikely to allow the situation to degenerate into anarchy 
without taking action). He thinks the Lemus Government’s chances 
of survival are fairly good, provided he takes steps to (a) effect some 
changes in his Government (where some of the advice he has been get-
ting has been bad): (b) be conciliatory in finding a solution to the cur-
rent unrest, and make some restitution; and (c) be impartial in domestic 
politics. (In this last connection he indicated that two major underlying 
causes of recent general resentment against the Government have been 
the changes effected in the electoral law, which lend it to the suppres-
sion of not only Communist but all opposition, and the interference in 
the conduct of this year’s elections.) Rubio Melhado would also have to 
give up any aspirations he might have for the Presidency, in view of his 
unacceptability to the Army.
The beating of the Rector was unpardonable, according to 
Dr.  Rochac, and action was taken against people, like Canessa,2 for 
example, who are clearly not Communists. In Rochac’s opinion Lemus 
fell into a clever trap laid for him by those having a Communist phi-
losophy and backed by money from Cuba, at a time when some of his 
sounder advisors (Ortiz Mancia, Carballo3) were out of the country.
2 Roberto E. Canessa, Salvadoran Minister of Foreign Affairs, 1950–1954.
3 Rafael Antonio Carballo, Salvadoran Minister of Justice.
