1114
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
modest add-on, either of $140 million for the African part of the pro-
gram (since Africa is where the food problem is worst) or of the $80 mil-
lion that IDCA proposes for increased support of agricultural research
in LDCs. Our most important contribution to LDCs since World War II
has been the research aid which has enabled these countries to develop
new rice and wheat strains; we might achieve equally important break-
throughs for hundreds of millions of poor people by a modest addi-
tional effort. (See Frank Press’ attached memo.)3 (C)
b. Energy. Within the OMB mark the FY 1982 aid program for
helping LDCs produce energy is an increase of $30 million over FY
1981. IDCA and State propose an additional $100 million, to carry out
the recommendations of an interagency task force chaired by Ed Fried,
whom you may remember from Brookings. Ed’s report calls for in-
creased bilateral aid in a vital area that will not be adequately ad-
dressed by the proposed World Bank energy affiliate: increased pro-
duction of fuelwood, which is the main energy source for many LDCs.
If continued for four years, the $100 million fuelwood aid program that
Fried’s task force proposes, coupled with action by other donors,
should produce a big increase in LDC energy production, which in-
volves a much more favorable rate of return than projected for most
intended energy investments, at home and abroad. Through exten-
sive reforestation, this program will also yield large environmental
benefits. (C)
2. Science and Technology; Population. In addition to the food and en-
ergy, I recommend:
a. $6 million for the central AID program of scientific and techno-
logical cooperation with LDCs. The Congress appropriated $12 million for
this program in FY 1981. A 50% increase for FY 1982 seems modest by
comparison with the $35 million we had proposed for the ISTC, whose
purposes the Congress instructed us to achieve within AID. (C)
b. Additional funds for family planning. IDCA and State propose an
increase of $133 million for family planning over the OMB mark. They
point out that FY 1981 is the first year in which demand for US family
planning services in LDCs has exceeded supply. They estimate that the
proposed extra aid will elicit a comparable increased effort from other
donors and LDCs that could mean a billion less people forty years from
now. If fiscal considerations preclude such a large add-on, we could fall
back to the additional $55 million OMB wants to add by means of re-
ducing other development programs now proposed by IDCA and State
3 Not attached; however, a December 5 memorandum from Press to Carter entitled
“Foreign AID Budget: Science and Technology” is in the Carter Library, National Secu-
rity Affairs, Staff Material, Special Projects, Henry Owen, Box 1, Budget Appeals Session
1982: 12/80.
