National Security Policy  573
But they will also recognize that, particularly in consequence of the 
policies they are pursuing to compel a retraction of Western power by 
political means, situations might arise in which the use of force on a 
local scale would seem essential to one side or the other. In such situa­
tions the Soviets would prefer to provide logistic and other support for 
local operations in which only non-Soviet forces participated directly. 
Their objectives in such operations would be limited, and they would 
seek to avoid direct Soviet involvement, to limit the geographic area of 
engagement, and to prevent the use of nuclear weapons by either side.
104. Soviet planners probably consider, however, that such lim­
itations might be impossible in some instances, and that encounters 
between their own and Western forces might result. They would prefer 
to minimize the amount of force employed in such situations, in order 
to limit the scale of conflict and the degree of their own involvement 
as much as possible. For example, they would almost certainly wish to 
avoid the use of nuclear weapons. In deciding whether to employ their 
own forces in any particular local situation the Soviets would have to 
balance the risk of provoking a train of counteractions, possibly leading 
to general war, against the stakes involved in the area of local conflict. 
They probably believe that the West’s military posture and doctrine rest 
increasingly upon the use of nuclear weapons, even in limited wars. 
But they probably also view their own nuclear deterrent capabilities as 
already having raised the threshold at which the West would react in 
such a manner.
105. It is impossible to forecast how the Soviets would behave in 
all the situations of local conflict which might arise. Despite the con­
fidence they evidently now have in the power of their own deterrent, 
we believe that they would handle such situations with the greatest 
caution. They would realize that the dangers of miscalculation would 
mount as each side increased the scale of its involvement. Therefore we 
believe that the Soviets would seek to prevent any crisis from develop­
ing in such a way as to leave themselves only a choice between accept­
ing a serious reverse and taking action which would substantially 
increase the likelihood of general war. The Soviet leaders would almost 
certainly not decide to precipitate general war unless they concluded 
that conceding a position to the West would sooner or later threaten the 
survival of their regime.
106. We believe that the Soviets recognize that very great advan­
tages would accrue to the side striking the first blow in an all-­out 
nuclear war, and that therefore, in the event that they decided on gen­
eral war, they would themselves initiate it by strategic nuclear attacks. 
The primary objective of such attacks would be to destroy or neutralize 
Western nuclear retaliatory capabilities—­or at any rate to achieve the 
maximum possible reduction in the weight of Western retaliation that
