1956  1207
730.	 Letter 57 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 57
Washington, October 12, 1956
Dear Alex:
The principal event since your last meeting has been the Chinese 
Communist last-­moment refusal to allow Addis, the British Counselor 
from Peiping, to see Father McCarthy in Ward Road Jail in Shanghai 
on October 5, after all arrangements had been made and after Addis 
arrived at the prison. Addis was met with the bland statement from 
the officials that McCarthy had changed his mind and did not want to 
see Addis. The officials added that they could not force McCarthy to 
have the interview. Addis was naturally taken aback, but did what 
he could by way of remonstrance. The British are of course as aware 
as we are that McCarthy did not voluntarily change his mind. The 
Communist claim was either an outright lie, or else they had broken 
McCarthy. We suspect that they want to demonstrate to the British 
that they are wasting their time in trying to see the prisoners. The 
Communist decision may have been made after they allowed Father 
McCarthy’s letter to O’Neill to be delivered. We are enclosing a copy 
of the full text of this letter, which shows that Father McCarthy was 
alert and resolute when he wrote the letter. We have it from other 
sources that he probably is the most resourceful and durable of the 
remaining Shanghai prisoners, which makes it all the more unlikely 
that he would have voluntarily given up the fight. Since this rep­
resents a callous and completely indefensible hardening of the 
Chinese Communist position, Mr. Robertson believes that we should 
attack Wang very vigorously on it at the October 18 meeting. You will 
get full instructions on it in your guidance telegram. The British are 
awaiting guidance from us on how they should react in Peiping. We 
will counsel a strong reaction there too although our main reliance 
will be on you at Geneva.
2. [text not declassified] a Chinese mental case at Logansport, Indiana 
still demands to return to the Communist mainland but according to 
the foreign student adviser appears to be incompetent to take the ini­
tiative to get in touch with the Indian Embassy. Consequently we are 
considering asking the Immigration Service to deport him. The longer 
he remains the more chance there is that the Chinese Communists will 
exploit the case in their propaganda.
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
