326
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
the right combination of firmness and discipline. We have made Iran
an international issue. Going for UN sanctions is logical and potentially
the most effective next step.
As you are all too aware, however, our national strategy has thus
far foundered on the rocks of Khomeini’s personality and the near
anarchy in Iran.
In thinking about next steps, therefore, it is important that we keep
looking at the situation not only in terms of what makes sense to us (and
our public and friends abroad), but also what might move Khomeini.
I always find it easy to slip into assumptions and reasoning based on
what we would do were we in his shoes.
Experience of past weeks suggests that:
—Actions and statements conveying strength are respected. But
threats and signs of impatience do not help.
—The prospect of physical attack on Iran or Khomeini himself
tends to make him more obdurate. He is vitally concerned, however,
about the future of the revolution and Iran’s integrity as a nation. Good
relations with the U.S. are not an important factor for him. But his and
his circle’s concerns about U.S. mischief making in Iran are probably
sincerely felt. The Revolutionary Council, but not Khomeini, is con-
cerned about international opinion.
—We are not in a “negotiation,” and most likely cannot enter into
one with Khomeini. We should not think of strategy in those terms. Our
concessions will simply be pocketed and taken as signs of weakness,
not taken as signs of good faith or reciprocated.
—The hope has to be that, at some point, he will simply make the
decision that conditions require the release of the hostages, and order/
persuade the compound captors to do so.
—Our double task is thus a complex one:
a) to create the kinds of pressures that have meaning for him and
will make him look for such an out; and
b) without seeming to plead or concede, make it clear that if the hostages
were released, some of his concerns could be met.
As suggested below, I believe we are doing better in the first task
than in the second.
I. Pressures
We continue to have a range of external pressures we can exert with
increasing force against Iran, although we will soon have undertaken
most of those on our earlier list.
