1956 709 4. Wang said at last meeting I had claimed that action by US in forcibly seizing Taiwan June 1950 taken to prevent spread of Korean hostilities. Such actions can in no sense be taken as intended prevent aggression. Facts have proven to contrary. After US launched aggression against Korea, at same time it extended its aggression and attempted spread its aggression to China’s northeast section. 5. Wang said now Korean War long ceased, yet US stepping up aggressive military activities in Taiwan area. This serves confirm point that US attempting use pretext of Korean War to whitewash its acts of war in seizure of Taiwan. However this simply vain attempt. 6. Wang said I had also claimed that tension in Taiwan area not cre­ ated by American acts of aggression; that instead it created by ­China’s desire exercise sovereign rights over Taiwan. This again is turning everything upside down. 7. Wang said exercise by state of sovereign right over own territory could in no way cause tension. Had it not been for outright intervention US, Taiwan would be liberated long ago, and there would have been no tension in Taiwan area whatsoever. No amount of sophistry could deny fact that American seizure Taiwan by force and intervention in Taiwan by threat of force caused tension in Taiwan area. 8. Wang said I had next claimed that US in Taiwan purely for self-­ defense and that presence American forces on Taiwan in accordance with collective defense arrangements with Chiang Kai-­shek clique. Fact is Taiwan is China’s territory and US had no right at all to traverse Pacific all way to Taiwan and put up defenses on that territory. 9. Wang said Chiang Kai-­shek rule over Chinese people long been overthrown by Chinese people. Chiang could not represent any­ one. Any treaties signed by his clique null void and could not legalize ­American aggression. 10. Wang said however my assertion that US on Taiwan purely in self-­defense and that presence in accordance with self-­defense arrange­ ments fully proves my draft proposal for renunciation force amounts to requiring PRC side recognize occupation of Taiwan as well as recognize treaty between US-­Chiang Kai-­shek clique so as to legalize American occupation. 11. Wang said I had repeatedly stated US side does not demand PRC accept its views. In fact it not only demands they accept US posi­ tion but also demands PRC recognize US actions of aggression as legal. He wanted say again that this could by no means be accepted. 12. Wang said it American occupation Taiwan which created ten­ sion Taiwan area. Their side proposes that conference Foreign Ministers be held by two countries, whereas US proposes that US must be given prior recognition status quo Taiwan so as to legalize occupation. As to
