3 8 3 6/ 8 S/800 8 January–May 1980 735 these troubled times. To speak with one voice on Soviet policy would not only be a self-evident improvement in our diplomatic strategy toward the Soviets, but it would enormously help the President domestically as well. The charge that this Administration speaks with two voices on Soviet affairs has repeatedly been leveled by critics of the President. The invasion of Afghanistan has given us the opportunity to get our act together and cut the ground out from under such critics. (S) 256. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, January 9, 1980 SUBJECT A Long-Term Strategy for Coping with the Consequences of the Soviet Action in Afghanistan You have stressed—rightly so—that the Soviet action has created consequences which cannot be dealt with in only a few weeks or with a series of short-term measures. The Soviet action poses a test involving ultimately the balance of power between East and West. Our response will determine how several key states will adjust their foreign policy and particularly whether they will accommodate themselves to the projection of Soviet military power. Before outlining for you an agenda of possible responses, let me put the foregoing in a brief historical context, which may also be useful to you when you comment on the subject. We have, in effect, entered the fifth decade in the U.S.-Soviet competition. Each of the decades has had a specific historical character: 1. The 1940’s: consolidation of Soviet gains in the context of U.S. disarmament after World War II and probes for Western weakness; 2. The 1950’s: lines drawn sharply in the West and in the East (the Iron Curtain, the Korean buffer); 3. The 1960’s premature Soviet global challenge; increasing competition in other areas: economic (we will bury you); space (Sputnik); with 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 1, Afghanistan: 1/9–31/80. Secret. In the upper right-hand corner of the document, Carter wrote, “cc Zbig J.”
