1228 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI —programs aimed at diffusing the results of these discussions to wider audiences abroad; —intensified research designed to provide U.S. policy-makers with a clearer understanding of the views of important foreign publics. You should designate an appropriate member of this interagency committee with a rank equivalent to and not lower than that of Deputy Assistant Secretary. The committee will be chaired by the International Communication Agency. Final recommendations of the committee should be completed as soon as practicable and in any event no later than August 1, 1978.2 I would appreciate your communicating to the Director of the ICA the name of your representative to the interagency committee at your earliest convenience. The NSC staff representative will be Dr. Robert Putnam. Zbigniew Brzezinski 2 Not found. 498. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 10, 1978 SUBJECT SSOD and Negative Security Assurances On behalf of the US delegation to the UN Special Session on Disarmament, Averell Harriman and Andy Young have expressed serious concern to Cy Vance that the guidance under which they are now operating is in several respects not sufficiently forthcoming to ensure a positive outcome of the Special Session.2 Their concerns focus on: 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 118, Special Session on Disarmament: 6–7/78. Secret. Carter wrote a “C” in the upper right-hand corner of the first page of the memorandum indicating that he saw the document. 2 In telegram 2311 from USUN, June 7, Harriman and Young reported that “the Non-Aligned countries view our lack of positive response at the Special Session to their request for (A) firm negative security assurances and (B) a commitment in principle to explore more steps toward nuclear disarmament as being a failure of the US to take an affirmative position as required by our obligations under the NPT.” This failure, they argued, “precludes us from advancing important objectives in non-proliferation, and seriously risks our being isolated from almost all our friends.” (Ibid.)
