594  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
U.S. return to your country. Thus matter has no relation either to letter 
or spirit of our agreed announcement.
W. I have spoken thus frankly with regard to this matter as I hope 
you continue share my feeling that it is important that in privacy of this 
room two of us not attempt dissimulate and conceal differences but 
openly discuss them with view of finding solutions.
X. I have spoken in some detail concerning our agreed announce­
ment on September 10 in hope that our differences with regard to this 
matter could once and for all be resolved and that, fully understand­
ing our point of view, your government would take the necessary 
steps remove this impediment to understanding between us and to 
progress in our discussions of other matters. I feel that encouraging 
progress we have been able make toward finding acceptable form of 
words to express our determination that our differences should not 
lead to war makes it doubly urgent that this other matter be quickly 
resolved. It is in this spirit I have made this statement this morning 
and it is in this spirit I hope it will be most carefully considered by you 
and your government.
End prepared statement.
2. Wang replied he had already made known position PRC side 
on questions relating to first item on agenda which I had raised at last 
meeting.
3. Turning to prepared statement Wang continued during meeting 
this morning I had again raised questions in this respect. Though he 
had already made his reply on same questions I had raised nevertheless 
he willing once again express position his side.
4. Wang said at last meeting and again this morning I had raised 
question on first item and without grounds accused PRC side violating 
agreed announcement. At same time U.S. side kept stalling discussion 
of second item. PRC side considered this attitude could in no way be 
reconciled with the statements and the gestures I had made regarding 
my desire see progress in talks.
5. Wang said our first item concerned return civilians. It was none 
other than U.S. side which violating terms agreement. In first place as 
he had previously pointed out PRC side had provided us complete 
list of Americans in China at outset our talks whereas U.S. side failed 
do same by providing complete list all Chinese in U.S. so that Indian 
Embassy in U.S. had no means of fully carrying out functions specified 
in agreed announcement.
6. Wang said he could not agree to my statement that this question 
bears no relation to discussion of return civilians.
7. Wang said his side has every reason to request Indian Embassy 
look into status Chinese in U.S. and investigate facts concerning
