60 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 Spokesmen for the group have refused adamantly any negotiated compromise that does not include the return of the Shah to Iran for “trial” and have stated they will not obey an order from the Revolutionary Council to release the hostages unless the Shah is extradited to Iran. If a basis for negotiation short of returning the Shah receives any support from Khomeini, the apparent ideological differences among various members of the forces occupying the Embassy could result in dissension within the group and confusion over policy. It is unlikely, however, that the group would continue to hold the hostages if Khomeini ordered them released. [portion marking not declassified] The Islamic militants who reportedly form the nucleus of the Islamic Monotheists may be an offshoot of the “Hezb-eh-Allah” (Party of God): groups of young, poorly educated, lower class Muslim fanatics, initially organized during the 1967–68 period by the Mujahidin-eh- Khalq guerrilla group. The Mujahidin organized the Hezb-eh-Allah as a means of drawing sympathizers and recruits from lower class opponents of the Shah. Hezb-eh-Allah groups were poorly organized and engaged in limited operations such as attacks on police to acquire weapons. These groups, which have gone by a variety of names, have in the past year stated their allegiance to Khomeini and have been involved in such activities as attacking liberal demonstrators protesting Khomeini’s policies. [portion marking not declassified] The size and organization of groups such as the forces that have occupied the Embassy are difficult to determine. Unlike the two guerrilla groups active during the Shah’s regime—the Mujahidin-eh-Khalq and the Cherikha-yeh-Fedai-yeh-Khalq—that developed a cohesive ideology, tight organization, and security procedures that isolated them from the social environment, the more loosely organized groups of Islamic militants have tended to remain embedded in the society, drawing support from their families and coming together on an ad hoc basis. [portion marking not declassified] The leftists among the forces occupying the Embassy may have infiltrated the Islamic organization as a means of advancing their goals under the protective coloration of ostensible fidelity to Ayatollah Khomeini. Khomeini has been strident in his attacks on the left, and the leftist guerrilla groups that played a prominent part in overthrowing the Shah have since been driven underground. [3½ lines not declassified] Possible PFLP Involvement [1 paragraph (5½ lines) not declassified] We do not believe that the PFLP, whatever its involvement in the Embassy seizure, is in collusion with Iranian Government officials. Ayatollah Khomeini and his entourage have been deeply hostile toward the PFLP and other radical Palestinian groups. Prime Minister Bazar-
