1956  1103
681.	 Telegram 60 to Geneva1
Washington, July 19, 1956, 7:11 p.m.
60. For Johnson.
Guidance for July 26 meeting.
1. We believe it is important at the coming meeting to protest the 
prolonged failure of Communists to implement the agreed announce­
ment on return of Americans. Point out agreement made more than 
10 months ago, return was to be expeditious, and that 90 days had 
even been discussed as a limit of time. Point out our full compliance in 
letter and spirit with announcement, and our recent action in arrang­
ing for deportation of Chinese in prison, although they not covered 
by announcement. Point out that this U.S. decision made in light 
­Communist repeated claims that they included so that there could 
be no possible basis for Communist continued refusal to release U.S. 
prisoners. Point out difficulty in making arrangements for exercise 
by prisoners of choice of repatriation and for participation by Indian 
Embassy; incomprehensible failure of Indian Embassy to cooperate 
due to request by Communist that it do not do so. Point out difficulty 
of making progress toward further agreements when those already 
made are not lived up to.
2. You should also point out inability understand failure of 
­Communists to agree to meaningful renunciation of force, particularly 
when U.S. had accepted Communist formulation of December 1 with 
only slight additions to make clear its meaning.
3. With respect to topic of trade controls, we must maintain our 
fundamental position that there can be no fruitful discussion of this 
item under the over-­hanging threat of use of force; that there must be 
a meaningful agreed announcement by parties renouncing force before 
trade embargoes can be usefully discussed. However it is hoped that 
without prejudicing in any way this position, you can lead Wang to 
disclose just what he has in mind as to the item of trade embargo and 
what changes the Communists propose in existing situation.
4. You may wish point out that unrealistic to think any country 
would help to strengthen economically another which threatens to 
use force if its demands are not met, by trading with it, where goods 
received in that trade could be used to support use of force. All this 
should lead back to discussion of necessity for meaningful renunciation 
of force in order permit progress in talks.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/7–1956. Secret; Priority; Limit 
Distribution. Drafted by Phleger and McConaughy; approved in draft by Dulles.
