1310 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement of “long range” or “large” rockets would have to be very carefully con­ sidered in the preparation of any type of agreement in this field. 4. Although an agreement to exchange advance flight schedule information on large rockets leaving the atmosphere could be moni­ tored, it would not be possible to distinguish with any degree of confi­ dence between a large rocket fired as a part of a military program and one fired for “peaceful purposes” [text not declassified]. 5. In view of the inherent similarity of the technical problems involved in [text not declassified]. 6. Even though inspectors stationed at authorized launching sites were empowered to undertake an inspection of the assembled rocket prior to the launching as part of an agreement limiting large rocket tests to “peaceful purposes,” it would not be possible to assure that the tests would not contribute most if not all of the essential data for the devel­ opment of a military ballistic missile program as well as operational experience for military personnel. 7. A complete prohibition of the launching of all large rockets leav­ ing the atmosphere, including those intended for “peaceful use,” could be fully monitored and would freeze the development of ballistic mis­ siles and space vehicles near their present status and would prevent their use for “peaceful purposes.” 8. An agreement, prohibiting all national large rocket testing and establishing either an international or joint US-­Soviet agency to plan and execute all rocket firings for “peaceful uses” of space would still provide the nations participating in the agency with some information pertinent to military missile development. However, such an agree­ ment could probably be designed in a manner which would limit the rate of accumulation of this information to a rather low level. 9. Although an agreement which established an international or joint US-­Soviet agency to plan all rocket launchings for “peaceful uses” of space without prohibiting other national tests would not have direct effect on the capability of participating nations to develop military mis­ siles, such an agreement might have desirable features in developing international cooperation and might contribute to a reduction of inter­ national rivalry in the missile field. [text not declassified] The advantage of such an agreement would be increased if the rocket launchings were carried out by the agency. 10. An agreement to prohibit all nationally conducted large rocket tests would not prevent the USSR from building up an operational military missile force, if the USSR had already developed an ICBM capability as of the time of such an agreement. The maintenance and expansion of this capability by the USSR could only be prevented by the prohibition of the retention or manufacture of ballistic missiles or nuclear warheads. The panel did not consider whether, in fact, such a
