1977 67 20. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, June 16, 1977 SUBJECT Mobile M–X Land Requirements Secretary Brown has sent you a memo (Tab A) describing the status of the land on which a mobile M–X system might be deployed.2 You will note that he calls attention to the politically-­volatile environmental impact issue as well as the question of whether a mobile M–X is technically feasible. Since the memo did not appear to be time urgent, my staff delayed sending it forward in order to include some additional perspectives on the M–X land requirement issue based on analyses done as part of NSC/ PRM–10.3 Unfortunately these analyses were very contentious and led to the long delay in forwarding Secretary Brown’s original memo. Secretary Brown’s memo provides a conceptual layout of 200 seven nautical mile long trenches at the Luke Gunnery Range and Yuma Proving Ground in Arizona. Each trench would contain one M–X. Analyses of M–X survivability undertaken as part of PRM–10 indicate that if the Soviets attacked this system (and the US silo-­based ICBM force) with their projected 1986 ICBM forces in an attack designed to minimize surviving missiles, the number of surviving US ICBMs would be: Fraction of Soviet ICBM Force Expended Approximate ­Number of Surviving M–X ICBMs Approximate Number of Surviving Silo-Based ICBMs [3 columns, 3 rows not declassified] 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 42, Missiles: 2–6/77. Secret. Sent for information. Carter initialed the top of the memorandum. Molander and Utgoff sent the memorandum to Brzezinski for his signature under a June 13 covering memorandum. 2 Attached but not printed is a May 5 memorandum to Carter, from Brown, who wrote: “Here is some information on possible basing of M-X, which puts the ‘trench’ problem in context. The technical workability still needs to be argued convincingly. Moreover, environmental concerns will still exist. My evaluation: not impossible (as thousands of miles of trench in an extended publicly used area would be) but the feasibility, technical and political, is by no means proven.” 3 See Document 3.
