day, appears to be a departure from the ordinary meaning of the term, and
seems to give to it a special sense in contradiction to customary usage.
Immigration is generally considered to involve a change of domicile, and
no other instance is known in which persons who retain in full their legal
domicile and citizenship in one country are, at the same time, treated as
immigrants to another country. In the view of His Majesty’s Canadian
Government, the interpretation of the term “immigrant” carried out in the
practice which has been in force between Canada and the United States for
many years is eminently fair and reasonable.
Certain exceptions to the operation of General Order Number 86 are made
in Section 2 of the Order, by which the individuals who come within four
specified classes are to continue to be admitted upon payment of head tax
only. I understand that these exceptions are made to mitigate the hardship
caused to individuals who began crossing the border before the passage of
the Immigration Act of 1924. In Section 3 of the Order, all who have begun
to cross the border since June 30, 1924, are given “a reasonable time, not to
exceed six months from June 1, 1927, within which to obtain immigration
visas and otherwise comply with the laws”. I am instructed to represent that
for those who have to secure quota immigration visas the period of six
months can hardly be regarded as “a reasonable time”, except perhaps in a
small number of cases in which the persons’ names have for some time
been on the waiting list for quota visas. As you already are aware, it is for
those citizens of Canada who have to secure quota visas, numbering
probably between four and six thousand, that His Majesty’s Canadian
Government feels an especial concern.
The laws of Canada make no distinction between citizens of Canadian birth
and those of British or foreign birth who have acquired citizenship by
domicile or naturalization, just as the laws of the United States make no
distinction between native born and naturalized citizens. Unless some
modification is made now or later, the effect of this Order will undoubtedly
be to exclude from the United States the very large majority of these four to
six thousand Canadian citizens who will be unable to secure quota visas
before December 1, 1927. The number of persons seriously affected is a
very small proportion of the population either of Canada or of the United
States, but in the Windsor area it represents a very substantial percentage of
