178 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement 9 and 11. The Sec thinks at the proper time the three of them (probably McElroy too) should sit down and work out what they think is sound, show it to the Pres but it should come from the top down and not down up. A agreed and said we should not pass on this. 49. Draft Briefing Note for 364th NSC Meeting by Cutler1 Washington, April 30, 1958 Introduction 1. The Planning Board has devoted much of the last two months to concentrated discussions of the world situation and in annual review of Basic National Security Policy (the current policy statement having been approved by the President last June). 2. Our review took into account major security policy decisions since last June; the Intelligence Community’s February “Estimate of the World Situation”; the Council’s discussion of that Estimate at its March 20 Meeting; and other factors. We were stimulated by informal discussions with General Gruenther, Arthur Burns, Jack McCloy, Karl Bendetson, and Robert Bowie. 3. The result of this reappraisal is the proposed revision before you, NSC 5810. The chief elements of this revised policy are stated in Section A on p. 2–3, (The Outline of U.S. National Strategy), and developed in detail in Section B (Military, Political and Economic Measures, and Domestic Strength and Other Measures). The chief elements are substantially the same as in existing policy, but there is different emphasis upon then. 4. As an orderly procedure, consideration today will be divided into three parts: First: an introductory summary of the principal factors influencing our review of last year’s statement, and of their reflection in the new statement before you. Second: focussing attention on two significant paragraphs—one on limited military aggression; and the other on Red ­China-Formosa. Here will be taken up the oral views of Defense and of the Chiefs. Third: five economic paragraphs which reflect splits of opinion in the Planning Board. Here will be taken up Mr. Randall’s comments. 1 Source: Basic national security policy, NSC 5810. Top Secret. 14 pp. Eisenhower Library, Whitman File.
