Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
9
3.
Statement by Senator Walter F. Mondale1
Washington, June 2, 1975
AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY AFTER VIETNAM
Mr. President.2 Let me express my appreciation to Senator Cran-
ston, Senator Kennedy, and others who have arranged this historic dis-
cussion. It is fitting that we begin the debate on the future course of
America’s post-Vietnam foreign policy in the context of the Senate’s
consideration of the military authorization bill.3 For it was our tragic
experience in Vietnam which showed how empty is a foreign policy
based on military power alone.
As we try to define America’s future world role, we must take full
account of the fact that the citizens of this country are profoundly skep-
tical. They know only too well that their patriotism has been exploited
by political leaders who could no longer justify their actions with
candor. I do not believe that the United States is about to become an iso-
lationist country, but the American people no longer want to be the
world’s policemen nor go on one-man crusades. I believe that Amer-
icans are willing to continue to shoulder our fair share of the world’s re-
sponsibilities, but only if these responsibilities are defined in terms that
make sense, that are consistent with our basic values and that relate to
our real concerns. This requires that we go back to basics—in the terms
that we use to think about foreign policy, in the values we pursue, and
in the way we view the real sources of America’s prestige and power.
The first step in revising our thinking about foreign policy should
be to jettison the amorphous term “national security,” and to get back
1 Source: Minnesota Historical Society, Mondale Papers, Senatorial Papers, Press
Relations/Media Activities Records, Speeches, 1975, Senate Floor Statement on Amer-
ican Foreign Policy After Vietnam, June 2, 1975. No classification marking. Aaron’s name
appears on the first page of the statement in an unknown hand. Mondale delivered his
statement on the Senate floor. During 1973 and 1974, Mondale had launched an explora-
tory campaign for the Democratic nomination, ultimately withdrawing his name from
consideration in November 1974. He later recalled, “On the day I announced I was
ending that experiment, I felt huge relief. After that I had no intention of going back into
the presidential arena. I felt I had found my sweet spot in the Senate.” (The Good Fight, p.
157)
2 Reference is to President Pro Tempore of the Senate Eastland.
3 On March 3, 1975 Stennis introduced the Department of Defense Appropriations
bill (S. 920). The Senate Armed Services Committee reported Stennis’s bill to the Senate
with amendments (S. Rept. 94–146) on May 15. During the last week of May and first
week of June, Cranston, Kennedy, Hart, and Mondale opened debate in the Senate over
the bill. Ultimately, the House version of the legislation (H.R. 6674; P.L. 94–106) was
passed in lieu of S. 920. Ford signed the appropriations bill into law on October 7. See
Spencer Rich, “Arms Debate Tied to View of Cold War,” The Washington Post, June 4,
1975, p. A–7 and Congress and the Nation, vol. IV, 1973–1976, p. 168.
