January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1199
istrative Council—which was Israel’s idea—and destroy Israel’s con-
nection with Jerusalem. How could this be done? For more than 3000
years, it has been a part of their life. It is not dead, it is alive. Their
prayers, every day—Dr. Burg prays for return, after 1900 years.
The President said that he is not trying to take the Jews out of East
Jerusalem. Under Prime Minister Begin’s definition, people and not
land are under jurisdiction. Therefore, we are not talking about a terri-
torial jurisdiction.
Prime Minister Begin said that at Camp David, they talked about
Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza district. And in the letters!
The President asked if an Arab in Tel Aviv or Nazareth could vote.
Minister Burg said that there is no absentee vote under Israeli law.
Minister Kubersky said that even Ambassador Evron can’t vote.
Prime Minister Begin said that this was a problem of the constitu-
tion—one day it would be amended!
The President said we need to find an alternative to the election
process.
Prime Minister Begin said that the President had asked that they
think about it; therefore maybe it can be raised again tomorrow. The
U.S. should not blame the Israelis’ attitude on Jerusalem.
The President said he was not blaming them for anything. But he
doesn’t see any way to proceed with elections.
Prime Minister Begin said that Sadat said there are 700 million
Moslems who do not agree. But for Israel, Jerusalem is sacred; it is their
life.
The President said he did not want to change that.
Prime Minister Begin said: thank you.
The President said perhaps they could adjourn on a pleasant note!
(laughter)
Prime Minister Begin asked when they meet tomorrow.
Ambassador Evron said 10 o’clock.
The President said there is another question. Sadat wants there to be
a security committee, to work out the delineation of what is internal se-
curity, and what is for the police.
Prime Minister Begin said could he please ask permission. At 5:00
he is to meet with some Senators. The President and he have to speak at
7:30. He will reply tomorrow. Thank you.
The President said: thank you.
(The meeting concluded at 5:10 p.m.).
