684
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
Options:
You could direct amendment of the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations, either by deleting the C–130 from the Munitions List or by
deleting it from the definition of significant combat equipment. For the
reasons set out above, I believe that neither action should be taken at
this time and that we should, instead, seek to remove any legitimate
complaints by Lockheed through improvements in FMS procedures.
Recommendations:
That you authorize the Department of State to inform Lockheed
that the C–130 will continue to be designated as “significant combat
equipment” and that we will seek to improve FMS procedures con-
cerning its sale.3
3 Carter checked the “Approve” option, and wrote underneath “Cy—Let me know
what specifically is done re FMS procedures. It seems to me that a non-weapon configu-
ration would make it possible to sell C–130’s with minimum delay. It’s a good safety
valve to retain friendly relations & not violate offensive weapons constraints. J.C.”
274.
Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence
(Turner) to Secretary of Defense Brown1
Washington, June 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Control of Incentives that Stimulate Arms Transfers
1. As requested in your memorandum of 9 June 1977,2 I have un-
dertaken the Presidentially-directed review of policies and procedures
that may promote the sale of arms, insofar as these may relate to Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency responsibilities and operations.
2. As a result of this review, I am satisfied that present Agency pol-
icies and procedures do not serve, directly or indirectly, to stimulate
foreign requests for arms transfers. As you know, under present rules,
1 Source: Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Harold Brown Papers, Box 78,
Arms Transfer/FMS Policy, 1977. Secret. A stamped notation at the top reads “SEC DEF
HAS SEEN, 1 JUL 1977.” In the upper right-hand corner, Brown wrote “7/1 ASD (ISA)—
all agencies are providing self-serving disclaimer, and many of them may well be correct.
Are we in DOD the only [illegible]? I doubt it. (State for example is worse). HB.”
2 Not found.
