292
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
countries also to do more; an interagency group is being set up to con-
sider whether new proposals for international cooperation to increase
energy output can be developed, which you might advance at the 1978
Summit.
(b) Nuclear. The International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation Pro-
gram which you persuaded the Summit to launch is making good
progress. But it will only head-off proliferation if it leads to agreement
on some way of internationalizing the nuclear fuel cycle that will offer
importing countries an alternative to reliance on dangerous nuclear
technologies. The U.S. will have to take the lead if such an initiative is to
be developed. You will have to keep pressing if the U.S. Government is
to develop such a proposal in 1978 instead of focusing on more
short-term and less difficult goals.
5. North-South Relations
Aid levels set or foreshadowed in 1977 are going up, in fulfillment
of Summit commitments. You have also fixed the right priorities for
1978: fulfilling our pledges to the IFIs, and reforming the bilateral U.S.
aid program, in preparation for a substantial expansion of that pro-
gram in 1979. These goals will only be achieved if we can learn how to
consult more effectively with the Congress on the IFIs, and if we can get
the executive branch to agree on proposals for major reforms in the
present bilateral aid program. Your leadership will be essential on both
points if there is to be progress.
6. U.S.-European-Japanese-Relations
You put more emphasis on the U.S.-European-Japanese relation-
ship in 1977 than any U.S. President in recent years. We made good
progress in strengthening NATO and promoting economic cooperation
among industrial countries.
Nonetheless, serious problems persist in U.S. relations with both
Europe and Japan. It will be important in 1978 to address not only these
specific issues, but also the ways in which they interact to affect the
U.S.-European-Japanese relationship as a whole. It would be useful to
do this at the next Summit. To the same end, it would be useful to invite
the President of the European Community (a position that rotates every
six months among European heads of government) and the President
of the European Commission (Jenkins) to come to Washington twice a
year for a broad review of U.S.-European relations. This would not take
up more of your time, since each of these leaders is likely to come to
Washington anyway; it would show your interest in European unity, as
well as in U.S.-European relations.
7. Conclusion
In your first year you have set the right goals and priorities, ad-
dressing underlying problems that were long neglected. In the year
