3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
622
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Brezhnev said that in the course of the correspondence between
him and President Carter he had not concealed that the Soviet Union
was resolutely opposed to any attempt to sanctify a separate Egyptian-
Israeli deal through the authority and prestige of the United Nations,
inter alia through involvement of the U.N. forces presently in the Sinai.
Whatever arguments are marshalled in favor of continuing the pres-
ence of U.N. troops in that area, such presence would mean complicity
of and association by the United Nations in actions which cannot lead
to lasting peace in the Middle East, but only the opposite. To expect the
Soviet Union to support such a force in this matter would be hopeless.
President Carter said he understood but disagreed with2 Brezh-
nev’s response. We will do whatever is necessary to assure that moni-
toring of the withdrawal is adequate, and will attempt to work as
closely as we can with the Soviet Union in this matter, and also con-
cerning Lebanon and other troubled areas of the Middle East.
Soviet-American Cooperation
The President said he wanted to mention three other subjects that
should not be difficult for Brezhnev. He hoped that Brezhnev and the
other members of the Politburo will examine very carefully the state-
ment the President had made yesterday regarding the trouble spots of
the world and the need for the Soviet Union and the United States to
consult closely and, whenever possible, to cooperate. Also, he hoped
that very careful consideration will be given to the written note the
President had given Brezhnev concerning the possibility of future arms
agreements.3 We consider this to be very important, and the President
hoped that it would be given careful consideration. He hoped that as
early as possible the two sides would provide some means to consider
these ideas together.
Brezhnev said that the Soviet approach to SALT III, based on prin-
ciple, has been set forth here, inter alia last night. As for the specific
questions President Carter had raised and included in the memo-
randum referred to, Brezhnev doubted if he could go into them today.
They require further reflection and analysis in the context of other
SALT III issues.
The President agreed and said that as he had listened to Brezh-
nev’s statement, he had seen much in common.
2 Carter added “but disagreed with” to this sentence by hand.
3 See Document 202.
