Yugoslavia 829 254. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, March 8, 1978, 11 a.m. SUBJECT The Secretary’s Meeting with Yugoslav Foreign Secretary Minic PARTICIPANTS U.S. The Secretary The Counselor Lawrence Eagleburger, U.S. Ambassador to Yugoslavia George S. Vest, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Richard Holbrooke, Assistant Secretary for Asian and Pacific Affairs Raymond Albright, Vice President of the Export-Import Bank William H. Luers, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs Louis V. Nosenzo, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Oceans, International Environmental and Scientific Affairs Nicholas G. Andrews, Director of the Office of Eastern European Affairs Darryl N. Johnson, Country Officer for Yugoslavia Michael Petrovich, Interpreter YUGOSLAVIA Milos Minic, Vice President of the Federal Executive Council and Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs Dragan Bernardic, Assistant Federal Secretary for Foreign Affairs Dimce Belovski, Yugoslav Ambassador to the United States Svetozar Starcevic, Director of the Office of North American Affairs Vladimir Sindjelic, Minister-Counselor of the Yugoslav Embassy, Washington Vladimir Matic, Political Counselor of the Yugoslav Embassy, Washington Zvonimir Petnicki, Interpreter Korea. After opening remarks, Secretary Vance asked Secretary Minic for clarification of President Tito’s comment to the President the previous day suggesting contacts with North Korea.2 He wanted to clarify that these contacts would involve the North and South Koreans as well as the United States. Minic replied that this understanding was correct. He continued that President Tito, before his departure for Washington, had received a detailed message from President Kim Ilsong, but it contained no new ideas and largely repeated those which President Tito had relayed to Carter last fall.3 The major obstacle to conversations was still South Korean President Park. During Tito’s visit 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office of the Secretariat Staff, Ambassador at Large and Representative of the President for Nonproliferation Matters (S/AS), Gerard C. Smith, 1977–1980, Lot 81D287, Box 2, Yugoslavia 1978. Secret. Drafted by Johnson; approved in S/S on March 23. The meeting took place in the Secretary’s Conference Room. 2 See Document 253. 3 Letter from Tito to Carter, September 22, 1977. See footnote 5, Document 243.
