January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981 1089 the Palestinian problem. It is a unilateral step without any guarantees from Israel. They see this as the end of the negotiations not the beginning. Mr. Christopher said there are various forms which were suggested in the past which would make it more balanced. That has continued relevance and vitality. We hope it has not been dropped by your side. Prince Saud said that the Palestinians would probably be willing to accept 242 if the United States could give some indication of its determination to resolve the problem on the basis of self-determination. Dr. Brzezinski noted that we use the formula that the Palestinians should participate in the determination of their own future rather than using the word self-determination. This is a result of Israeli security concerns which have not been inconsiderable in the past. The autonomy talks are not intended to create a regime which will last forever, but it is necessary that the Palestinians become engaged in the process. Prince Saud said that what prevents them from becoming engaged is the unwillingness to recognize the PLO. When Israel says it does not want to talk to the PLO, they are really saying that they want to avoid dealing with the Palestinian problem. Dr. Brzezinski said we recognize that but we also seek movement. There is a debate in progress about the West Bank, that is a breakthrough. More and more Israelis say that they should talk to the Palestinians—Dayan, Weizman, Evron—but it is not easy to force this process. It takes time. Prince Saud said at the present time this is a festering sore that will remain that way unless the United States makes an incision. Dr. Brzezinski said that we prefer healing to surgery. Begin used to say that the PLO was a gang of murderers. Now the PLO has begun to talk more intelligently. Both sides are changing. Prince Saud said that we trust the motives of the United States to get a resolution of the problem based on justice, equity, and a stable solution. We do not question the US motives but on the timing we know that the Soviets want to implement their objectives now, not in the next decade. Whatever we can do to speed that process we must do it. One thing you could do would be to accept the PLO. Dr. Brzezinski said the fact that you keep pressing us is helpful. It not only makes us keep this issue in the forefront but also to recognize the need to consider the views of Arabs, just as we take consideration of the Israeli views. The Europeans are ahead of us on this issue. That also helps. We appreciate how deeply you feel on this subject. Prince Saud said he would take advantage of this open door policy on the Palestinians and keep pressing.
