March–August 1953 525 189. Telegram From the Station in Iran to the Central Intelligence Agency1 Tehran, April 12, 1953. TEHE 945. Re: TEHE 941 (IN 15134?).2 For K. Roosevelt. 1. Station asset meeting with COS took place 11 April at 0900 hours as scheduled (TEHE 932–IN 14994).3 2. Following statements made by asset: A. Shah will not fight against govt for protection his prerogatives. B. Opposition giving impression it has dropped all plans overthrow Mossadeq. However opposition still working secretly to stir up public opinion against recommendation contained “Report of Majlis Cttee of Eight”. Source doubts recommendation contained “report” (defining and drastically limiting Shah’s powers) will pass Majlis, though only few deputies are for Shah. Large number a majority [sic] are against Mossadeq. “Report” is opportunity [to oppose?] Mossadeq on ground other than [illegible]4 opposition [illegible]. C. Mossadeq in difficult position. He not sure of majority on “report” or even of majority when and if vote confidence requested. Mossadeq now soft pedalling. He making friendly overtures toward opposition and in particular toward Shah. What he wants is Shah to endorse “report” without forcing Majlis vote, but source convinced Shah will never append his signature to “report”. Source repeats “the Shah will do nothing, he will not fight for his privileges; he will not renounce them voluntarily. He is passive and will let events take their course.” Mossadeq will not at this time take initiative of stirring mob and causing street demonstrations in support “report.” Since incidents 23 Feb when his gate stormed and he had to climb over wall to save own life he has developed healthy fear against crowd.5 D. Thus neither opposition nor govt likely start acts violence. 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency. Secret. This telegram was transcribed from microfilm in the Central Intelligence Agency specifically for Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, volume X, Iran, 1951–1954, although it was not released in that volume. The original telegram and its microfilm copy no longer exist. This is the case for all subsequent telegrams in this volume that are identified as having been transcribed for the Foreign Relations series. Please see the “Sources” chapter for more details. 2 Not found. Question mark is in the transcript. 3 Not found. 4 The bracketed references in the telegram to illegible text are in the transcript. 5 This incident occurred on February 28, when a mob attacked Mosadeq’s home.
