Afghanistan
609
11. Ul’yanovskiy’s statement does not include an explicit warning
of the consequences when a “signal” is received by Moscow of a
“retreat” from a “socialist orientation”. In terms of the translation of
theory into practice, the threshold triggering and defining Soviet action
obviously is seen to vary from case to case (depending on geopolitical
factors, international environment, etc.), even for an ideologist such as
Ul’yanovskiy; thus no Soviet “aid” at all was rendered to Somalia
although it is cited in the article as a country of “socialist orientation”
in retreat. (Besides, Soviet ideologists are not supposed to issue warn-
ings.) But the net result of Ul’yanovskiy’s description of what comprises
a “retreat”, when considered in light of the action the Soviets took
against the Amin government, is to suggest a doctrine akin to the
Brezhnev Doctrine—but addressed to this category of countries rather
than “socialist countries”. For the countries of the Third World,
assigned now or in the future by Moscow’s ideologists to the “socialist
orientation” category, Ul’yanovskiy’s language adds up to a fairly
credible warning—and made more credible as Moscow’s capability to
project force into the Third World improves.
12. While our purpose has been to focus above on an ideological
justification for Soviet intervention in Third World countries, the fact is
that—as mentioned previously—in the case of Afghanistan the Soviets
have thus far emphasized primarily “legal-political” justifications,
especially the 1978 Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation. It may well
be that the Soviets in fact will only feel comfortable engaging in a
significant military intervention in a sovereign state in circumstances
providing both an ideological explanation for domestic consumption
within socialist countries, and a “legal-political” justification for the
world at large. This would follow the Czechoslovak pattern where the
Soviets had their “legal-political” pretext, given Czechoslovak member-
ship in the Warsaw Pact, and developed their ideological justification
in the form of the Brezhnev Doctrine only after the fact of the invasion.
In any event, the ideological justifications discussed in the preceding
paragraphs in no way contradict Soviet “legal-political” explanations
for the Afghan invasion, but are rather hypothesized as a complement
to them. All factors considered, there is the suggestion that the states
most endangered by the precedent of Afghanistan are those countries
which are both “of socialist orientation” and have in addition legal-
political ties to Moscow such as treaties of friendship and cooperation.
13. We suggest the above as one possible approach to identifying
a Brezhnev-type doctrine in the thicket of the largely non-ideological
Soviet statements so far issued in justification of the Afghanistan inva-
sion. Given Moscow’s awareness of anxieties in the Third World
following its action, it may be some time before a comprehensive state-
ment lending itself to the development of a new doctrine actually
