1956 847 that United States had instituted measures to prevent Chinese who desired to return from doing so. You made these allegations partly on basis of certain entirely normal and proper requirements of my government applicable, not to Chinese who desired to return, but to Chinese—or to any other alien—who desired to stay in U.S. Partly, your allegations seem to have been based on no more than supposition that all Chinese in U.S. desire to return, and that therefore failure of any Chinese to return is of itself evidence of obstruction. E. More seriously, you made these allegations in apparent disre­ gard of third party arrangement, to which we both agreed in making our agreed announcement. This arrangement provides an objective test of whether in fact Chinese feel they are being prevented from leaving my country. By this objective test, I think it is evident that Chinese in U.S. do not consider that they are being prevented from leaving. F. You nevertheless allege that some Chinese are being prevented from leaving, and you have given me names of 37 persons who you say fall into that category. My country has already fully complied with terms of agreed announcement as regards these 37 persons, as well as all other Chinese in U.S. Most important and essential thing is that any of these 37, or any other Chinese in my country, if they desire to return, can exercise their right return your country whenever they choose and expeditiously as they choose. Next most important and essential thing is that any these persons who feels he being obstructed from departing can communicate with Indian Embassy. I have informed you repeatedly and in detail of wide publicity given agreed announcement my country in accordance terms announcement. However, in view your allegations these 37 persons, my government willing go beyond matter of agreed announcement and ensure that each them, insofar as can be positively identified, has copy of full text announcement. Also desire inform you medical case history Liu Yung-­ming is, accordance your request, being transmitted by American Red Cross to your Red Cross Society. G. I would like ask you just how far you prepared go in comply­ ing terms our agreement with regard Americans your country. Can you assure me each of 13 Americans whose names I given you and who do indisputably desire return can now expeditiously exercise right return? 20. Wang said statement by Department State of March 7 as well as my statement this morning had again raised question 13 Americans. They thought such manner of raising question not in conformity truth and intended stir up argument. 21. Wang said it precisely attempt use this question as pretext cover up fact obstruction against return Chinese in U.S. It precisely Chinese side instead U.S. side which feels highly dissatisfied with situation return its civilians.
