1156  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
will be increasingly dependent upon such factors as adequate warning, 
airborne alert capability, hardening and mobility. During FY 1961, two 
of our ballistic missile early-­warning installations (Thule, Greenland 
and Clear, Alaska) will be operational. One site has an initial operational 
capability today. Full coverage is not scheduled for completion until the 
U.K. Station becomes operational in FY 1963. The latter site is needed to 
cover missile launchings from sites in southwestern USSR against tar­
gets in the eastern U.S. To augment BMEWS, research and development 
effort increased in FY 1960 on the satellite-­borne ICBM attack alarm 
system MIDAS. Good progress has been made in satellite programs 
which are essential to our reconnaissance and intelligence activities. We 
have no active defense against ballistic missiles but development effort 
on NIKE ZEUS continues at the highest priority. A coordinated Soviet 
attack against our long-­range nuclear retaliatory forces, our deployed 
land-­based forces, our logistical base, and our naval forces at sea would 
be extremely difficult to execute with complete surprise, and only a 
coordinated attack with almost complete surprise could endanger our 
effective retaliatory power.
Limited War. As the Soviet nuclear, ballistic missile and conven­
tional capabilities grow, the element of pressure and threat will prob­
ably become more pronounced in Communist dealings with the rest 
of the world. In their continual probing of the strength and determi­
nation of the West they will be more aggressive in their use of politi­
cal, economic, and perhaps even limited military means. Although the 
Communists probably would draw back if the Western response were 
of such vigor as to make clear that further involvement would incur 
serious risk of general war or political disadvantage, the chances of 
their miscalculating such risks may increase if they remain convinced 
that their relative power is growing. Our military capacity to counter 
a single local aggression supported by the Sino-­Soviet Bloc is adequate 
to meet national security requirements. Dependent upon the location 
and size of force required, we would be hard pressed to execute limited 
military operations simultaneously in two or more areas of the world 
and maintain an acceptable general war posture. In the latter event, 
national measures providing for a degree of mobilization and augmen­
tation of lift capabilities might well be required. If sizeable forces were 
involved in such situations, our capabilities for limited war are such 
that authorization to use nuclear weapons selectively would probably 
be required. Our capability to conduct non-­nuclear war is very sub­
stantial and although it has not kept pace with our growing nuclear 
capability it has increased. Additionally, we must continue to rely, to a 
considerable extent, upon indigenous forces to cope with guerrilla and 
jungle warfare.
