North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1979
1057
UNCSTD should be promptly sent to NSC and OMB for staffing to the
President. (C)
3. Presidential Directive—Strengthening US International S&T Pro-
grams. Agreeing that a Presidential Directive was desirable, the PRC
endorsed the drafting of a directive which would serve to strengthen
US international science and technology programs by directing do-
mestic and foreign affairs agencies to examine ways to broaden contri-
butions of their R&D programs to US international objectives. The PRC
noted that analysis of the budgetary implications of such a directive
should be factored into the PD and that State will seek agency views
prior to submitting the PD for Presidential approval. (C)
4. Funding of USG International S&T Activities. The PRC directed the
completion of the State-led (CISET) study on this subject and its sub-
mission for PRC action by February 1, 1980. (U)
333.
Memorandum From Secretary of State Vance to
President Carter1
Washington, August 2, 1979
SUBJECT
S&T Cooperation with Developing Countries
This memorandum asks you to make certain decisions regarding
U.S. positions for the UN Conference on Science and Technology for
Development (UNCSTD) which begins August 20, 1979 at Vienna. The
primary focus of the U.S. presentation at this Conference will be the
proposed U.S. Institute for Scientific and Technological Cooperation
(ISTC), which has now been approved by the House and Senate. Three
other issues, which were reviewed by a PRC on July 23,2 require deci-
sions by you.
1. Bradford Morse, head of the UN Development Program, has
suggested that the UNDP create a special $250 million two-year fund to
provide scientific and technological aid to developing countries. (This
would be an alternative to the developing countries’ more grandiose
proposal for a $2 billion UN science and technology fund.) The PRC
1 Source: Carter Library, Records of the Office of the Staff Secretary, Presidential
File, Box 141, 8/7/79. Confidential.
2 See Document 332.
