March 1952–February 1953
469
before lunch because he was afraid that if he did not (rpt not) get away
so much pressure would be brought upon him that he would have dif-
ficulty leaving without incident. I told Ala that as Minister Court I con-
ceived it to be his duty to inform Shah that in interest of country Shah
should not (rpt not) leave in this fashion. I also asked him tell Shah that
I had just received message indicating that very important personage
for whom Shah had most friendly feelings had also expressed sincere
hope that Shah could be dissuaded from leaving country (London tele-
gram 195, February 27 repeated Washington 4844).2 Ala asked if Shah’s
present adviser, Valatbar, could join our conversation. I agreed and at
Ala’s request repeated to Valatbar what I had just told Ala. Ala said he
thought it would be good idea if I could talk directly with Shah. Would
I object? I said in circumstances even though I might later be charged
with interference in Iran affairs, I would welcome opportunity. Ala
called Shah on inter-Palace telephone and after few minutes conversa-
tion said Shah unable see me personally since Prime Minister already
on way to Palace to bid him farewell. Shah would appreciate it how-
ever if I would talk to him by telephone. I asked Ala if he sure tele-
phone not (rpt not) tapped; Ala said every possible precaution taken in
this respect.
4. Despite risks involved I talked with Shah. I told him that in
present emergency I had had no (rpt no) time to obtain instructions
from Washington but I knew US Government policies sufficiently well
to be confident that US Government just as I considered it would not
(rpt not) be in interest Iran for him leave country so hastily in present
circumstances. No (rpt no) matter what kind of announcement he or
Iran Government might make impression would be created through-
out world that he was departing under duress. Furthermore after he
departed Communist and other internal enemies of independent Iran
would fabricate stories against him. It would be charged that his
sudden departure was proof he was not (rpt not) worthy remaining as
Shah. He represented symbol unity and also hope for future Iran
throughout country. His departure would be sure to lower morale of
those enlightened elements of country who understood Iran’s external
dangers and were anxious preserve Iran independence. Shah repeated
he must go immediately. He had promised Prime Minister he would
leave today. He could not (rpt not) go back on his word. I said when
you gave your word it must have been with understanding that your
departure would be secret and would be accompanied by announce-
2 In telegram 4844 to Tehran, February 27, the Department relayed a message from
the Embassy in London that reads in part: “Foreign Office this afternoon informed us of
receipt message from Eden from Queen Elizabeth expressing concern at latest develop-
ments re Shah and strong hope we can find some means of dissuading him from leaving
country.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1950–1954, 788.11/2–2753)
