World Hunger and Food Policy 853 Total volume would be about 6.5 million tons, about 5% above last year. State believes that all major diplomatic and other program objectives can be accomplished with a budget increase 20 percent below USDA, but would go no lower. Tonnage cutbacks would fall on the middle income countries and on the reserve which State would reduce by one-third. State would add $35 million for Africa programs not in the January budget and strongly urges approval of the Egypt add-on. Option III (IDCA)—Request a $206 million supplemental maintaining the Title II tonnage, holding most middle income Title I recipients to the original dollar levels, and excluding the Egypt add-on. Total volume (6.3 million tons) would be very close to the 1979 level. IDCA Director Ehrlich believes this is the maximum needed to achieve humanitarian and developmental objectives in light of budget stringencies. IDCA would cut back Korea slightly, thus extending further the past practice of stretching out the textile payments. IDCA would maintain a higher reserve than State, which would leave room for some but possibly not all of the new Africa initiatives. Ehrlich questions the need to increase the Egypt program by $60 million to maintain tonnage and opposes the $41 million add-on as turning the program away from the greater emphasis on development objectives that you previously have encouraged. Option IV (OMB, Henry Owen)—Add $161 million to the budget by seeking a $103 million supplemental to maintain Title II tonnage and supporting the House’s $59 million add-on for Title I in the upcoming appropriations conference. Thus, the supplemental request would be limited to Title II, defensible on humanitarian grounds and meeting the statutory minimum tonnage. Total volume would be about 5.8 million tons, about 5 percent below last year. Programmatically, we would maintain Indonesia at the level that the Indonesians believe was pledged by the Vice President, accept most of the cuts proposed by IDCA, but would reduce the reserve IDCA seeks from $110 million to $80 million, taking smaller cuts in a few other countries. This would be a tight reserve for a year of rising prices. Although there would be little room for the new Africa initiatives, we believe that small cuts in a few countries, possibly including Portugal, plus a further reduction in the reserve could accommodate most of them at this total Title I level. We doubt that reductions of this magnitude would cause major diplomatic problems. This option includes $60 million to maintain the Egypt program at 1.5 million tons but rejects the $41 million add-on for Egypt. We believe that the political objectives stressed by Vance can be met by having Ambassador Atherton announce publicly that the U.S. is increasing food aid to Egypt by $60 million, reducing other countries in order to do so. This would give Sadat visible evidence of U.S. support. Bob Strauss states that although he is not familiar with the economic considerations, if the $60 million would clearly establish that the
