332 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 would remain frozen pending settlement of claims between the Governments of the United States and Iran. • Assuming the Government of Iran would likewise agree, the U.S. would abide strictly by the provisions of the Declaration of Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, and by the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. • [Flatly guarantee that the U.S. will not intervene in Iran’s internal affairs.]6 Guarantee that there will be no military reprisals if the hostages are released. • Agree to meet with Iranian officials in any appropriate forum to seek a resolution of all issues between us. It would be clear that while the U.S. would be prepared to hear Iran’s grievances, the United States would present its grievances as well. U.S. relations with Iran will inevitably suffer from the events that have taken place. The U.S. and Iran can try to limit the damage and perhaps begin to build for a better future, once the hostages are released. • [The U.S. would not maintain formal diplomatic relations with Iran, but would agree to the establishment of a joint commission with Iran under the auspices of a protecting power. The joint commission would review bilateral differences, including such issues as settlement of claims, disposition of the ICJ action, spare parts for military equipment purchased by Iran, commercial relations, etc.] —This is an opportunity Khomeini should seize. It is unclear whether, more weeks down the road, this would still be the U.S. position.7 —Every day that the crisis continues, and the situation in Iran erodes, foreign perceptions of the revolution in Iran erode as well.” The method of conveying such a position is as important as the position itself. If portrayed as concessions in advance of knowledge the hostages would be released, the hands of the Revolutionary Council might be strengthened, but Khomeini would still be likely simply to conclude that we were weakening. However, a combination of carefully drawn public statements and direct approaches would have a chance of getting to him. B. Private Approaches The purpose of an approach would be to get across to Khomeini the point that there is a way out for him, if he seizes it. It need not be to initiate a negotiation. And, to avoid giving Khomeini an impression of the U.S. as demandeur, I believe the message should not be directly from us. 6 These brackets and those in the paragraph below are in the original. 7 An unknown hand struck through an additional point following this one: “—No one should doubt American unity and resolve on this issue.”
