Chapter 8, June–August 1991  1165
and that is specified for that deployment area or test range, and shall 
limit the number of such transporter-loaders located outside deploy-
ment areas and test ranges to no more than six. The aggregate number 
of transporter-loaders for ICBMs for road-mobile launchers of ICBMs 
shall not exceed 30.
6. Each Party shall limit the number of ballistic missile submarines 
in dry dock within five kilometers of the boundary of each submarine 
base to no more than two.
7. For static displays and ground trainers:
(a) Each Party shall limit the number of ICBM launchers and SLBM 
launchers placed on static display after signature of this Treaty to no 
more than 20, the number of ICBMs and SLBMs placed on static dis-
play after signature of this Treaty to no more than 20, the number of 
launch canisters placed on static display after signature of this Treaty 
to no more than 20, and the number of heavy bombers and former 
heavy bombers placed on static display after signature of this Treaty 
to no more than 20. Such items placed on static display prior to signa-
ture of this Treaty shall be specified in Annex I to the Memorandum of 
Understanding, but shall not be subject to the limitations provided for 
in this Treaty.
(b) Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of heavy bombers 
converted after signature of this Treaty for use as ground trainers and 
former heavy bombers converted after signature of this Treaty for use 
as ground trainers to no more than five. Such items converted prior to 
signature of this Treaty for use as ground trainers shall be specified in 
Annex I to the Memorandum of Understanding, but shall not be subject 
to the limitations provided for in this Treaty.
8. Each Party shall limit the aggregate number of storage facilities 
for ICBMs or SLBMs and repair facilities for ICBMs or SLBMs to no 
more than 50.
9. With respect to locational and related restrictions on strategic 
offensive arms:
(a) Each Party shall locate non-deployed ICBMs and non-deployed 
SLBMs only at maintenance facilities of ICBM bases; submarine bases; 
ICBM loading facilities; SLBM loading facilities; production facilities 
for ICBMs or SLBMs; repair facilities for ICBMs or SLBMs; storage facil-
ities for ICBMs or SLBMs; conversion or elimination facilities for ICBMs 
or SLBMs; test ranges; or space launch facilities. Prototype ICBMs and 
prototype SLBMs, however, shall not be located at maintenance facil-
ities of ICBM bases or at submarine bases. Non-deployed ICBMs and 
non-deployed SLBMs may also be in transit. Non-deployed ICBMs for 
silo launchers of ICBMs may also be transferred within an ICBM base 
for silo launchers of ICBMs. Non-deployed SLBMs that are located on 
missile tenders and storage cranes shall be considered to be located at
