Afghanistan 295 verbally ever since the April 1978 Communist takeover in Kabul. As the waves of 27/28 Dec. events in Kabul wash down the Kabul River into the Indus Valley, Pakistani paranoia and anxiety will naturally rise. Words alone—in the absence of tangible follow-up actions which demonstrate that our interest in the security of the region is matched by a capability to respond to threats—will fall on deaf ears. At bare minimum, we must look for practical steps in the security assistance area which we can somehow pursue despite, and without torpedoing, our non-proliferation policies. (FYI Paks are already aware from Wash leak that we have put a temporary hold on any new military sales, an action I believe was ill-advised when it was taken in early Dec and which now appears ludicrous, as I wrote in a letter to Hal Saunders that should reach him tomorrow. End FYI) 11. Failure to use Pakistan, as one vehicle in our response to Soviet actions in Kabul—will produce a new set of pressures for further dilution of ties with a seemingly helpless United States and for further accommodation with Soviet power, not just here but through the region as a whole. 12. Dept. repeat as desired. Hummel 105. Situation Report Prepared in the Department of Defense1 [report number not declassified] Washington, December 28, 1979 Afghanistan: Situation Report (U) (S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Although sporadic shooting continued on 28 December, Kabul is generally quiet following yesterday’s violent overthrow of the Amin government by Soviet combat troops and Afghan allies. The city is securely in the hands of Soviet forces and armed civilians associated with the new regime of Babrak Karmal, a longtime pro-Soviet extreme Marxist. The government has wasted no time in projecting a moderate image in public statements. 1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 7, DINS & PROD, Aug–Dec 79. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified; text not declassified]. A note indicates the report was “as of 0721 EST, 28 Dec 79.” Prepared by [1 line not declassified].
