970 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 2. World Hunger Initiative. —The National Security Council proposes that we use the PRM review process to come to grips with this particular issue and develop a governmentwide world food policy plan, I disagree for the following reasons: —Does not involve the private sector early. —Does not involve the President in interacting with the private sector before the policy is developed. —The issue has been extensively studied and a different approach, which includes a policy review should be followed. —Does not provide the mechanism by which we develop a political constituency for this issue on the Hill. —NSC and the Domestic Council propose that they jointly chair this initiative; this is entirely too much Executive Office involvement and detracts from Cabinet-level responsibility (State, AID, Agriculture). —Your involvement in this issue may be an important example of your international human needs initiatives and can have the effect of mobilizing support for your overall foreign policy objectives. Thus the necessity of seeking a different format for conducting a policy review which involves substantial private sector participation. —The difficult issue of price of food and other difficult agribusiness, farm labor, and consumer group issues may be very difficult to cope with politically, especially in the West (business and farmers), and, therefore, early involvement between the government and these interest groups will have the effect of defining the differences before the public and Congress, thus enabling you to make tough decisions which may be more politically acceptable and saleable later on in the process. —Some things may be accomplished in this area over the next year or two like providing a set-aside contingency fund for food assistance and other visible, tangible initiatives which will have the effect of diverting attention from the emotion-charged political rights issues to the related human needs issue. —I have been in close touch with people like Jim Grant of the Overseas Development Council, and through him an Interreligious Task Force on World Food Policy which includes Father Hesburgh; they believe your visible involvement early on will be helpful to you with Congress. —My image as a physician and an anthropologist and the way I have been working in a cross-cutting approach, both domestically and internationally, may be a useful vehicle to mobilize the different interests on this subject.
