The conduct, of which Peru complains and which was the subject of numerous and elaborate protests evoking serious controversy, is charged to have been the execution of a policy described as “Chilenization” of the territory, embracing as alleged, (a) the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens and (b) the dispersion of the Peruvian population after 1900. A. The acts charged as constituting the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens may be summarized as follows: (1) the creation of the Department of Tarata; (2) the removal of the court of appeals from Iquique to Tacna; (3) the removal of military headquarters from Iquique to Tacna and the concentration of Chilean military forces in the Provinces; (4) founding of newspapers for pro-Chilean propaganda; (5) the subsidizing of factories; (6) the granting of railway, irrigation and other concessions; (7) colonization; and (8) the arrangements in regard to the Arica customs. As to these charges, it may be said: The creation of the Department of Tarata involves the question of the extent of the territory covered by Article 3, a question which will be considered in dealing with the boundary dispute. In so far, however, as the creation of this department was a matter of the administrative organization of a portion of the territory placed by the treaty under “Chilean laws and authority”, there would be no ground for complaint as there was no restriction upon the authority of Chile to provide administrative organization of the territory. The same is true of the removal of the court of appeals from Iquique to Tacna, the removal of military headquarters from Iquique to Tacna, and the concentration of military forces in the Provinces, if such concentration took place. All these acts were clearly within the authority conferred upon Chile by the treaty. Chile denies the charge that periodicals and newspapers were founded to carry on pro-Chilean propaganda, but apart from the issue of fact the Arbitrator finds it impossible as matter of law to deny to Chile the right to establish or subsidize newspapers in territory “subject to Chilean laws and authority.” Chile admits the subsidizing of new industries in Tacna and Arica but adds that “unfortunately however these factories have been forced to discontinue operations.” Whether such factories succeeded or failed, there can be no question of Chile’s general right to subsidize industry. It is unnecessary to consider an extreme situation in which large sums of government money invested in the subsidizing of industries in Tacna and Arica might have stimulated a considerable artificial immigration of persons into the provinces, because no such showing has been made on the facts. The granting of railway, irrigation and other concessions was clearly within the authority of Chile. The life of the concessions might be limited to such time as she possessed the legislative and executive power, but this is a matter which it is not necessary for the Arbitrator to determine in this case. Such a limitation would not affect the validity of the concessions during the time of the grantor’s possession and authority. The only aspect in which the granting of railway and other concessions need to be considered as a factor in “Chilenization” is in relation to the tendency of such
