force to regain control of the country. Through personal representatives, its leaders constantly continue informal relations with leaders of other factions. In its territories it permits the Central Government to function with regard to customs, wine and tobacco, salt, telegraphic and postal services (although, except in the case of customs, the conversion of revenues to local uses is acquiesced in by the Central Government). 3. The representative of the Government of China on the Commission on Extraterritoriality, Dr. Wang Chung-lin [Wang Ch’ung-Jiui?], who is himself a Cantonese, has just called on me for the purpose of making, in behalf of the Canton Government, certain informal representations in the pending customs question. He confirms my understanding that while they claim complete independence, nevertheless the Canton authorities regard themselves, while waiting for opportunity to extend throughout China their influence in accord with the policies which Dr. Sun Yat-sen laid down, as administering a portion of the territory of China. 4. Were the British to extend recognition to the Canton Government, the Cantonese faction doubtless would be gratified by that action as tending to strengthen greatly their influence in Chinese affairs. It would, however, lead to these questions: could the British continue recognition of the independence of a regime which lacks desire for separation from China, and would the British withdraw the recognition they have given to the government existing at Peking? 5. It is doubtful, when such recognition is considered from the standpoint of British interests as a matter of expediency, whether it would be effective in any case in conciliating those influences which are concentrating under Russian guidance their attack upon Great Britain in line with what is a considered antiforeign policy. 6. British recognition of Canton would condone the similar action taken by Soviet Russia toward Mongolia. It would afford temptation at least for encouragement of the secession of north Manchuria and Chinese Turkestan by the Russians, of south Manchuria by the Japanese, and of Yunnan by the French. While it might be possible to reconcile such action with the letter of the Washington Treaty in regard to policies, such action would have the
