388 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 1983–1986 so long as there was evidence of a vigorous program which would be effective in the long term. The gap from 83–86 might be tolerated by beefing up our other TRIAD legs temporarily during this period (e.g., increased bomber alert), recognizing that we could rely on the effectiveness of these TRIAD legs until 1986, but that our confidence beyond then might begin to degrade. 4. Basing Approach (S) If a Multiple Aimpoint (MAP) approach is selected, all panels agree that vertical shelters are the best technical implementation. All panels agree on the following desirable features of MAP: 1) it provides a technically sound approach to survivability; 2) it offers endurance; 3) it is straight forward to construct; and 4) we can confidently predict its nuclear hardness. All groups recognize the breakout problem associated with a Soviet MAP deployment, but there is disagreement on the degree to which a Soviet MAP deployment exacerbates the present breakout problem. All panels feel that mutual verification of MAP systems will be a difficult problem, but recognize that it can be resolved with hard work. With respect to MAP, there is disagreement on the expected difficulty in negotiations, the time when negotiations would be completed, and the impact on delaying SALT II. (S) There is disagreement on the relative effectiveness of alternative approaches to MAP. The OSTP panel feels that a strip alert airmobile system with dispersed inland basing (e.g., wide bodied jet, initially with MINUTEMAN III missiles) is the most attractive alternative, and it would be reasonable to begin deployment of such a system by 1983. A more effective air-­mobile system (e.g., hardened aircraft with a new missile) would be competitive with a long term MAP deployment in 1986, in the opinion of the OSTP panel. This approach would avoid the potential environmental and SALT problems which this panel associates with MAP. Other panels objected to the strip alert air-­mobile approach because of its dependence upon tactical warning, sharing many of the survivability problems of the present air-­breathing force. They also felt that a 1983 Initial Operating Capability (IOC) was unrealistic and noted that, with a 1977 start, we were projecting a 1982 IOC for ALCM, with B–52 modifications as the pacing item. There was also disagreement on beginning with an unhardened aircraft as opposed to developing a system with long term effectiveness from the start. (S) All panels agreed on the merits of two potentially far term (beyond 1990) solutions. One potential solution is a Ballistic Missile Defense system to provide preferential defense for those MAP shelters containing a missile. Such a system would be low altitude and probably non-­nuclear. A limited point defense system could be consistent with the ABM treaty or, some felt, an expanded system (1000 interceptors) could probably be negotiated in SALT III (if non-­nuclear). The second
