238  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
each other. (INF essentially treated both nuclear and conventional 
GLCMs as nuclear-­armed and thus subject to the ban.)
Those who support Option 3 believe that Soviet agreement to our 
other ALCM proposals, including counting rules and nuclear/conven-
tional distinguishability, should be achieved before we relax our range 
threshold.
The DCI sees no monitoring difference among the options.
Option 1.  Accept the Soviet position of a 600 kilometer range cutoff, 
contingent on resolution of:
— Option 1A. the ALCM distinguishability issue (see issue 
below); or
— Option 1B. all remaining ALCM issues.
Option 2.  Accept a 1000 kilometer range cutoff, contingent on resolu-
tion of:
— Option 2A. the ALCM distinguishability issue; or
— Option 2B. all remaining ALCM issues.
Option 3.  Maintain the existing U.S. position of a 1500 kilometer 
range cutoff, but continue to indicate flexibility in return for 
Soviet acceptance of other elements of our ALCM position, 
(favored by JCS, State, ACDA and Ambassador Rowny)
Option 4.  Maintain the existing U.S. position of a 1500 kilometer range 
cutoff; do not indicate any flexibility. (favored by OSD)
NSC staff believe that this issue should be considered internally 
and in the negotiations in close coordination with following issue, 
ALCM distinguishability. See staff comments on that issue below.
NSC Staff Recommendation
That you approve Option 3.7
2. ALCM Distinguishability. We have agreed with the Soviets that 
all currently existing ALCMs (with the range threshold still unresolved, 
as noted above) will be considered to be nuclear-­armed, and that future 
conventional ALCMs will either be distinguishable from nuclear-­armed 
cruise missiles by NTM or will be considered to be nuclear-­armed. At 
issue is whether to alter this agreed element in the draft Treaty.
7 Beneath this sentence Scowcroft wrote: “Let Burt be the judge of moving between 
Options 3 and 4, but stay closer to 4 until the Soviets show signs that flexibility might be 
promising.”
