Yugoslavia
839
slav Government remained very active in its preparation as well as
the preparation for the NAM summit in Havana, which he hoped
would contribute to a constructive conference. “Now we have a situa-
tion in which non-aligned countries are at war with one another,” Tito
declared, making reference to the Horn of Africa and the situation in
South East Asia. Tito continued: “There is an important issue for the
Non-Aligned countries to deal with: preventing the split of the non-
aligned countries into ‘right’ and ‘left,’ into ‘progressive’ and ‘non-
progressive’ countries.” Tito concluded: “We all must work to prevent
that from happening. There are such tendencies from several sides,”
alluding to Cuba, “and we will not allow this to happen.” As Carter
expressed his concern that Havana might not be the most appropriate
venue for the next NAM conference, Tito replied: “We are concerned
about Cuba too, but what can we do?” He continued: “If we allowed
a split into ‘progressive’ and ‘non-progressive’ countries, we would
face quarrels internally and externally.” “That is why the Conference of
Foreign Ministers in Belgrade is important,” Minic interjected, “because
many are concerned about how the Conference in Havana will proceed,
because they are concerned that Havana may direct the Non-Aligned
Movement in a different direction.” The Belgrade conference, Minic
concluded, should “achieve a platform that cannot be changed.”
The conversation then shifted to the relationship between the Soviet
Union and the United States. Minic stated that “it seems that the Soviet
Union has come to believe that U.S.A. is not in any hurry to conclude
SALT, but is seeking to postpone [agreement].” “We hear” he contin-
ued, that the Soviet leadership believed that this is “a calculating move
to prolong the arms race, and this is a great burden on the Soviet
Union. Since the U.S. economy is far stronger than the Soviet economy,
it is easier for the U.S. to endure the [arms] race and, according to
President Tito’s talks with Brezhnev, there is a serious [Soviet] interest
that race be stopped so that Brezhnev can focus on the internal prob-
lems, which are quite severe.” The Middle East situation, which the
Soviet bureaucracy saw as a ploy by the United States to limit Soviet
influence in the region, was described by Minic as another reason for
Soviet distrust of the United States. Lastly, Minic suggested that U.S.
policy on human rights added to Soviet apprehensions: “In talks with
them, we see that they perceive it as a calculating move to destabi-
lize the East European countries.” Minic concluded: “Much will need
to be done to dispel Soviet belief that this action is aimed at destabilizing
Eastern European countries.” Human rights, Carter responded, could
easily be solved during a meeting with Brezhnev.
What “worries us tremendously,” Carter noted, “is the issue of
enormous increase in armament of the Soviet Union, which is con-
stantly increasing military expenditures, three to four percent above
