Human Rights 339 olations are to be judged have not been clearly specified. On the contrary, the Christopher Committee has consciously chosen to hang loose on this. —While foreswearing any formal criteria, however, an informal “hit list” has begun to emerge. With respect to the allocation of PL–480, Title I assistance, for example, thirteen countries are being asked to accept special reporting requirements which amount to their admission that they have engaged in consistent and gross violations. The common thread that binds these 13 countries is not apparent to the untrained eye. I expect this list, designed for PL–480, will acquire a measure of “legitimacy” when it comes to determining those who are to be penalized when other forms of assistance are being distributed. —Nor have I seen much evidence that the Human Rights bureaucracy is very interested in results. At least in the EA area my colleagues at State inform me that they are rarely questioned by D/HA about the consequences of particular measures—e.g. a statement, a loan, an arms transfer, etc.—on the human rights situation in a particular country in the mid-term. The concern of the bureaucracy seems more clearly directed at dissociating the U.S. from manifestations of what particular individuals regard as unsavory political practices in other countries, rather than achieving concrete and tangible advances in human rights within the context of what is realistic and practicable in a given country. I cannot help but wonder whether in this area we are operating on the basis of the “Me-generation’s” Golden Rule: “If it feels good, do it”—an approach which reduces foreign policy to a form of personal therapy. I believe Max Weber’s essay “Politics as a Vocation”3 provides a more reliable guide to responsible ethical conduct. It counsels less perfectionism and more professionalism—an effort to grasp the longer term consequences of our actions than is apparent in our current methods. —Our expectations must be tailored to specific national situations and framed in terms of long-term trends. We cannot manage a sensible policy in terms of yesterday’s headlines. The recent decisions of the Human Rights Committee, however, are ad hoc and improvisational. Trends appear less important than current events—to wit, our abstention on the Philippine loan was explicable in terms of the Aquino sentence.4 Worse yet, we introduced new reporting requirements from In- 3 Reference is to German sociologist and political economist Max Weber, author of The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. “Politics as a Vocation” was a lecture Weber delivered at the University of Munich in 1918 and was published as “Politik als Beruf” in Gesammelte Politische Schriften (Munich, 1921). 4 On November 25, a Philippine military tribunal had imposed a death sentence on Benigno Aquino, Marcos’ foremost political opponent. According to press reports, Marcos indicated that he was leaning toward staying Aquino’s execution by firing squad. (Jay Mathews, “Marcos Strongly Hints He Will Spare Key Foe,” The Washington Post, December 9, 1977, p. A–22)
