Afghanistan
427
Yet the Europeans also appreciate that Soviet behavior may have
major strategic implications, requiring certain kinds of firm resistance
on the part of the West in order to ward off any further expansion of
Soviet influence in the Third World, to prevent in particular eventual
Soviet dominance in the Middle East oil producing region, to deter the
Soviets from similar behavior in Europe itself (possibly Yugoslavia),
and to discourage Soviet efforts to exert political pressure on the Euro-
peans based on Soviet “successes” elsewhere.
European responses to Soviet behavior in Afghanistan will also be
affected by the course the Soviet intervention takes in the longer term,
and by the threats and inducements the Soviets pose in the European
theater as US-Soviet relations chill. Public opinion will be important
too—it may surprise European governments by pressing for a firm
reaction to the Soviets.
At this stage of the crisis, however, the Europeans emphasize that
the Afghan crisis is primarily a confrontation between the Soviet Union
and the Third World—especially the Moslem nations—and that any
response to the Soviets must include the participation of such countries.
They have stressed that the Western reaction should be directed specifi-
cally to the region of Afghanistan, that it should be restrained in any
case, and that major elements of detente such as SALT should be
preserved as far as possible.
However the Europeans eventually assess the Afghan crisis, the
extent to which they will support US actions depends crucially on their
own special interests and vulnerabilities in relation to the Soviet Union.
The British will probably be most forthcoming. The government of
Prime Minister Thatcher, which is uniquely sensitive to Soviet abuses
of power and to ideological differences that persist between the East
and the West, has already shown a willingness to undertake firm
defense policy measures at considerable cost. Moreover, the British are
less vulnerable to the Soviets than the Continental countries; they are
still protected to a certain extent by a special relationship with the US;
and they have rather less to lose economically by trade restrictions.
The British also have traditional links to South Asia that allow them
to influence events in that region independently of actions the US
may take.
The countries on the Continent, however, are highly dependent
on continuing oil supplies from the Middle East and would find the
prospect of growing Soviet influence on those supplies profoundly
alarming. France, in particular, has championed the idea of a special
link between Europe, the Middle East, and Africa, and has been willing
to intervene in Africa—even militarily—to quell disturbances that
might create opportunities from which the Soviets could profit. Yet
President Giscard, whose government is already under pressure from
