1064
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
lieve ratification can and should be used as a “bargaining chip” to ex-
tract better treatment from the U.S., particularly over human rights
questions. They see the U.S. making concessions and soft-pedalling on
Brazilian human rights violations in order to influence that country’s
nuclear power program, and would like to use Tlatelolco in the same
way. Others admire the Brazilian government’s blunt negative reaction
to U.S. human rights pressure and advocate a similar aggressively
non-cooperative attitude for Argentina on matters of U.S. bilateral
concern.
7. Other objections to ratification were registered by the CNEA ad-
visory committee on safe guards which reported that adherence to the
treaty would bring a number of disadvantages. These include: the fi-
nancial cost of staffing and maintaining the large complex administra-
tive mechanism foreseen in the treaty; excessive layering of inspection
requirements beyond those levied in other international and bilateral
nuclear agreements; and the political inacceptibility of having Great
Britain be a party to additional Protocol I by signing for the Falkland
Islands as required by the treaty (Paragraph 1.B of Article 28). Argen-
tina does not recognize British sovereignty over the islands. [less than 1
line not declassified]
8. While the Tlatelolco treaty—as most nuclear questions—is of in-
terest to only a small sector of the public, strong opposition from vocal
military and civilian interest groups and the growing awareness of nu-
clear capability as an important foreign policy tool will make ratifica-
tion a costly business for the Videla Government. Should the Videla
Government opt in favor of ratification quickly and without any ap-
parent concession on the part of the U.S., the navy can be expected to
find fault with the decision and use it to paint itself as the major de-
fender of the country’s sovereignty. It should also be pointed out that
even should Videla agree to ratification, the actual process would re-
quire approval from the legislative advisory commission (CAL) and a
junta decree. CAL has rejected government-introduced proposals be-
fore and other government and military officials, most particularly Ad-
miral Massera, could, despite the most careful preparations on the part
of the Videla Government, use public doubts on the issue for
self-promoting propaganda.
9. This cable is classified secret—not releasable to foreign na-
tionals—[1 line not declassified]
Chaplin
