National Security Policy  1125
E. SIOP TERMINATES WHEN PREPLANNED TOT FOR FINAL 
NSTL TARGET HAS ELAPSED. After the last SIOP TOT time has passed, 
any commander can strike any target. SIOP has no further effect and 
ceases to exist. Definite cut off time will be determined when the SIOP 
timing has been finalized. (S)
3. DEFINITIONS.
A. TACTICAL WARNING. Tactical warning time is that time which 
each weapons system can be expected to survive enemy action. Time will vary 
depending upon degree of mobility and/or hardness of the weapon carrier. (S)
B. ALERT FORCE. That force which is constantly prepared to execute a 
preplanned NSTL assignment after receipt of an execution order under condi­
tions of “tactical warning” and within an established time period.
FIXED BASE—15 MIN
MISSILE SUBS—2 HOURS
AIRCRAFT CARRIERS—2 HOURS
This is not an all inclusive list of forces which may be included in the 
alert force. However, to be included in the alert force there must be a 
reasonable assurance that the weapon carrier will survive enemy action 
long enough to be launched effectively. If only a short time is available 
there must be a high degree of destruction levied upon the primary 
target system, assuming that the remainder of the U.S. force will be 
destroyed. (TS)
C. STRATEGIC WARNING. That period of time which permits a com­
mander to prepare and position his forces to execute his War Plan. To permit 
peacetime training and other activities, all of a commander’s force can­
not be in the desired posture or location to most effectively launch his 
force against the target system. The time required for generating and 
positioning his entire force is full strategic warning. (S)
D. FOLLOW ON FORCE. That portion of the SIOP Force that is gen­
erated after receipt of a preparation order (A-­Hour) to execute a preplanned 
NSTL assignment. This is that position of the SIOP forces following the 
alert force. This force cannot be counted on for effective utilization 
without some strategic warning. (TS)
E. INITIAL STRIKE.
(1) The total SIOP effort against preplanned NSTL assignments.
(2) Weapons carriers will not be preplanned for recycle assignments.
(3) SIOP assignments remain the responsibility of parent command until 
assigned SIOP weapon(s) are expended on the assigned target or until the last 
schedule time for that target has elapsed.
