98
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
26.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, March 5, 1977
SUBJECT
Weekly National Security Report #3
1. Opinions
Foreign Policy Design. Judging from press reactions—both domestic
and foreign—there is considerable appreciation of your dedication to
more effective and far-reaching strategic arms control; there is aware-
ness of the depth and sincerity of your concern over nuclear prolifera-
tion; there is remarkably widespread support for your position on
human rights, which has done so much to revarnish America’s moral
credentials.
Moreover, through the various missions undertaken immediately
after the inaugural (to Southern Africa, to the Middle East, to Panama,
and to the Aegean) you have signaled clearly that the Administration
will be activist, and that you yourself will be in the tradition of those
presidents who have exercised a personally active leadership in foreign
affairs.
However, I do not believe that at this stage the larger design of
what you wish to accomplish has emerged with sufficiently sharp re-
lief. I discern two immediate needs, both of which might well be cor-
rected in your forthcoming foreign policy speech:
1. You need to express a more coherent vision of what we aim to
accomplish, of what our priorities are, and of how you define the
present historical era within which US foreign policy has to be shaped;
2. You need to convey to the public your awareness of the com-
plexity of the problems that we confront; disappointments and set-
backs are normal in international affairs and accomplishments tend to
be the exception. We are setting in motion a process, and the public
must be made to understand that the President and his associates un-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski
Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 125, Weekly National Security Report: 2–4/77. Top Se-
cret; Sensitive. Both Carter and Mondale initialed the memorandum. Brzezinski later ex-
plained that he had “initiated, approximately a month after his [Carter’s] inaugural, the
practice of sending him a weekly NSC report. It was meant to be a highly personal and
private document, for the President alone. It contained usually some additional intelli-
gence information or reports on policy implementation, as well as an occasional sum-
mary of more incisive papers written by NSC staffers, and frequently the report was
opened by a brief one-page-long editorial piece by me, entitled ‘Opinion.’” (Power and
Principle, p. 65)
