Negotiating Channels 429 everyone shuns responsibility and all the “officials” of the government and the Revolutionary Council spend all their waking hours (and probably their nightmares as well) scheming about how to maintain Khomeini’s personal support. This is about the best we can expect so long as Khomeini is alive. Ironically, if he dies, the game will return to square one and it will be every man for himself. In the meantime, the left is organizing itself. The Tudeh Party expects Khomeini’s imminent collapse and is positioning itself to inherit as much of the wreckage as possible. If the present chaos drags on, the left will continue to ingratiate itself with Khomeini as one of the few reliable bastions of support, and he will be forced to rely on them more and more heavily. The presidential elections will probably change very little. The election will be boycotted by major sections of the population, and the remainder will probably split according to personalities. Any president, even if elected by a genuine majority, will find himself in the same position as poor old Bazargan—and the new president’s fate is likely to be about the same. Khomeini will not brook real independence, so the new president will either have to be a total rubber stamp or he will have to set about building an independent power base. The latter is more likely, but it is also dangerous to the health—politically and otherwise. The threat of internal collapse and the emergence of the left as the dominant power strikes me as much more imminent and likely than an actual Soviet military intervention. Any prolongation of Khomeini’s faltering regime only increases that risk. Our objective should be to hasten the downfall of the present regime. We need not do much actively, for it is falling of its own weight. But we should beware of taking tactical steps in the context of the Soviet invasion which artificially breathe new life into the present leadership and give the Iranian public the false impression that there may be more there than meets the eye. They are troubled by sanctions. We should use that weapon, and reinforce it with some hype and propaganda. It undercuts the credibility of the mullah rule and it puts pressure on them where they feel it—in their domestic support. We should continue with our contacts with dissident groups. Our objective should be to encourage those groups who have real influence—particularly those in Azerbaijan which stand between Tehran and the USSR and who have the manpower, talent and political determination to provide some kind of alternative regime. They also have an invaluable religious asset in Shariatmadari, and a network of fellow Azeris in key positions throughout the country, including the military. We need not delude ourselves into thinking that we can mastermind a countercoup. That would be both infeasible and historically
