Afghanistan
879
332.
Current Analysis Report Prepared in the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research1
Report 21–CA
Washington, November 6, 1980
SOVIET STRATEGY AND TACTICS IN AFGHANISTAN:
LARGER IMPLICATIONS
Despite indications that the wisdom of the Soviet involvement in
Afghanistan may still be under debate in Moscow, there are no signs
that Soviet resolve is weakening or that major changes are being consid-
ered. The size of the Soviet armed forces and of their weapons stockpile
has allowed the USSR to field an 85,000-man force in Afghanistan
without disrupting military deployments elsewhere or interrupting
military aid programs. All evidence points to a long-term Soviet mili-
tary presence in Afghanistan, with continued military improvements
and some force increases opposite China, NATO, and Iran.
USSR: New Military Priorities
Soviet defense planning has been complicated over the past two
years by the addition of new priorities to the traditional concerns with
NATO and China.
—The Chinese attack on Vietnam in February 1979 led to significant
improvements along the Sino-Soviet border and contingency planning
for a second Chinese attack.
—The occupation of Afghanistan has required continuous supply,
construction of permanent facilities, and troop turnover.
—Developments in Iran and the Persian Gulf have led to new force
priorities in the southern USSR, heretofore a relatively neglected area.
—The Polish situation has imposed a new requirement on the
Soviet General Staff to be ready to take military action.
Military developments throughout the USSR indicate that the Sovi-
ets are attempting to deal with all these contingencies, which continue
to stretch both military and civilian resources.
We see no decrease in military aid to the Warsaw Pact and the
Third World. Indeed, the Soviets apparently promised the Syrians more
military aid during Assad’s visit in early October.
Afghanistan: The Military Situation
After 10 months of fighting, the Soviets still face significant opposi-
tion and serious military problems.
1 Source: Department of Defense, Afghan War Collection, Box 6, Soviet Strategy
and Tactics in Afghan—Larger Implications. Secret. Drafted by Crocker (INR/PMT) and
Limberg (INR/EEA), and approved by Baraz (INR/DDR/RNA).
