774  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
three alternatives—Nevada/Utah, Texas/New Mexico, or split basing, 
with the first one preferable, the second one more expensive (and with 
greater public impact); and the third most expensive (by $2 to $5 bil-
lion). While these results will clearly indicate the desirability of sticking 
with Nevada/Utah basing, I don’t believe the EIS study should reach 
that conclusion; rather, that decision gets bucked to SECDEF and—­if 
we were to decide to propose the split basing at the extra cost-­to the 
President for approval and Congress for appropriation.
3. Congressional/Public Interface (U)
a. House (U)
(S) The FY 81 M–X request will be supported by the HASC without 
crippling amendments. HAC is still an unknown, but could be a prob-
lem. Gunn McKay is taking a real position of leadership here. He held 
a constructive hearing last week which cleared up a lot of misinforma-
tion on M–X basing. I will be meeting with him tomorrow morning (at 
his request) to plan a strategy for getting the bill through the house 
and for interfacing with State Officials. I will seek his advice on how 
to handle the split basing issue (clearly Nevada and Utah would prefer 
this, but the Congress probably would not accept the additional cost).
b. Senate (U)
(S) SASC will probably support the FY 81 request, but may be look-
ing for restrictive language. I see Sen Nunn as the focal point on the 
Democratic side and will meet with him to discuss strategy. Sen Warner 
has offered to take the leadership in bringing around the Republicans, 
whose opposition is partially state oriented (Sen Garn) and partially 
politically inspired. Sen Warner will argue that a bipartisan approach is 
indicated for this important national security program, and that Repub-
lican opposition to M–X “because its the wrong design” is transparent 
and could backfire on them. He is planning an additional M–X hearing 
this Wednesday3 at which he will invite some dissident Senators, not 
on the committee, to give them a chance to get onboard. Additionally, 
I plan to meet one-­on-­one with Sen Garn to see if I can determine how 
much of his objection is a real concern with the system (which we can 
deal with) and how much is Utah politics.
c. State Leadership (U)
(S) I met with Gov Matheson and Gov List last week4 and gave 
them a chance to express their concerns. I explained in detail why other 
basing options (air mobile, SUM, etc.) are unattractive. We talked about 
the split basing option; I assured them that the Air Force EIS study 
would not foreclose the split option, but that the extra cost would be a 
3 April 2.
4 No minutes of this meeting were found.
