Haiti 787 revolutionary situation may be efforts by the Castro-­government or Castrophiles to form a leftist regime sympathetic to or subservient to the Castro regime. There was general agreement that the Government of Haiti is in a desperate situation at the present time, because of economic and financial difficulties as well as the political box in which she finds herself, caught in the middle between Trujillo on the right and Castro on the left. There was general agreement that the United States’ objective be to obtain enough leverage in Haiti to counterbalance pressures from Trujillo and Castro. President Duvalier’s request for budget support and economic aid must be considered in this context. In the ensuing discussion Mr. Mann stated that Haiti should not be rewarded for being irresponsible and that any sizeable projects financed with our assistance cannot be converted into political slush funds, although we must recognize that the desires of the host government with regard to individual employees must be taken into account. It was agreed that budget support should have priority over economic development aid, and there was some discussion of the desirability of tying budget support to specific items in the budget. Mr. Mann favored administering our assistance in such a way that we can turn it on and off in accordance with the degree of cooperation we receive from the Haitian Government. Mr. Mann also favored not embarking on any large new projects pending better indications of a cooperative attitude from the Haitian Government. Mr. Mann recommended that in offering budget support we urge the Haitian Government to give further consideration to carrying on construction in the Artibonite valley under contract. Mr. Mann had to leave the meeting early, but requested that he be given concrete recommendations (with justifications) along the lines suggested. In the latter part of the meeting, the possibility was discussed of “untying” the DLF road engineering loan from the Artibonite loan. Mr. Perry believed this might be possible. With regard to the suggestion that the DLF resume disbursements to pay for the engineering studies in the Artibonite valley, which have been largely completed, Mr. Perry stated that he would consult with others at the DLF concerning this possibility.
