1024
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
used. This would permit charges and rumors to be checked out before
they escalate to a point where they result in public attacks. I mentioned,
as an example, the article in the Egyptian opposition newspaper, Al-
Sha’ab, that the Saudis are financing the Kennedy campaign, an article
which had prompted Fahd to issue a public denial. This kind of thing
could be checked out before it becomes a public issue. Fahd agreed in
principle, but made it very clear that he does not trust the Egyptians.
They will at some point leak news of any such direct dialogue, however
secret it may be.
After we had gone round and round on this for a time and he
would not budge, I suggested that perhaps this kind of checking out of
malicious gossip could be done through our embassies. He seemed
agreeable. Again, however, he spoke of a “period of tranquility” of sev-
eral months after which the matter of an indirect dialogue could again
be considered. (I am convinced that he will do nothing on reestab-
lishing a dialogue with Egypt, direct or indirect, until after the ex-
change of Egyptian/Israeli ambassadors in later February and after the
inevitable ensuring flap has abated. He is scared and considers himself
vulnerable in the eyes of the other Arabs.)
Fahd said he will reply to your letter after he gets back from Tunis
and, with a little pressing, he also agreed to reply to Sadat’s letter. I
urged him to make his replies as constructive as possible and not to
give a long recital of past complaints. He gave me no commitments, but
said he would consider carefully what I had asked him to do. We shall
see.
Second Talk with Sadat (November 18)
I briefed Sadat in Ismailia about the results of my talks with Fahd. I
frankly put the best face possible on them, but made it clear that Fahd is
not yet ready to resume any kind of dialogue. I also made it clear that
Fahd believes the Egyptians will leak any such dialogue.
Sadat took it very philosophically. He said that he had not ex-
pected anything more to come from the talk with Fahd, but was glad
that Fahd had agreed to the need to reestablish a moratorium on public
attacks. He assured me that he will honor it. He also agreed that our
embassies be used to try to prevent any misunderstandings from esca-
lating to a point where they become public attacks. (Sadat will have to
be carefully watched on this, since he tends to get carried away when
he is making a speech.)
Fahd, Sadat said, is afraid. He feels himself vulnerable before the
other Arabs. Fahd will do nothing, Sadat opined, until after the ex-
change of ambassadors and the resultant flurry. Even then, Sadat
thought, Fahd will be very leery. This should not trouble us, Sadat
