September 18–December 16, 1978 459 cannot accept. We have another draft. So, why should our draft letter be thrown into the basket and the other letter be the document? Because President Sadat wants it—you know I am his friend and I wish him well. How can we say that the elections will take place in five or six months? If the PLO comes with its pistols—we shall do our best to talk to them, to convince them. We invited Jordan. But we cannot force anybody either to join our peace-making process, or to come into our election process. We can only convince people. This is the point. I don’t think that we read about renegotiations of points. We have our point of view in the Cabinet. We have a real objection to including those words, “Noting, etc . . .”, taking them out of context. If that is taken from Camp David, why shouldn’t other sentences be taken. This is one of our objections. There was a decision by the Cabinet. The majority of the Cabinet decided not to make a precipate withdrawal. I wasn’t even there. We must obey by these decisions. What Ezer said wasn’t binding. President Carter: I am not trying to reopen that discussion. It was not only Weizman; it was Dayan and Barak. But, that is not the main concern that I have. There is a limit to how much longer we can go on with the negotiations and I hope that you will read my letter very carefully within the bounds of your own commitment. Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir. Surely I will. President Carter: I hope you will be as flexible as possible. Prime Minister Begin: Yes, I think I will write to you from Jerusalem, answering your letter. President Carter: I think the answers can be accomplished in your discussions with Secretary Vance. Prime Minister Begin: I will get back home on Monday9 in the afternoon. I will convene a session of the Cabinet on Tuesday or perhaps on Wednesday. During the week I will answer you. Believe me, Mr. President, we will do our best to have peace. We have done all our best. Sometimes we are not understood by some members of your Administration, Mr. President, with all due respect. President Carter: I will tell Secretary Vance to discuss this again with you tonight and to explain the present draft document—by the way, which your negotiators have agreed to this. I hope you will also agree. Prime Minister Begin: Yes, sir. President Carter: Good. Prime Minister Begin: Thank you very much, Mr. President. 9 November 13.
