674 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII produce decisive victories, with the possible exception of Kabul, where severe repression of demonstrations in February appears to have discouraged further anti-government activities. The massive offensive in Konarha province retook one military outpost, temporarily relieved the insurgent siege of another, destroyed many villages and sent thousands of refugees into Pakistan. But the Soviets suffered significant casualties in the process and reportedly continue to do so as the rebels have again assumed the offensive in that region. Both Soviets and Mujahedin hope to profit, although in different ways, from increased mobility in the spring and summer. The Soviets will be able to move heavy equipment into areas previously blocked by winter snows, while the nationalists will be able to disperse higher up into the mountains. The Soviets clearly have the advantage of far superior fire power and the dreaded MI–24 helicopters. However, they are spread thin and reportedly suffer from at best indifferent morale and discipline. The nationalists, who can blend into a supportive population, appear to have excellent morale and are dedicated to their cause. Thus, the months immediately ahead promise serious fighting, much suffering for the population, and a continued flow of cross-border refugees. 249. Memorandum From the Chief of the Near East and South Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (Cogan) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner1 Washington, April 4, 1980 SUBJECT Talking Points for Your 8 April Meeting With President Sadat 1. Action Requested: None; this is for your information. 2. The following topics are appropriate for you to draw on in your meeting with President Sadat scheduled for Tuesday, 8 April:2 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 82M00501R: 1980 Subject Files, Box 12, C–370, 21 Jan–30 Oct 80, Egypt. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified] The memorandum was sent through Carlucci and McMahon. 2 No record of the first April 8 meeting between Carter and Sadat was found. For the memoranda of conversation of other meetings during Sadat’s April 7–10 State visit to the United States, see Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IX, Arab-Israeli Dispute, August 1978–December 1980, Second, Revised Edition, Documents 354, 355, and 356.
