14 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX have the authorities worried. One Czech [less than 1 line not declassified] has reported that nervous colleagues have been watching what the Chartists say, particularly on ideological questions, since they went public. One reason the regime is concerned is that the Chartists represent, in a figurative sense, the plight of a vastly larger number of people (perhaps as many as half a million), who were purged after 1968 and whose political and other rights remain severely circumscribed. As apostles of the aborted effort to give socialism a “human face,” many of the Chartists consider themselves forerunners of the Eurocommunism of the 1970s. The government has harassed the Chartists and has arrested several, but has not initiated a thoroughgoing crackdown. One of the Chartists’ leading spokesmen, Jan Patocka, died shortly after interrogation last month (he was not physically abused), but his funeral took place without incident, and as far as we know there was no popular reaction to his death. —The small number of Romanian dissidents have been deeply divided by personal feuds and different goals, but some common ground has been found in Charter 77. The dissidents consist mainly of unknown artists and intellectuals who do not command national prestige. Novelist Paul Goma’s “open letter” in support of the Chartists and a Romanian version of the Czech manifesto are the only recent evidence of vitality. The dissident’s letter strongly criticized party leader Ceausescu’s personal role and his authoritarianism. In Romania, they make clear, the problem is not the Soviets, but Ceausescu himself. This personal attack may account for Ceausescu’s vitriolic speech blasting the dissidents, but the Romanian leader did not follow up with harsher measures. On the contrary, Goma was allowed to see the party number-one man on cultural affairs, and there were even suggestions that some of Goma’s work might be published. Goma has not backed off and joined by a hundred-odd known sympathizers who signed his manifesto, he continues his struggle. —Dissidence in Hungary has elicited no signs of serious concern from the regime. A small number of intellectuals have publicly supported the Chartists, but thus far they have not criticized conditions in Hungary. Ironically, while party leader Kadar’s soft line has been successful at home, it has caused him some troubles with colleagues in Eastern Europe and perhaps the USSR as well. He is in a strong position as long as the Hungarian dissidents behave themselves and Hungary continues to be one of the quieter countries in Eastern Europe. —There is little active dissent in Bulgaria, still Moscow’s most dependable and ideologically conformist ally. Some passive resistance and unhappiness with living standards is evidenced by occasional work slowdowns and a widespread apathy, but this is nothing new. The aged top leadership will inevitably need to be replaced before long, and this might provide a new climate that would stimulate dissent.
