1206 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX derstanding. The negotiating teams on security . . . all depends on the principles he presented yesterday. They expect an answer today or tomorrow. They could have said (at Camp David) that they would just appoint the Administrative Council. But people would say that this is a masquerade, and an indirect aid to Israel. So Israel proposed free elections—though they may be difficult to do. Sadat is mistaken in saying that he could impose autonomy on Gaza. Sadat can’t do it; no one can. Can we drag people to the polls? In Belgium, there is a fine for not voting. But it doesn’t help; people just pay the fine, of about 50 francs. So you can’t drag people to the polls. Israel stands by the elections. It is objectively difficult if the Palestinian Arabs will not take part. First, the Mayors could appoint the Council—but this can’t be done. It would be like having PLO-types. Israel would prefer known PLO people if it came to that. That is, if the mayors would agree anyway, which is doubtful. So what if we postpone the elections—as with the mayors— and they appoint the members? The same difficulty would arise. If there are free elections, the President says, PLO sympathizers could be elected anyway. Israel would say, so?—this happened through free elections. It would ask the elected individuals not to be with the PLO, but what can Israel do once there have been free elections? Therefore, there should be no proposal to say that anyone acquiesces in non-elections. His proposal is, let us work to get done in 40 days. Then after 30 days or so, we can assemble, and the President can empower Secretary Vance to come together with them, and to reason together. Now there is no other proposal that seems reasonable. We should stand by the democratic process of free elections. (At this point, Robert Hunter left the room for about two minutes). Minister Burg said that surely, before May 26, talking about not having elections would be psychologically bad. The President said that this was a wise statement. Minister Burg said that since it came from a sage, it was appropriate. (laughter) He would add that if we leave the idea of free elections, it would be a grave deviation from Camp David. We do not wish that now, at least until May 26. The President raised the other option—Gaza-first. Minister Burg has assessed it well: to say today that we would abandon free elections would be bad. But the Camp David Accords would not come into being if the elections are not carried out. When we reach the final stages of the negotiations, it all becomes a failure if there is no means to get the Self-Governing Authority in place, then it will fail, and other provisions will be lost. Maybe we need to keep our option open to have a brief transitional period—maybe a committee—in Gaza or of mayors— to negotiate on a limited number of issues . . . We don’t need to cross that bridge now. We will work now, and with Israel and Egypt, on free
