Japanese Delegation6 (see page 4 of Minutes of March 12, 1926). Dr. Yen said that the Japanese draft introduced an entirely new idea, that in his opinion the proviso defeated the very purpose for which the sub-committee was sitting, that is, the subcommittee was trying to agree upon the levying of surtaxes on a certain day and the proviso practically made it impossible for the surtaxes to become effective on that day. He disliked also to note what he called an implied want of confidence in the work of the Conference and that it seemed to be an admission that the Conference had done almost nothing and that there was little likelihood of anything being done by June 15. A further objection was that the Japanese proviso would be a weapon which could be used to upset the Conference entirely, since there might be disagreement as to the purposes and conditions, in which case it would be possible, in effect, to cancel the Washington Treaty. Mr. Hioki took issue with Dr. Yen and stated that if the Conference allowed the Chinese Government to begin the levying of surtaxes without fixing the conditions, then they were in position to violate the Washington Treaty. He considered that the proviso, instead of delaying matters indefinitely, would impel them to finish their work with greater energy than before because they would all be determined to come to an agreement just to avoid the difficulties to which they might be brought by force of circumstances. He said that he had offered the proviso with the best of intentions and in the hope of arriving at a conclusion at the earliest moment. Dr. Yen replied that the latter part of the first sentence of Mr. Hioki’s draft, namely “to be applied later for such purposes and subject to such conditions as shall have been agreed upon at this Conference” practically covered all that was necessary or essential, so that he did not see the necessity of the negative side of the proviso. Dr. Yen remarked that the main purpose was to make provision for the safe-keeping of the revenues and to make it impossible for others to tamper with them. Mr. Strawn remarked that he could not share the chairman’s solicitude in any of the respects he had voiced concerning Mr. Hioki’s resolution. He said that he did not wish to be unpleasant by recurring to the fact that the American Delegation had offered last fall to put the Washington surtaxes into force, which offer had been rejected by the Chinese, and that had they availed themselves of the opportunity, the Conference could have proceeded immediately to consider the subject of conditions and purposes. He did not consider that the resolution manifested any lack of confidence on the part of the Powers, and he pointed out that if there were such a lack of confidence
