Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII Brzezinski: The Soviets have been directly engaged. Turner: Yes. In Kabul they are engaging in combat. We do not know what is going on in the countryside. There are reports of Soviet flights in Herat and Kandahar. Brzezinski: What is Radio Afghanistan outside of Kabul broadcasting? Turner: We don’t know. Vice President: What is the number of Soviet military there now? Turner: We do not know exactly—perhaps 10,000 men. Vice President: What are the reactions of other Islamic countries? Saunders: We have not got them yet. Newsom: We sent a message last night to the Islamic posts.2 Vance: Let’s go to the State paper now.3 Are there any substantial problems with the “objectives?” Brown: Do we have a long-term interest in the unity of Iran? Is that an agreed objective? I don’t think we are ready to judge that yet. A unified pro-Soviet Iran is not necessarily in our interest. Vance: That is true enough. Brzezinski: But we still have an interest in avoiding the disintegration of Iran. That would benefit the Soviets. Brown: Not necessarily—for instance if the Iraqis were to take over Khuzestan. Brzezinski: But disintegrating Iran is not in our interest. Vice President: Incipient disintegration is something that we might be able to use as a handle on Iran. Brown: Perhaps the paper should say “at this time.” Carlucci: Our covert activity, working with the tribals, could contribute to disintegration. Vance: That is why it is in our interest to look closely at this as we agreed this morning. Brzezinski: The fear of disintegration would favor us, not the Soviets. Perhaps we could exploit that. Aaron: But the fear of disintegration must not immobilize us from acting. Brzezinski: Perhaps the best formulation is that the use of the fear of disintegration could be useful but disintegration itself would not be wise unless the country were coming under Soviet control. 2 Not further identified and not found 3 Not further identified and not found.
