796 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I stead to the conquest of our common global enemies—dwindling resources, ecological decay, ignorance, and hunger. No one can guarantee you a future of unvarying success. I certainly do not promise you that. Nor will I tell you that the transition from the troubled world of today to the hoped for world of tomorrow will be an easy one. I promise you only that if you entrust the responsibilities of this office to me for another 4 years, this Nation will have the strength to be secure, and I will continue to find peace by seeking solutions to the real problems, the hard problems. I will do so with both hope and realism, with both determination and restraint. We will keep our Nation strong. But this I can say to you: Peace is my passion. And within the limits of the wisdom and opportunity God grants me, peace is my pledge. 159. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, October 21, 1980 SUBJECT Themes for your Foreign Policy Debate It is important that in the debate you not only demonstrate a superior knowledge of foreign affairs (which you clearly have) but also 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Subject File, Box 16, Debate Themes: Foreign Policy, 10/80. No classification marking. Printed from an uninitialed copy. There is no indication that the President saw the memorandum. A notation in an unknown hand indicates that the memorandum was part of a briefing book prepared in advance of the debate. The only Presidential debate of the 1980 campaign took place at the Cleveland, Ohio, Convention Center Musical Hall on October 28 at 9:30 p.m. and was broadcast live on radio and television. The League of Women Voters sponsored the debate, which was moderated by ABC News political commentator Howard K. Smith. Stone, Ellis, Hilliard, and Walters served as panelists. For the transcript of the debate, see Public Papers: Carter, 1980–81, Book III, pp. 2476–2502. In his diary entry for October 28, the President noted: “In the debate itself it was hard to judge the general demeanor that was projected to the viewers. Reagan was ‘Aw, shucks’ . . . this and that . . . ‘I’m a grandfather, and I would never get this nation in a war’ . . . and ‘I love peace . . . ’ He has his memorized tapes. He pushes a button, and they come out. He apparently made a better impression on the TV audience than I did, but I made all our points to the constituency groups—which we believe will become preeminent in the public’s mind as they approach the point a week from now of actually going to the polls. Both sides felt good after the debate. We’ll see whose basic strategy is best when the returns come in next Tuesday.” (White House Diary, p. 476)
