January 1, 1980–January 20, 1981
1337
—An announcement of a resumption of the negotiations in early or
mid-September might be the optimum timing from many standpoints.
—Finally, we all felt it would be wiser if Sol did not make his trip
until the ground has been prepared and we have a reasonable basis for
thinking Sadat can be persuaded to resume the negotiations. Having
Sol go prematurely would only expose a visible failure if in fact we
were unable to persuade Sadat to come back in.
399.
Editorial Note
On August 20, 1980, the United Nations Security Council voted
14–0 to pass Resolution 478 (1980), censuring Israel for the Knesset’s
July 29 enactment of the “Basic Law” on Jerusalem, effectively making
the city the de jure capital of the country (see Document 394), character-
izing it as an action constituting “a serious obstruction to achieving a
comprehensive, just, and lasting peace in the Middle East.” The lone
abstention in the vote was taken by the United States. Secretary of State
Edmund S. Muskie explained the U.S. decision in his address to the Se-
curity Council on August 20. While affirming his country’s support for
an undivided Jerusalem, “with free access to the holy places for peoples
of all faiths,” and opposition to “any attempt to impose sanctions
against Israel under Chapter VII [of the U.N. Charter],” he stated that
the resolution was “fundamentally flawed.” “It fails to reaffirm Resolu-
tion 242 as the basis for a comprehensive peace,” Muskie continued.
“Israel, for example, is to be censured—yet there is no censure, indeed
no mention at all, of violence against Israel or of efforts that undermine
Israel’s legitimate security needs. Further, the resolution before us calls
upon those states that have established diplomatic missions in Jeru-
salem to withdraw them from the holy city. In our judgment this provi-
sion is not binding. It is without force. And we reject it as a disruptive
attempt to dictate to other nations. It does nothing to promote a resolu-
tion of the difficult problems facing Israel and its neighbors. It does
nothing to advance the cause of peace. On these specific grounds, we
abstain on the resolution.” The complete text of Muskie’s speech, as
well as the text of Security Council Resolution 478, are printed in the
Department of State Bulletin, October 1980, pages 78–80.
