838  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
201.	 Memorandum From Smith (S/P) to Herter1
Washington, September 29, 1959
SUBJECT
Basic National Security Policy; Revision of Paragraph 59 (Mobilization Base)
Discussion:
On October 1 the NSC will consider this subject which was deferred 
during the basic policy review to allow Defense and OCDM additional 
time to work out an agreed draft revision. The proposed new mobi­
lization base policy would replace a policy in existence since 1957. 
The main purpose of the changes is to carry out the instructions of the 
President, who last December asked Defense and OCDM to inject more 
realism into mobilization planning. He suggested that in view of the 
likely character of general nuclear war, it is unrealistic to expect, and to 
plan for, (1) the availability of a six-month period for civilian and mil­
itary buildup between the beginning of mobilization and the outbreak 
of hostilities, and (2) a World War II type buildup of forces.
The new policy contains three important changes:
1. The M + 6 months concept is abandoned. The new policy does away 
with the M + 6 months concept and calls for planning for a military 
logistics and civilian readiness base flexible enough to meet any fore­
seeable military contingencies, placing the emphasis upon optimum 
readiness and capability for active forces. The new policy is expected 
to result in planning involving (a) a somewhat shorter time period 
than six months for achieving military readiness, and (b) force levels of 
lesser magnitude, particularly for non-active forces. The exact details 
of time periods and planned force structures are not yet known and 
will depend upon the planning experiences of the next few months. It 
would be unfortunate, however, if Council approval of the new concept 
were to be interpreted as agreement to further reductions in present 
U.S. ground force strength.
2. Planning for general war will now take into account estimates of dam­
age from nuclear attack both on the U.S. and on U.S. forces abroad. Previously, 
this problem had been ignored in mobilization base planning because 
of the difficulty of making such estimates and of factoring them into 
plans.
3. The new policy distinguishes between requirements for general war, 
and those for limited war. The previous concept was that readiness for 
general war would automatically satisfy the requirements for limited 
war because the latter would require only a small portion of the general 
war resources. The new policy recognizes that there must be separate 
1 Source: Recommends State Department position on paragraph 59 of NSC 5906. 
Top Secret. 3 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P–NSC Files: Lot 62 D 1.
