Ecuador  547
The Ambassador remarked that he had presented his credentials to 
Dr. Velasco in 1956. Dr. Velasco acknowledged in a very friendly ­manner. 
The Ambassador mentioned Ecuador’s “oriente” region, and mentioned 
the “trocha’’ (a path made by cutting down jungle) between Brazil and 
Ecuador, and the possibilities of opening a permanent road connecting 
Ecuador with Brazil. Dr. Velasco replied that he had been aware of the 
Ambassador’s interest in the “oriente”, and said that he would be most 
willing to cooperate with Brazil in such a venture because it would be of 
very great benefit for both Brazil and Ecuador.
The Ambassador expressed the desire to read the transition of the 
felicitations from the Secretary of State to Dr. Velasco on the occasion 
of Dr. Velasco’s electoral triumph, to which Dr. Velasco assented most 
cordially. He thanked the Ambassador and said that on this same day 
he would reply to the Secretary of State by telegram.
The Ambassador suggested to Dr. Velasco that the U.S. Government 
was anxious to know of Dr. Velasco’s thinking regarding Point IV and 
the military and other U.S. missions in Ecuador, and expressed the 
hope that Dr. Velasco would collaborate with the programs of these 
missions. Dr. Velasco replied that he was well informed of the bene-
fits which Ecuador had received and was receiving from Point IV pro-
grams in Ecuador. He said that he would most certainly cooperate with 
the United States, but that there must be an end to the “papeleo” (red 
tape) which bottled-up the launching of any program. Dr. Velasco made 
it clear that the red tape bottleneck was not the fault of Point IV, but 
rather of the Ecuadorean Government which took forever to sign nec-
essary agreements.
The Ambassador suggested that perhaps these administrative bot-
tlenecks could be abolished by means of agreement between the two 
governments. Dr. Velasco reiterated his conviction that these delays 
were entirely the fault of the Ecuadorean Government; that these short-
comings had to be corrected, and said that reciprocity and mutual 
respect should result in the realization of mutual achievements.
The Ambassador said that we sought his views and advice on 
how to help our friends in Latin America; that we would appreciate 
Dr. Velasco’s ideas and advice with the view of improving our relations 
with the Latin American people. Dr. Velasco thanked the Ambassador 
for this tribute. Velasco reiterated his sincere desire to cooperate with 
the U.S. Government, and mentioned a Secretary of State in President 
Roosevelt’s last administration, with whom Velasco said he conferred 
with the hope of attaining mutual benefits. He said, however, that con-
ferring with this Secretary did not produce any results. Dr. Velasco 
again mentioned his desire to cooperate with the United States.
The Ambassador said that the U.S. Government was anxious to 
help Ecuador in launching a low cost housing program, and that we
