66 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1 31. Memorandum From the Chief, Near East and South Asia Division, Directorate of Operations, Central Intelligence Agency (Cogan) to Director of Central Intelligence Turner1 Washington, November 15, 1979 SUBJECT White House Situation Room Meeting on 14 November 1979 Concerning Covert Action Prospects in Iran 1. The following is for your information. 2. On 14 November 1979 the DDCI, accompanied by the undersigned, attended a meeting chaired by David Aaron at which Mr. Robert Murray of DOD, Hal Saunders and Gary Sick were also present. Explaining the background to this and the previous meeting on 12 November,2 Mr. Aaron said that the Vice President, after consultation with the President, felt that planning should be initiated regarding covert action in Iran, but this should be kept outside the SCC framework at least for the present. 3. The aim of the group, continued Mr. Aaron, was to develop options on Iran—without having crossed the threshold into anti-Khomeinism but on the assumption this will be the case. Mr. Aaron outlined the broad lines of options as follows: a. Sowing dissension within the Khomeini regime. Creating differences within the Revolutionary Council to enhance destabilization. [2 lines not declassified] In general, sowing dissension through both internal and external contacts. b. [1 paragraph (6 lines) not declassified] c. The “infrastructure” option: irrespective of a and b above, what can we do to build up assets (e.g., among the dissidents) who would play a role in a future, post-Khomeini Iran? 4. Setting a target date of 19 November, Mr. Aaron said he would like to have from the Agency a paper detailing what steps we could take in response to the above three suggested options. NE Division will work with Chief, [less than 1 line not declassified] Staff in preparing this paper.3 1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence, Job 81M00919R: Executive Registry Subject Files (1976–1979), Box 14, Folder 10: C–372. Secret; Sensitive. Sent through the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence and the Deputy Director for Operations. 2 See Document 24. 3 Turner placed a large checkmark next to this item and wrote in the margin: “I’d like to see 1st.”
