1977 103 maintain the balance in the light of the Soviet advances in recent years. On the political sufficiency point, while there was no distinct advantage in having superiority as opposed to equivalence, if it turns around and the Soviets achieve preponderance in strategic forces, we might suffer severe consequences. He emphasized that we needed to maintain the strategic balance, since otherwise the Soviets might ask us to leave Europe. He also emphasized the importance of a strategic reserve force; however, the size was debatable in that at present, the JCS had no fixed notion of what the size of this force should be. He noted that our hard-­ target kill capability is important to respond to selected attacks against the US and also in terms of the capability it gives us if deterrence fails. He indicated that there were other key elements that we needed to take into account such as command and control. David Aaron indicated that he did not share the assessment that our superiority was of no use to us in the past. He noted that in the early 1960’s, we had a situation in terms of ground forces which was worse than today and, that as a consequence, our strategic nuclear superiority was an important factor. Dr. Brzezinski noted that it was also an important factor in Cuba and permitted us to use our conventional forces with immunity. ­Secretary Brown noted that he was in on the Cuban situation and was skeptical as to the importance of our strategic superiority in that situation. Dr. Brzezinski questioned whether we would have gone into Cuba without such superiority and raised the question of how we would respond today if, for example, the Soviets took Berlin. Secretary Brown noted that Curtis LeMay had told the President at the time of the Cuban crisis that the Soviets would have the capability of killing tens of millions of Americans. Dr. Brzezinski responded that we could have killed 50 to 60 million Russians. The question was what would happen today if ­Brezhnev said he was going to take Berlin—­would we simply say that we were going to talk. Secretary Brown said he continued to disagree, but that for now at least, it was simply an academic question. David Aaron said that in the early 1960’s, the strategic situation was a function of two curves that were climbing at different rates. At the time, they had very little but were increasing in capability. He questioned whether this was the same as a situation in which both have a great deal of forces and whether it is deaths that matter on the two sides or hard-­target kill capability or is it really the capability to limit damage. He indicated that nuclear weapons do not help Clausowitz out very much since there is very little political utility in a major nuclear exchange. He said we need to look at specific problems such as: —What amount of hard-­target capability we should have. —What the response should be to the increasing vulnerability of the land-­based ICBM force.
