840  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
3. Separate agreement on annual exchange of information on stra-
tegic offensive arms.
4. Modifying the SLCM declarations with respect to SLCMs with 
multiple warheads in order to be consistent with the ALCM provisions.
5. Agreement on data exchange and tours of solid rocket motor 
plants prior to treaty signature.
152.	 Memorandum From the Head of the Delegation to the Nuclear 
and Space Talks in Geneva (Burt) to Arnold Kanter of the 
National Security Council Staff1
Geneva, August 28, 1990
SUBJECT
Thoughts on Resolving START issues
Here are my ideas on the list of unresolved START issues for your 
meetings with Karpov in Moscow and Washington. Because I believe 
the time for closure on these issues has come, I am ignoring negotiating 
tactics in this message and focusing on realistic bottom lines. If possi-
ble, it would be useful to get your feedback on these ideas before we 
get together in Moscow. One possibility would be for you to relay your 
comments to Lint Brooks who is planning to see you at the end of the 
week.
Here are my comments:
— Heavy ICBMs: As you know I think we should have closed this 
out last spring. If we had, the hullabaloo from the right would by now 
have been forgotten. Our objective should be to drop this sooner rather 
than later—­we don’t want it to be portrayed as a last-­minute cave. 
I don’t think it matters much if this is done in Washington rather than in 
Moscow. But when we do inform the Soviets, we must repeat must tell 
them that we can only do this if they are prepared to accede to us on the 
variety of smaller heavy issues that are still unresolved, like whether 
their commitment to reduce 22 SS–18s per year is legally binding. In 
1 Source: George H.W. Bush Library, Bush Presidential Records, National Security 
Council, John A. Gordon Files, Subject Files, OA/ID CF00953–029, Backchannel 
[Cables]—August 1990. Secret. Burt sent the memorandum via classified fax under cover 
of a memorandum: “Arnie—This is what I’ve sent to Reg and represents the START ‘bot-
tom line.’ Please keep a close hold on this. Cheers, Rick.”
