1955  427
issues to head. This represents sharp contrast to his attitude at begin­
ning discussion item two.
2. It may be they have now reached conclusion it is in their interest 
keep talks going more or less indefinitely even though they obtain no 
concrete results. On other hand their present tactics might be related 
to FonMin meeting and may undergo change following that meeting.
3. Possibility that should be considered is that, if their present 
desire is to keep talks going for their own sake even though no con­
crete results obtained, they may estimate our only interest in talks is 
to obtain release of Americans and when that is accomplished we will 
cut them off. They may thus be estimating that it is necessary for them 
continue hold some Americans to accomplish even limited objective of 
continuation talks. Not sure how we can meet this possibility but will 
be alert for any opportunity to confirm this theory and do what I can 
to refute.
4. Wang will probably make opening statement next meeting reply­
ing my statement yesterday’s meeting on renunciation force. Question 
is what I can usefully say in reply other than reiterating points already 
made.
Gowen
306.	 Telegram 966 to Geneva1
Washington, October 21, 1955, 6:27 p.m.
966. For Johnson.
General tone of Peiping propaganda during week ending 
­October  20 continued hostile toward US. Commentary on Dulles 
speech of October 10 accused Secretary of trying to “undermine the 
cordial atmosphere” Summit Conference and seeking to “sabotage” 
coming Big Four Ministers Conference. US accused of continuing to 
rely on force to achieve “aggressive” goals and of showing off atomic 
power to maintain tension. US said to be converting Japan into “atomic 
war base,” and frantically trying to subvert PRC.
Attention given to Geneva talks past week relatively slight. NCNA 
October 19 gave brief summary Dulles press conference October 18 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/10–2155. Official Use Only. 
Drafted by Dawson (DRF); cleared in IAD and CA.
