Diplomatic Relations/Rescue Mission
657
tomorrow for something important. This suggests a need to try and
see where all the hostages are located.
The President said that, on timing, it would be at 3:00 and he would
make an announcement.
Mr. Cutler said the news from Tehran suggested that the militants
cannot account for all 50 hostages. Perhaps we should mention that.
The President said he would be queasy about acknowledging that
there might be 50. The militants could use that as an excuse to get rid
of some of them.
Secretary Vance agreed, noting we should be aware of the reaction
of the hostages’ families.
(At that point, 10:36 a.m., the meeting was reduced to the statutory
membership of the NSC.)
At 10:37, the NSC reduced itself to its statutory membership. The
members at that point were: The President, the Vice President, the
Secretary of State, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, the Director of
Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Dr.
Brzezinski and David Aaron.
The President said that he was really quite disappointed in recent
developments. Bani-Sadr is apparently too weak and lacks the courage
to act. The Secretary of State agreed with him.
The President said that his own assessment was that we are
embarked, finally and after great caution, on a procedure which he—
he was interrupted at that point by Hamilton Jordan who asked about
Congressional notification. Should the Congressional leaders be
brought down to the White House? The Secretary of State pointed out
that the Congress was not in session and the leaders would not be
around. The President concluded that if we get a draft of the statement
before noon, we can notify the key Congressional Leaders.
The President then continued his earlier thought. We have been
adequately reticent. In retrospect, we may have delayed taking action
for too long, although, at the time, it seemed the better course of action.
Now, we need to consider additional steps. We need to force the Allies
to help. If they will not, they must know that we will be taking more
forceful action. The President said he thought that what we are going
to announce today will not result in the freeing of the hostages. But
he still believed that knowledge on the part of the Iranian officials,
including such figures as Beheshti, that Iran is suffering and is increas-
ingly isolated is a necessary step in getting the hostages released. He
did not believe that we would get the help of Bani-Sadr if the action
he must take to free the hostages is unpopular. Bani-Sadr is hanging
by his fingernails already.
Turning to the military options, the President said that his inclina-
tion for the last few months has been the mining option. He did not
