March 27–December 31, 1979
933
in the early days of your administration.4 You know that I went to
Haifa5 mainly to consolidate the steps we have taken and encourage the
Israelis to take a more responsive attitude with respect to the Pales-
tinian question. Noticing that Prime Minister Begin was not in good
health, I deemed it more suitable to persuade him without resort to
overt pressure or confrontation. I have put you fully in the picture on
what took place during my visit in the oral message I sent you upon my
return.6 Therefore, I will confine myself to some extra remarks.
By and large, I found the Israelis in a more relaxed mood. As the
peace process is moving ahead, more barriers are falling everyday.
They have become more secure and hopeful of the future and less sus-
picious of others. This is precisely what I expected and worked for. I be-
lieve that, as we proceed further, the atmosphere will improve consid-
erably. In due course, we will achieve our goal.
As expected, Prime Minister Begin reiterated his views on the Pal-
estinian self-government issue and Jerusalem. However, I made it
crystal clear to him that any attempt on their part to prolong the status
quo on the West Bank and Gaza, even under disguise, will not work. I
also emphasized to him the inevitability of making a compromise on Je-
rusalem along the points I stated. The Muslims of the World, who
number about 800 millions and many Christians in all four corners of
the globe can not tolerate the present situation. The answer is to apply
our formula which calls for restoring Arab sovereignty to East Jeru-
salem while keeping the City united in every sense.
I told him that, as a first step and without prejudging the issue, the
Palestinian inhabitants of East Jerusalem should participate in the elec-
tion of the self-governing authority. On the other hand, that gov-
ernment should be given a real jurisdiction that transcends that of local
governments. In the absence of that, we will not be able to attract any
Palestinians to the peace process and, hence, the issue will remain un-
solved to the detriment of all parties.
As I did in my public statements, I indicated to Begin that the reali-
zation of the rights of the Palestinian people does not jeopardize Israeli
security. This was a recurrent theme in my speeches and I believe that it
will bear fruit in time.
One should not be pessimistic on the chances of reeducating the Is-
raelis on that issue however difficult that task might appear.
4 For the records of Sadat’s April 1977 meetings with Carter held in Washington, see
Foreign Relations, 1977–1981, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978,
Documents 25 and 27.
5 For Begin’s and Sadat’s assessments of their talks at Haifa, see Document 288 and
footnote 2 thereto.
6 See Document 288.
