802
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
abroad as well as at home. Recent data indicate that Americans now
contribute, for overseas relief and development to the private agencies
of their choice, as much money each year as the U.S. Government pro-
vides in bilateral assistance through AID. Land grant colleges and uni-
versities, research institutions, foundations, and other private agencies
have also been active in overseas efforts directed toward the needs of
hungry people. People-to-people efforts have always had a special ap-
peal to developing countries.
U.S. policy has generally sought in specific but modest ways to
draw on the strength of the U.S. private sector in meeting basic human
needs overseas. Recent legislation has directed the U.S. Government to
facilitate the work of indigenous non-governmental groups in inter-
ested LDCs. However, the U.S. Government has been considerably less
creative than other industrialized nations in supporting private sector
efforts. The U.S. private sector remains one of the distinctive resources
which the U.S. can make more fully available to other nations.
The establishment of the Presidential Commission on World
Hunger will be an important element in creating a sense of involve-
ment for private voluntary groups, as well as generating publicity and
momentum generally.
Recommendations
• The U.S. should establish high-level focal points in USDA, AID,
State and HEW for private sector involvement liaison, and enlist the
participation of informed private sector representatives in periodic ad-
visory meetings with key departmental and Executive Branch food and
development policy decision-making mechanisms (e.g., the Working
Group on Food and Agricultural Policy and the P.L. 480 Task Force33
mandated in recent legislation).
• The Agency for International Development should establish an
information clearinghouse on all U.S. Government activities concerned
with World Hunger. It should publish periodic reports for dissemina-
tion to private sector groups interested in this information.
• The U.S. should create a special grant program for U.S. PVO’s to
establish voluntary activities in the developing countries which are de-
signed to reduce hunger and malnutrition and related development
problems.
33 The Food and Agriculture Act of 1977 (P.L. 95–113) directed the Secretary of Agri-
culture to establish such a task force.
