Afghanistan 693 255. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, April 19, 1980, 11:45 a.m. SUBJECT Dobrynin’s Call on Secretary PARTICIPANTS Secretary of State Ambassador Anatoliy F. Dobrynin EUR—George S. Vest SUMMARY: Dobrynin came in to turn down our proposal to have arms control talks in connection with TNF. Other subjects covered were Afghanistan, Iran, the Middle East, SALT, Soviet harassment of our representatives in Leningrad and future travel plans of the Secretary. End Summary. [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Afghanistan.] 2. Afghanistan. Secretary asked Dobrynin to clarify what was indeed the Soviet position on Afghanistan. Dobrynin said that the Babrak Government had a good proposal (publicly announced by the Afghanistan Government on April 17).2 The first step would be a discussion among the three neighboring countries—Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan—about their borders. The Soviets supported that idea because, after all, there had been historically much trouble about those borders. The decision could create a peaceful atmosphere and if some countries wanted to guarantee the results such as the Soviets, the U.S. or European countries, the Soviets would be prepared for it. A second step would be to enlarge the discussions leading to a pact of non-interference, disarmament, etc., among the three neighbors, and of course there could be guarantees for this as well. A third step, which seemed not likely to be acceptable, 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Office Files of Marshall D. Shulman, Special Advisor to the Secretary on Soviet Affairs, 1977–1981, Lot 81D109, CV—AD, 4/19/80. Secret. Drafted by Vest. The meeting took place in Vance’s office. The main points of the discussion on Afghanistan were relayed in telegram 107514 to Bonn and other posts, April 23. (Department of State, Files of Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, 1977–1980, Lot 84D241, Box 9, Memcons: April, May, June 1980) 2 On April 17, the Afghan Government announced its intention to attempt to normalize relations with Iran and Pakistan. News reports quoted unnamed Western diplomats who characterized the move as a Soviet-directed attempt to mitigate the international boycott of the Soviet-hosted Olympics and to dampen worldwide condemnation of Soviet policies in Afghanistan. See Kevin Klose, “Afghanistan Seeks to Open Talks to Mend Ties with Iran, Pakistan,” Washington Post, April 18, 1980, p. A26.
