V Preface The publication Foreign Relations of the United States constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. The printed volumes in the series and the accompanying microfiche supplements include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions of the United States together with appropriate materials concerning the facts that contributed to the formulation of policies. Records in the files of the Department of State are augmented by documentation from other government agencies involved in the formulation of foreign policy. The basic documentary diplomatic record presented in the printed volumes of the series and the microfiche supplements is edited by the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State. The editing is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and in accordance with the following official guidance first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925: There may be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating the place in the text where the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing may he omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons. a. To avoid publication of matters that would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business. b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details. c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments. d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals. e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification: in connection with major decisions it is desirable, when possible, to show the alternative presented to the Department before the decision was made. Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V The initial research, compilation, and editing of the printed ­volume and microfiche supplement took place in 1980 and 1981. Before select-
