Colombia 319 The Secretary apologized for being late since he had to confer with the President with respect to the latest Soviet note on a summit meeting and on Tunisia. Foreign Minister Santamaria stated that Colombia had made tremendous efforts to restore a democratic regime and to restore financial stability. It had ran into grave difficulties because of the fall in coffee prices, and although it had followed the advice of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, it needed help. To underscore that need, the Colombian Government had sent two ex-Presidents, two ex-Ministers of Finance and the Director of the Bank of Colombia. He said that President Lopez would make the main statement. President Lopez stated that Colombia faced a three-­fold problem: (1) political, (2) economic and (3) social. All were related and all had to be dealt with at the same time. He said that in the political field they have been very successful and had settled historic political difficulties in less than 10 months. A reorganization of the Government had taken place and there was agreement to have presidential elections in May and a new President installed in August. In the meantime economic developments were fast overtaking Colombia. Last June a settlement of the commercial arrears was made, but the settlement was thrown out of gear by the fall of 10 cents a pound in the price of coffee. Since there were some 6 million bags to be exported the loss was close to $100 million. The arrears settlement covered $448 million of which 1/2 had been paid off in a single year and $220 million was left to be dealt with. In the domestic situation, the Military Junta had done everything possible to restrain inflation, to restrict credit and currency issues. It had imposed heavy new taxes. The Junta had first placed a tax of 15 per cent on the sale of foreign exchange plus an additional 10 per cent on importers. To this they had recently added a 10 per cent tax in kind on coffee exports. All these were inadequate to make up the loss of $90 to $100 million per annum in the fall of coffee prices. The social consequences of the foregoing were serious. With the cut in the imports and the rise in the rate of exchange there was a corresponding increase in the cost of living. Although production was going fairly well there has been increasing unemployment. The situation has now reached the point where Colombia is unable to pay for the importation of the raw materials necessary to keep its industrial plant going. Columbia was short of imports by about $7 million per month. It is the purpose of the present Mission to refinance prior debt to keep things going. The Colombians now thought they were too hasty in trying to pay off $440 million in debt in a mere 30 months. This over-­eagerness and the loss of $100 million in coffee earnings had led to the failure of their hopes.
