Article XI. There appears to be a misconception on the part of the Department with respect to the interpretation to be placed upon the Austrian Trade Law (Gewerbeordnung #59) quoted on page 15 of my despatch No. 374 of December 18th, 1923. In Instruction No. 527 of December 1st, 1926, pages 6 and 7, it is stated: “Apparently Austrian law forbids commercial travelers to take orders for merchandise from the consumer but allows them to sell their merchandise only to merchants, industrials and tradesmen. … If commercial travelers representing American concerns are permitted to sell their samples to merchants, industrials or tradesmen, the privilege granted by paragraph (c) would be fulfilled. The Austrian law referred to in your despatch does not, therefore, justify the omission of paragraph (c).” Austrian municipal law does not in truth and in fact permit commercial travelers to sell to anybody. They may only take orders for merchandise from merchants, industrials and tradesmen. For this purpose they may carry samples, but no merchandise is to be sold directly, and therefore samples may not be sold. The law upon this matter is very stringent and is regarded as almost fundamental and organic, as I have hitherto reported. The main reason for this distinction appears to lie in the fact that commercial travelers pay no taxes. Merchants and tradesmen do pay taxes upon their businesses and upon their sales and to permit commercial travelers to sell, even if their privilege of selling were restricted to samples only, would be deemed unfair competition. It is pointed out that a commercial traveler might conceivably have and legitimately require a large line of samples. Even under the existing practice it is difficult to control the disposition of these samples and it is possible that some of them find their way into domestic consumption without the sanction of the law. Commercial travelers who are Austrian nationals may not sell their samples. The Austrian Government could not possibly grant a greater privilege to commercial travelers who are not Austrian nationals. Because of the settled policy of Austrian municipal law in this respect it is insisted that section (c) must go out. In view of this explanation further instructions upon this point become necessary and as the issue here
