102.1702/137
[Document 165]
The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Howard)
WASHINGTON, May 4, 1925.
MY DEAR MR. AMBASSADOR: I beg to refer to your note No. 329, of March 31, 1925, enclosing a
Memorandum setting forth the views of the British Government in regard to the Act of
Congress, approved January 13, 1925, providing that Customs Attachés shall be
regularly and officially attached to American Diplomatic Missions.
With reference to the objections taken by the British Government to the activities of
representatives of the United States Treasury in conducting investigations into foreign
costs of production, mentioned in your Memorandum, I may say that the American
Ambassador at London has been sent very full instructions outlining a method of
procedure in these cases in the future, and explaining in detail the purposes for which
these representatives of the United States Customs Service are stationed abroad. I am
hopeful that, upon the receipt of the information which the Ambassador has been
requested to convey to him on this subject, Mr. Austen Chamberlain will consider that
the apprehensions felt by the British Government and by British business interests will
have been removed.
With regard to the Act of January 13, 1925, I may say that pursuant to its provisions,
diplomatic passports are being issued to Customs Attachés and to Assistant Customs
Attachés. These officials have been regularly attached to the staff of the American
Diplomatic Missions. The American Ambassador at London has been instructed to
advise Mr. Austen Chamberlain in this sense, and to request, through him, recognition
of these officials in their respective capacities by the appropriate British authorities.51 It
is hoped that, in the light of more complete information, the British Government may
deem it possible to modify its tentative position as to these officials outlined in your
Memorandum.
I am [etc.]
FRANK B. KELLOGG
51 On May 16 the Ambassador was informed that Russell L. Rice had been appointed
assistant customs attaché, with headquarters in London, for duty in the British Isles
(file No. 121.5741/1).
