Comprehensive Test Ban
459
obligations or a joint determination to extend the treaty. The duration
formula recently proposed by the UK includes that principle, while
meeting our key objective of permitting the treaty regime to continue
without French and Chinese adherence. Moreover, as the UK Delega-
tion suggested, it could provide an opportunity to terminate CTB obli-
gations and resume testing if serious stockpile reliability problems de-
veloped. U.S. Delegation believes that UK proposal could well be
desirable option to pursue and feels that it should be given careful con-
sideration during the recess.
15. Conclusion. Despite their cautious and inadequate position on
verification, we have no reason to think that the Soviets are interested
in relaxing the pace of the negotiations. In fact, by providing us a pre-
view of their position on duration and PNE linkage and by giving us
their draft separate agreement immediately before the recess, Mo-
rokhov has conveyed the impression that at least the leadership of the
Soviet Delegation is determined to move ahead and even accelerate the
pace.
16. Morokhov has told us privately several times that, if verifica-
tion can be solved, the other issues will fall into place easily and
quickly. We question how easily and quickly that might be. But at the
present time, we can agree with his assessment that verification, espe-
cially the question of internal seismic installations, holds the key to
prospects for achieving a treaty at an early date.
17. A caveat is necessary, however, on the permitted nuclear ex-
periments issue. In accordance with instructions, we have not raised
the issue with the Soviets. Early in the round, the Soviet deputy men-
tioned to U.S. Alt Rep that the issue could cause difficulties for our two
countries. In the course of an informal conversation March 9 on the de-
tection capabilities of ISIs, Morokhov said that the USSR “would not do
nuclear experiments” under what he believed to be the current detec-
tion threshold using NTM (one-half of a kiloton). Recently, Timerbaev
asked UK Dep Rep Edmonds when we would get to the issue raised in
the first paragraph of the U.S. December 7 working paper (i.e., defini-
tions). He said that the three Delegations should be able to handle that
matter the way we did at the NPT Review Conference (when a certain
type of laser fusion research was interpreted as not falling within the
scope of the NPT).6
18. It is quite possible that the Soviets have simply not figured that
the permitted experiments might not be confined to activities like laser
fusion research. In fact, we have no idea of how the Soviets would react
to the range of options that we have considered in the course of the re-
6 No further information was found.
