Arms Control and Disarmament 1615 agreement with the Soviet Union to end all tests. This loss might be the consequence of moving to a unilateral proposal. Mr. Herter agreed that we could propose to continue negotiations towards the ending of all tests, along with an offer to stop atmospheric tests as the first part of a package. Dr. Killian felt that we should not let insistence on mobile inspection hold up whatever progress was possible on limited meas­ ures where it was not required. We should do whatever we could on the basis of what was now feasible and should seek an evolutionary development of an inspection system which would extend to cover all tests. Mr. McCone said that the AEC would support such an approach. ­Ambassador Wadsworth suggested that the objective should be to seek cessation of all tests as agreement was reached on the appropriate inspection provisions. As part of this approach we could suggest col­ laboration on a program of underground tests to test improvements in the detection system. Dr. Killian said that we should arrange for an urgent analysis of whether underground tests would really be useful to the U.S. or to any­ body. There was a serious difference of opinion in the scientific commu­ nity on this point. Another technical problem in connection with ending atmospheric tests was to obtain a definition of where the atmosphere ended, since fallout could result from tests at very high altitudes. Mr. McCone said that the AEC was looking into this latter question urgently at State Department request. After a discussion of whether mobile inspection, even on a very limited basis, would be needed as a part of an atmospheric test agree­ ment, Dr. Killian said that the uncertainties without mobile inspection would be minor, and that we should not let the genuine USSR fear of inspection as an instrument of espionage prevent us from getting agreement on atmospheric testing. Mr. Herter said that we would be right back where we started if we insisted on mobile inspection in this connection. The meeting concluded with a discussion about whether the information in the Berkner and Panofsky panel reports should be made public or available to the Congress. It was agreed that the information would be kept classified and that it would be preferable to make available the Panofsky report, which contained Restricted Data, only to the Joint Committee. Consideration should be given to making available the Berkner report and the non-­Restricted Data parts of the Panofsky report to the Humphrey Subcommittee on a private basis.
