4  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
while times were good. With trade slipping and prices of some com-
modities sharply down, this policy, while still valid as far as it goes, 
will require some strengthening in order to improve both its real and 
its public relations impact. Latin American Governments and peoples 
tend to judge our policies as much on a comparative basis as on an abso-
lute basis. Thus, we shall have to be especially vigilant in weighing the 
impact of decisions in other areas on Latin America.
Recommendations
1. We should administratively earmark a portion, not less than 
15%, of the Development Loan Fund2 for Latin America.
2. We should take a more positive and flexible position in the 
Eximbank toward loan applications from Latin America, with empha-
sis on longer-­term loans.
3. We should review our policy of opposing the establishment 
of an Inner-American Bank. It may be feasible to use the funds for 
our contribution, say one-­third, to such a fund; we would thus have 
a controlling role in the bank; probably no step by the United States 
in the financial field would have as much propaganda impact as 
this one.
4. We should emphasize to Latin America the necessity of avoiding 
political penetration by the Soviet Bloc as they undertake to expand 
their commercial dealings with the Communists.
5. The Administration should be prepared to withstand domes-
tic pressures to restrict imports, either by tariffs or quotas, of Latin 
American products for in so doing it can offset to a degree the bad 
effects of such measures, if voted by Congress; if the Administration 
cannot do this, the Department should be prepared to face the conse-
quences of worsening relations with its closest friends and neighbors 
in Latin America.
2 The development Loan Fund (DLF) was originally established within the 
International Cooperation Administration by the Mutual Security Act of 1957 (71 Stat. 
355), and it became an independent corporate agency of the United States under the pro-
visions of the Mutual Security Act of 1958 (72 Stat. 261). The Fund carried out its respon-
sibilities subject to the foreign policy guidance of the Secretary of State. Its functions 
involved, inter alia, provision of investment capital for specific development projects in 
developing areas through loans or certain types of credits directly to private enterprises 
or governments. For documentation on the activities of the Fund during the period 1958–
1960, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. IV, Foreign Economic Policy.
