468
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
3. (S) To assure high confidence in the nuclear deterrent, certain
minimum nuclear testing requirements must be fulfilled. These re-
quirements include:
a. Identifying and correcting reliability and potential safety prob-
lems in existing nuclear weapons.
b. Replacing nuclear weapons reaching the end of their stockpile
life.
c. Adapting existing warhead designs to new delivery systems
with high confidence.
d. Incorporating into existing warheads systems to enhance safety,
security, and command and control.
e. [2½ lines not declassified]
These minimum requirements should be able to be fulfilled at the
level of testing necessary to assure confidence in nuclear stockpile
reliability.
4. (S) At the Special Coordination Committee meeting of 22 March
1978, three options were discussed which might be applied under a
CTB regime.4
a. Option A—Self-Regulation. This option would ban testing with-
out defining what activities were permitted or precluded.
b. Option B—Periodic Treaty Review. This option would also ban
testing but would include explicit provision for periodic review with
the understanding that serious problems with the US stockpile could
prompt action to seek treaty amendments to allow limited testing.
c. Option C—Provision for Continued Testing. This option would
allow some nuclear tests limited by yield, number of tests, agreed
phaseout period, or date of entry into force.
The Self-Regulation and Periodic Treaty Review options, which
would preclude necessary weapons testing, would contribute to long-
term strategic instability because the United States would be unable to
meet the criteria stated in paragraph 2 above. Further, the Periodic
Treaty Review option, by deferring the question of testing, might place
the United States in an unacceptable position should the need arise to
seek treaty amendment. The political consequences of seeking treaty
amendment, or failing that, unilateral abrogation of the treaty, are such
that the United States might find itself in the position of having to ac-
cept a high military risk. The Appendix provides additional discussion
of the Periodic Treaty Review option.
5. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that continued testing is es-
sential to maintain the US nuclear deterrent posture. Therefore, they
cannot support a test ban which:
4 See footnote 4, Document 190.
