742 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement I expressed regret that persons appearing to be American citizens had participated in hostile act against government. While President gave repeated assurances desire avoid any deterioration friendly relations there are already indications subordinate officials may be disposed capitalize on situation to place us on defensive. At end session in his office President Duvalier took me to room on lower floor in palace containing large stock rifles, shotguns, M-1’s and ammunition together with miscellaneous personal effects allegedly removed from boat as well as large number snapshots of alleged American participants found on boat. While not yet prepared comment on legal chain evidence linking Magloire with launching armed expedition there is no doubt my mind he is one of several or possibly sole instigator and financial backer of coup. All three Haitian ex-­officers identified as his close supporters and partisans. The President’s claim Dejoie connected therewith apparently based on assertion that Dejoie’s photographs found in boat. However if legally or administratively possible I believe if only on grounds of comity we should respond affirmatively and promptly Duvalier request for expulsion Magloire. Re Dejoie I prefer wait for further evidence. Obviously participation alleged U.S. citizens places us in extremely vulnerable position and regardless well known deficiencies Duvalier regime I recommend at earliest possible moment we make public disavowal participation American citizens and appropriate expressions regret. Incidentally I do not exclude possibility GOH may seize on this to endeavor to extract economic and political advantages from us possibly including diplomatic claim for damages. While Duvalier emphasized his desire avoid disturbing friendly political relations between two governments delay in facing up to situation can only weaken our position.4 Drew 4 On July 31, the Department of State issued press release 439 which indicated that Ambassador Drew had been instructed to inform the Haitian Government that the United States deplored and regretted the reported involvement of American citizens in the revolutionary attempt of July 29 against the legally constituted Government of President Duvalier. The release also noted that Drew had requested Haiti to furnish all available evidence to facilitate the inquiries of U.S. Government agencies into whether there had been any violation of United States laws. For the text of the release, see the Department of State Bulletin, August 18, 1958, p. 282.
