122  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
otherwise, each would be free to deploy strategic defenses without fur-
ther reference to the ABM Treaty. (This option could be implemented in 
conjunction with options for differentiated periods of permitted testing 
activities discussed in DST 001.) (S)
Those who would support this option believe it would help over-
come the political barrier of withdrawing from the ABM Treaty in order 
to deploy strategic defenses by logically connecting the right to deploy 
without further reference to the ABM Treaty to the outcome of dis-
cussions on a cooperative transition, rather than to a non-­withdrawal 
pledge. The onus for failure of the discussions (should it occur) would 
fall on the Soviets, providing the U.S. with a stronger political argu-
ment for deployment. Also, in conjunction with proposals for differen-
tiated periods of permitted testing activities, it could shorten the time 
under the restrictive interpretation of the ABM Treaty. (S)
This option is not now supported by any agency. (S)
4. Drop the right to deploy in exchange for unlimited testing rights 
during the non-­withdrawal period as a quid pro quo for a non-­withdrawal 
period. This option would instead entail making explicit a right to test 
all space-­based weapons, regardless of physical principle, as the quid 
pro quo for a non-­withdrawal period. At the end of the non-­withdrawal 
period, the sides would simply regain their right to withdraw from the 
ABM Treaty. Or, this option could be implemented in conjunction with 
Option 2. in DST 001, which would make explicit such a right. (S)
Those who would support this option believe that the most import-
ant U.S. interest is to demonstrate the feasibility of strategic defenses 
through realistic testing, and that if this can be done, it will naturally 
diminish the political barriers to deployment of defenses. They also 
would argue that there is little practical difference between the polit-
ical difficulty in providing six months notice of an intention to deploy 
defenses and six months notice of withdrawal from the ABM Treaty. (S)
This option is not now supported by any agency. (S)
Future Work. Options considered in this paper were limited to 
those that could conceivably be implemented as we return to the nego-
tiations in Geneva in June. Moreover, options 3 and 4 are included in 
the paper despite the fact that no agency now supports them. Some 
agencies believe that these are promising options, which merit further 
consideration, but would not be appropriate to table now. Moreover, 
other options must and will be considered. In this work, thorough anal-
ysis of our negotiating position in light of SDI deployment objectives 
stemming from the President’s decision on the course and funding of 
the SDI program will also be considered. (S)
