International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1055 “Consistent with the announced expansion of foreign aid, and our effort to focus that aid on the poorest of the world’s people, my administration has undertaken a review of international health needs. Our aim was to determine the most effective ways in which the U.S. Government and private organizations could help reduce the personal and economic impact of widespread malnutrition, infectious diseases, and other health hazards including those associated with frequent childbirth. “As a result of that study, I am announcing today my intention to launch a program to strengthen the participation of the United States in worldwide efforts to overcome disease and ill health. “Our efforts will be based on the following principles: “—A basic minimum level of health, nutrition, and family planning services should be available to the world’s poor, whether they live in rural areas or urban slums. “—Developing nations can eventually meet their own health needs if we assist them in strengthening their institutions and building their own health systems. “—Community-based primary health care, including the use of community resources and the training of appropriate health personnel as near as possible to where they will deliver services, is the most effective means of achieving the standard of health we desire for all people. “Our objective is to concentrate on the prevention of disease and ill health. We will put special emphasis on providing clean drinking water, basic sanitation, basic immunizations, and efforts to prevent and treat blindness. This emphasis will be reflected in our own programs and in our support of priorities established by various international organizations. “We will work toward the lasting control or eradication of the major infectious diseases, particularly ‘tropical’ diseases that continue to be the leading causes of death and disability. “We will give special attention to the major causes of death in children—diarrhea and respiratory disease, particularly when aggravated by malnutrition. “Private industry provides most of the goods and services needed to sustain the world’s health. It can play an important role by exercising initiative and careful judgment in developing needed products and in helping to make sure they are used wisely to improve health in the developing world. “We recognize the invaluable contribution voluntary organizations have made in improving the health of people throughout the world and their special services in developing nations. We will strive to aid them in their efforts and to coordinate our activities.
