Comprehensive Test Ban
549
in light of the move to a three-year duration. Subsequent informal con-
versations, including US rep Johnson’s conversation with Timerbaev
October 12,6 have stressed that we view agreement on high-quality NSS
arrangements as a prerequisite to the successful conclusion of a CTB
treaty. In separate conversations, Neidle strongly encouraged Chair-
man Petrosyants and Timerbaev to reply soon to our proposal for 10
stations, and urged that the Soviet Delegation make as positive a re-
sponse as it is authorized to make, rather than simply come back to us
with a counterproposal reduced for negotiating purposes. Neidle
stressed that agreement on a good NSS network was of the greatest im-
portance and that the highest levels of the US government were
watching to see the Soviet response. Finch, Givan and other US Deloffs
have conveyed similar messages to Soviet counterparts.
5. On October 12 Sov Deloff Slipchenko, after being pressed by
Einhorn on when Sov Del would get down to business on NSS, indi-
cated that his Delegation was giving active consideration to a response
on numbers, and thought they might be in a position to make a coun-
terproposal as early as next week. Tarasov separately confirmed to
Finch that Sov Del planned to present its NSS position next week, al-
though not as early as at the NSS working group meeting on Oct. 16.
6. In a number of recent conversations, the Soviets have begun
stressing the notion that it is hard to justify the burdens of NSS for a
three-year treaty that might not extend. We have tried to discourage
them from thinking that there is mileage in that argument. Finch ar-
gued with Tarasov that an effective NSS program could be even more
important with a three-year duration, since we would be facing deci-
sions in the third year regarding future CTB limitations. If the NSS pro-
gram had gone well, it would not only make a direct contribution to
verification of the initial treaty but—as evidence of our countries’
ability to succeed in a cooperative verification effort—it could con-
tribute to a positive climate and increase the prospects of decisions to
have CTB beyond three years. For these reasons, Finch thought the US
position was sound, that there should be no compromise in qualitative
aspects of NSS, and he urged a positive Soviet response soon.
7. When Timerbaev told Neidle that there was resistance on the So-
viet side to accepting a large NSS network for a treaty which might end
after three years, Neidle responded that he saw no prospect of getting
off the ground with any treaty without a good NSS network; nor did he
see prospect for continuing with a CTB after the initial duration if such
a network had not been established.
6 The October 12 Johnson-Timerbaev discussion is recorded in telegram 15493 from
Geneva, October 13. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780419–
0887)
