December 17, 1978–March 26, 1979 735 tenacity to represent the United States government, because these negotiations have proved that it is essential that our government play a key role in the relationship between Israel and Egypt. In reviewing many of the details of the agreements which have been worked out, it is obvious that the various specific recommendations which I passed on to the President as a result of my communications with Leon Charney, which resulted from his communications with Ezer Weizmann, have been both accurate and helpful.5 It is important that first I write an appropriate letter to Leon and further that something from the President be sent to him as an expression of appreciation. This does not mean that the relationship is ended; to the contrary, it probably will continue for a very long period of time and hopefully be as helpful as it has in the past. It is obvious that Ezer Weizmann and Harold Brown have an excellent relationship established and therefore that it may be that many matters which we had handled through these “back channels” can be handled in a direct manner in the future. I have not discussed this with Harold Brown, I do not know if he is interested in getting into the diplomatic or political aspect of relationships, but we should determine these things to make sure that we are coordinated and utilizing this entire relationship with Weizmann in the most effective manner. Perhaps I should discuss this with the President first, and then with Harold Brown. Having been so close to the day-to-day and hour-to-hour negotiations and other activities in connection with this matter, particularly over the past several days, it is difficult to comprehend the magnitude of the entire situation. Several of us have discussed this and realize that it really is a mammoth undertaking which the President embarked upon, and it appears that the success of it will have a profound effect on both the United States and Israel, as well as many other millions of 5 Charney, who was Weizman’s U.S. attorney and attached to the U.S. delegation in Jerusalem, wrote that the lack of progress in the March 12 talks had left Lipshutz “depressed.” Meeting with Lipshutz, Charney stated that he “pressed” him to “write a memo to the President urging him to insist on taking a signed paper back to the States with him; further, the Americans and Israelis should agree on what had been previously agreed upon and let time settle the outstanding matters.” (Charney, Special Counsel, pp. 132–133) Following this meeting, Lipshutz produced a handwritten memorandum for Carter at 10 p.m., March 12, which is in the Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 3, Mid East, 12/78–3/79. As Lipshutz was delivering this memorandum to Carter, Charney wrote, Weizman summoned Charney to a meeting later in the evening of March 12. (Charney, Special Counsel, pp. 134–136) At 11:30 p.m., March 12, Lipshutz wrote a second memorandum for Carter, conveying the suggestions made during the Charney-Weizman meeting, including proposals for an exchange of Israeli and Egyptian military personnel in lieu of Egyptian liaison personnel in Gaza and for Egypt to sell Israel a fixed number of barrels of oil at world market rates “provided it does not jeopardize (conflict with) Egyptian national interests,” backed by a U.S. guarantee. This memorandum is ibid. Charney noted that this memorandum was passed to Carter on the morning of March 13. (Charney, Special Counsel, p. 137)
