National Security Policy 495 would probably also seek to destroy other key US war-­making capabil­ ities. At the same time, the USSR would make a maximum air defense effort against those Western nuclear striking forces which had escaped the initial Soviet attacks. 149. During any local war or intense international crisis it is virtu­ ally certain that the USSR (as well as the US) would prepare against the possibility of a greatly broadened conflict. These preparations would almost certainly include some redeployment of forces, mobilization of additional strength, civil defense precautions, and the like. However, the USSR would not want to push preparations so far as to convince the US that general war was imminent, lest this lead the US to strike the first all-­out nuclear blow. This factor would constitute a limitation on the degree of Soviet preparation. 150. Another major limitation on Soviet preparations for general war would lie in the importance of achieving surprise. The necessity of attempting to neutralize Western nuclear retaliatory capabilities would make surprise in the initial nuclear attack a key element of Soviet strat­ egy. While the USSR could not count upon achieving surprise against all Western nuclear capabilities, both within the US and elsewhere, it would almost certainly attempt to do so to the fullest extent possible. Thus, if the Soviets decided to begin the general war themselves, they would try to avoid compromising the element of surprise in their initial nuclear attack by observable preparations. 151. The foregoing considerations lead us to believe that the outbreak of general war would find the Soviets at a stage of military readiness beyond that of ordinary peace-­time, but short of what their planners might believe best for the most rapid exertion of the total mil­ itary effort. The actual state of readiness would depend on the devel­ opment of the particular situation and on the Soviet calculation of the risks involved, and is impossible to predict in advance. 152. The Soviet leaders would probably launch an attack by ground and tactical air forces against Western Europe in order to pre­ vent NATO mobilization, deployment, and counter-­attack. We believe that the USSR would plan to commit its ready forces to an offensive, especially in Western Germany, as soon as possible consistent with maintaining surprise for the initial assault against the US, US and allied nuclear bases overseas, and carrier task forces. Under favorable circumstances from the Soviet point of view, advances against NATO could be initiated concurrently, i.e., at the moment the West obtained warning of the Soviet strategic attack. The Soviets would probably also regard an attack to seize the Turkish Straits as of early high priority, but we believe that they would probably delay initiation of other major
