8. The Japanese Government, however, do not feel themselves at liberty to make any overtures to China for the settlement of the question, without the full understanding and cooperation of the United States. They fear that if they took such independent action at Peking, it would place the Chinese Government in an embarrassing position, and would, moreover, be a fruitful source of popular misgiving. It seems to the Japanese Government only natural and more likely to attain the desired result, that the parties having conflicting claims to the radio enterprise in China should first agree between themselves, at least upon the general principles governing the adjustment of these claims, subject to the approval of the Chinese Government. 9. Doubt is expressed by the American Government as to the feasibility of the Japanese proposals. The Japanese Government will welcome any suggestion for the modification of such terms of their proposals as may appear unworkable to the American Government. But, they place great importance upon the elimination from any radio arrangements in China of such features of foreign control or of monopoly as the counter-proposals of the American Government would appear to involve. They further re-emphasize the point that they deem it highly desirable, for China and for all Powers interested in that country, to adopt such a solution as will lighten her financial liability. 10. The question of radio facilities in China formed a subject of discussion at the Washington Conference, and the British and French Governments, which took active part in that discussion, are no doubt keenly interested in the outcome of the present exchange of views between Tokio and Washington. Accordingly, it has occurred to the Japanese Government that if it is more essentially the matter of feasibility than any question of principle, which seems unconvincing to the American Government in the consideration of the Japanese proposals submitted on December 24, 1924, it might be useful to call a meeting of representatives of the American, British, French and Japanese radio interests, with instructions to examine in common accord the feasibility of the Japanese proposals, and to work out detailed terms of adjustment for recommendation to their respective Governments. In making this suggestion, the Japanese Government have no other desire than to reach a practical solution of the difficulty that will best serve the lasting interests of China and will at the same time secure friendly cooperation among the Powers interested in radio enterprise in that country. WASHINGTON , June 1, 1925.
