Arica as long as it had. … He also said that he could not understand your statement that the Commission lacks authority to suspend the plebiscitary proceedings, as the terms of the award expressly give the Commission this authority. I made the following explanation: [End paraphrase.] That my understanding of your statement was that the Plebiscitary Commission had no authority to suspend or postpone the plebiscitary proceedings merely on account of the acceptance of good offices and that I did not understand it to deprive the Commission of the authority to carry out the terms of the award in the discretion of the Commission. The President stated that General Lassiter had stated to the Peruvian delegate that he could not act in the matter without instructions from Washington and that he had received no instructions. I explained to the President that, as I understood the situation, it was that in your desire if possible to bring about a lasting settlement of the controversy, you did not desire to make a final breach with either party which would close the door to further negotiations and so, upon a failure of the plebiscite as well, leave matters unsettled, and that perhaps for that reason the Commission had been as lenient as it had been with Chile. I told the President that I did not understand that you intended in any way to blame him or Peru for any action which they had taken in the past, but that in view of the new situation which had developed and of your earnest desire to be of service to both parties and to bring about a final settlement of the dispute, you were appealing to him to cooperate with you with that end in view; and I suggested to the President that he cable to Mr. Freyre to have a frank consultation with General Lassiter about the entire matter from all angles with a view to cooperating towards that end. The President stated that he would do so, but reiterated that unless protection were given to Peruvian voters and the terror which reigns in the provinces were stopped it would be impossible for them to participate in the plebiscite; and referred again to the findings on this question which had been made by the American advisers on the ground. He said that in addition to this the whole morale and spirit of the Peruvian delegation had been broken by the offer and acceptance of good offices and the general assumption in Arica that this meant that the plebiscite would not be carried through.
