168 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III by U.S. Steel and Bethlehem Steel.2 I have asked Charlie Schultze, Barry Bosworth (your Director-designate of the Council on Wage and Price Stability) and the Special Trade Representative’s office to prepare options.3 These options are as follows: 1. Tariff Reductions. Strauss and Schultze agree that this would be an inappropriate action since it would have little impact on the industry, would appear to be a punitive response, and might reduce our negotiating leverage in the Multilateral Trade Negotiations. We agree with their conclusion that this option should not be exercised. 2. Reduction of the “Buy America” Preference. We agree with Schultze and Strauss that there is little utility in attempting to reduce this preference since it has little impact on the industry, particularly the type of steel product involved here, and, likewise, would appear punitive. (Under this preference U.S. producers have a 6% price preference—and in some cases, a 12% price preference—in general government procurement, and a 50% preference in procurement by the Department of Defense. 3. Direct GSA and the Department of Defense to remind government purchasing agents of their obligation to make steel purchases from the lowest priced American suppliers. Charlie Schultze feels that this action will have little impact unless a split market price develops, and that government purchases do not constitute a large enough share of the structural steel and tin mill market to force such a result.4 Nevertheless, we believe that this would be an appropriate action and might have some actual impact in encouraging the development of a split market. At the very least, it would be a positive action in the right direction and certainly, in and of itself, is appropriate since it re-emphasizes an obligation which government purchasing agents should be following in any event. This action could put the steel companies which 2 On July 21, U.S. Steel announced an increase in the price of its structural steel by 6 percent and its tin mill products by 7 percent. The following day, Bethlehem Steel announced that it too would raise structural steel prices by 6 percent and tin mill product prices by 7 percent. (Gene Smith, “U.S. Steel Planning Increases in Prices to Ease Labor Costs,” The New York Times, July 22, 1977, p. D1; Gene Smith, “Bethlehem Follows U.S. Steel in Move to Increase Prices,” The New York Times, July 23, 1977, p. 25) 3 Schultze offered his recommendations in a July 27 memorandum to Carter. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files, Box 284, Steel (O/A 6343)) Strauss discussed the role of trade policy in a July 25 memorandum to Carter. (Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Council of Economic Advisers, Charles L. Schultze Subject Files, Box 81, [Steel] [7]) Bosworth’s recommendations were not found. 4 In discussing this option in his July 27 memorandum to Carter (see footnote 3 above), Schultze noted: “This requirement is supposed to be followed in any case. The action will have little impact unless a split market price develops for a particular steel product. Emphasis on the requirement would reinforce our earlier statements, however.”
