Article 22 abrogates all claims to consular asylum.
The immediate source of this project is No. 22 of the Pan American Union
with modification of form rather than of substance.
IX. Maritime Neutrality. This project is based upon the enlightened practice
of modern times. It is not original. Its basis is the Rights and Duties of
Neutral States in Maritime Warfare, drafted by the Second Hague Peace
Conference in 1907, ratified by the United States as well as by the other
leading maritime powers.29 It is superior to its predecessor or model, in that
it takes note of the experience had in the World War, and sets forth in
twenty-nine articles the law and the practice of the present day.
It was accepted by the Commission as such statement without reserve.
X. Asylum. The delegates of the United States deemed it to be their duty to
interpose a general reserve to the entire project on the express ground that it
was not only contrary to the long-established and well-known policy of the
United States, but also, in their opinion, opposed to the generally
recognized modern practice of the world at large in such matters.
As, however, it appeared that all of the countries represented in the
Commission, with the exception of the United States, were desirous of
recognizing the right of asylum for political refugees, as stated in the
convention, the American delegates did not oppose its discussion and
adoption by the Commission. Their desire was in this case as in all other
ways, to advance the work of the Commission without interposing
objections to the desires of the other delegations.
It is an original project of the Commission.
XI. Obligations of States in Event of Civil War. This project, also original
with the Commission, undertakes to define the duty which one State owes
to another with which it is at peace, with reference to civil war and
insurgency within the other. It is believed that this short project of but five
paragraphs summarizes the legislation and practice of the United States for
more than a century. It reads like a series of extracts from the Neutrality
Laws of the United States, particularly that of 1818.30
