500.A15 a 1/c: Telegram
[Document 5]
The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in France (Herrick)
[Paraphrase]
WASHINGTON, February 3, 1927—9 p.m.
27. Referring to Department’s telegram 25. The Department desires that, in
presenting its memorandum to the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, you
impress on him that this Government has tried to formulate its proposals in
such a way as to make them acceptable to the Government of France. You
should point out especially that the United States Government has avoided
proposing any detailed plan in the memorandum, because it does not wish
to preclude free discussion later of any such detailed plans which the
French Government might be inclined to bring forward in its own interest.
The French Government’s often-expressed desire to bring about an early
limitation of armament has impressed the United States Government by its
sincerity. The difficulties of treating with three categories of armament
simultaneously are, on the other hand, so great as to cause serious
apprehension lest a deadlock prevent any real progress in the direction of
the common goal. These proposals have been made by the United States
Government in the hope that such an unfortunate conclusion of the
Preparatory Commission’s labors may be avoided. The earnest hope of the
United States Government should be expressed to the Foreign Minister that
his Government will agree respecting the desirability of a special effort
being made to accomplish at least one type of limitation, thereby
contributing to the Preparatory Commission’s work and facilitating the task
of the final Conference, in the calling of which the Government of France
has taken the lead. As your personal opinion, you may have the chance to
point out that the French Government’s unconditional acceptance of this
American proposal would very happily affect public opinion in this country.
You should add that the United States Government believes the negotiations
contemplated by its memorandum, while not necessarily beginning on the
