Chapter 5, May–June 1990  753
Bartholomew: The first problem I have with this is the form. We 
propose a politically-­binding declaration. You have given us a let-
ter. There is a strong argument for parallelism on the formality of the 
undertaking with what we have agreed to do for SLCMs—­a statement 
of a politically-­binding nature that applies for the duration of the treaty.
Second, regarding para 2, our declaration has a specific reference 
to in-­flight refueling or in any other manner. We wish to specify in-­
flight refueling.
Third, the number does not include naval Backfire.
Fourth, in the last para, are you speaking of naval Backfire or all?
Karpov: We are ready to say we will not give the TU–22M the capa-
bility to operate at intercontinental distances, and we are ready to say 
no more than 400.
Bartholomew: Are you saying that naval Backfire in the ATTU 
region should not be dealt with in CFE?
Karpov: What I want to emphasize here is that we will not give 
any Backfire the capability of operating at intercontinental distances, 
none at all. With regard to the 400 aircraft, they are related only to land 
forces. If we want to discuss naval Backfire, that has to be done in the 
context of naval armaments.
Bartholomew: Your proposed omission of naval Backfire vitiates 
the work of any numerical limit in START. In effect, it vitiates the work 
of any inclusion of Backfire in CFE. It all comes down to a simple ques-
tion. If aircraft outside the limits are the same aircraft as those that are 
covered, and are included or not included solely on the basis of assign-
ment to one service or another, this vitiates the effect because either side 
can decide whether the aircraft is a lion or a tiger by simply applying 
different colors.
This is a real and serious problem. We know that the Soviet Union 
has been resubordinating combat aircraft from Frontal Aviation to the 
Soviet Navy. These resubordinated aircraft include light bombers and 
fighter bombers of the Sukhoi type, as well as fighter bombers and 
ground attack aircraft of the Mikoyan type. Soviet resubordination of 
these air units has taken place several times over the past year or two, 
and the total number of aircraft resubordinated is in the hundreds. 
Many of the resubordinations have been carried out while the CFE 
negotiations have been underway.
It is hard to conceive of a more vivid illustration of our concern over 
your insistence on excluding land based naval aircraft from the reduc-
tions and limitations of CFE and START. Land based combat aircraft of 
exactly the same type as those in the Warsaw Pact Frontal Aviation, and 
based at airfields in the ATTU would—­according to your position—­be 
excluded by the simple device of changing their subordination. At the
