3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
33
uary 1976 proposals,3 in which context some accommodation on Back-
fire could surely be reached. He stressed again the Soviet willingness to
give us additional assurances, even though the weapon, in his view, is
clearly not a strategic one.
In addition, he asked for clarification as to the implications of a de-
ferral of an agreement on cruise missiles and on the Backfire beyond
the SALT 2 agreement. He specifically wished to know how much later
thereafter, in our judgment, would such an agreement then follow.
He stressed that a proposal for a SALT 2 agreement on lower levels
than those envisaged in Vladivostok would in all likelihood benefit the
U.S. much more than the Soviet Union, and hence some additional U.S.
accommodation should be necessary. He stressed that on the Soviet
side, particularly the military would be against such an agreement
since the tangible concessions would in effect be Soviet.
He was curious to know why so many new issues were being in-
troduced by the U.S. side and whether this was not in effect an effort to
delay a SALT 2 agreement.
He was also curious to know what was meant by the reference to
minimum strategic forces on both sides and wished to know what
levels and what composition of strategic forces this might entail.
It was obvious from the foregoing that the President’s letter was
being subjected to extremely detailed scrutiny before a reply would be
forthcoming. I stressed to Dobrynin that I was not in a position to
discuss the letter from the President to the General Secretary, since the
letter was a highly personal one and meant for the Secretary himself.
Moreover, it should not be viewed as a negotiating document, to be
subjected to the critical exegesis to which a negotiating document is
normally subjected. Dobrynin, in response, indicated that it was impor-
tant for the Soviet leaders to understand what was the meaning and the
intention of the letter and this is why he was making these inquiries; in
effect, he indicated he was trying to facilitate the process of communi-
cation and attempting to limit misunderstanding. It was obvious from
his comments that the Soviets were seeking to establish the nature of
our likely position at the forthcoming SALT discussion and the degree
to which the President’s letter was foreshadowing a new position.
Finally, and at the very end of the lunch, he brought up the issue of
the President’s letter to Sakharov,4 saying that Brezhnev noted that cor-
respondence was being conducted on two levels at the same time. Do-
brynin said he was doing his best to make the Soviet leaders under-
stand the reasons why the President was taking the stand that he was
3 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXIII, SALT II, 1972–1980, Document 120.
4 See Document 5.
