602  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
propulsion and weapons systems, we estimate that the total force will 
approximate 470 submarines in mid-1963.
191. Capabilities for naval warfare. A grave threat to Allied naval 
forces and merchant shipping is posed by the Soviet submarine force, 
which is about eight times the size of the submarine force with which 
Germany entered World War II. In the event of war, Soviet submarines 
could conduct intensive operations against Allied sea communications 
in most of the vital ocean areas of the world. Mining could be under­
taken on a large scale and would constitute a serious threat to Allied 
sea communications. This threat is greatest in waters relatively close 
to Soviet-­controlled air and naval bases, but Soviet submarines pro­
vide a distant minelaying potential of major proportions. Soviet Naval 
Aviation could attack Allied naval forces, shipping and port facilities 
within range using bombs, mines, torpedoes and air-­to-­surface mis­
siles. Soviet Long Range Aviation probably would also conduct attacks 
on naval targets, but its participation at the outset of a war presumably 
would be limited to missions of the highest priority. Although the pri­
mary threat to Allied naval forces in the Atlantic, the Pacific and the 
peripheral seas of Eurasia would come from Soviet submarines and air­
craft, the surface navy would play a role in preventing attacking forces 
from operating with impunity close to Soviet shores. Naval exercises 
of the last several years, stressing defense of the sea approaches to the 
USSR, indicate a strong defensive capability in the fleet operating areas.
192. The Northern Fleet, with more than 100 long-­range subma­
rines and direct access to the open Atlantic, is considered the most for­
midable of the Soviet fleets. Northern Fleet submarines could deliver 
attacks throughout the North Atlantic and the large “Z” class subma­
rines could operate in the Caribbean. Soviet seizure of Norway would 
greatly extend the submarine and air offensive capability of this force. 
The geographic position of the Baltic and Black Sea Fleets limits their 
offensive capabilities. Seizure of the Baltic exits would allow the Baltic 
Fleet submarine force to join in the interdiction of Allied sea communi­
cations in the North Atlantic and would increase the potential of Baltic 
Fleet surface forces for operations in the North and Norwegian Seas. 
Similarly, seizure of the Turkish Straits would permit submarines of the 
Black Sea Fleet to range throughout the Mediterranean and threaten 
Allied sea communications in that area. Submarines from both the 
Baltic and Black Sea Fleets might also be deployed outside of home 
waters prior to the initiation of hostilities. Aircraft and submarines 
of the Soviet Pacific Fleet could attack Allied sea communications in 
the North Pacific and adjacent Far Eastern waters from the outset of 
hostilities.
193. The capabilities of Soviet naval forces will improve steadily 
throughout this period with the acquisition of more advanced
