Human Rights 501 input. In too many instances, we will not be able to avoid a negative or muted stance. Because of our strong support for the human rights provisions of the United Nations Charter and our interest in making the United Nations a more effective instrument for the promotion of human rights, we must seek to highlight those items on the agenda which offer opportunities for positive participation by the United States. The administration’s commitment to human rights requires that the United States delegation to the 33rd General Assembly continue to work for the advancement of human rights, pursuing goals in line with our own national concept of human rights and, wherever possible, encouraging and joining with governments of all regions of the world in taking actions consistent with our goals. The limitations inherent in the provisional agenda for the 33rd UNGA suggest the conclusion that it would be in the United States interest to propose additional matters, either through a new agenda item or under existing agenda items, for consideration. In determining the substance of such initiatives, we should use as a principal guideline the program for action sketched out by the President in his address to the United Nations on March 17, 1977.7 In this address, President Carter called for a strengthening of the international machinery for protecting human rights and, in particular, he suggested (A) that the Human Rights Commission be prepared to meet more often with all nations being prepared to offer their fullest cooperation; (B) the move back to central headquarters of the United Nations Human Rights Division, and (C) renewed attention and support for the proposal for a United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Specific Action Proposals In line with our overall goal of promoting human rights and taking account of the complex of human rights issues which will appear in the provisional agenda of the 33rd UNGA, the U.S. delegation should seek to carry out the following actions: A. Deliver a major statement during plenary consideration of the 30th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights assessing the record of the United Nations in the human rights field and describing our hopes and concerns for the future. B. Consult with other key delegations with a view to proposing a new item for the provisional agenda with the title “Coordination and review of the human rights program and activities of the United Nations system and of other international organizations.” We should proceed with this new item only if our consultations reveal an adequate amount of support. 7 See Document 26.
