164 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX defend law and public order without awaiting a specific order, the act being of the very essence of their tasks and duties. 9. In this connection, reference should be made to the campaign currently being launched by the Israeli information media on the subject of an alleged liquidation of Christians in Lebanon. I very much wish that in relation to this campaign you would recall the acts and practices of Israel against the Palestinians—Christians and Muslims alike. When the Christians were hard pressed in the civil war in Lebanon, Syria alone assumed the responsibility for relieving pressure and restoring balance to the Lebanese arena. I hope you are not unaware of the fact that the overwhelming majority of the Lebanese Christians are opposed to the policies and practices of the Phalangists and Chamounites, as has been declared by a large number of their leaders. Moreover, the Christians living in the areas controlled by the peacekeeping forces enjoy excellent conditions of life. If the whole question were sectarian in nature, why is it, it may be asked, that fighting breaks out only in a limited section of Beirut? The fact is that the Christians in Lebanon, like the Muslims, are opposed to the acts of violence practiced by the Phalangists and Chamounites with Israeli instigation. They are all in favour of the unity of the country and of restoring the authority of the State to all parts of Lebanon. 10. It should also be noted here that the talk now being carried on by the Israelis and Zionists concerning alleged persecution of Christians—who constitute part of our nation and cannot be subjected to persecution by anyone—is reminiscent of the European practice in the 19th century—which is now part of history—of using the pretext of the protection of minorities in order to cover intervention in some areas and to impose European colonialism. A more important consideration is that this talk will lead the Islamic world to talk about the fate of the Muslims of Lebanon, considering that Lebanon, by its very social structure, consists of several sects and communities. Such trends, Mr. President, will surely lead to the destruction of the national unity of Lebanon, which is a matter of the utmost significance to all the citizens of Lebanon. 11. While thanking you for the letter in which you expressed concern over the present situation in Lebanon—a concern which I share with you, I believe that the United States can greatly help the sister state of Lebanon by exerting pressure to make the Israeli Government stop its intervention in Lebanon and discontinue the military, material and political support which it gives to some armed groups—a support that encourages acts which contradict what both our governments have declared concerning the security, peace, sovereignty and unity of Leb-
