348  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Assistant to the Chairman, AEC (for Item 1); Capt. John H. Morse, 
Jr., USN, AEC Observer on the NSC Planning Board (for Item 1); the 
Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff; the Director of Central Intelligence; 
The Assistant to the President; the Deputy Assistant to the President; 
the Director, U.S. Information Agency; the Director, International 
Cooperation Administration; the Special Assistants to the President for 
the Atoms for Peace Program, for National Security Affairs, for Science 
and Technology, and for Security Operations Coordination; the White 
House Staff Secretary; Assistant Secretaries of State Rountree and 
Smith; Assistant Secretary of Defense Irwin; the Executive Secretary, 
NSC; and the Deputy Executive Secretary, NSC.
There follows a summary of the discussion at the meeting and the 
main points taken.
1. STATUS OF NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS: THE ATOMIC 
ENERGY PROGRAM
(NSC 5819)
The Special Assistant to the President, Mr. Gordon Gray, intro­
duced the new Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, Mr. 
McCone, who stated that he would give the first portion of the report 
on the status of the atomic energy program. In the course of his report, 
Mr. McCone dealt with the following main subjects: First, U.S. com­
mitments for the purchase of uranium ores at home and abroad for the 
next several years; second, availability of fissionable ­materials—U–235, 
plutonium, and tritium—­in the light of requirements of various kinds; 
third, the aging and deterioration of U.S. reactors and forthcoming 
problems of replacement; and fourth the program for nuclear power 
for peaceful purposes. On the latter subject, Mr. McCone indicated 
that the U.S. goal was to achieve economically competitive nuclear 
power in the United States in ten years, and in friendly foreign nations 
in five years.
Following Mr. McCone, the remainder of the status report was pre­
sented by Dr. Willard F. Libby, of the Atomic Energy Commission, who 
discussed the following subjects: The U.S. basic research program; the 
program for the study of radioactive fallout; isotopes; the non-­military 
uses of atomic explosions (Project PLOWSHARE); forthcoming 
PLOWSHARE plans; the U.S. atomic weapons program (HARDTACK 
I); and the HARDTACK II series of tests now proceeding in Nevada. 
(Copies of the reports by Mr. McCone and Dr. Libby are filed in the 
minutes of the meeting.)
The President asked a question with respect to the use of atomic 
explosions to recover oil, and was answered by Dr. Libby. Thereupon
