March 27–December 31, 1979 945 Egypt Vice President Husni Mubarak Ambassador Ashraf Ghorbal The President began by saying that he had had good phone calls this morning with both Prime Minister Begin and President Sadat.2 They were both in good spirits. There is growing trust and mutual respect between them, and a developing friendship. Both Begin and Sadat had pledged their commitment to a comprehensive settlement, and to resolve autonomy questions. To Begin he had said that the big impediment was the settlements. Begin acknowledged that this was a problem. He did not say when, or all of it, but it could be put in the past and resolved. It was a good talk. The President had called from Camp David. Begin’s (?) attitude had been friendly and constructive in his assessment. He (The President) hopes and prays that there can be movement without delay on settlements. What does the Vice President think? Vice President Mubarak said that he wants to convey President Sadat’s best regards. He looks forward for good results of the autonomy talks by the end of the year. He has three points: first of which is a message from President Sadat.3 (President Carter read it.) The President said that it was a good message. Vice President Mubarak said that he had three issues to discuss, and had done so with Vance,4 Brzezinski, and Strauss: political problems, economic questions, and military equipment Egypt needs. Beginning with economics: he would present their requirements. After the Treaty, Egypt has had no source of currency except for the U.S. The Arabs are not providing them with hard currency. There is no other way but the U.S. He has asked for some requirements like wheat. He talked with Vance that they are getting 1.5 million tons, and need 500,000 more. Vance had said that the U.S. can afford 100,000 more; but that is very, very difficult for Egypt. He has talked with Khalil and Sadat; they said to speak with the President and his Administration, since this is vital: it 2 No transcripts of these telephone conversations have been found. According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Sadat from Camp David from 7:39 a.m. to 7:44 a.m. Carter then spoke with Begin from 7:45 a.m. to 7:49 a.m. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary) 3 See Document 289. 4 Vance met with Mubarak in his office at the Department of State on September 11, where the discussion covered the current state of the peace process, Egyptian military needs, and economic assistance. A full memorandum of conversation for this meeting was produced on September 13 and is in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country File, Box 18, Egypt: 7–9/79. Vance met with Mubarak again on September 14 to discuss Egypt’s requests for more commodity and PL–480 aid for FY 1980. A summary of this meeting is in telegram 243222 to Cairo, September 16. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790422–0608)
