Options Identified SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS Domestic Issues 1. Economic Steps. Secretary Vance and Mr. Cooper reported on the discussions with the Europeans. The acceptability of various steps differs from country to country because of legal and policy problems. It was felt, however, that it is not necessary for all of our allies to adopt exactly the same posture. Dr. Brzezinski asked State to prepare a matrix which will show the position of each country on each of the prospective actions.2 (S) Secretary Vance reported that when and if we come to the point of requesting sanctions under Chapter VII, the Europeans are pledged to support us. We will have to decide whether to go for complete sanctions or in stages. We can initially request limited sanctions, e.g. denying military credits and military equipment deliveries; a second stage could be a selective trade embargo, excluding food and medicine, and termination of mail and rail links, which would involve removal of foreign nationals; the third stage would involve a total embargo. By Monday,3 State will be prepared to discuss options regarding resort to Chapter VII and the pros and cons of various strategies. Based on the discussions Monday, a recommendation will be prepared for the President. All agreed it would be premature to make a recommendation until we see what the reaction is to the World Court ruling. The European allies, however, have agreed to go ahead with sanctions if Chapter VII is defeated by Soviet veto in the Security Council. (S) State and Treasury will today prepare and send cables to the European allies which clarifies and ties down the specific commitments they have made. This will be necessary before the European finance officials meet on Monday. On Monday, follow up messages jointly from Secretary Vance and Secretary Miller will request immediate implementation of the measures as agreed. It was agreed that no immediate steps would be taken with regard to Belgium, the Netherlands and Canada until after the Europeans have had their meeting on A separate cable of instructions will be prepared for Mr. Carswell, who is on his way to Japan. These instructions will outline the various steps which the Europeans have agreed to and request that the Japanese accept those steps plus a few technical elements which are applicable 2 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “Prepare for UNSC sanctions. I prefer maximum trade interruption.” The matrix was discussed at the December 17 SCC Meeting; see Document 102. 3 December 17. 4 In the left margin, Carter wrote: “all ok.”
