Chapter 3, June 1989–January 1990  337
both sides’ positions in the negotiations. Burt then handed over the U.S. 
mark-­up of the Soviet text2 and briefly noted the proposed changes. He 
concluded that the U.S. side had tried to be responsive. It was hoped 
that the changes would help clarify the text and expedite agreement.
Nazarkin expressed his appreciation for the quick and construc-
tive U.S. response. The changes at first glance did not seem to create 
serious problems. They would be studied and a response would be 
provided at the next sub-­group meeting. Nazarkin then suggested that 
attention be turned to another document almost ready for signing—­
the one on advanced notification of strategic exercises. He wished, in 
particular, to note the change proposed by the Soviet side in Article I 
of the Russian text.
Burt asked for an explanation of that change and whether there 
were other proposed changes.
Nazarkin briefly cited a few other changes that he characterized 
as “strictly editorial.” Concerning Article I, the Soviet side wanted to 
stress that we were talking about notification of a major strategic exer-
cise in each calendar year. The Soviet side had had doubts which were 
dispelled that morning when the U.S. side stated that, if Global Shield 
were not carried out in a particular year, notification would be pro-
vided for the largest exercise held that year.
Burt, restating the U.S. approach, said that we would notify Global 
Shield annually. If, for some reason, Global Shield was not held one 
year, the U.S. would provide notification of the exercise involving 
bomber aircraft that it believed was the largest that year. The U.S. side 
wanted to avoid compliance problems that might arise if one side noti-
fied what it believed to be the largest but the other side did not believe 
it was the largest. He suggested that a few people from both sides get 
together and try to work it out.
Nazarkin agreed.
Burt, turning to unit of account, said the U.S. side had studied the 
issue carefully and now wished to propose a compromise. In provisions 
describing what would be limited under the 1600 ceiling, U.S. references 
to “ICBM” and “SLBM” and Soviet references to “launcher for ICBM” 
and “launcher for SLBM” would be replaced as appropriate with either 
“deployed ICBM and its associated launcher” or “deployed SLBM and 
its associated launcher.” Thus, what would be limited would be a set of 
two things (missile and launcher), not a single item (missile or launcher). 
The change would affect primarily Articles III and VII. It did not in any 
way affect the U.S. position on non-­deployed missiles, and it did not 
2 Not found.
