Arms Control and Disarmament 1619 that the views expressed have not been coordinated with the Depart­ ments of State or Defense nor with the Atomic Energy Commission. J.R. Killian, Jr. Attachment Memorandum by Killian March 30, 1959 MEMORANDUM ON SOME TECHNICAL FACTORS INVOLVED IN POLICY DECISIONS ON ARMS LIMITATIONS AND SPECIFICALLY ON THE LIMITATION OF NUCLEAR TESTING The recess of the Geneva Conference on the Discontinuance of Nuclear Tests with a stated date (April 13) for reconvening, requires the United States Government to re-­examine its policy positions with respect to these negotiations. This memorandum deals with my personal summary of the tech­ nical considerations which have a bearing on these policy questions. In discussing the technical factors, I recognize that they probably are of secondary importance to political and policy objectives. Trends in Military Technology Let me first point out how current trends in military technology emphasize the urgent importance of arms limitation of some kind. While deeply convinced that we must be unremittingly alert to keep ahead in our military technology, I also must conclude, in the light of factors mentioned below, that I see little opportunity to simplify the complexity of our military technology, to reduce the burden of defense, or to achieve a stable condition by means of military technology alone. On the contrary, the trend of technological measures and countermeas­ ures will steadily complicate our defense, augment instability, and increase the cost of maintaining the relative strength we need. We see this trend clearly revealed in our needs to make our stra­ tegic striking power, both aircraft and missiles, less vulnerable to sur­ prise by dispersal, hardening, and shorter reaction times (including ground alert and possibly some degree of air alert). We see it clearly in the changing requirements of air and missile defense as typified by the problems associated with the Sage system and Bomarc, with Nike-­ Zeus, ballistic missile early warning systems, antisubmarine warfare systems, and with requirements for more comprehensive communica­ tions systems.
