420 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954 looked by the National Security Council when the Council takes action on NSC 136.5 For the Joint Chiefs of Staff: Omar N. Bradley6 5 An attached memorandum from R. Armory to Under Secretary of State Smith, November 19, discussed the Russo-Persian Treaty of 1921. It reads: “Concerning the last sentence of the JCS memo, State’s position is that legally the 1921 Treaty is no longer in force. D/DCI, from personal legal experience with the Treaty, concurs in this legal view. Possibility that the USSR might invoke the Treaty, as a pretended justification for any action, was informally considered in the drafting of NSC 136, and it is believed that further consideration is not necessary prior to action on NSC 136. In D/DCI’s and my judgment, the Treaty would play only a secondary role in any Soviet action. The general question of Soviet and world reaction to use of force by US or UK might be an appropriate one for a National Intelligence Estimate, and for use in the execution of paragraph 5 of NSC 136. The Treaty would be considered in such an NIE.” 6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature with an indication that Bradley signed the original. 146. Memorandum of Conversation1 Washington, November 18, 1952, 2 p.m. PRESENT President Truman, accompanied by Secretary Acheson, Secretary Lovett, Secretary Snyder, Mr. Harriman, Director of Mutual Security Agency General Eisenhower, accompanied by Senator Cabot Lodge, Mr. Joseph M. Dodge [Omitted here is discussion unrelated to Iran.] 2. Iran. Another situation had developed to a critical point. This was the dispute between Iran and the United Kingdom over oil. We had been trying for a year and a half to find a fair solution which would provide compensation for the British and allow oil to flow from Iran and funds to come to Iran. Both parties had been wholly unreasonable, but in different senses of the word. The Iranians were unreasonable in 1 Source: Truman Library, Acheson Papers, Memoranda of Conversation, Box 71, November 1952. Secret; Security Information. The meeting between President Truman and President-elect Eisenhower took place in the Cabinet Room at the White House. A handwritten note in the upper right-hand margin of the memorandum reads: “Secretary’s original dictation. Revised by Nitze, Bohlen, etc.”
