420  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
 SLCMs: Soviet complaints about SLCMs are more serious—­they 
clearly want to get moving on this and will probably urge you to agree 
to a verification dialogue. I suggest a three-­part, preemptive strategy.
— First, the Soviets have said they are prepared to settle SLCMs 
outside of START. We favor a non-­binding declaratory statement on 
SLCMs. So why not, as Reg suggests, give Shevardnadze a draft state-
ment and get his response? This may open the door to a good give-­and-­
take on the issue. (I’m attaching a possible draft statement.)2
— Secondly, we should agree to a verification dialogue with clear 
understanding that we will hold up our part of the conservation by 
explaining the problems of verification.
— Thirdly, you should privately explore a cruise missile package 
deal, that is, an arrangement in which the Soviets bought our approach 
to SLCMs in return to buying their approach to ALCMs (at least, “as 
equipped” counting.) Nazarkin believes that if we were to take the ini-
tiative on a package deal, we might be pleasantly surprised.)
 Non-­circumvention: The Soviets think this issue should be resolved 
sooner rather than later and I agree. Existing Soviet language would pre-
vent us from providing the Trident II missile to the British. I have made it 
crystal clear to Nazarkin that this won’t fly.
— A possible solution: If Shevardnadze raises non-­circumvention, 
you could agree to a general discussion as long as their anti-British language 
is dropped. In INF we accepted the idea of not undertaking any interna-
tional obligations in conflict with the Treaty. This approach could work 
for START.
 Stability Talks and START II: With a START Treaty on the horizon, 
the Soviets are already pushing for talks about a follow-­on negotiation. 
In part, this helps them deflect pressure for more ambitious moves 
now, such as further SS–18 cuts. But it also reflects “new thinking” in 
Moscow about further nuclear reduction and “minimum deterrence.”
— We don’t even have a position on whether there will even be a 
START II, let alone what its focus would be. This is one gap in our posi-
tion we should fill before Moscow. In my view, it would be a mistake, 
especially right now, to appear to be unwilling to talk to the Soviets 
about the future of nuclear arms control. One approach: Without pre-
judging the U.S. position on the timing and goals for START II, the two 
negotiations could be authorized to hold informal discussions and 
report back to the ministers at a convenient time.
Filling in the Gaps
 Most of the issues outlined above are ones in which each side has 
a position and the positions disagree. There is, as you know, another 
2 Not found.
