For your information and guidance. Please reinforce the foregoing note with vigorous oral representations and endeavor in all proper ways to obtain prompt favorable decision. The essential fact is that France recognizes Lloyds but not the American Bureau. The refusal to recognize latter is not only important to vessels immediately affected, but has broader significance to American shipping inasmuch as greater part of American merchant marine is registered in American Bureau and any action that might be construed as reflection upon the standing of the Bureau would tend to weaken position of vessels registered therein. The Shipping Board adopted a resolution on May 15, 1924, to the effect that the action of the French Government in this case presents a situation contemplated by Section 26 of the Shipping Act 1916 whereby it is authorized in cases of discrimination against American shipping to propose remedial measures to the President, and by Section 19 (b) of the Merchant Marine Act 1920 under which the Board is authorized “to make rules and regulations affecting shipping in the foreign trade not in conflict with law in order to adjust or meet general or special conditions unfavorable to shipping in the foreign trade.” The resolution called upon the Department to communicate with the French Government, preliminary to final action by the Board, with a view to causing that Government to accept as sufficient classifications by the American Bureau of Shipping of vessels documented under the American flag in cases in which, under similar circumstances, classifications by other foreign societies are accepted. You may informally advise the Foreign Office of the purport of the resolution at the same time furnishing it with copies of Section 26 of the Shipping Act approved Sept. 7, 1916 (See 39 Statutes at Large, page 737) and Section 19, Paragraph B of the Merchant Marine Act approved June 5, 1920 (See 41 Statutes at Large, page 995). The Department desires, of course, that a serious controversy possibly even involving consideration of recourse to retaliatory measures may be avoided. Advise Department by telegraph of important developments. GREW
