National Security Policy 1091 4. Mr. Gates said he really did know that, but that he particularly did not mean the leadership of the Navy. He knew that we would sup­ port the decisions that were made if we accepted the decision at all. If we were to fight we would fight above board. However, he said that he had had great experience since he had been in the Secretary of Defense office. There had been many occasions when subordinate people in all Services kept fighting for their own Services against the decisions of the Secretary of Defense. I said that I did not know about that. I didn’t think the Navy was really very much involved in that sort of business. Before the decision was made, that could be true. There would be presenta­ tions which all the Services would put on to favor their own projects and that sort of business. 5. I again repeated that I wanted Mr. Gates to know exactly where I stood, that I had taken this thing to the President although I knew when I asked to see the President that the President would have to stand by the Secretary of Defense’s basic decision. What I wanted to do then was to impress upon the President and upon the Secretary of Defense, and everybody else two things. First, the responsibilities of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. They had to know what they were doing. They had to get into the basic data. They had to have the basic data available to them. They had to analyze the NSTL and the SIOP. They had to be able to do this completely, thoroughly and in any way it might turn out to be most convenient to do it. This meant that all data, raw data, finished data, working data, everything else had to be made available to the JCS in the event the JCS wanted it. And to the [illegible in the original] of the JCS. 6. Mr. Gates said I certainly had made that point clear enough. And he agreed with it. He was sure the President understood it. The President had said that in different words himself when talking about the means of doing this. 7. I then said the second reason why I wanted to take this to the President was to prevent a snow job. I knew that Mr. Gates expected a reasonable target list and a reasonable operational plan to come out of this organization. I did not think it would come out unless extraor­ dinary efforts were taken. I meant to take those extraordinary efforts. And I wanted to make sure that everybody knew that those extraordi­ nary efforts would be necessary and that was one of the reasons why I wanted to make sure that all of the data would be available for check­ ing. What I was afraid of was that the atomic weapons requirements and the force levels, the disposition of forces, the whole budget pro­ cedure could be changed radically if these documents were not well analyzed, studied not only by the Joint Chiefs but also by the Unified Commanders.
