Afghanistan 579 207. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1 London, February 14, 1980, 1829Z 3468. Subject: (S) Afghanistan: Request For Arms for Insurgents. 1. (S—Entire text) 2. Salim Azzam, head of the London-based Islamic Conference of Europe, and still carried as a Saudi diplomat on the British diplomatic list, asked EmbOff to call February 14. 3. Azzam had just returned from Pakistan where he claimed to have been personally responsible for the formation of the United Islamic Liberation Front of Afghanistan. He said that he had himself announced the Front’s formation to the press and recalled earlier conversations with EmbOff in which he had said he had been working toward getting the various groups to agree to a charter.2 4. Azzam claimed also that he had been responsible for having the Afghans accepted as observers at the Islamic Conference where he had personally assisted them in meeting with important Arab Foreign Ministers. 5. Asked if he thought the Front would hold together, Azzam says that he believes it will because money will be supplied not to independent groups but only to the umbrella organization. This he had personally made clear to the leaders when he delivered to them “donations” from “private individuals” in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the UAE. 6. Since he has now come to know the various leaders quite well, Azzam said, he has become certain of their real needs. No weapons, he insisted, have been delivered to them from the Peninsula, and they have expressed an urgent need for particular items: —anti-tank weapons; —anti-aircraft weapons for use in shooting down Soviet helicopters from the “sides of deep mountain valleys” as the pilots drop down for low-level reconnaissance and attack; —small arms ammunition. 7. In summary, Azzam said, it is important to insure that the Soviet stay in Afghanistan is made as uncomfortable as possible; the Afghans 1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P880029–1590. Secret; Nodis. 2 Azzam’s activities in Pakistan were reported by James Sterba. See “Moslem Meeting is Urged to Unite Against Moscow,” New York Times, January 28, 1980, p. A1; and “Afghan Insurgents Fight Among Themselves, Too,” New York Times, March 2, 1980, p. E2.
