September 1953–December 1954
797
havi–Baqai relationship. Gen. Akhavi has stated that he respects Gen.
Deihimi as much as any other officer in the Iranian Army and that he
heavily relies upon Gen. Deihimi’s judgment.
8. After August 19, 1953, when Gen. Zahedi displaced Dr. Mos-
sadeq, Gen. Akhavi sent Gen. Batmangelich’s personal Army plane to
Kerman to fly Gen. Deihimi to Tehran. In Tehran Gen. Batmangelich
and Gen. Akhavi ousted Acting Deputy Chief of Staff Col. Abbas Far-
zanegan and replaced him with then Col. Deihimi. The Shah approved.
9. There followed a struggle which continues: the struggle between
the Shah and the Prime Minister for control of the armed forces.
Maj.Gen. Vossuk, Deputy Minister of National Defense, a Shah man,
was ousted by Prime Minister Zahedi from his cabinet. Maj.Gen. He-
dayat, whom Gen. Zahedi believes to be his man, was made Minister of
National Defense. In the meantime, the Shah ordered Gen. Batmange-
lich to refer all papers concerning the Army directly to him, rather than
going through Gens. Zahedi and Hedayat. This decision by the Shah
greatly strengthened the position of the Chief of Staff, who thereby was
able to promote officers friendly to him in such a way that Gen. Zahedi
was unable to prevent it. It is known that Gens. Batmangelich, Akhavi
and Deihimi have ignored Army regulations in promoting their per-
sonal friends, with the Shah’s approval.
10. The prosecution of the Army officers apparently guilty of
treason and of Dr. Mossadeq and his closest advisers has proceeded at
what Gen. Zahedi considers to be a snail’s pace. Upon five different oc-
casions Gen. Zahedi has sent his son to protest against this slow-down.
Gen. Zahedi became convinced that the Chief of Staff and his deputies
were deliberately attempting to embarrass the Zahedi government by
keeping alive the hopes of those who were still political friends of Dr.
Mossadeq and of the Tudeh Party. Upon one occasion Gen. Zahedi
threatened to resign. On 13 October he sent his son to the Shah with a
demand that the Shah dismiss the Chief of Staff or accept Zahedi’s res-
ignation; however, his son did not tell the Shah that Gen. Zahedi de-
sired to resign, in an effort to smooth over this crisis in his father’s polit-
ical career. There now can be no doubt that the failure by the Chief of
Staff to execute, or at least to prosecute, those traitors now in his hands
continues gravely to embarrass the Zahedi administration.
11. Efforts by the U.S. to keep the Shah and the Prime Minister to-
gether have been successful except over the issue of the armed forces.
This problem is greatly complicated by the fact that Gen. Batmangelich
and his deputies now seem to feel strong enough in the Shah’s graces to
move out and to attack Zahedi stalwarts. Recently Gen. Batmangelich
attempted to replace Col. Malek, Chief of Staff to Maj.Gen. Golpyra,
with Brig.Gen. Mirfanderski, Gen. Batmangelich’s brother-in-law. For
professional reasons, the American Mission to the Iranian Gendarme´rie
