Costa Rica 415 most of this special opportunity to demonstrate our willingness and our ability to help Latin America evolve toward a sound economic system based on democratic principles. 2. The Issue: Private Enterprise Versus Socialist Tendencies. After the five years of the Figueres Administration (1953–58), with its ever increasing inclination toward socialism, there was inaugurated in May of this year the Administration of Mario Echandi, who had campaigned on a program to reinstate private enterprise as the primary motivating force in the economy of the country. Since a primary U.S. objective is to prove that faith and reliance on the free enterprise system is justified, it follows that a major U.S. objective in Costa Rica is to help Echandi fulfill his campaign pledge. Last week President Echandi stated his position to Ambassador Willauer along the following lines: “Since I have championed the cause of private enterprise, the overall success of my Administration in improving economic conditions in Costa Rica will either aid or hurt the concept of private enterprise throughout this Hemisphere. Quite apart from any definite accomplishment I may achieve in my own country in improving economic conditions will be the repercussion my success will have elsewhere in Latin America. My success or my failure will be noticed and will help tip the scales one way or the other. Specific projects may or may not succeed, but the general result of my Administration must be favorable. If it is not successful, the fact that a man campaigned for private enterprise and failed will be used as an argument throughout Latin America for more socialism.” The basic need for positive results and their urgency was highlighted in an intimate meeting held a few days ago to discuss the possibility of holding a Central American Investment Conference in San José in February 1959,4 with President Echandi, Ambassador Willauer, and some prominent Costa Rican and American businessmen present. It was frankly stated that the investment climate still prevailing in Costa Rica is hardly propitious for holding such a conference with positive results, at least so far as Costa Rica is concerned, and the outcome of such a meeting would hinge on the change in the general economic climate which could be achieved in the meantime. President Echandi faces serious immediate obstacles in accomplishing his frequently reiterated objective of strengthening private enterprise. He is essentially a minority president having been elected with less than a plurality of the votes. The Legislature is controlled by the only well-­organized political party which is devoted to the semi-­ socialistic policies of former President Figueres. Echandi must depend 4 No record of the proposed conference was found in Department of State files.
