3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
815
War II; in fact, he had been in it. Until the early 1960s we had been in a
superior position in nuclear arms. A number of conflicts had arisen
during the early 1960s (for example, the Cuban missile crisis), but that
had not deterred us from seeking genuine arms control negotiations. It
had not stopped us from understanding that equality and not superi-
ority must be the test. We had watched the development of Soviet tech-
nology and knew what the Soviets could do. We had no desire or ex-
pectation that the Soviet Union would come to us as a petitioner as it
were. It had come to us as an equal, and the Secretary accepted that and
believed that the people of the U.S. had accepted that. The Secretary
would add one other characteristic which rendered the situation most
difficult: equality was a fact that can be recognized, while respect was
something that had to be earned. Trust and confidence in each other’s
intentions and motivations had been shaken. What Gromyko had said
indicated that clearly. On the other hand, what the Secretary had said
with respect to Afghanistan was that the situation there had also
created these kinds of doubts. He agreed with Gromyko that normali-
zation of relations served each of us better than any other basis. He did
not know if there was any test of normalization of relations between the
two superpowers. It was difficult to arrive at in view of our different
cultures and histories. Whenever any nation has the kind of power that
we each had, it was difficult to establish mutual trust. We knew that
and believed the Soviet side knew that. Much could be said that would
be useful for discussion at great length. The Secretary was glad that
Gromyko had raised these points, because he had seen press reports
about the concern in the Soviet Union with respect to our country. He
would only suggest that Gromyko consider the situation thoroughly
and use his experience in arriving at a judgment that he could convey
to his people.
Gromyko said that before addressing the Afghanistan issue he
wanted to make two or three points in connection with the questions
the Secretary just discussed. The Secretary had alleged that the U.S. and
NATO move to deploy medium-range missiles in Western Europe had
been dictated by the deployment of SS–20 missiles. In this connection
he had to tell the Secretary that this was not a new weapons system.
The SS–20 was an old missile, but the Soviet Union was modernizing it;
in brief, equipping it with MIRVs, although the overall yield of the mis-
sile remained the same. Thus, what NATO had done in Western Eu-
rope and in the Mediterranean was something entirely different. It had
decided to deploy new missiles armed with nuclear weapons, which
could reach deep into the territory of the USSR. Apart from that, he
could recall a time when the U.S. did not have ships in the Mediterra-
nean, armed with nuclear weapons that could also reach deep into the
territory of the USSR. Now such a fleet was there, and so were U.S. air
forces in the British Isles, also capable of reaching Soviet territory, not
