First Responses
107
IRANIAN HOSTAGE PROBLEM
My Two Talks With Sadat (November 14 and 18)
As we had anticipated, Sadat felt that there was relatively little
that he could do with respect to the Iranian hostage situation. He
characterized Khomeini as “mad.” He suggested that Fahd might be
able to exert some influence on Khomeini, but acknowledged that
because of Sunni/Shi’a cleavages, even Fahd’s prospects might be lim-
ited. He doubted that the Lebanese Shi’a leadership could do much,
but thought it was worth a try and suggested the Saudis be asked
about this.
I explained to Sadat that you were thinking of (a) a possible contin-
gency action in the event our hostages were hurt, and (b) a possible
punitive action against Iran after the hostages have been gotten out.
While you had not yet made any decision, you would welcome Sadat’s
views and also, should you decide to undertake one or another such
action, his help. I specifically mentioned your hope that he might permit
us to use the Aswan Airfield for staging purposes. Aswan, I noted, is
somewhat remote and therefore out of the public eye.
Sadat said that he had been thinking a great deal about the Iranian
hostage problem. He had been looking at maps to consider what kind
of action he might take if he were in your position. He spoke firmly
about the need to undertake some kind of punitive action against Iran
in order to reestablish the United States’ credibility and national honor
in the Middle East. If Khomeini gets away with his action, Sadat said,
the position of the United States in the Middle East will be badly hurt.
At my first meeting, Sadat had no specific ideas; at my second meeting,
however, he suggested that after the hostages are out, the United States
should level the Iranian oil fields as a lesson. Whatever you decide to
do, Sadat emphasized on both occasions, should be done in the form
of a one-time action rather than an American occupation of parts of
Iran. A one-time, punitive strike, in Sadat’s view, will be understood
by most of the nations of the Middle East, even though some will
publicly protest. An American occupation, on the other hand, will be
counterproductive in terms of Middle East attitudes.
Sadat wants you to know that, should you require help, any facility
in Egypt is at your disposal. He mentioned Aswan and also Berenice
as possible places to be considered.4 Should you wish to send an
advance team for planning purposes, this can be taken up with
4 On November 30, Mubarak reiterated Sadat’s suggestion to Atherton. In a Decem-
ber 3 memorandum, Brzezinski informed Brown that Carter wanted Brown and Vance
to explore this idea and report. (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski
Material, Agency File, Box 6, Defense Department 12/79)
