Venezuela 1267 understanding position. At the same time Canada made public its protestations and now Canada is being granted an exemption from the controls. This, says the President, will make him look to his people as being entirely too weak or even cowardly to protect his country’s best interests. Ambassador Sparks expressed understanding of the President’s problem and asked him if he had any suggestions as to how the matter might best be presented to the Venezuelan public. The President said that he has a radio-­television address scheduled for the night of April 30 and he hopes he may be able at that time to tell the Venezuelan people of the Canadian exemption and that he has received assurances from the United States Government that there will be no untoward effect on importations into the United States of Venezuelan petroleum. The Ambassador said he would report immediately to the Department the President’s thoughts on this matter. The President was not bitter in his conversation but he was obviously very concerned. The President then discussed somewhat the Venezuelan economic situation and said that he feels confident about it. He said that a group of Venezuelan banks have assured the Government that they can handle an internal credit of 500,000,000 Bolivares. He recognized also that there will have to be some foreign loans but the President said that he is thinking of this in terms of an Export-Import Bank loan for electrification development, and also an overall IBRD loan based on fundamental economic studies of what the country needs in the way of really basic development. He said that the Government’s employment program is going along quite well and that the excitement over unemployment is very much reduced. He pointed out, for example, that the threatened unemployment demonstration a few days ago was never held. President Betancourt said that in the Government’s budget planning he is thinking in terms of an operating Budget and a Public Works Budget. He is anxious also to do a few things for the Armed Forces and he repeated what he had said on a previous occasion about the deplorable conditions in many of the barracks. He wants to take corrective action but this work will not fit into his budget unless he can somehow economize on other expenditures. The President said that expenditures for military materiel will total Bs. 45,000, 000 next year unless arrangements can be made to make token payments” to the United States as he understands Uruguay and Brazil do. The Ambassador recalled that the President had spoken of this before but had not set forth his ideas in any detail. The President said he would send the Ambassador a memorandum on this subject and he hoped something could be done about it.
