Human Rights 387 targeting on those principal areas in which official human rights attitudes, policies and practices manifest themselves: Demonstrable efforts to meet the basic needs of the poorest sectors of the population for food, shelter, education and health care; respect for the sanctity of the person; and promotion of basic civil and political liberties. We simply must know more and, in our reporting to Congress, we must refer to specific illustrative examples, including the positive as well as the negative, to support our necessarily more general reporting and analysis of the situation. 4. A corollary to better reporting is the need for comprehensive and systematic data collection on the human rights situation and issues in your country of responsibility. We must be prepared to document carefully and comprehensively each African government’s record on human rights, even in countries which do not presently receive bilateral economic or security assistance. It is no less important in cases where the government has a good record of observing human rights. The time to begin building a reporting record is now. Do not wait for us to task you with specific reporting requirements on the human rights situation in your country of responsibility. 5. We will need to expand our contacts with those individuals who are best placed to know about human rights conditions. In some cases it will be an expatriate lawyer; in others local police or attorney general, etc. Above all, these contacts can help us gain a deeper knowledge of the local judicial system which makes decisions about people’s lives. 6. Given our experience with the development of this year’s papers, we cannot rule out the possibility that there will be formal changes in the guidelines for our CY–78 papers. However, we do not anticipate any essential change in the three basic categories of human rights contained in the Secretary’s April 1977 Law Day speech in Georgia. Although difficult to identify, some thought should be given to quantifiable measures which help objectively judge human rights issues in these areas. For example: percentage changes in government funds aimed at poorest segment of population; numbers of rural health workers trained; rate of scholarization; infant mortality and other health initiatives, central budget breakdown by sector; countrywide breakdown of court cases, broken down along lines of number of acquittals, length of sentences in relation to law under which sentenced, etc. 7. We will try to give you additional grist for your side of the exchange by providing from time to time selected private organization and press reporting on specific human rights issues in Africa. This will include copies of periodic reports and occasional papers from Amnesty International, P.E.N., Freedom House, the International Commission of Jurists and other non-governmental organizations whose reporting is
