76 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement recognized that there would be a deficit in the overall public sector accounts; that deficit was to be covered by non-­inflationary borrowing. Ceilings are set on the level of domestic assets of the Central Bank and a prudent policy was to be maintained with regard to bank credits to the private sector. The existing single fluctuating exchange is to be continued. In addition to the International Monetary Fund standby fund, Argentina is attempting to secure credits from the other participants of the previous loan package arrangement. The Western European countries probably will make available between $75/80 million of which about $50 million will be used to cover debt payments under the Parle Club refunding plans so that the new money will come to about $25/30 million. Commercial banks in New York City have been approached by the Argentines and they may make available about $50 million or more. Of this amount some $41 million would have to be used to repay maturing commercial bank credits during 1960. Also, the Eximbank and the Development Loan Fund may make financial facilities available to Argentina. It is understood that the above loans are in various stages of negotiations. BOLIVIA As a result of balance of payments deficits which exhausted Bolivia’s foreign exchange reserves and a hyper-­inflation which created social unrest and a reduced standard of living, discussions were begun in 1954 looking toward stabilization effort. In December 1956 the International Monetary Fund provided $7.5 million to support a stabilization program which included a grant of $10 million from ICA in the form of procurement authorizations and a cash grant subject to the supervision of the United States Operations Mission in Bolivia. In addition, the United States Treasury made available to Bolivia an exchange agreement of $7.5 million. This joint program required the unification of the exchange rate at a realistic level, an attempt to balance government expenditures and receipts in order to eliminate inflationary financing from the Central Bank, a reduction in bank credit expansion, and the removal of all economic controls and subsidies except for a wage and salary freeze. Prior to the beginning of the stabilization program the United States Government had given emergency grant aid to Bolivia amounting to $22.6 million in 1955 (of which $14.6 million was in PL 480 agricultural surpluses) and $23 million in 1956. Since the stabilization program has begun the United States Government through the ICA has continued its grant program in the amount of $22.6 million in 1957, $21.5 million in 1958 and about $21 million in 1959. The stabilization program has been in continuous
