2. The total sum to be paid back should approximate 1,250
million schillings and not 1,000 million as proposed. (In this
connection, I may say that Schüller informs me that he arrived at
the sum of 1,000 million schillings by adding to the 848 million
total amount of the principal of the relief credits, the accrued
interest up to the present time at a low rate of interest. This differs
from the understanding of Minister Wildner as reported by me at
the bottom of page 3 of my despatch No. 1656.34 The outstanding
relief credit bonds, as I understand, carry interest at the rate of 6
per cent, and Schüller admits that on this basis the total amount
due would more closely approximate the 1,250 million schillings.
He asserts however that the idea of paying any interest upon
credits of this character arising out of supplies furnished in time
of dire need to feed a starving population is repugnant and that it
was never really contemplated that interest would be exacted. He
ventures the opinion that Secretary Hoover, having charge of the
relief credit operations, never seriously believed in the repayment
of the principal, to say nothing of the interest.)
3. The payment of 10 million schillings annually for five years,
beginning in 1929, appears to be satisfactory, but for the second
period of five years an increase of payments from 15 million to
20 million was suggested. There was some further suggestion that
beginning in 1943 the period of annual instalments should, if
necessary, be somewhat extended so as to provide for the
payment of 1,250 million schillings instead of 1,000 million.
4. Annuities should be made payable in gold schillings.
5. Relief debts should retain their full priority over reparations as
now provided.
The Austrian aide memoire and the counter aide memoire of the
International Relief Bonds Committee are regarded as only affording a basis
for negotiation. The Austrian Government does not believe that it will be
required in the end to pay 1,250 million schillings. Schüller, as I have
heretofore reported, feels that his government should get in principle from
the United States as favorable treatment as the United States accorded Italy.
