356
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
CIA
Deputy Director Frank Carlucci
JCS
Admiral Thomas Hayward
Lt. General John Pustay
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
CIA reported that about 40,000 Soviet troops are now in Afghani-
stan. They are encountering some resistance. The Afghan army is
shrinking rapidly through desertions. The rebel tribes will retreat in the
mountains and continue resistance, probably increasing in the spring.
Thus, the insurgency will continue, and Soviet forces will be the main
source of the counterinsurgency effort. (S)
CIA also reported that Egypt is sending equipment to Pakistan to
be supplied to the Afghanistan insurgents, and Saudi Arabia has agreed
to contribute $4 million. (S)
It was asserted in the discussion that the degree of resistance in
Afghanistan will depend upon two factors: first, the size of the support
received covertly through Pakistan, and second, the degree of Soviet
pressure on Pakistan to block this supply. (S)
CIA Resources—It was agreed that [less than 1 line not declassified]
is far too small and needs rapid expansion. CIA was directed to present
its request for an increase and also obtain OMB’s written objections
which may then be forwarded to the President for a decision.2 (S)
Aid to Pakistan—Pakistan’s ability to support the insurgency and
to resist Soviet pressures, it was agreed, will be highly dependent on
U.S. assistance and commitment. It was argued that the small support
we can now promise Pakistan will be more confusing than reassuring
because of the publicity about changing U.S. policy. It is essential,
therefore, to address the non-proliferation issue with the Congress and
find a satisfactory way to make an exception in the Pakistani case. It
was agreed that this matter should be discussed at the National Security
Council meeting today and a decision taken on whether to seek an
amendment to the law or to seek Pakistani assurances sufficient to
certify Pakistan’s intentions on nuclear proliferation to the Con-
gress.3 (S)
Christopher’s Trip to the NAC—Warren Christopher gave a brief
report on his impressions from the NAC meeting.4 He added that
Japanese participation would be useful. He also argued that we need
2 See Document 151.
3 See Document 135.
4 See footnote 2, Document 107.
