Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX their own aims and problems in their relations with Yugoslavia, and they do not by any means always coincide with those of the Russians. And in dealings with the West, the Bulgarians are more open and lenient about Western influence, cultural or economic, than the Soviets are happy to see, as I understand the situation. All of the above being said, I still cannot point to any open difference in Soviet and Bulgarian foreign policy, and do not expect to see any. I do believe, however, that this strict loyalty has a price, both in bilateral stresses and strains, and also in the amount Moscow must pay for Bulgaria’s continued loyalty. I have a feeling—which I cannot prove—that Moscow will have to pay a higher price for this loyalty as the years go by. 17. Eighth, are there any openings for the West? 18. Not too many, but more than most people think. The fact is that Bulgaria has been neglected, largely written off, and the West has invested very little here in money, or effort, or people. I am probably the wrong one to bring it up, but the quality of Western Ambassadors here has not always been topnotch, because Sofia is not considered an important enough post. (This was not always the case in the past: The British in particular have sent some first-rate diplomatists to the Balkans, including Sofia.) Nowadays some countries find it hard to get good quality young diplomats to agree to a tour in Sofia, so bad is its reputation. (I do not believe this is true of our Service.) And along the line, the quality of trade shows, cultural presentations, intellectual exchanges, and the like tends to be lower than with most of the other East European countries. For us and some of the other Western countries—especially the Germans, who have great opportunities here— this is a mistake, for Bulgaria has more to offer than its stereotypes say. Among the intellectuals, in business circles, in terms of popular interest, an opportunity is there for the West to have more influence. Especially in trade, the opportunity for a higher volume—with all the political consequences that entails—is clearly present. The reader will write all of the above off as a case of localitis, and I suppose my only answer is, “Come and see.” In plain hard terms of realpolitik, there are opportunities in Bulgaria which we should be exploiting. 19. Ninth, are any changes needed in US policy? 20. No, I believe we are on the right track. We have shown more interest in Bulgaria in recent years, partly because we discovered it was there, partly because the Bulgarians came out of their shells. In the wake of Polish events, the going may become trickier, but I think we should still go as far towards improving relations (I know the term is vague, but I hope its meaning is clear) as the Bulgarians are willing to go. I hope we will not try to fit Bulgaria into some formula that places them carefully in relationship to Czechoslovakia or the GDR or Poland. Bulgaria is Bulgaria, and I hope we will deal with it on its
