Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II 500,000-ton target. There was general agreement at the 1978 ministerial session of the World Food Council on the need to establish a more permanent reserve, with yearly replenishment and commitments by governments for more than one year in advance. The Manila Communique´ recommended that a Food Aid Convention of the International Wheat Agreement be established to contribute to the attainment of the 10 million ton target, and that negotiations provide for an increase in the amount of food aid moved through the World Food Program. In the IWA negotiations the US has endorsed the 10 million ton target, and has proposed that a new “Special Provision for Emergency Needs” be negotiated as part of the Food Aid Convention, providing for an increase in the flow of food aid of up to 20 percent above the minimum level in times of critical or exceptional food needs in developing nations. If the Convention with this special provision is negotiated and ratified, the US would be obligated by treaty to provide at least 4.47 million tons of grains for food aid annually, and perhaps as much as 5.4 million tons under extreme circumstances. To cover this possible obligation, the Carter administration has proposed legislation that would authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to buy and hold an International Emergency Wheat Reserve of up to 6 million metric tons of wheat.7 The food aid convention of the IWA is considered by the developing countries to be one of the most important elements under consideration in the political and economic dialogue between developed and developing countries. The Group of 77, the UN caucus of the developing countries, has expressed concern at the slow pace of the talks. The group suggested at the 1978 World Food Council ministerial session that, in the event a new IWA cannot be concluded by the end of this year, a food aid convention should be negotiated independently of the new trade convention, and that it be incorporated in the trade convention when that is concluded. A major component of the world food security system is the FAO’s Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agriculture.8 This system, which operates to alert food donors to emerging critical food shortages, worked well during the recent food crisis in Ethiopia. Ethiopia has been on the FAO’s list of food-shortage countries for the last two years. In March the FAO, using data from monitoring stations it had set up in Ethiopia late last year, alerted foreign donors to the probability of a major food emergency, even though the Ethiopian Government was still issuing optimistic reports. When foreign donors responded too slowly to this appeal to be of immediate help—mostly
