820
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
500,000-ton target. There was general agreement at the 1978 ministerial
session of the World Food Council on the need to establish a more per-
manent reserve, with yearly replenishment and commitments by gov-
ernments for more than one year in advance.
The Manila Communique´ recommended that a Food Aid Conven-
tion of the International Wheat Agreement be established to contribute
to the attainment of the 10 million ton target, and that negotiations pro-
vide for an increase in the amount of food aid moved through the
World Food Program. In the IWA negotiations the US has endorsed the
10 million ton target, and has proposed that a new “Special Provision
for Emergency Needs” be negotiated as part of the Food Aid Conven-
tion, providing for an increase in the flow of food aid of up to 20 per-
cent above the minimum level in times of critical or exceptional food
needs in developing nations. If the Convention with this special provi-
sion is negotiated and ratified, the US would be obligated by treaty to
provide at least 4.47 million tons of grains for food aid annually, and
perhaps as much as 5.4 million tons under extreme circumstances. To
cover this possible obligation, the Carter administration has proposed
legislation that would authorize the Secretary of Agriculture to buy
and hold an International Emergency Wheat Reserve of up to 6 million
metric tons of wheat.7
The food aid convention of the IWA is considered by the devel-
oping countries to be one of the most important elements under consid-
eration in the political and economic dialogue between developed and
developing countries. The Group of 77, the UN caucus of the devel-
oping countries, has expressed concern at the slow pace of the talks.
The group suggested at the 1978 World Food Council ministerial ses-
sion that, in the event a new IWA cannot be concluded by the end of
this year, a food aid convention should be negotiated independently of
the new trade convention, and that it be incorporated in the trade con-
vention when that is concluded.
A major component of the world food security system is the FAO’s
Global Information and Early Warning System on Food and Agricul-
ture.8 This system, which operates to alert food donors to emerging crit-
ical food shortages, worked well during the recent food crisis in Ethi-
opia. Ethiopia has been on the FAO’s list of food-shortage countries for
the last two years. In March the FAO, using data from monitoring sta-
tions it had set up in Ethiopia late last year, alerted foreign donors to
the probability of a major food emergency, even though the Ethiopian
Government was still issuing optimistic reports. When foreign donors
responded too slowly to this appeal to be of immediate help—mostly
7 See footnote 4, Document 225.
8 See Document 211.
