Peru  1125
Mr. Dillon then emphasized the need for adequate planning. 
He asked what specific plans had been made for Beltran’s program, 
whether goals had been set on resettlement, whether roads had been 
planned, and so forth.
Sr. Beltran replied that a start must be made gradually. He has engaged 
an Italian firm, Italconsult, to take charge of planning and directing the 
resettlement program and which would work closely with the World 
Bank. This firm can draw on its considerable experience in land reform 
in Italy as well as abroad. He was also making arrangements on other 
aspects of his program with the firm Arthur B. Little of New Haven and 
with a Canadian firm, which would start next week. Beltran explained 
that the planning of roads was not so difficult and that he already had two 
principal areas in mind where roads had been started but had stalled—
that is, in the North and South where the best colonization areas were to 
be found. In answer to a further question from Mr. Dillon, Sr. Beltran said 
these roads were distinct from the Aguaytia-Pucallpa road for which a 
DLF loan had been approved and which his predecessors had promoted 
primarily as the only road connection to an Amazon port, although it did 
pass through some areas suitable for colonization.
Mr. Dillon then remarked that the discussion seemed to point to 
roads as the main field in which the United States might be of assis-
tance in resettlement.
Sr. Beltran replied that although Peruvian companies could build 
the roads, Peru needs local currency for this purpose which is not 
available locally and hence must seek foreign currency for conversion. 
Funds are also needed for foreign exchange costs of road construction, 
particularly machinery. In addition to roads, the Government will need 
funds to finance actual resettlement, including payment for land. It is 
contemplated that the settlers will eventually repay the Government 
for the land, following a period of grace of from one to three years, at a 
rate set by the value of crops, e.g. 20%, which would thus gear payment 
to good and bad yields. Nevertheless, the Government does not really 
expect to get all its money back for resettlement costs.
Mr. Dillon remarked that the big problem seemed to be time. We had 
already approved loans for the Savings and Loan Association and for one 
road, and we could find other projects. We could possibly help in land 
reform, which is a necessary thing and which would seem to be easier in 
some ways than the opening of new lands. However, this is a complex prob-
lem which we have not gotten into before and which is largely for the coun-
try itself to handle. Hence, we don’t know yet what we can do in this field.
However, Mr. Dillon continued, Mr. Brand6 and the DLF are ready 
to look into new ways of assisting. We plan to be more active in Latin 
6 Managing Director, Development Loan Fund.
