Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1974–1976
27
trilateral countries and to propose progressive reforms in relations be-
tween North and South. Quite apart from the influence which it may
have had in this way, the Commission has increasingly become an ef-
fective and recognized organization in which major problems of topical
and political importance can be discussed in a policy-oriented fashion.
As I suggested in Ottawa, the uncertainties currently hanging over
the East-West relationship make it appropriate that the Commission
should begin its new phase by paying also some attention to relations
with the Communist countries. I think it is also important to sustain the
work that we have done in the North-South area. In this way we can
contribute to insuring that the improvement in the tone of the discus-
sions between the developed and the developing countries is translated
into practical, longer range measures which can avert the threat of se-
rious North-South turbulence.
I fear that otherwise North-South tensions might interact danger-
ously with East-West conflicts in such areas as the Middle East or
Southern Africa. In general, this potential intersection of East-West and
North-South conflicts deserves our closer attention. It represents a
novel and an ominous development on the world scene.
I also proposed in Ottawa that now that the members of the Com-
mission have established a good working relationship with one an-
other, we might consider broadening the circle of those involved in our
work by inviting guests to our meetings, possibly including some gov-
ernmental representatives. I also suggested that in the future our task
forces might give slightly lower priority to achieving consensus so as to
provide more scope for originality. We shall be looking at these and
other ideas for changing and improving the operation of the Commis-
sion during the coming weeks and months. We would welcome any
comments and suggestions which you may have in this connection.
Finally, I would like to thank you for your interest and support in
the Commission in its first three years. There is no doubt that during
that time the idea of trilateralism has increasingly taken root in the con-
sciousness of the leaderships, in and out of government, in our three re-
gions. This has been an important change and one to which our efforts
have, I believe, made a major contribution. For the future, our task will
be to build on this initial success and ensure that the trilateral idea does
not become frozen but remains flexible and relevant to changing inter-
national conditions. I look forward to continuing with you in this work.
