406
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III
to have a solid and clearly winning series of trade proposals ready for
Congress in January that will help ensure approval of the Tokyo Round
results.
“DEFENSIVE” ELEMENTS OF TOKYO ROUND RESULTS
1. Major Moves for “Fairer Trade”
Much of our focus in the Tokyo Round centers on improving the
international system leading to “fairer trade.” These include the fol-
lowing aspects that we must negotiate in Geneva and emphasize in our
public presentations.
A. Codes: Central themes through all of the codes call for
—increased discipline in the system
—greater transparency of domestic and international procedures
with an increased opportunity to air individual cases and complaints
—greater opportunities for consultations over problems before
they reach the crisis stage
—objective reviews of differences
—expanded international understandings with more common
ground rules, leaving less latitude for arbitrary manipulation of trade
measures and administration
B. Dispute Settlement Mechanism: Our aims here are for
—reinforced procedures
—easier notification and consultative arrangements
—accelerated, objective reviews of trade complaints and violations
of understandings
—greater tendency to build over time a series of case precedents
that themselves permit the evolution of the GATT to deal with
changing circumstances.
2. More Realistic Safeguards
Also as a defensive measure, our aims here are to widen the range
of options for safeguard actions and avoid a major confrontation and
diplomatic incident whenever safeguards are involved. While in-
creasing the actual level of discipline within the system by encompas-
sing many sub-rosa activities, we need to be able to protect the legiti-
mate interests of American industry when trade is diverted by informal
arrangements and secret procedures.
Moreover, we should have the international right to invoke con-
sultations on a government-to-government basis without threatening a
trade war or taking Article XIX3 actions when we face or anticipate
problems from import disruptions. These consultations should provide
opportunities for reviewing a whole range of trade problems, including
3 Article XIX of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade deals with “Emer-
gency Action on Imports of Particular Products.”
