893.00/6872: Telegram [Document 458] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State PEKING, December 23, 1925—10 p.m. [Received December 23—5:50 p.m.] 542. 1. On December 22 General Connor at Tientsin informed me by radio substantially as follows: International train under Japanese command which left Tientsin for Shanhaikuan the morning of 22nd was fired upon by Feng forces near Hsinho and compelled to halt about 1:30 p.m. A subsequent attempt to proceed was prevented by an armored train. Brigade commander of Feng forces boarded and inspected train against the protest of the train commander. Officer in command of Feng forces on that front, General Connor was informed, direct[ed] that the international train return to Tientsin and [warned?] that he would open fire if the train did not retire at once. Infantry and an armored train belonging to Feng’s forces were put in position to resist an advance by the international train; its commander’s request for time to report to senior commandant at Tientsin by radio was refused. Train returned to Tientsin at 6 p.m. 2. Senior minister this morning conveyed these facts to Feng’s local diplomatic representative with whom this Legation has been in negotiation concerning arrangements for running of the international train back to Tientsin from Peking. He surmised Feng’s commander on Tangku front had not yet received instructions as to Feng’s approval of arrangement for operation of the international train (see below) but promised to telegraph immediately to Feng urging that this commanding officer be sent prompt orders. Senior minister likewise has addressed a note to the Chinese Government which after reciting the facts states as follows: “I have to invite Your Excellency’s attention to the above-stated facts which constitute a very grave violation of article 9 of the protocol of 1901 and to ask that immediate instructions be issued to permit the passage of the international trains which it is proposed to send from Tientsin to Shanhaikuan in the near future.” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4. My 532, December 17, 6[3] p.m., last sentence.43 After much negotiation covering a week’s time arrangements for operation of international trains have been approved by Feng, these arrangements meanwhile having been agreed to by Li Ching-lin. They
