Chile  301
in conjunction with the hospitals and to carry supplies to otherwise 
inaccessible areas. From the Canal Zone and the U.S., we have airlifted 
communications equipment and technicians, as well as large quantities 
of tents, blankets, cots, field rations, and medicines. Those expenses of 
emergency relief operations chargeable to the ICA contingency fund 
are expected to amount to approximately $2.5 million. This represents 
the cost of supplies and transportation but does not include the pay and 
allowances of personnel involved.
Of course, your own direct appeal to the American people to help 
Chile has had a dramatic impact both here and in Chile.3 U.S. volun-
tary private agencies, as well as firms and individuals, are making 
generous contributions in cash and kind to Chilean disaster relief. The 
American National Red Cross is organizing a major campaign which 
should raise millions of dollars. Taking into account the sum total of for-
eign contributions and the efforts of the Chileans themselves, there appears 
to be no need for any substantial new emergency assistance from the U.S. 
Government.
Even before the emergency relief operation is completed, we 
expect to devote urgent attention to Chile’s reconstruction require-
ments. Our Embassy in Santiago will soon be sending us a com-
munication outlining the Chilean Government’s general policy and 
tentative action plan for reconstruction. On the basis of this commu-
nication, we hope soon to be able to make specific recommendations 
for courses of action by the U.S. Government. In the meantime, the 
Export-Import Bank has made available a $10 million dollar recon-
struction credit.4
Douglas Dillon
3 For text of President Eisenhower’s statement, see Eisenhower, Public Papers of the 
Presidents, 1960, pp. 467–468.
4 For additional information concerning U.S. emergency assistance to Chile, see 
Department of State press release [illegible in the original]83, dated May 26, printed in 
Department of State Bulletin, June 13, 1960, pp. 967.
