Paraguay 1009 5. American Business Group The Ambassador believes that a U.S. Embassy represents not alone the Government of the U.S., but also the people and that it is the responsibility of the Embassy to have helpful contact with Americans abroad. It has been his policy to receive visiting Americans and to emphasize to those having business in Paraguay that it is the duty and pleasure of the American Mission to serve them. It is suggested that we hope their interest is to develop, not to exploit, and to make friends for the U.S. business generally. Twenty-­two months ago the Ambassador organized on an invitation basis occasional group meetings of Americans doing business in Paraguay. These meetings were held approximately once monthly in the office of the Ambassador. The current economic conditions were discussed as well as the current American program and policy. On September 4, l959, the group gave the Ambassador a farewell asado and a silver tray as a memento of appreciation. The group has an excellent spirit. To qualify for attendance the guest must be a citizen of the United States. It has been mutually beneficial. In September 1956, while the State Department inspectors were working in Paraguay, the Ambassador held a meeting so as to permit them to attend and observe for themselves. This practice should be continued. 6. Private Development Bank7 Second only to monetary stability, it has been recognized that the most important economic fact in Paraguay is the unavailability of equity and loan capital for private enterprise. As is true of the Latin American complex of nations, Paraguay has a few people of sizeable wealth and many who live just above the subsistence margin. A history of revolutions and inflations has always carried in its train a sequence of uneconomic investment, hoarding and capital flight. In May l956, the U.S. Ambassador proposed to a representative group of businessmen that a privately-­owned development bank be established. The idea was enthusiastically received. But being Paraguayans, they conceived of a bank in which Paraguayans would not have to invest any money—it would be totally financed by capital pledged from the United States and/or international sources. We have changed that idea! Through several open meetings and through the establishment of a voluntary businessmen’s committee, the Ambassador made it clear that help would be given only provided Paraguayans put up a substantial equity investment. It took more than one year to effect an organization,
