1978  217
our friends. Certainly they must not keep us, along with our allies, from 
offsetting Soviet military power in such vital areas as Western Europe.
The main objective of our collective security system must be the 
maintenance of an overall military balance with the Soviet Union no 
less favorable than the one that now exists. Deterrence and stability, not 
overbearing military power, are what we seek. To have them, and to be 
confident in them, we must be assured of a credible fighting capability.
The demands of such a capability are substantial. Over the past 
15 years, Soviet defense spending has been gradually increasing; we 
estimate the average rate of increase, in real terms, at between three 
and four percent a year, roughly in line with growth in the Soviet GNP. 
For a substantial part of that same period (from FY 1964 to FY 1975), 
U.S. baseline budgets (with military retired pay and the incremental 
costs of the war in Southeast Asia excluded) have been declining in 
real terms. Only since FY 1976, has our defense budget been increasing 
in real terms. As a consequence, the Soviet defense effort now appears 
to exceed ours. The margin is a matter of judgment, and depends on 
whether the two programs are compared in rubles or dollars. Estimates 
of 20 percent to 40 percent for this excess appear reasonable.
On the other hand, we are fortunate in having prosperous and 
willing allies who can help counterbalance the Soviet effort. The Sovi-
ets are not so fortunate. Moreover, they have felt obliged to allocate 
up to about 20 percent of their total defense effort to the Far East and 
the PRC. These considerations are allowed for in our judgments on the 
proper size of the U.S. defense program. Nonetheless, if we and our 
allies are to keep pace with the Soviets and offset their military power, 
we must increase our own efforts.
In particular, an increasingly precarious conventional balance 
between NATO and the Warsaw Pact in Europe is a matter of serious 
concern. That is why we and our NATO allies, in May, 1977, recog-
nized the need to raise our respective levels of defense spending by 
approximately three percent a year in real terms. That is also why we 
have already launched several major initiatives to cope with short term 
NATO vulnerabilities, develop long term and coordinated defense 
plans, and achieve a greater degree of alliance cooperation in the com-
mon defense. All of us, it is now acknowledged, must expand our 
responses to the Soviet military buildup.
The general magnitude of the Soviet defense effort, and the con-
tinued uncertainties in international relations, account to a consider-
able extent for the size and composition of the U.S. defense budget. But 
we do not seek to create a mirror-­image of Soviet military capabilities. 
Instead, we strive to maintain the nuclear and conventional forces nec-
essary to deter, or if necessary frustrate, possible Soviet military actions 
in areas of the world that are vital to us.
