1978  367
upon the memorandum the Chairman forwarded to you on 12 August 
1978.2
2. (S) We believe that US (and Allied) and Soviet (and Allied) 
military postures are generally in balance today. However, we also 
believe that a contemporary snapshot of the current balance is mis-
leading unless placed in the wider perspective of long-­term trends. 
Leaving aside arguments about specific growth rates, percentages of 
GNP, or intentions and recognizing the Soviets’ “China Problem” as 
well as their many shortcomings and reverses in political and economic 
spheres, there is no escaping the fact that the Soviets have been able to 
pull abreast of us militarily through a systematic and protracted invest-
ment in both numbers and quality of weaponry. In relative terms, there 
can be little doubt that the strategic balance has shifted, that the margin 
of US military capability relative to that of the USSR is narrower today 
than it has ever been, and that these adverse trends are continuing.
3. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff see the present consequences and 
implications of these trends as follows:
Strategic Nuclear Forces: In the space of a few years, the United 
States has moved from a position of clear-­cut superiority to our cur-
rent position of essential equivalence. However, while the present bal-
ance might appear superficially static, the trends are divergent. The 
Soviets are modernizing virtually every component of their strategic 
nuclear force structure behind the momentum of new systems which 
are in the field and in production. In contrast, a decade or more of 
slips, reductions, and cancellations has retarded US modernization 
appreciably and our ability to accelerate production enough in the 
short term to keep pace in the event of an unrestrained competition is 
questionable.
Moreover, we agree with the conclusion of NIE 11-4-78 (“Soviet 
Goals and Expectations in the Global Power Arena”) that the Soviets 
may expect to achieve a margin of superiority in the strategic field in 
the early 1980’s.3 Statistically, the margin may not be great, but any 
significant overall edge would have a profound influence, not only 
on the perceptions and apparent options open to decisionmakers in 
­Washington and Moscow, but also on the policies and alignments of 
other nations.
Our situation can be likened to skating on thin ice with the ice get-
ting thinner. Any sudden and dramatic Soviet achievement could cause 
a precipitous change in world perceptions, just as Sputnik electrified 
2 Jones presented his views in an August 12 memorandum to Brown. (Carter Library, 
National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, 
Box 87, Defense Budget: 1–8/78)
3 See Document 62.
