908
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
345.
Letter From Director of Central Intelligence Turner to the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Jones)1
Washington, August 21, 1980
Dear Dave,
When Jim Holloway and his group asked for my support, I unhesi-
tantly agreed, assuming the final report2 would be a helpful, objective
assessment. I asked in return only to see the sections of the final report
that touched on intelligence. He sent me Issues #3 and #18 of his report.3
Frankly, I am appalled at the content and tone of these sections.
Issue #3 clearly implies that the Intelligence Community was slow
off the mark. [2 lines not declassified] The report’s allusion to delays in
responses [less than 1 line not declassified] indicates a lack of understand-
ing of the HUMINT function. The discussion even leaves the impression
that intelligence support may have delayed execution of the rescue
operation in November–December. I saw no sign that a military opera-
tion was anywhere near feasible in November–December; indeed, I
believe our mutual perception was that military and intelligence capa-
bilities developed in parallel—neither could be brought to 100% effec-
tiveness instantly after the seizure.
Issue #3 recommends that in any future similar effort the Director,
DIA, be placed in charge of an Interagency Intelligence Task Force.
This is an unworkable and inappropriate suggestion. The Director,
DIA, clearly does not have the authority, statutory or otherwise, to
organize and coordinate Community intelligence assets. That is the
responsibility of the DCI under statute and Executive Order.
Issue #18 implies that casual conversation with a CIA officer on
board Nimitz may have negatively influenced a helicopter pilot. If
that were in fact the case, it would indicate highly unprofessional
performance by the pilot. In any event, the report goes on to state that
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Office of the Director of Central Intelligence,
Job 82B00162R: Subject Files, Box 9, Folder 8: Official Memos/Letters August 1980. Secret.
2 See Document 321.
3 An undated paper prepared by the Joint Task Force, “Issue 3, Centralized and
integrated intelligence support external to the JTF,” noted that the augmentation of
existing intelligence capabilities evolved over time and “in somewhat piecemeal fashion.”
Additionally, OPSEC intelligence officers involved in the operation had to “deduce for
themselves in essence what was being planned.” The Holloway group believed that the
Intelligence Community assets and resources “could have been pulled together more
quickly and effectively than was actually the case.” Issue 18, “The enemy radar threat,”
looked like a “single, highly explicit event in which unevaluated data was passed directly
to helicopter aircrews,” and which “contradicted the final conclusions of intelligence
analyst.” The implication was that perhaps “some helicopter pilot judgments regarding
altitude selection were affected by the informal report.”
