880
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
red tape and inter-service rivalry that I despair that the issue can
successfully be resolved in time for the joint military meeting in October
without a push from you or Brown. (C)
I suggest that the topic be raised at the VBB luncheon, either this
week or, at the latest, next week. Given the time constraints, this week
would be better but if, after reading Eagleburger’s cable, you feel (as
Vest does) that we should give Siena more time to get DOD’s act
together, Kimmitt and I will postpone preparations of material until
next week. But the issue does need urgent top-level attention and your active
intervention. Otherwise we risk jeopardizing much of the careful work
we have done to develop the military relationship—and conceivably
a lot more. (C)
RECOMMENDATION:
That you raise the issue at the VBB luncheon.3 (U)
APPROVE
4
DISAPPROVE
THIS WEEK
NEXT WEEK
3 Gates wrote in the margin: “Sounds like a suitable agenda item.”
4 Brzezinski approved the recommendation and wrote at the bottom of the memo-
randum: “Tell me concretely what needs to be done. I need a good-tough memo, with
quotes from Eagleburger, to both V[ance]-B[rown]—and a DR. ZB.” In a September 19
memorandum, Kimmitt and Larrabee recommended that Brzezinski raise the issue of
military sales to Yugoslavia at the next VBB lunch, and stress that “both Departments
need to give higher-level attention to issues that arise and decisions that are made.” On
the sale of Dragon missiles to Yugoslavia, Kimmitt and Larrabee, suggested that Brzezin-
ski ask Brown “personally to look into the current status of this case in an effort to
rescue it.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Europe, USSR, and
East/West, Larrabee Subject File, Box 68, Yugoslavia: Military: 1/79–1/80) On September
20, Gates notified Larrabee and Kimmitt that at the VBB “it was decided that Brown
would expedite resolution of the problem and would report as soon as possible.” (Ibid.)
