744 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Bartholomew: I want to close this by saying that with the exception of technical elements that we have not reviewed, this START statement is done. It is a good statement for the readers. The joint statement on START is agreed between us except for those technical issues Burt and Nazarkin have just done that remain to be addressed. Karpov: After Yuri reports to me, I will say OK or not. Bartholomew: Now let us hear from the negotiators on the future joint statement. Burt: There is not as much success to report. There are some drafting problems, but I suggest we focus on three questions: — The first concerns stabilizing reductions. Both agree the objective is to reduce the risk of war, and enhance stability. The US doesn’t want to mention reductions in this paragraph. The balance of this sentence and the next sentence say all that needs to be said. — The second concerns ABM and space. The US would like to say the two sides will continue the negotiations without interruption, and discuss strategic stability issues including a cooperative transition to a proper balance between strategic offensive and defensive arms. We worked a solution in Geneva, but now the Soviet side has bracketed the entire paragraph. — Third, the US wants to reduce the concentration of warheads on ballistic missile forces, beginning with a ban on mobile MIRVed ICBMs, and looking to the elimination of all land-­based MIRVed ICBMs, especially heavy ICBMs. Karpov: Let me say this is news to me. Yesterday we discussed this document with Nazarkin. There is an additional problem in the first paragraph that you did not mention. I ask Rick to explain the problem of “ensure.” Burt: This is a stronger, better word. It demonstrates that the two sides are working to get the proper relationship between offense and defense. Our language for the rest of this sentence was “a proper balance.” We made a concession by moving to “an appropriate relationship.” Smith: We began with “achieve.” Karpov: I believe this issue is related to the issue of offense/defense on the next page. If we solve the second, the first is automatically solved. Bartholomew: Let me turn to that issue, and explain the rationale for our approach. In 1985 we wet up the NST negotiations in three parts—INF, START, and Defense and Space. INF is finished, and START soon will be. This statement addresses how we continue the process. We are in agreement that there is a relationship between offense and defense. We both have an interest in continuing the talks on defense as we continue talks on offense. We disagree on what that offense/defense relationship should be; that is precisely why we should keep talking in the Defense and Space negotiations.
