174 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI relatively stabilizing. The same factors which lead to this advantage, however, mean that mobile ICBMs are difficult to target—­which creates a situation in which the U.S. may not be able to achieve target coverage and damage goals against Soviet forces. All agree that the least acceptable outcome with respect to mobile ICBMs would be one in which the Soviets shift major portions of their ICBMs into mobile basing (as is projected), and the United States fails to ensure the survivability of its ICBMs through mobility and/or deployment of strategic defenses. The resulting situation would compound existing force asymmetries and could have far-­reaching effects in its impact on public perceptions of the strategic nuclear balance. This implies that mobile ICBMs should be allowed only if a domestic political consensus that would allow deployment of a robust U.S. mobile ICBM force has been achieved. (We cannot, however, prevent Soviet deployments if the Soviets are willing to forego a START agreement.) Mobile ICBMs pose serious monitoring, verification and breakout problems. [2 lines not declassified] [3 paragraphs (30 lines) not declassified] Some are greatly concerned that the Soviets could use mobile ICBMs as an avenue for cheating or rapidly breaking out of START. It was concerns of this nature that led the U.S. to seek a ban on mobile ICBMs initially. These concerns will remain until a regime for effective verification of these systems has been identified and agreed upon. As noted above, there are differing views over whether the U.S. will be able to complete the development of and negotiate successfully a regime that meets our verification requirements and is acceptable in its impact on the U.S. The foregoing considerations suggest to some that the United States should continue to seek a mobile ICBM ban. On the other hand, banning mobile ICBMs forgoes the stability benefits they offer. In addition, a major goal of the strategic review has been to bring our procurement and arms control positions into harmony. Despite the successful INF example (negotiating to ban systems while we were deploying them), some believe it is inconsistent to seek a mobile ICBM ban while embarking on the development of not one but two mobile missiles, and that attempting to do so will prove increasingly unacceptable to Congress. Others note that this has been the U.S. position for some time and has served our interests. One approach to dealing with the competing concerns outlined above would be to ban MIRVd mobile ICBMs while allowing single RV mobiles. Such an approach would ban rail-­mobile versions of the SS–24 and Peacekeeper, while allowing deployment of the SS–25 and Small ICBM. Banning MIRV mobiles could improve stability; the threat
