Non-Proliferation
1003
ening of the global nonproliferation regime conditional upon progress
in arms control, thus providing an additional excuse for some devel-
oping nations to resist specific US proposals for tighter control of inter-
national nuclear commerce.
The ability of the developing nations to mold and pursue a unified
negotiating position at the review conference is likely to reinvigorate
their efforts to negotiate as a bloc on other international issues that can
be cast in North-South terms. G–77 unity has been under considerable
strain recently, particularly on economic issues such as the cost of oil.
Stimulated by their success on nuclear matters, the G–77 members are
likely to redouble attempts to find issues of common concern around
which they can achieve consensus.
The increased cooperation among developing nations does not
necessarily imply, however, that the dialogue with industrial nations
will become more acrimonious. Nations normally considered mod-
erates within the G–77 and the related nonaligned movement assumed
leadership roles at the NPT review conference. This may presage a
trend against Cuba and other radical nations that have attempted to
steer these organizations in a distinctly anti-Western direction.
The results of the review conference may even stimulate a leader-
ship role for Third World moderates, particularly in the nuclear prolif-
eration field. Many developing nations wish to preserve, in upcoming
meetings of the new International Atomic Energy Agency Committee
on the Assurance of Supply and in other forums, important concessions
on nuclear trade issues already won from the industrial nations.
Finally, the outcome of the NPT review conference is likely to af-
fect future arms control negotiations and deliberations. At minimum, it
will reinforce the G–77’s allegations that the nuclear weapons states are
dragging their feet on arms control negotiations, and this attitude may
serve as a basis to oppose as ineffective and discriminatory almost any
multilateral arms control initiative sponsored by the superpowers. In
any event, the nonaligned nations probably will lobby in the UN Gen-
eral Assembly for a broader mandate for the Committee on Disarma-
ment, including the creation of a working group on CTB.
If the CTB issue is not resolved in the UN, nonaligned nations are
certain to insist on such a working group in the 1981 sessions of the
Committee on Disarmament, knowing that Washington has accepted
the idea, at least in principle. Even if the procedural issue is resolved in
the Committee on Disarmament, there is little reason to expect the de-
veloping nations to be in a cooperative mood at the Third NPT review
conference in 1985 unless the nuclear weapons states have by then
concluded a comprehensive test ban treaty and other arms control
agreements.
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
