1002  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Bolivia, Mr. Rubottom pointed out that under today’s inter-American 
system we simply do not resort to arms as a means of settling diver-
gencies. Mr. Rubottom found it incomprehensible that Latin American 
countries should ever again wage war against one another.
Turning again to Paraguay’s urgent need for economic devel-
opment, the Minister observed that hitherto the United States had 
adopted a strict banker’s attitude when considering loans to Paraguay. 
Although the banker’s attitude was understandable, it meant that the 
have-­not countries can borrow practically nothing, while the have 
countries can go on unlimitedly borrowing and adding to their gran-
deur. The Minister thought that the United States lending institutions 
were a bit heartless in their dealings with Paraguay. He said the GOP 
is thinking in terms of a loan from the United States of some 25 to 
30 ­million dollars . . . . .
Mr. Rubottom said that it was now his turn to speak frankly. He 
began with a reference to the report Dr. Milton Eisenhower made to the 
President following his recent fact-­finding tour of Central America.4 
He said that foremost among Dr. Eisenhower’s findings in the area vis-
ited was the need for bankable loans-­not grants.
The Minister quickly replied that Paraguay is not at all interested 
in grant–aid, the very thought of which is repugnant to her. He spoke of 
the reputation Paraguay enjoys for paying her debts and of her intention 
to maintain her good name. She does not ask for charity. The Minister 
said he had not necessarily meant an immediate loan of $30 million, 
but something approximating that sum to be spent over a period of 
time—­perhaps on a five-­year economic development plan. He then 
inquired about the possibility of the United States sending an economic 
planning mission to Asunción to make a complete survey of Paraguay’s 
economy; to study her necessities; to find out what Paraguay is doing 
that is wrong; to suggest projects that might be undertaken, and gener-
ally to show the Paraguayans the pathway to some of the better things 
of life. Paraguay, he said, sorely need a well-­ordered plan.
Mr. Rubottom indicated interest in the idea of such a mission and 
agreed, without making any commitment, to look into the feasibility of 
the United States sending one.
Mr. Rubottom told the Minister that Paraguay is not alone in her 
problems. He referred at some length to the multifarious problems con-
fronting the United States, both at home and abroad, and suggested that 
relatively speaking, Paraguay’s worries are no more severe than those 
4 Apparent reference to the statement made by Milton Eisenhower and released 
by the White House upon his return from Central America on August 1; for text, see 
Department of State Bulletin, August 25, 1958, pp. 309–310. For documentation on Milton 
Eisenhower’s trip, see Documents ETA–7; CO–1; CR–6–9; ES–2, 5–6; GT–8, 24; HO–3; 
NI–4, 7–9; PM–3; PA–7.
