1955  371
clocking exactly 635 miles on the speedometer. I drove back on Mon­
day the same way, but do not think I will repeat as it is pretty strenu­
ous. However, I was very glad I went. Harold Vedeler has just arrived 
up there as Counselor and we had a good chance to talk things over. 
Also made a lot of calls including the Acting Foreign Minister, picked 
up much information, and made arrangements with the Czechs for 
Vedeler to start on the extensive economic negotiations which I had 
been hoping to carry out but which could not wait any longer. Also 
made arrangements for me to keep track of the negotiations here. There 
will come a time when I should probably go up there for about a week 
to help out. Found to my surprise the Czech press and radio are report­
ing my movements in considerable detail.
While I think of it, would you ask Newt to send to me here the FE 
and UN tear sheets from the Daily Summary that he has been sending 
to Prague. I will find them very useful here.
As I indicated in my telegram, I felt the renunciation of force 
statement to be a masterpiece and am anxious to use it. I was sorely 
tempted to do so at yesterday’s meeting but as I got along all right 
without it decided to hold off in pursuance of the objective of string­
ing things out.
As I have also indicated I am still far from happy with the miss­
ing military personnel statement although it is an enormous improve­
ment over the first draft you sent me. I hope that I did not ruffle too 
many feelings in my comments on it, but I wanted to make it abso­
lutely clear that I had no doubt it was just the wrong way to go about 
things. Frankly, I do not see why we have to let Defense have such a 
big voice in exactly how I handle the matter here. It does not seem to 
me that is their business. They should give us the problem and the 
information and then it should primarily be our decision on how it is 
handled. It seems to me that too much attention is being paid to the 
public aspects of my presentation. After all the meetings are closed, 
there should not be any occasion to make the details of what I say 
on the subject public, and when publicity is given to the matter it 
can be handled in way we and Defense desire. It still does not seem 
to me that a sterile rehash of the Panmunjom approach is the way to 
go about the matter in this forum. I was, therefore, seeking for some 
new approach in a maximum effort to achieve some results rather 
than approaching the matter from the standpoint of building up a 
public record that looks good on paper to the “give them hell” school 
of thought. I am sorry, but I wanted to get this off my chest, and hav­
ing said it will go ahead and do what I am told. It probably does not 
make too much difference as we are not likely to get anything in any 
event. Perhaps it might have the good effect of goading them into 
raising the subject of the 21,000 and this could furnish material for 
much discussion.
