518  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
by the United States alone another suggestion is that several American 
States might get together and ask the Papal Nuncio to have a try at con-
vincing the Generalissimo. In either case, I suppose it would be necessary 
for the emissary to state that he speaks with the knowledge of the United 
States or the group of American States as the case may be. I am rather 
inclined to give something like this a try on the theory that if handled 
properly we don’t have a great deal to lose and may gain something.
Finally, I believe there is a real danger that without some orderly 
plan of transition there is a real danger that pro-­communist types would 
take over. I am not sold on the theory that the end objective ought to 
be a bloody revolution to overthrow Trujillo. I think everything we do 
should have as its end objective not vengeance but the creation of a 
decent democratic government in the Dominican Republic.
Please let me have your comments on the foregoing as soon as 
convenient.
Sincerely,
Thomas C. Mann
DR–28.	
Letter from the Consul General in the Dominican 
Republic (Dearborn) to the Assistant Secretary of State 
for Inter-American Affairs (Mann)1
 
Ciudad Trujillo, October 27, 1960.
Dear Tom:
I was glad to receive your letter of October 102 and to know that 
you have been able to give your personal attention to our problems 
here. I knew you soon would, but I have also been fully aware that 
we were competing with any number of other problems all demanding 
your immediate consideration.
I am in full agreement with your impression that the problem of 
dealing effectively with Trujillo was made more difficult by the reluc-
tance of the Foreign Ministers to go along with a realistic program 
designed to bring about orderly elections and ensure an orderly transi-
tion to a genuinely democratic government. The important word in that 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/10–2760. Secret; Eyes Only; 
Official-Informal.
2 See Document DR–27.
