Comprehensive Test Ban sume testing after the expiration of the treaty unless a vigorous safeguards program and studies indicate that resumption is not necessary. The review conference formulation therefore should not create a barrier either to having no treaty obligations beyond three years, to having different treaty provisions, or to having the same treaty provisions. —to permit the US to carry out the President’s commitment that any further agreement on testing limitations after the three year period would be submitted to the Senate for approval. We would insist on seeking Senate advice and consent on any subsequent treaty obligation regardless of whether other treaty parties would be required to obtain legislative approval in their countries. —to find a formula, consistent with these objectives, that is more likely to be negotiable with the Soviets and British. The Soviets have stressed that the language must at least provide for the possibility of extending the same comprehensive treaty. —to increase the prospects for adherence to the treaty by non-nuclear weapon states. Non-nuclear states may be less likely to join the treaty if the review conference formulation unnecessarily provokes questions about whether certain nuclear weapon states are already tilted against having a treaty after three years. —to avoid singling out the question of French and Chinese testing in relation to the function of the review conference. We might want to refer to factors affecting the concerns of individual nations, but if we did so, we would want to broaden the phrase to reflect other relevant factors. In examining alternative review conference formulations, it is important to bear in mind the extent to which our interests are protected by provisions that have already been agreed in the negotiations. For example, by virtue of language to which the Soviets have already agreed, the treaty will have a three year duration. Therefore, US agreement would be required for any treaty obligation regarding prohibitions after that period, and we would only accept such obligations with Senate approval. In connection with the tabling of any new review conference language, we would reaffirm formally that such prohibitions would be submitted for a new approval by the US Senate. In addition, it is already agreed that the review conference cannot take any decision on the period beyond three years without the approval of all parties that are Permanent Members of the U.N. Security Council. Thus, it is clear that the treaty will simply expire at the end of three years and no new arrangement will follow unless the U.S. agrees to it. Before the review conference, we would conduct private consultations with the UK and USSR to coordinate a nuclear weapon state position. Regardless of the outcome of these consultations, we will have a veto over actions by the review conference.
