Comprehensive Test Ban
561
sume testing after the expiration of the treaty unless a vigorous safe-
guards program and studies indicate that resumption is not necessary.
The review conference formulation therefore should not create a bar-
rier either to having no treaty obligations beyond three years, to having
different treaty provisions, or to having the same treaty provisions.
—to permit the US to carry out the President’s commitment that any fur-
ther agreement on testing limitations after the three year period would be sub-
mitted to the Senate for approval. We would insist on seeking Senate ad-
vice and consent on any subsequent treaty obligation regardless of
whether other treaty parties would be required to obtain legislative ap-
proval in their countries.
—to find a formula, consistent with these objectives, that is more likely to
be negotiable with the Soviets and British. The Soviets have stressed that
the language must at least provide for the possibility of extending the
same comprehensive treaty.
—to increase the prospects for adherence to the treaty by non-nuclear
weapon states. Non-nuclear states may be less likely to join the treaty if
the review conference formulation unnecessarily provokes questions
about whether certain nuclear weapon states are already tilted against
having a treaty after three years.
—to avoid singling out the question of French and Chinese testing in re-
lation to the function of the review conference. We might want to refer to
factors affecting the concerns of individual nations, but if we did so, we
would want to broaden the phrase to reflect other relevant factors.
In examining alternative review conference formulations, it is im-
portant to bear in mind the extent to which our interests are protected
by provisions that have already been agreed in the negotiations. For ex-
ample, by virtue of language to which the Soviets have already agreed,
the treaty will have a three year duration. Therefore, US agreement
would be required for any treaty obligation regarding prohibitions
after that period, and we would only accept such obligations with
Senate approval. In connection with the tabling of any new review con-
ference language, we would reaffirm formally that such prohibitions
would be submitted for a new approval by the US Senate.
In addition, it is already agreed that the review conference cannot
take any decision on the period beyond three years without the ap-
proval of all parties that are Permanent Members of the U.N. Security
Council. Thus, it is clear that the treaty will simply expire at the end of
three years and no new arrangement will follow unless the U.S. agrees
to it. Before the review conference, we would conduct private consulta-
tions with the UK and USSR to coordinate a nuclear weapon state posi-
tion. Regardless of the outcome of these consultations, we will have a
veto over actions by the review conference.
