1955  459
out all right as the Secretary had both messages in front of him yester­
day and he and Herman did up a Dulte on the subject to you.
The one specific question which I particularly desired to, and did, 
discuss with the Secretary and Herman Friday evening was this: As I 
told him, it seemed to me that in the context of our talks my continued 
reference to “other matters” which could be more hopefully discussed 
following a satisfactory renunciation of force statement included, in 
Wang’s mind, the presence of our forces in the Taiwan area. As I told 
the Secretary, I have very carefully avoided any specific statements and 
have carefully kept to simply the “other matters” formula. Wang has 
also not pressed me to be specific in this regard but he might well do 
so. In any event I want it to be clear in my own mind as to whether we 
would admit to discussion of the presence of our forces in the Taiwan 
area as an “other matter” if there were the satisfactory renunciation of 
force statement. Admitting to discussion, of course, would not carry 
with it any implication that we might be willing to agree with their 
demand for withdrawal or otherwise accept their point of view. How­
ever, I said it seemed to me that it would, as Herman phrases it, carry 
with it an implication of willingness to “bargain in good faith” and not 
simply sit and say “No”. I particularly raised the question as to whether 
any such discussion would be within the agreed scope of our talks or 
whether it would be something involving the rights and interests of the 
GRC and, therefore, outside the scope of our talks.
I believe the Secretary’s view can be summarized as follows: We 
cannot, of course, give any consideration, under present conditions, to 
withdrawal of all of our forces from the Taiwan area. Apart from any 
other considerations, the presence of at least symbolic forces is essential 
for the maintenance of morale on Taiwan. However, the United States 
has no desire to maintain forces in forward positions except as we con­
sider essential in the light of our estimate of security situation in the 
particular area. This policy has been demonstrated by a reduction of 
strength in Korea and Japan. Similarly, the forces we maintain in the 
Taiwan area will be dependent upon our estimate of the security situ­
ation in that area. If the Chinese Communists unequivocally renounce 
force in the Taiwan area and otherwise demonstrate their peaceful 
intent, it could be expected we would give consideration to unilateral 
reduction in whatever strength is being maintained by us in the area. 
This would be a purely unilateral act on our part and not subject in any 
sense to agreement with the Chinese Communists. Such decisions on 
our part do not involve the rights or interests of the GRC nor our agree­
ments with the GRC. Therefore, “discussion” of the subject with PRC in 
the light of the foregoing could be admitted to.
