1390  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
reduction of the threat of an attack without warning, although they 
may have other attractive features.
It now appears that unlimited aerial surveillance alone, no matter 
how elaborately reinforced by scientific devices, can increase warning 
time only to the limit of the duration of flight of missiles, i.e., to 30 min­
utes for ICBM’s and to 15 minutes for IRBM’s. Any further increase in 
warning time would require quite different kinds of measures and any 
discussions with the Russians would doubtless have to examine these 
measures. Examples of these additional means include: (a) Devising of 
intelligence indicators for providing strategic intelligence; (b) Ground 
surveillance adequate to cope with dispersed or even mobile missile 
launchers; (c) Controls on the design, deployment, and numbers of 
offensive weapons.
Any further increase in warning must be based on the observa­
tion, not of hostile acts, but of preparations for hostilities. Examples 
of the sorts of preparatory acts that might give indication of intention 
to launch a surprise attack include; (a) Forward deployment of long-­
range bombers; (b) Fueling and positioning of missiles in preparation 
for firing. It is an inherent limitation of observations of such action that 
they cannot give certain indication of the intent to launch hostilities. At 
best, the observable acts are clear indications of a state of heightened 
readiness on the part of the observed power. It may turn out, therefore, 
that no reliable system can be devised to provide dependable advance 
warning of a surprise attack except in conjunction with agreed limita­
tions on weapons numbers or deployment. Given such agreement, the 
observation or detection of deployments or weapons production in vio­
lation of the agreement might furnish the kind of indicator that would 
be a reliable warning of attack.
With such considerations as these before us, we early came to the 
conclusion that discussions with the Soviets cannot long be confined to 
the strictly technical aspects of surveillance. They will inevitably touch 
upon the problem of weapons controls, controls of deployment, etc. 
While there are technical aspects to almost every part of the Surprise 
Attack problem, it is also clear that the subject of the proposed meeting 
with the Soviets is of such a nature that technical questions are in inex­
tricably intertwined with political and military considerations.
We suggest that any group making preparatory studies for the 
conference should recognize the impossibility of separating technical 
questions from non-­technical questions. If the Science Advisory Com­
mittee, therefore, is to be effective in conducting the study you request, 
we must join with competent representatives of the State Department, 
the Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency and other 
government agencies.
