North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1980 1107 353. Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Miller to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT Your Meeting with President-Elect Reagan2—Passage of IDA Legislation Despite major efforts by a number of Republican members of the House, and indications of support from potential members of the Reagan cabinet (particularly Bill Simon and George Shultz), there was insufficient indication of Republican support for the IDA legislation to persuade the Democratic leadership to bring the bill to the floor today. Chairman Reuss of the Banking Committee summarized it succinctly: “With Reagan yes, without Reagan no”. As you will recall, passage of the IDA legislation in this session is critical. Without it, IDA will be out of funds for most of next year and the United States will be blamed (correctly) for a major breach in North-South relations. In addition, it will be very difficult to halt PLO involvement in the institution, and Tom Clausen’s nomination, if it proceeds, will do so under a very dark cloud. Pushing the bill into next year would also add substantially to an already full legislative plate in this area (World Bank callable capital, completion of authorization for the regional development banks, the normal appropriation bills, the Common Fund, etc.). All this suggests that it is clearly in the interest of the President- Elect for the IDA legislation to be passed in the current session. I strongly recommend that you lay out the situation for him and urge him to take a firm position—publicly if possible, perhaps immediately after your meeting—in support of moving ahead on the legislation im- 1 Source: Department of the Treasury, Office of the Secretary, Executive Secretariat, 1980 Files, 56–83–05. No classification marking. Sent to Miller for his signature under a November 19 cover memorandum from Bergsten, who wrote: “The attached explains to the President the status of the IDA legislation, concludes that only direct intervention by the President-Elect can save the bill, and recommends that the President seek such action at their meeting tomorrow. Henry Owen has already alerted the President to the possibility that such a step will be needed. You may prefer to call the President rather than send this memo, and Don [not further indentified] and I strongly recommend that you do so.” Miller wrote on Bergsten’s memo: “11/21, Handled by phone call to President on 11/19 and 11/20.” (Ibid.) Carter and Miller spoke by telephone on November 19 from 10:19 p.m. until 10:22 p.m. and on November 20 from 10:32 a.m. until 10:37 a.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memoranda of conversation of these telephone calls were found. 2 On November 20, Carter met with Reagan in the Oval Office from 2:07 p.m. until 3:32 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary) No memorandum of conversation of this meeting was found.
