386 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI A much simpler INF agreement that covered only a few systems took six months of intense work and several Ministerials to complete even after the major issues were settled. You will find that once you and your colleagues settle the big problems, a new layer of secondary issues looms larger and must be taken on. Thus, if we haven’t broken the back of the central issues by the end of the 1990 Summit, and move smartly through the thicket of secondary issues thereafter, we won’t bring START into force before the election. The Current Track Won’t Get Us There If the Washington process remains stuck on the current track, we can’t get there from here. Consider: — There is no sense around town that START is urgent business. For example, some proposals in the PCC work program on developing US positions stretch out more than a year. — No work is underway in the interagency process on the big issues such as ALCMs (look at Tab A for a summary of the status of the major START issues). The interagency process is instead focused on necessary work on important but secondary issues (e.g., mobile ICBM verification, RV counting). — We don’t even have a complete US START position on the table, or a work program to fill in the gaps. The gaps include mobile ICBM limits, non-­deployed missiles, Perimeter-Portal Monitoring, suspect-­site inspection, RV counting, treaty duration, and a host of lesser questions. The list at Tab B gives you a feel for just how many gaps there are. — Against this background, the Geneva delegation is doing what it can to work the secondary issues with the Soviets, and is trying to stimulate Washington decisions that it needs by sending in its own analysis and recommendations. The fact is if we continue on this track you will have precious little to do on START when you meet with Shevardnadze in the USSR. (And I think that if in the early December meeting the President announces your meeting as part of an agreed work program, late January gives more of a sense of immediate follow-­up than early February.) Nor would we be able to substitute other arms control action because NTT is behind us, we can’t move bilaterally on CFE, and the process on the President’s CW initiative may not be ripe for your intervention. In sum, START would be front and center in your meeting with Shevardnadze for these reasons and because he will make it so. What Needs to be Done Some might argue that the best way to get to the best START treaty before 1992 is to pressure Gorbachev to make more concessions by continuing to hold back on the main issues while engaging on the secondary questions, and maybe doing just enough from time to time to keep him coming. The rationale for this negotiating strategy, simply put, is
