762 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume III 254. Presidential Review Memorandum/NSC 81 Washington, January 21, 1977 TO The Vice President The Secretary of State ALSO The Secretary of the Treasury The Secretary of Agriculture The Secretary of Commerce The Secretary of Labor The Director, Office of Management and Budget The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers The United States Representative to The United Nations The Special Representative for Trade Negotiations The Director of Central Intelligence The Assistant to the President for Energy Policy SUBJECT North-South Strategy (U) The President has directed that the Policy Review Committee undertake an analysis of, and provide options concerning, U.S. policy on relations between developed and developing nations. The economic aspects of this analysis are to be staffed through the Economic Policy Group prior to their consideration by the National Security Council. The agencies listed in parentheses should take leadership responsibility for the following subjects: —Institutional arrangements, including forums in which North- South issues can be discussed, with proposed strategies for UNCTAD and CIEC2 (State) —Commodities, including commodity agreements, the Common Fund,3 and price indexation (Treasury and State) 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Council, Institutional Files, Box 2, PRM/ NSC 1–24 [1]. Secret. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was originally included as a recipient, but was deleted on January 22 per Inderfurth’s instructions. NSC Staff Secretary Jeanne Davis forwarded a copy of PRM 8 to the Secretary of Defense under cover of a January 26 memorandum in which she noted that he had been “inadvertently omitted from the list of addressees.” (Ibid.) Acting NSC Staff Secretary Michael Hornblow forwarded a copy to the AID Administrator under cover of a February 9 memorandum in which he noted the AID Administrator’s addition to the list of addressees of PRM 8. (Ibid.) 2 See footnote 3, Document 28. 3 At the end of its fourth session in Nairobi, Kenya, in May 1976, UNCTAD agreed to consider the establishment of a Common Fund to finance a buffer stock program designed to smooth out primary commodity price fluctuations. See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, vol. XXXI, Foreign Economic Policy, 1973–1976, Documents 304–306.
