Chapter 8, June–August 1991 1079 5. Nazarkin said that Obukhov, Presidential Advisor Katayev, missile designer Ashratov, General Ladygin, and Soviet delegation members Koltunov and Kryuchkov would all return to the Soviet Union the following morning. Obukhov, Katayev and Ladygin would probably not return to Geneva until the return of Bartholomew. The others would return, probably on Sunday, July 7. 6. Brooks said that the U.S. side proposed to turn the agreements reached on ALCMs and heavy bombers into treaty text. Nazarkin said that Peresypkin was prepared to continue to work with Curtin to reach solutions on the unresolved issues. Brooks repeated that the first task was to document what had already been agreed. Brooks said that the U.S. side would also prepare treaty text recording the progress on PPCM and would attempt to prepare a paper giving the state of play on stage dimensions. 7. Brooks noted that the Soviet side had asked Bartholomew to agree to an agreed statement on Andersen Air Force Base. Although Bartholomew had rejected the idea, Brooks would be willing to ask Bartholomew to reconsider if the statement were a benign one. Brooks asked for a copy of the Soviet proposed statement. Nazarkin responded that the statement was not yet drafted, but that he would provide Brooks with a preliminary copy the following day. 8. Brooks said that he could accept a limit of 25 air crew members on each update of the list of inspectors, monitors and air crew members. The two agreed that this closed out the issue and that the inspection protocol working group would implement their agreement. 9. Brooks asked Nazarkin about a proposal he had made a few days earlier whereby the Soviet side would accept a modified version of the U.S. proposed agreed statement on mobile space launchers, while the U.S. side would accept a thirty day notification following the initial flight test of a new kind of strategic offensive arm. Nazarkin said he expected to be able to give his response the next day. 10. Brooks said he was prepared to make a further attempt to solve the issue of heavy bomber contingency operations. His solution had three parts. First, all reference to such operations would be deleted from the treaty. Second, the current U.S. proposal would be accepted by the Soviet side in the form of an exchange of letters. Third, the Soviet side would accept the remaining aspects of the recent U.S. package proposal on operational dispersals and heavy bomber contingency operations. 11. Brooks then gave Nazarkin a draft3 of a possible exchange of letters. Brooks pointed out that, in deference to Soviet sensibilities, the U.S. side had dropped the term “heavy bomber contingency operations” in the draft letters. Nazarkin said he thought the move was 3 Not found.
