1584 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement hurt our public position. I also thoroughly understand the necessity of not proposing a draft which we could not live with if eventually there is a treaty, but I do think that it is possible to have a draft which is simple and which at the same time fully protects all our interests. I strongly recommend that we propose a one-­sentence article along the following lines: Begin verbatim text. This treaty shall remain in force indefinitely, provided the provi­ sions of the treaty and its annexes are being fulfilled and observed. End verbatim text. I know there are some who argue that there should be explicit mention of the inherent right to withdraw from a treaty if another party does not observe it. I personally am not persuaded of the merit of these arguments. But if it is necessary to make explicit mention of the right of withdrawal, the language I have suggested could be modified to read as follows: Begin verbatim text. This treaty shall remain in force indefinitely subject to the inherent right of a party to be relieved of obligations hereunder if the provi­ sions of the treaty and its annexes (including the timely installation and expective operation of the control system) are not being fulfilled and observed. End verbatim text. At first sight I know that my suggested language seems to be a rad­ ical departure from the complex versions that we have been thinking about up until now. But I do hope it will be given close study because I sincerely believe that it not only would help our public position but that it would also provide us adequate protection if we were to reach agreement. The phrase about the provisions of the treaty and annexes being “fulfilled and observed” provides a basis for unilateral with­ drawal in the contingencies of: violation of the treaty by a weapons test; obstruction of the installation or operation of the Control Organization by a party to the treaty; and also failure of any country such as Commu­ nist China to adhere to the treaty by the time such adherence has been specified in any agreed phasing provisions of the treaty. I realize the text I suggest does not cover the problems of suspend­ ing the obligations of the treaty in the event there is failure to achieve revisions of the treaty which may be required in the future if the agreed control system does not operate satisfactorily. The text also does not provide for suspension of obligations or other measures to be taken in the event there is nuclear explosion in the territory of a country which is not a party to the treaty. But neither of these contingencies really needs to be covered in a draft duration article. The appropriate time to
