1957  1465
we were going to express our joint determination to seek their settle­
ment by peaceful means only. I pointed out the importance of any such 
declaration, especially with regard to the Taiwan area, and that such an 
agreement need not in any way prejudice the position of either side or 
the pursuit of its policies by peaceful means. Yet you have persisted in 
misinterpreting and misrepresenting this simple proposal which is in 
full accord with accepted standards of international conduct and for the 
past year and a half have not even been willing seriously to discuss it. 
Mr. Ambassador, this has also been a source of deep disappointment to 
me and to my country.
(d) Mr. Ambassador, as this is my last meeting with you it is a 
source of particularly keen disappointment to me this morning to have 
to recount this record of the failure of your authorities to live up to the 
first and only agreement reached between us as well as their failure to 
take any steps to resolve these other outstanding issues. When I came 
here almost two and one half years ago I had high hopes that your 
government would be promptly responsive to these few fundamental 
and mutually advantageous suggestions for the removal of obstacles to 
the improvement of our relations and thus establish an atmosphere in 
which other problems could profitably be discussed. I desire to inform 
you that I am being transferred from Prague to a new post and it will 
therefore not be possible for me further to carry on these talks with you. 
However, my government persists in its determination and willing­
ness patiently to seek a settlement of our differences and accordingly 
desires to continue these talks here. To this end Mr. Edwin Martin will 
be ­designated as the United States representative.”
2. Wang replied. The record of our talks of more than two years 
shows we have not done the duty given to us to settle the issues pend­
ing between our two countries. He came to these talks with me with 
great hopes. It is a fact that there existed a number of practical issues 
between our two countries. The existence of such issues between our 
two countries not only exerts an influence on the relations between our 
two countries, but also leads to the tense situation in the Far East. It was 
with the desire of resolving the issues between our two countries as 
well as to improve our relations that he had in the course of the entire 
talks made various concrete proposals to bring about this end. Yet he 
must point out that the Ambassador and the United States Government 
have not given sufficient attention to proposals that he has made.
3. Wang continued. The progress of our talks has suffered due to 
the policy of my government during the entire course of these talks to 
obstruct and drag on deliberately what we have started here. For this 
his side is extremely dissatisfied with the situation of these talks. And 
the responsibility for this state of affairs is not on his side at all.
4. Wang continued. At this morning’s meeting he still would like 
to bring up and discuss with me another matter that is relative to the
