Arms Control and Disarmament  1347
that he would discover that we have been giving “full and frank expo­
sure” of the fallout hazards.
In all of our official public utterances, we have sought to put radi­
ation emanating from fallout into proper prospective. I fail to see how 
we could improve our position by agreeing with the dire, unwarranted 
conclusions of some scientists such as Linus Pauling and Dr. Schweitzer.
USUN has now sent three telegrams dealing with the carbon 14 
problem. I recognize that we have been somewhat remiss in not get­
ting an answer back to them. In this connection I would point out that 
experts in the AEC have been studying now for some two weeks the 
principal report of concern, namely one submitted by the USSR, sent to 
the Scientific Committee; however, something should be available next 
week on this report. In such matters as this, I think it is well to err on the 
side of caution and not rush into something which might be misleading 
and inaccurate. Dr. Libby’s comments with respect to carbon 14 help 
to put the carbon 14 matter into proper prospective. The letter in THE 
NEW YORK TIMES of May 2 by Dr. Kulp and others should help.
The hearings on fallout conducted by the Joint Committee on 
Atomic Energy last summer offer the best evidence that we withhold 
nothing on the matter of fallout. A review of the statements made there 
and since then would show that we are aware of risks from radiation, 
but that the risks from radiation from fallout are minimal when com­
pared with radiation received from cosmic rays, etc.
Maybe we can find a synonym for “negligible”; however, to me 
“negligible” is a good word and expresses the situation accurately.
We do publish regularly and as promptly as possible data on the 
world-­wide distribution of fallout. Cumulative totals are now available 
through June, 1957. Later data on certain areas have been released but 
as a general rule we are almost a year behind in analyzing samples. 
When one considers the magnitude of the fallout collection operation 
and the limited number of people who are qualified and capable of 
analyzing the samples and the complexities involved in the conduct of 
the analyses, it is remarkable that we are not more than a year behind. 
With respect to “complexities”, several months efforts were required 
to develop adequate means of analyzing radio-­chemically the sam­
ples collected by balloon. In the past good samples of soil and other 
items have been destroyed through improper analysis. There is the “fly 
paper” operation and the “steel pot” operation carried out by HASL. 
There is the balloon program conducted by General Mills on behalf of 
the AEC and the AFSWP high altitude aircraft monitoring program. 
Food samples have been collected in various parts of the world as have 
soil samples, bone samples, etc.
Unless the draft of the UN Scientific Committee’s report has been 
changed radically from the previous drafts, I believe that its release
