20
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
Stan Turner noted that you could not simply count the piers and
put the island out of operation for quite a while.
Dr. Brzezinski wondered how long it would take us to mount that
kind of attack.
Secretary Brown said a week.
General Jones noted that we can lean forward and cut down the
time. At present our Marines are completing an exercise in Spain, but
moving them to the Eastern Mediterranean or into the Indian Ocean
would send a strong political signal.
The President felt that occupying Iranian territory would arouse the
opposition of the entire world.
General Jones noted another option where the small islands of Abu
Musa and the Tunbs near the mouth of the Gulf [which] were occupied
by the Iranians several years ago and their sovereignty was contested
by several of the Emirates in the UAE. They were lightly inhabited
and lightly defended and they had limited strategic value except for
the psychological value of being very near the mouth of the Gulf.
Hamilton Jordan wondered whether Kharg Island was important to
Khomeini and his group.
Secretary Brown said that it might not be in the first instance but
in fact a whole livelihood and economy depended on the oil exports
from Kharg Island.
The President noted that with regard to closing off the oil from
Kharg Island we could stand it. He was not sure, however, that the
French, British, Japanese, and others could stand it especially if other
oil producing nations closed down their own operations as a sign
of sympathy.
General Jones noted that the small islands at the entrance of the
Gulf represent the exact opposite extreme of Kharg Island. Kharg Island
is of enormous practical and economic significance. The small islands
are largely of symbolic importance. Another possibility are air strikes
particularly against the U.S. F–14s in Iran. However, he noted that
many of these F–14s were in shelters which we built specifically for
their protection. Therefore, we could expect to get some of them but
not all. Another possibility is Bandar Abbas a town in the south where
most of their navy is located. However a strike on their military forces
would be most likely to turn against us the people who would be most
likely to be helpful later on.
Hamilton Jordan wondered if it was beyond imagination to do some-
thing like kidnapping Khomeini’s son.
Secretary Brown said that getting Khomeini himself might be easier.
Stan Turner wondered about the possibility of simply mining the
waters around Kharg Island.
