1977 185 of individual communications and to carry out changes in regulatory policy and draft legislation that may be required. Further, the NSC Special Coordination Committee shall periodically review the extent to which the Soviets or others may be collecting and exploiting individual private communications to determine if additional surveillance or protection activity is warranted. Finally, the laws which protect against criminal domestic acts such as wiretaps or intercept shall be strictly enforced. 3. The following activities should be pursued in support of the above policy: a. The private sector telecommunications carriers should be briefed on the nature of the threat and appropriate government R&D information shall be made available so as to help and encourage them to devise adequate protection strategies. A similar program shall be pursued for government contractors and other most likely affected industries, corporations and private sector entities. b. The Secretary of Defense shall initiate, through the industrial security mechanism, new and improved personal and telecommunications security measures among business organizations holding classified Defense contracts. c. All departments and agencies shall revitalize programs of security training for U.S. Government personnel who use telephones and other means of communication for both unclassified and classified purposes. d. A permanent interagency group under the chairmanship of the Department of State shall be established consisting of representatives of the Executive Office of the President, the Director of Central Intelligence, the Department of Defense, National Security Agency and the Department of Justice/Federal Bureau of Investigation to review and if necessary to deny real estate acquisitions through lease or purchase by the USSR and other Communist countries that present a serious potential threat to U.S. telecommunications security. e. All foreign government leased or owned facilities in this country should be evaluated as to their possible use for intercept operations and appropriate investigative action undertaken in the most likely cases. Any identified intercept activities should be monitored to determine the threat posed to USG and private sector telecommunications. f. Subject to continuous review of available technology and reassessment of the foreign intercept threat the following immediate technical actions shall be undertaken:
