442 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Soviets we moved toward you in all areas (even as we still protect Tacit Rainbow). Scowcroft: The only question is why we won’t give Jim another 100 km. And the fact is Colin needs to go back into the tank to consult the chiefs. Baker: I will call. I won’t put it on the table until I come back. Cheney/Powell: There will be no problem if you come back. Baker: All right, it’s agreed 900 km but I will call. Scowcroft: With respect to counting rules, the choices have been the maximum the planes can be equipped with or some notional number. The US position is to count ten cruise missiles on the B–­1 and we won’t force the Soviets to count at the same level. The President: Do they say that the B–2 can carry more? Scowcroft: The Soviets are afraid to count them as just four and so on because they figure we can cram them on planes and flood them with these ALCMs. We are prepared to count 20 as the maximum on any single plane with a notional count different for each kind of aircraft. Cheney: We worked this all out in a way that preserves our discount. This is the most important aspect. We’re all agreed on this and we think it solves the Soviets’ problem. Baker: I’ll come back if I have to go to 12. Ron Lehman: On this one you can actually go down to the Soviet numbers. The Soviets are more interested in the maximum limits. Scowcroft: The second broad issue is non-­deployed missiles—­ spares, test-­missiles and so forth. We need to get a handle on those and limits have been proposed. The President: Do we know how many the Soviets have? Scowcroft: It’s hard to know how to verify. It is a big political issue, especially with respect to mobile missiles that we have a hard time targeting anyway. There’s a concern that the Soviets could circumvent the Treaty. The current notion is that we focus on mobile ICBMs, non-­ deployed missiles which are the most easily reloaded and refired. For example, we would require 130 non-­deployed MX. The question is how important is it? Cheney: There is theology behind it. The Soviets do practice reloading, although the idea of reloading silos is remote. Baker: The extremists say you should count them all and then have to verify them all. I agree with the Powell approach, “It don’t mean a shit.” I think we are agreed on how to handle it except for the precise number.
