3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
94
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
Soviet scientists had suggested using PNE to provide storage
space for wastes and for other purposes. He repeated his suggestion
that an expert be assigned to monitor a peaceful explosion for verifica-
tion purposes. An expert could always determine by examining the ex-
plosive device whether it was a weapon or not. He pointed out that the
Soviet Union had also made use of conventional explosives for peaceful
purposes. There were no technical difficulties here, only a desire was
needed for verification to be effective.
Gromyko recalled some films that had shown PNEs. Any expert
who could not assure himself that an explosion was not carried out for
weapons purposes either did not understand the subject or did not
wish to see an agreement of this sort. He recalled that a few years ago a
representative of the United States had talked with him about the pos-
sibility of using PNEs to dig a new Panama Canal. He asked if the US
did not expect that PNEs might be very advantageous in the future.
The Secretary responded that he was familiar with the suggestion
for construction of a new Panama Canal. The project had been exam-
ined in great detail and we had come to the conclusion that the results
of digging a canal in this manner would be unacceptable—PNEs would
produce fallout dangerous to people in the area. Consequently, the
plans had been abandoned. We also had acquired a great deal of expe-
rience in testing PNEs, but had concluded that such explosions pre-
sented environmental dangers. We had also concluded that the
problem of weapons-related information were quite real. One of the
problems that arises with the weapons aspect was the fact that it would
be necessary closely to examine the explosive device itself. This created
many problems.
Gromyko suggested that the Secretary inform him when the US side
would be prepared to enter into discussions of all the questions arising
in this connection.
The Secretary agreed.
Gromyko suggested that several groups of experts could examine
the non-political questions involved.
INDIAN OCEAN
The Secretary took up the problem of demilitarizing the Indian
Ocean. In this question, we would be interested in exploring the subject
with the Soviets. We believed that if we could have some ideas on how
one could proceed to demilitarize the Indian Ocean, it would help us
understand the Soviet position and to decide how one could develop
further discussions on this subject. There were a number of items that
logically came to mind. First—elimination of naval bases in the area.
Another item was the possibility of agreeing on limiting the number of
ship-days for warships in the area. Of course, one would have to define
