Afghanistan
533
189.
Intelligence Assessment Prepared in the Central Intelligence
Agency1
ER 80–10120
Washington, January 1980
[Omitted here are a title page, security information page, and
cover page.]
Afghanistan: The Economy Under Marxism
[classification marking not declassified]
Summary
Even before the December 1979 Soviet invasion, Afghanistan’s
economy was faltering and its minimal economic gains had ground to
a halt. Land and credit reforms initiated by the pro-Soviet Marxist
government that took power in April 1978 caused major disruptions
in economic activity and helped spark the insurgency that has now
spread throughout the country. ([classification marking not declassified])
Kabul’s land reform program, coupled with unfavorable weather
in 1979, resulted in a drop of 400,000–500,000 metric tons in wheat
production. Government attempts to tighten control over commerce
produced frequent shortages of essential goods and led to capital flight
by bazaar merchants, who are a major factor in overall trade and
economic activity. ([classification marking not declassified])
Since the Soviet invasion, economic activity has slumped further.
The insurgents are hampering food and fuel deliveries to Kabul. In
the capital, the Soviet-backed Babrak government has imposed price
controls on items such as meat and tea and established special dis-
tribution centers for essential commodities. ([classification marking not
declassified])
Longstanding Afghan-Soviet trade and economic aid ties are likely
to be strengthened in the wake of the Soviet invasion. Soviet economic
support is critical for Kabul now that Western aid donors have sus-
pended their small but important programs and multilateral financial
institutions have halted disbursements pending a reviewing of their
operations. Even with Soviet help, the durability of the Babrak regime
is in doubt because it has failed to rally popular support and it is
viewed by nearly all Afghanis as atheistic and anti-Islam. ([classification
marking not declassified])
[Omitted here is the body of the assessment.]
1 Source: Central Intelligence Agency, Job 81T00315R, Box 6, Afghanistan: The Econ-
omy Under Marxism, ER 80–10120. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified]. A statement
on the title page reads: “The author of this paper is [text not declassified] Developing
Nations Division, Office of Economic Research. This paper was coordinated with the
Offices of Political Analysis and Geographic and Cartographic Research.”
