Chapter 2, January–June 1989 219 (the U.S. does not have any heavy ICBMs but the Soviets would have to cut theirs by 50 percent). — A maximum of 1600 “strategic nuclear delivery vehicles” (SNDVs), a term that encompasses ballistic missiles and bombers. — Reduction to equal levels in ballistic missile throwweight to about 50 percent of the current Soviet level. (Since this limit is larger than current or planned U.S. forces, it would have no direct effect on us.) There remain a significant number of disagreements as well. The more important ones are: — The U.S. has proposed a 3000–3300 sublimit on ICBM warheads. The Soviets say they will only accept one with an equal SLBM warhead sublimit. — The U.S. has proposed to ban mobile ICBMs, but with the proviso that we would reconsider if an effective verification regime could be devised. — The Soviets want limits on sea-­launched cruise missiles (SLCMs) and reiterated to Secretary Baker in Moscow that a START agreement will be impossible without them. The U.S. does not consider SLCMs to be strategic weapons that should be subject to START limits, and has not identified an effective verification regime that is not unacceptably intrusive. — The U.S. has proposed to count each heavy bomber as though it carried 10 ALCMs, fewer ALCMs than they can carry when fully loaded (another reason why the sides would be able to deploy far more than 6000 warheads under START). The Soviets would count each bomber at the maximum number of ALCMS it is capable of carrying. — The Soviets say they will not sign a START Treaty without an assurance of U.S. compliance with their interpretation of the ABM Treaty. The U.S. has refused to link START and Defense & Space issues, but has said it would not sign START until the Soviet violation of the ABM Treaty (notably the illegal Krasnoyarsk radar) is resolved. UNDERLYING START PREMISES We turn now to a discussion of the fundamental premises upon which our negotiating positions are based, both to understand the underlying issues and as a framework to help evaluate possible alternatives. In evaluating our basic arms control policies and the specifics of our proposals, it is important to keep in mind that we are not pursuing an arms control agreement for its own sake but only to the extent that it supports our overarching security objective of maintaining a stable, effective deterrent. In evaluating START, therefore, we are concerned not just with how it would affect the number of forces on both sides, but also with how it will help shape the capabilities and characteristics of those forces.
