290
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
In Chile, Argentina, and Uruguay, the visits of Ambassador Low-
enstein, Assistant Secretary Todman and myself were preceded or fol-
lowed by government announcements designed to reflect improved
human rights situations.5 The actions ranged from purely cosmetic to steps
which were real but limited in scope. All indicated a desire to diminish the
U.S. focus on their repressive practices.
Haiti—Haiti agreed to a visit by the Inter-American Commission
on Human Rights and to sign the American Convention on Human
Rights and released several prisoners on the list that Ambassador
Young turned over to them during his trip there.6
Argentina—Argentina has rejected our condition on the sale of
eight helicopters—a statement that they would not be used for internal
security. In addition, arms transfers for internal security purposes have
been prohibited. Other arms transactions have been approved or de-
layed on a case-by-case basis.
Uruguay—General agreement has been achieved within the De-
partment and with the Ambassador not to move forward on internal
security arms transfers and to review all others on a case-by-case basis
with agreement that the only issues to be decided relate to spares.
Nicaragua—An initial decision to withhold approval of the FY 77
FMS credit agreement was followed by the GON lifting the state of
siege.7 The Government of Nicaragua has been informed that imple-
mentation is dependent upon continued improvements in human
rights. Two AID loans have been deferred for later consideration by the
Interagency Group. Additional arms transfer requests remain under
review.
Guinea—The GOG stated a willingness to allow the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to visit. Sending military assistance
(patrol boats) has been under review because human rights problems
are serious. The Guinea PL 480 program is also under review.
Indonesia—Agreement apparently has been reached with the
ICRC for the reinstitution of its visits to prisons in Indonesia although
no movement has occurred with regard to visits to East Timor. In addi-
5 Derian traveled to Argentina in April and August; Lowenstein visited Chile in
early August, as did Todman, who also traveled to Uruguay and Argentina. (“Carter
Rights Aide, Visiting Argentina, Warns on Violations,” The New York Times, April 3, 1977,
p. 11; Juan de Onis, “Carter Aide Again in Argentina For Assessment of Human Rights,”
The New York Times, August 9, 1977, p. 4; “Brazil Rejects Visit by Lowenstein,” The New
York Times, August 12, 1977, p. A–5; John Dinges, “Visiting U.S. Official Praises Progress
on Human Rights in Chile,” The Washington Post, August 14, 1977, p. 36; and “U.S. Official
Has Talks in Argentina,” The New York Times, August 16, 1977, p. 6)
6 Schneider, testifying before Fraser’s House International Relations subcommittee
on October 25, indicated that Indonesia, Iran, and Haiti would now permit the ICRC to
inspect their prisons. (Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Reports Political Prisoners Freed
Abroad,” The New York Times, October 26, 1977, p. 3)
7 See footnote 9, Document 80.
