National Security Policy  681
Capabilities and Policies, 1958–1963 (NIE 11–4–58) and Estimate of the 
World Situation (NIE 100–59).
This morning Mr. Allen Dulles is going to summarize the two 
estimates for the Council, after which there will be an opportunity for 
questions and discussion. No policy issues are being put forward for 
decision at this time.
(CALL ON: ALLEN DULLES)
(Note: To the extent that Allen Dulles does not cover or adequately 
highlight them, you may wish to mention the following 5 points which 
were identified in the P/B)
The Planning Board noted five respects in which the estimate of 
the world situation this year differs from last year’s:
1. More emphasis on Soviet Bloc confidence.
2. Decline of Communist influence in Western Europe.
3. Strengthened cohesion of NATO.
4. The restoration of faith as to U.S. leadership, in Western opinion.
5. The lack of Communist success with immediate objectives in 
under-­developed areas.
It was noted that these developments of 1958 seem to look favor­
able when compared to the rather gloomy developments of 1957. 
However, it was pointed out that the East-West struggle continues and 
indeed during 1958 “took on a somewhat more ominous character.”
(Para 6, NIE 100–59)
(Note: If adequate Council discussion is not generated, you may 
wish to mention some of the following issues which were indentified 
at the P/B.)
The Planning Board indentified five longer-­range developments 
which it thought should be called to the Council’s attention:
1. The rise in scale and intensity of the Soviet threat: the new confi­
dence of the Soviet leaders; a more assertive and challenging policy; the 
continuing increase in military power; and an already powerful econ­
omy, growing faster than ours
2. The continuing chance of general war occurring through misin­
terpretation of the opponent’s acts in a major international crisis
3. The growing challenge to the West of the Soviet increased 
emphasis on trade and aid, and particularly the impact upon under-­
developed countries
4. The long-­range implications of the growing strength of Commu­
nist China
5. The conclusion on the part of some members of the intelligence 
community (although, of course, there is a split) that “the Soviet lead­
ers feel freer to adopt an aggressive posture in peripheral areas, and 
probably feel somewhat freer to encourage or instigate armed conflict 
in those areas, although probably not initially with overt Soviet forces.” 
(Para 16, NIE 100–59)
