International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
167
—by pointing to the fundamental strength and improvement of
the U.S. economy; and
—by persisting in the effort to deal with energy and control infla-
tion as the only effective way of assuring a strong dollar.
Attached are:
a) A summary table on periods of dollar depreciation and U.S. in-
tervention in support of the dollar.2
b) The table on foreign intervention and rate movements you re-
quested this morning.3
c) The talking points on the exchange rate I sent you last week.4
2 The attachments are attached but not printed. Attachment a is a table entitled “De-
preciation of Dollar: Rates and U.S. Intervention in “Support” of Dollar (Selected Period,
March 1973–Present).”
3 Attachment b includes an undated note on “Exchange Market Intervention by
Major Foreign Countries” and a table entitled “Official Market Intervention in Dollars by
Major Foreign Central Banks.”
4 Attachment c is an undated paper entitled “Suggested Talking Points” and a July
20 cover memorandum from Solomon to Blumenthal in which Solomon noted that “the
markets continue to be unsettled. If the situation continues, it may become desirable or
necessary for us to comment in order to try to calm the situation, though without
changing our substantive position. (For the moment, I continue to think it best that we
minimize public statements to the extent possible and that it is preferable to make any
moments that are necessary on a background basis.)”
47.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for Domestic
Affairs and Policy (Eizenstat) and Robert Ginsburg of the
Domestic Policy Staff to President Carter1
Washington, July 30, 1977
SUBJECT
Administration Response to Steel Price Increases
You asked me to coordinate the development of possible options
for your Administration’s potential response to the steel price increases
1 Source: Carter Library, Staff Office Files, Domestic Policy Staff, Eizenstat Files,
Box 284, Steel (O/A 6343). No classification marking. Carter initialed “C” at the top of the
page.
