810  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
there are 30,000 relays. The Air Force, however, has made earnest efforts 
to reduce the complexity in the design of later squadrons, while at the 
same time improving dispersion and hardening. The result is that the 
fully dispersed and hardened squadrons are expected to cost less than 
the early installations. The high cost and complexity of the early instal­
lations must be largely blamed on lack of experience and the speeded 
up program, which allowed little time for testing of base designs.
Even in the later installations, there appears to remain some gold­
plating. Starting now, changes could be profitably made only in Atlas 
squadrons after the 8th, and in Titan squadrons after the 6th, since 
the detailed base designs are already too advanced on the others. The 
OSD has now directed inquires to the Air Force as to why certain items 
couldn’t be eliminated or a simplified in the late squadrons, but these 
are not the major items.
The complexity of the ground installations is very largely due to a 
high degree of automation. This, in turn, is an unavoidable consequence 
of the requirement to have a 15 minute response time. Unfortunately, 
nothing much in the way of simplicity is gained by changing from 15 to, 
say, 20–25 minutes. To simplify base design drastically one needs to go 
to manual operations, and that probably means 1 to 2 hours response 
time.
The fully dispersed and hardened squadrons of 9 missiles each are 
expected to cost in the neighborhood of $130 million each. The costs 
may be higher, however, because the estimates of the cost of hook-­up 
and check-­out of ground equipment have been rising from 5 to 15 mil­
lion dollars per squadron and some people are pessimistic enough to 
think that they may actually turn out to be some $30 millions. This part 
of the program may become the time-­controlling factor for achieving 
operational ICBM force, as it is for Thors in England, because of short­
age of competent engineers to do the job.
III.
Since July 23, when Mr. Dillon presented to you a plan for changing 
the objectives of our Geneva negotiations on nuclear test suspension, I 
have been trying to analyze the technical aspects of the plan and have 
discussed the matter with selected members of your Science Advisory 
Committee, including Dr. Killian.
Recently I presented my considerations to Mr. Dillon and with his 
knowledge would like to present them now to you. Mr. Dillon wished 
me to tell you that because of the British reaction to his message and the 
coming end of the Foreign Ministers Conference, the urgency of talking 
to Gromyko has been reduced.
As you recall, Mr. President, the plan presented by Mr. Dillon 
involves approaching Gromyko with the proposal that a treaty be
