Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979
625
122.
Memorandum From Samuel Huntington to the President’s
Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, August 2, 1979
SUBJECT
Four year Goals Revisited2
On the basis of a very hurried survey of the goals material you
gave me today, I conclude:
1. The Administration’s impressive accomplishments in foreign
policy look much less impressive when compared with the goals the
Administration set for itself in 1977.3 This is due not to a paucity of
achievement but rather to the scope and magnitude of the goals. A dra-
matic example of this is Arab-Israeli relations, where the Administra-
tion obviously scored a major triumph at Camp David, but which does
not produce a very good rating when compared to the goal of a com-
prehensive peace settlement including Palestinians and with Saudi in-
volvement and backing. As a consequence of this phenomenon, how-
ever, it clearly would not be desirable to use the April 1977 goals
statement4 in any public presentation of the Administration’s foreign
policy record.
2. The 1977 goals do make for some interesting reading now as a
reflection of the dominant approaches to foreign policy at the start of
the Administration. Despite the fact that this statement was primarily
the work of you and me, it is still striking to me now to see the impor-
tant role in it of the foreign policy approach which you labeled “Liberal
2” in your January 1978 report.5 In this connection, it might be useful to
do a think piece for purely internal consumption on why it was the Ad-
ministration was so successful in achieving its goals in some areas (e.g.,
China) and unsuccessful in others (e.g., Africa). I suspect such an
analysis would relate success and failure to the extent to which the
goals were based on realistic assumptions concerning the hard power
politics of the situation. While I won’t give it a high priority, if you’re
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Out-
side the System File, Box 63, Goals: Four Year Foreign Policy Goals—1980 Review:
8/79–10/80. No classification marking. Sent for information. Huntington left the Na-
tional Security Council Staff in August 1978 and returned to Harvard University, where
he served as Director of the university’s Center for International Affairs.
2 Huntington added “Four year” to the subject line by hand.
3 Brzezinski placed a vertical line in the left-hand margin next to this sentence.
4 See Document 36.
5 See Document 62.
