1168
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
2. Of the eleven nations represented, seven (Norway, UK, US,3
Canada, France, the Netherlands and Italy) stated that they have
drafted but not yet submitted their replies to the UNSYG. Both Den-
mark and Turkey have already done so. In light of their plans to circu-
late their draft replies to the other Delegations, experts did not give de-
tailed summaries of their positions.
3. The FRG (Ruth) emphasized the necessity for Western consulta-
tions with the Non-Aligned states leading up to the SSOD. He cited re-
cent discussion in Bonn with the Yugoslav Representatives to the
NACC and the seriousness with which the Non-Aligned are approach-
ing disarmament issues. According to the FRG, these states view the
1978 meeting as the first in a series to be held under UN auspices. The
German position was widely supported: Belgium and the UK stressed
the need for such consultations with Non-Aligned leaders, notably Yu-
goslavia. Denmark (Schoen) viewed the SSOD as an opportunity for
the West to improve its image in the developing world and urged that
it adopt an active stance at the conference.
4. Belgium (Onkelinx) and Denmark expressed similar expecta-
tions regarding the Soviet role at the SSOD noting that the USSR ap-
peared to have lost interest in the conference. Several Delegations
noted that lack of support for a World Conference on Disarmament
(WDC) accounted for Soviet aloofness. Canada suggested that will-
ingness to consider follow-on SSOD’s could further deflate Soviet
WDC efforts. However, the UK (Edmonds) questioned Soviet motives,
citing Soviet demarche´s to Italy and the FRG as well as the UK for bilat-
eral consultations with the USSR on SSOD issues. France (Mistral)
warned against complaency regarding Soviet inactivity, and foresaw a
renewed campaign to link SSOD with WDC.
5. Turkey (Ulucevik) noted that the most recent version of the
Non-Aligned paper was identical to the earlier draft4 with the addition
of references to a WDC. France (Mistral) categorized the text as an ex-
3 Earlier in the day, the Carter administration said that the “Special Session offers
an opportunity to come to grips, in a concentrated manner, with some of the fundamental
problems in the disarmament field.” Nonetheless, the session “will need to do more than
seek agreement on abstract priorities determined without reference to their achievability,
on general principles for disarmament that may or may not contribute to the solution of
specific problems, or on a rigid programme and schedule of action seeking to determine a
long-range process inevitably dependent on a multitude of factors subject to unforesee-
able change. Such efforts, if not kept in perspective, could result in obscuring the Ses-
sion’s paramount purposes and divert its attention from more urgent problems.” The
United States also cautioned that the Session “must be regarded as one step in a very long
and arduous process. That process is nothing less than improving the security of all na-
tions and their peoples and building a world order in which human energies and talents
are devoted more fully to meeting the basic needs of all humanity.” (Telegram 90685 to
USNATO, April 22; National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770139–
0860)
4 Not found.
