Bolivia  209
BL–35.	
Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the 
Embassy in Bolivia1

Washington, November 7, 1960, 8:45 p.m.
Embtel 2162
DEPT recognizes that GOB may in short time come under irresist-
ible pressure of leftist and Communist groups to open negotiations with 
USSR on tin smelter, concentration plants, etc. and that Paz, despite ori-
entation to West, may feel compelled to proceed accordingly. (Soviets 
are understood to have asked that offer be taken up through Bolivian 
Embassy which they insist should be established Moscow.)3
To relieve pressure on Paz and buy time to implement our imme-
diate and long range plans for assistance to COMIBOL, you should 
subject to your approval, recommend that Paz consider the following 
course of action (1) under no circumstances should he permit the estab-
lishment of a Soviet diplomatic mission in La Paz since it would be 
used primarily in an effort to subvert Bolivia and to replace Paz by 
someone amenable to Soviet direction; (2) if irrestible pressure devel-
ops, Bolivia offer to send a mission to Moscow which would be strictly 
commercial in nature to discuss the Soviet offer; and (3) this mission 
determine what conditions are attached to the Soviet offer and whether 
the Soviets are genuinely prepared to provide equipment and con-
vertible currency for loans required to meet attendant Bolivian local 
currency requirements. Mission could well announce in advance that 
it wants to determine whether Soviets offer aid without any strings 
attached as frequently claimed. This play would prevent USSR from 
exercising pressure within Bolivia and would buy time until U.S. posi-
tion firm. Bolivians would be able to evaluate full implications Soviet 
offer and consider pitfalls establishment of Soviet Embassy and pres-
ence of Soviet technicians and political agent would pose for Bolivian 
independence and duration Paz administration.
Dillon
Acting
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 724.00/10–2660. Secret. Drafted by 
Robert W. Weise, Jr., Officer in Charge of Bolivian Affairs, and signed by Milton Barall, 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs.
2 Telegram 216 from La Paz, October 26, 1960, reported that Paz had stated that the 
Government was in grave difficulties and that he was in need of an immediate loan of 
$10 million. (724.00/10–2660)
3 Additional documentation concerning Bolivian-Soviet relations is in decimal files 
824.25 and 824.062, and also in ARA/WST Files, Lot 63 D 61, “Bolivia-U.S.S.R.”
