themselves in favor of partial and progressive codification of each of the
two branches of international law, and appointed a number of committees to
collect information from the American governments, and to prepare reports
on the subjects submitted to them for the consideration of the Commission
at a later session.
The outbreak of the war in Europe in 1914 which affected profoundly the
thought of the world and the relations of the American Republics—some of
which were eventually drawn into the conflict—put an end to the labors of
the first American Commission for the Codification of International Law.
However, codification was to be adjourned only for the moment. In the
Spring of 1923, some three years after the World War was officially
declared to be ended, eighteen of the American Republics met in
conference at Santiago de Chile, and in this fifth of the Pan American
assemblies, a resolution was voted in favor of reconstituting the
International Commission of Jurists, to be composed of two members from
each of the American Republics, to meet in Rio de Janeiro, to proceed anew
to the codification of public and private international law. The resolution
contemplated the partial and progressive codification of public international
law, and recommended to the Commission the projects of Mr. Alejandro
Alvarez as a basis for discussion.17 A code of private international law was
also to be prepared.
The Honorable Charles Evans Hughes was then Secretary of State of the
United States, and, as such, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Pan
American Union, as it was then organized. Deeply interested in the
codification of both branches of international law, he was anxious that
projects of both should be prepared well in advance of the meeting of the
Jurists in Rio; that the projects should be drafted by unofficial publicists of
repute, and transmitted by the Pan American Union to the various American
governments, and by them laid before the International Commission of
Jurists, for such consideration as its members should care to give to them.
Therefore, Secretary Hughes proposed to the Governing Board of the Pan
American Union, at its meeting of January 2, 1924, that the American
Institute of International Law be invited to prepare a series of projects on
public international law. The motion was unanimously adopted. The
American Institute was thereupon invited to prepare the projects. It did so,
