North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1978
961
World Bank
We should seek a $40 billion General Capital Increase (GCI) in the
IBRD, with a U.S. share of 24 percent ($9.6 billion). This would enable the
Bank to expand its real lending by 5 percent annually for about six years,
maintaining its position as the central agent of global development.
Such a contribution would enable us to maximize our leverage in the
bank.
Annual appropriations of $1.6 billion would be needed during FY
82–87, if there is a continued need to appropriate callable capital—an issue
on which we are now working with key Congressional leaders. In any
event, however, budget outlays would be only 0 to 10 percent of this total be-
cause of the large callable capital component.
With this increase, the Bank could support continued rapid growth in
the upper and middle income LDCs and provide a much needed “cushion”
for them against many uncertainties in the world economy such as
shortfalls in private capital flows. The cost to us is only two cents for every
dollar of lending, because of burden-sharing among donor countries and
the Bank’s heavy reliance on borrowing from the private capital
markets. The major alternative is to limit the GCI to $30 billion, but this
would greatly reduce the impact of our pledge—with only a slight re-
duction in the annual appropriation request and cutting only one year
off the replenishment period.4
Inter-American Development Bank
In the upcoming IDB replenishment, we should support 7 percent
annual real growth in the Ordinary Capital (OC) while reducing modestly
the size of the Fund for Special Operations (FSO) because there is little need
for highly concessional funds in Latin America. The net result would be a
virtually unchanged level of total IDB lending, with a shift from softer
to harder terms due to the rapid economic improvement of most Latin
American countries. From FY 80–83, annual U.S. appropriations would
be $661 million for the OC and $150 million for the FSO.
State prefers to hold the FSO at current levels ($200 million annually)
and increase OC lending by 10% annually ($720 million) in order to pro-
vide some increase in total IDB activity. They believe that the cutbacks
which I propose would have adverse effects on overall U.S. policy toward Latin
America.
Approve my proposal
Prefer State proposal
5
4 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
5 Carter did not indicate his preference with respect to this recommendation.
