September 18–December 16, 1978
367
self-determination,”
Saunders
replied.
He
explained
that
self-
determination does not mean automatically giving the Palestinians an
independent state. A review of acts of self-determination shows dif-
ferent methods have been used to suit the unique circumstances in each
case.
11. Shehadeh suggested that a national conference be convened on
the basis of such a public US declaration in order to formulate a con-
structive response to the CDA. Freij warned that such a conference
would only put a seal of rejection on it.
12. Saunders reiterated that the USG would listen to reasonable
proposal, but—he cautioned—it would have to be politically astute,
something which could move the Israelis.
13. The group asked Saunders what he thought would happen if
CDA were finally rejected by Palestinians. He said he believed Israelis
would implement some form of self-rule and Western world would
find it difficult to differentiate this from Camp David Accords and to
understand why this was not in the Palestinians’ interest.
14. The Consul General suggested that, as a result, the West Bank
and Gaza would be isolated and Israeli colonization would continue
apace. “The PLO can’t help; Syria, the Saudis and the King have their
own interest; you will have to help yourselves,” he urged.
15. Saunders comment: It becomes increasingly clear that advan-
tages of CDA are not understood and that it is politically safer to reject
CDA because it does not guarantee a clear-cut outcome. Palestinians
are sure from experience that they are too weak to negotiate success-
fully with Israelis. More fundamentally, one senses that serious dia-
logue is going on among them, but they need a little more time to sort
out their thoughts. Apart from the political difficulty of deciding who
can make decisions and represent them, the West Bankers also have
some tough technical problems to talk through on the powers of SGA
when they reach that stage. I will have recommendations on how we
might proceed when I return.
Newlin
