816 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX pendence could be their best insurance against Soviet meddling in a time of transition. In this context, a stable structure of U.S.-Yugoslav relations in the present may well help to insure a future which the Yugoslavs desire and which would serve our interests. III. KEY ISSUES 1. Bilateral Relations U.S. Objectives: To convince President Tito that the US supports Yugoslav independence from Soviet domination; that we seek a cordial relationship with Yugoslavia; that we are interested in Yugoslavia’s economic well being; and that we are prepared to continue expansion, consistent with PD–13, or our military sales relationship. Yugoslav Objectives: To indicate that Yugoslavia is trustworthy and sincere in its dealings with the US; that it maintains a balanced foreign policy through its commitment to nonalignment; and that Yugoslavia firmly desires to avoid economic or military dependence on the Soviet bloc. Essential Factors: Bilateral relations have improved significantly in the past year with the visits to Belgrade by the Vice President and the Secretary of Defense, and to Washington by Kardelj. We seek to continue this process by developing ties which will survive the post-Tito transition. The Yugoslavs are quite willing to credit your Administration for this new relationship; they see in Washington a policy and a view which are more open, relaxed, confident and tolerant of the views of others. US-Yugoslav economic relations have generally been good in recent years. Two-way trade has expanded to almost $700 million, and the US is Yugoslav’s fourth largest trade partner (after the USSR, the FRG and Italy). Yugoslav exports to the US enjoy either MFN or preferential (GSP) tariff treatment. American investment in Yugoslavia—the first Communist nation to welcome foreign capital—has grown to about $150 million and there are now some 20 joint ventures, including a $750 million petro-chemical complex being built jointly by Dow Chemical Co. and its Yugoslav partner. Yugoslavia wants to expand trade with the US, in part because of its very large trade deficit with the EEC, in part because the Soviet Union’s share of its total trade has grown uncomfortably high. Recently, a dispute over Yugoslav guarantees for ExImBank loans threatens to maim ExIm’s important loan and guarantee program which has stimulated US firms to invest in Yugoslavia’s economy. This dispute is still being negotiated by ExIm Chairman Moore, bearing in mind Yugoslav laws and ExIm’s needs.
