314
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX
standing on before overall agreement is possible, and we have recom-
mended to the Egyptians that they authorize their experts to begin dis-
cussions now.
7. Review Clause. The Egyptians want a provision in the treaty for
review after five years, which in their mind would be linked to the
five-year period for a transitional regime in the West Bank and Gaza.
For the same reason that Egypt likes this idea, the Israelis don’t. The Is-
raelis have countered with language providing that the parties can
open discussions about “amendments” to the treaty “at any time.”
8. Security Council Endorsement. The Egyptians have signaled that
they want to embody in this treaty the language in the General Frame-
work on Security Council endorsement. We have signaled to them our
concern that this might give the Soviets a handle on the treaty that none
of us want. The Egyptians said they would give some further thought
to the matter.
II. U.S. Assistance to Israel
Weizman has persistently brought up at our bilateral meetings the
extra costs that are entailed for Israel in a speedy withdrawal from
Sinai. He hopes the U.S. will assist Israel financially to compensate for
these costs, and also possibly with certain equipment which the Israelis
would have to leave behind. Weizman has informally put a $2 billion
figure on this and has made it clear he sees it as over and above the
assistance on the two airfields that we are already committed to. He
told me this morning once again that he is anxious to come to grips
with this as soon as possible. He has experts standing by in Israel who
could come here as soon as we signal that we are prepared to begin dis-
cussions on this aspect. Weizman said clearly to me this morning in pri-
vate discussion that he does not see such assistance as a condition to the
rapid conclusion of a peace treaty, but he has also said our response on
this is likely to affect Israel’s final interim withdrawal schedule. At min-
imum, he wants the discussions on U.S. assistance to be underway as
the final terms of the treaty are worked on.
III. Israeli Gestures on West Bank/Gaza/Palestinian Question
We have discussed with Dayan practical steps or statements of
intention Israel might make, in conjunction with the signing of the
Egyptian-Israeli Treaty, to encourage Hussein and the Palestinians to
begin negotiating, such as:
—Reduce military government presence and give more responsi-
bility to the existing local authorities.
—Amnesty for Palestinian detainees.
—Withdrawal and redeployment of some Israeli troops.
—Permit political meetings in the West Bank and Gaza.
