1090  Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI
to Brooks at their last meeting (NST/START Memcon-XV-M-343 of July 
5, 1991)2 were personal, and were given before the new instructions had 
been received from Moscow. Nazarkin was not authorized to engage on 
the subject at all, and asked that Brooks not mention any of the ideas 
which Nazarkin had raised.
6. Brooks said that he had been instructed not to discuss an agreed 
statement on Andersen Air Force Base in Guam. Any discussion of such 
a statement would have to occur in Washington.
7. Brooks noted that the U.S. position on telemetry included early 
implementation of at least some elements of the ban on data denial. 
Brooks asked what the Soviet view of such early implementation was. 
Nazarkin, who seemed distracted and upset by his exclusion from the 
impending ministerial, did not respond. Nazarkin said that effort in 
Moscow was focused on tape exchange. Brooks urged Nazarkin to 
ensure that the team attending the ministerial was prepared to settle on 
the issue of early implementation of the data denial agreement.
8. Brooks informed Nazarkin that the Conventional Forces in 
Europe Treaty would be submitted to the Senate July 9 with initial tes-
timony by Secretary Baker on July 11. Nazarkin thanked Brooks for the 
information.
9. Brooks noted that the Soviet side had tabled language providing 
for only one fixed structure for road-mobile ICBMs to be inspectable in 
a restricted area. Brooks said he wished to make sure Nazarkin under-
stood that Brooks had not agreed to this. The Soviet position appeared 
to be based on a false analogy with bombers and would lead to more 
limited inspection rights under START than under INF. There was no 
possibility of U.S. acceptance of such an outcome. Nazarkin said he 
would pass on the comments.
10. Documents exchanged: None.
Kangas
2 In telegram 7527 from NST Geneva, the delegation transmitted an account of 
Brooks’s meeting with Nazarkin on July 5. (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy 
File, Electronic Telegrams, D910648–0150)
