160  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
that a comprehensive policy statement be in effect in the interim to pro-
vide focus and guidance for nuclear employment planning.
(S) I further recommend that action continue under the leadership 
of the Secretary of Defense to refine and support implementation of 
NSDM–242, especially in those areas unlikely to be affected by possible 
future policy adjustments. Such action should include:
—Continued action to familiarize you and your senior advisors 
with the content, capabilities, limitations and risks of the nuclear oper-
ational plans developed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff in support of the 
national nuclear employment policy, and to familiarize decision mak-
ers with the critical factors to be considered during the nuclear decision 
process.
—Initiation of actions needed to enhance the definition by you, 
with the advice of the National Security Council, of political objectives 
and criteria to assist the Joint Chiefs of Staff in their preparation of mil-
itary plans for limited nuclear employment options when required by 
the President during a crisis. We also need to assure in peacetime that 
in crisis and war there will be adequate interaction and coordination of 
political, diplomatic, and military measures (including both operations 
and intelligence) in any attempt to control escalation through the lim-
ited employment of nuclear weapons.
—Initiation of a comprehensive review of deterrent concepts, 
to include alternative strategic targeting criteria which could serve 
as a basis for refinement of nuclear employment planning guidance 
(NUWEP) issued by the Secretary of Defense.
(S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have developed and I have reviewed a 
briefing on non-SIOP (i.e., relatively small) nuclear options. This brief-
ing on limited nuclear employment options and the status of their plan-
ning was prepared as a follow-­on to briefings you have received on the 
SIOP. I recommend that after you have reviewed the attached report, 
we schedule the Joint Chiefs of Staff briefing for you.9
(S) I also recommend that you and I visit the Strategic Air Com-
mand and the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff within the next two 
months—­perhaps in late September or early in October.10
(S) I will make a further recommendation on the disposition of 
NSDM–242 and the appropriate policy on the issues it presents after I 
have completed a review of deterrent concepts and alternative strategic 
targeting criteria as a follow-­on to PRM–10.
Harold Brown
9 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “do so soon.”
10 In the right margin next to this paragraph, Carter wrote: “ok.”
