964  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
4. Isthmian Canal Plans, 1960 (CP–60–108)
ACTION: a) Subject to the further consideration mentioned in sub-­
paragraph b(i), and taking into account, in addition to the points raised 
in the Cabinet paper,
i) the relatively diminished importance, in the long run, of the esti-
mated differences in costs, when judged against other considerations, and
ii) the possibility of higher tolls because of full-speed transit, 
the President indicated his favorable inclination to the 
Recommendations of CP - 60 - 108, with the proviso that the nuclear 
excavation of a trans-Mexican route be included as one of the most 
likely alternatives—­this in view of:
—­the friendliness of the Mexican Government;
—­the savings to shippers in the lessened coast-­to-coast distance.
b) The President requested the staff of the Department of State to 
prepare for use upon the return of Acting Secretary Dillon materials on 
the basis of which he may advise the President as to
i) the diplomatic considerations involved in negotiating respec-
tively a Mexican, Colombian or Panamanian route, this matter being 
scheduled for a subsequent meeting of the National Security Council;
ii) the recommendation of Secretary Brucker, i.e. that favorable 
consideration should be given to releasing the text of CF – 60 – 105 
and/or a related interim statement in the very near future, and thus 
ensuring that the Administration receives the credit for the new pro-
posals which its initiative deserves.
With respect to paragraph (b) (ii) above, the subject report was trans-
mitted to the Department by the Secretary to the Cabinet, Mr. Robert Gray, 
on April 12 under cover of Cabinet Paper 60–100. As noted, the President 
requested that the Acting Secretary of State advise him whether a recom-
mendation by Secretary of the Army Brucker, that “the text of Cabinet 
Paper 60–108 and/or a related interim statement be released in the very 
near future”, was agreeable to the Department of State.
ARA, in consultation with S/AR and S/P, is requested to determine 
whether, in the Department’s view, this document might now be released. 
A memorandum for the President should be prepared for the signature 
of the Acting Secretary outlining the Department’s views on this matter.3 
This memorandum should he received, under cover of an appropriate 
memorandum to the Acting Secretary4 by 3:00 p.m. today, May 2.
John H. Stutesman
Cabinet Assistant
3. For the Acting Secretary of State’s memorandum of May 4 to the President, see 
Document PM–45.
4 Rubottom’s memorandum of May 2 to the Acting Secretary of State is in the 
Rubottom-Mann Files, Lot 62 D 418, “Panama 1960.”
