74
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
and political activity, his formation of a political government, and
his fostering thereby of a political opposition (refair). Pent-up pressures
are slowly being released, among them concerns over the erosion thus
far of the 1973 Constitution and concerns also about resurgent regional-
ism. The verities of martial law are slowing giving way to the uncertain-
ties of a less ordered political process which may be the harbinger of
promised elections. These concerns—plus a difficult economic situa-
tion—must engage his full attention over the next few months, making
more than ever welcome the prospect of at least a pause in Pak-
Afghan relations.
6. There are, of course, potential pitfalls which could undo the
current desires on both sides for a period of tranquility. One of these
is the refugee situation; we have commented (septel) on reports of a
recent rise in the number of refugees coming across, especially in areas
not tribal.6 Continuation of such a flow, or a marked increase, could
strain Pakistan resources and patience and become a matter of public
concern despite GOP efforts for now to downplay the issue. This is an
area of the world where memories of large refugee flows are painful
and have been volatile. Continuing unrest on the Afghan side could
encourage tribal brethren on the Pakistan side—especially in tribal
areas where GOP control is less than perfect—to join in, creating the
specter of border clashes and bringing the confrontation to more imme-
diate crisis proportions.
7. For the moment, however, we see the GOP willing to join in the
apparent desire to avoid an early crisis which they sense among the
Afghans and to do whatever is in their power to minimize frictions
and to restrain their forces and the tribals in the border areas from
undertaking actions which could move the confrontation to the front
burner.
Constable
6 In telegram 9243 from Islamabad, September 25, the Embassy reported that the
number of Afghan refugees in Pakistan was growing, but that Pakistan was reluctant
to publicize the situation so as not to further disrupt relations with Afghanistan. (National
Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D780391–0802)
