1668  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
instrumentation and spacing requirements for ground based ele­
ments of high altitude detection and identification system for tests 
above 50 kilometers to be installed in control posts established in first 
phase and to make recommendations as specifically as possible re 
satellite detection system to be developed and installed at later date. 
USDEL may undertake to provide names of US panel members in 
advance of meeting and should propose report to conference within 
one week of date group convened.
(3) USDEL should indicate disappointment that Soviet delega­
tion has thus far been unwilling enter into technical discussion on 
assessment of capabilities for detection and identification seismic 
events and recommendations of methods for improving these capa­
bilities. Should express hope that upon clarification US–­UK propos­
als as to purpose and task such group SOVDEL will reconsider its 
position.
(4) USDEL should state that US has, as indicated January 5, con­
tinued its studies of implications of new seismic data for control pro­
visions to be incorporated in treaty. US scientists have considered 
in light of all pertinent data concerning the capability of detection 
and identification system (1) certain improvements to detection and 
identification system that might be achieved within range of existing 
technology, (2) potential of further improvement through program of 
seismic research and (3) question of decoupling as it relates to capa­
bilities for detection and identification of underground tests. USDEL 
should table for consideration revised declassified version Berkner 
Report of Panel on Seismic improvement together with annex on 
concealment. Should also table detailed studies covering major 
possibilities for improvements and possibilities for advancement 
of science of seismology in fields directly related to detection prob­
lem. Should point out that contrary to SOV charges study of these 
reports and recommendations will demonstrate their constructive 
purpose. They do not recommend additional control posts; imple­
mentation of these recommendations would increase the capacity 
of the system to identify seismic events and in this respect serve to 
limit the number of inspections required for effective control. If these 
recommendations for improved instrumentation are considered and 
agreed in light of latest technical data, it would not be necessary to 
reach any precisely agreed reassessment of capabilities of system as 
such. This unnecessary in light US formula for determining number 
of on-­site inspections contained Annex I which takes into account 
changing capabilities of system. Because formula is based on percent­
age relationship to unidentified events, it is self-­adjusting accord­
ing to number such events that develop in practice. USDEL should 
renew proposal technical consideration capabilities for detection and
