836  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
Many times each year there are events which result in a display 
indicating launch of either a single or of a few missiles. These can be 
caused by a Soviet test launch of ICBMs or SLBMs, which are observed 
by our infrared satellites. Occasionally they are caused by errors: elec-
tronic interference in one of our radars, which results in a false indi-
cation; the reflection of sunlight off the top of high clouds or off the 
surface of a pond which causes a false target in our infrared satellites; 
communications error; or computer malfunction. (S)
Moreover, there are about 50–60 Soviet test launches every year. 
Because of the nature of these events (for example, the tracks are gener-
ally in a direction that makes them nonthreatening) they are quickly dis-
missed during a conference of duty officers at NORAD, SAC, ANMCC 
and NMCC. A few of them, however, may persist long enough or be of 
such a nature that SAC takes precautionary actions for survival such as 
alerting crews or starting engines. (S)
In the 1950s and 1960s we had nuclear-­armed SAC bombers on 
airborne alert. Our strategic warning system is good enough today to 
allow us time to flush our bombers for survivability, so we now keep 
them on ground alert. A necessary consequence of this mode of oper-
ation, however, is that the alert status of the bomber force must be ele-
vated on any missile warning indication, however unlikely the false 
alert scenario which generated the warning may turn out to be in ret-
rospect. (U)
Against this background, I recommend that we emphasize the fol-
lowing general points in response to questions about the recent false 
alerts:
• Because of short times of missile flight, a semi-­automated warn-
ing system is necessary to integrate and display information from 
multiple sensors, and provide it quickly to the National Command 
Authorities for decision. (U)
• The automated parts of our warning system may generate 
ambiguous or misleading indications from time to time. (U)
• Fully recognizing this possibility, the Defense Department has 
consequently made human safeguards an integral element of the over-
all warning system. We are confident that these safeguards will catch 
all false alerts no matter how they are generated. (U)
• False alerts may occasionally result in some precautionary mea-
sures for survivability (but the steps taken to date are far short of the 
airborne alert of bomber aircraft that was continuously in effect 15–20 
years ago). (U)
• There is no chance that any irretrievable actions would be taken 
based on ambiguous computer information. (U)
