VI
About the Series
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent
material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional
documentary sources, provide references to important related docu-
ments printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide sum-
maries of and citations to public statements that supplement and eluci-
date the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and
other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supple-
ment or explicate the official record.
The numbers in the index refer to document numbers rather than
to page numbers.
Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation
The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documenta-
tion, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records,
advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations
series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and
editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the prepara-
tion and declassification of the series. The Advisory Committee does
not necessarily review the contents of individual volumes in the series,
but it makes recommendations on issues that come to its attention and
reviews volumes as it deems necessary to fulfill its advisory and statu-
tory obligations.
Declassification Review
The Office of Information Programs and Services, Bureau of Ad-
ministration, conducted the declassification review for the Department
of State of the documents published in this volume. The review was
conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive
Order 13526 on Classified National Security Information and appli-
cable laws.
The principle guiding declassification review is to release all infor-
mation, subject only to the current requirements of national security as
embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed
concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in
the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Govern-
ment, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific doc-
uments of those governments. The declassification review of this vol-
ume, which began in 2012 and was completed in 2013, resulted in the
decision to withhold 0 documents in full, excise a paragraph or more in
0 documents, and make minor excisions of less than a paragraph in 1
document.
The Office of the Historian is confident, on the basis of the research
conducted in preparing this volume and as a result of the declassifica-
tion review process described above, that the documentation and edito-
