Peru 1135 to President Prado concerning bills on La Brea y Pariñas oil fields. IPC gravely concerned over nationalist and leftist campaign against Government bill4 and worsened climate for passage as result introduction six expropriation bills; believes Beltran and Grieve will be effective in defending bills when called for interpellation October 11 but that only Prado has sufficient political influence to master congressional majority;5 also believes now best time make representations before opposition campaign makes further headway and since attitude successor Government unpredictable. This view seems coincide generally your reports. In your discretion seek audience Prado, taking following general line: USG concerned over bitter campaign against Government bill seemingly directed as much against USG and U.S. investment in general as against IPS and bill itself. Expropriation would of course be very detrimental to climate for U.S. and other investments and credits in Peru. To substantial albeit lesser extent, continued irresolution and controversy over La Brea y pariñas, even without actual expropriation, harming investment climate. While not appropriate USG express opinion on details Government bill, it presumably meets GOP requirements, is acceptable to company and appears best hope for settlement this long standing issue. View uncertainty congressional support for bill in face heavy attacks by opposition, we hope Prado will make every effort mister support by pro-Government majority.6 Dillon 4 In despatch 148 from Lima, September 13, the Embassy enclosed an unofficial translation of the draft Peruvian Petroleum Law submitted to the Congress on August 30. It provided for immediate cession of the La Brea y Pariñas property to the Government and a 30-­year concession to the company which would pay taxes in dollars assuring the Government receipt of 60 percent of its profits. After 30 years the Government would own all fixed installations on the property. (823.2553/9–1360) 5 In despatch 221 from Lima, October 13, the Embassy reported that Prime Minister Beltrán and Development Minister Grieve received a 74 to 33 vote of confidence in the Chamber of Deputies on October 12, after an interpellation on the La Brea y Pariñas petroleum issue. (723.00 (W)/10–1360) 6 In telegram 241 from Lima, October 7, Chargé Neal reported that President Prado was confident of congressional approval of the Government’s bill and asked Neal on October 6 to assure the Department that the matter would end satisfactorily. (823.2553/10– 760) At the conclusion of the period under review, the draft legislation remained under study by special committees appointed by each house of the Peruvian Congress.
