732  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
of 2.2:1, which in my opinion is cause, not for complacency, but for deep 
concern.
Another example that I consider seriously misleading—­even if 
literally correct—­is the statement that our projections show continued 
improvements in the ratio of ROK/US ground forces versus North 
Korea in the next decade even at the minimum level. At the minimum 
level, that balance will by 1985 still be 1.74:1 in favor of the North 
Koreans. In 1977 (when in PD–18 you directed a policy of no further 
degradation in that or other such balances), we had thought the ratio 
was 1:1, or slightly better. But now, at the current rate, the balance will 
still be 1.46:1 against us and the ROKs as late as 1990. The fact that the 
balance is improving should not be allowed to obscure the fact that 
it is currently unsatisfactory and likely to remain so for some time to 
come.
And in one final geographical assessment, I consider the treat-
ment of the Persian Gulf area totally inadequate. The PRC material, 
which the OMB has, points out that if we had to counter the Iraqis 
alone—­quite apart from any Soviet or Cuban forces—­today, we 
would be at more than a 2:1 disadvantage on the ground (measured in 
Armored Division Equivalents) for at least 3 weeks, even if we could 
devote our whole current mobility force to the deployment. If there 
were also to be a simultaneous NATO crisis (perhaps orchestrated by 
the Soviets), the 3 weeks would grow to 5. Our capability for inter-
vention with more than a token force in that area of the world today, 
therefore, depends on 1) weeks of advance warning, 2) immediate 
action on that warning, and 3) no simultaneous crisis elsewhere—­far 
from an impressive capability and, in my opinion, quite unsatisfac-
tory. The OMB paper gives no inkling of that, but I think it must enter 
your deliberations.
Beyond the question of specific military balances, there is the far 
larger issue of US leadership. The OMB paper cites a decision by the 
FRG to limit its real growth in defense spending to 1½–2% (we feel 
that a higher figure is likely for 1980 before that year ends), points out 
that the Japanese have been reluctant to increase the allocation of their 
resources to defense, and notes that the US allocates more to defense 
on a per capita basis and as a percent of GNP than Japan, Germany, the 
UK, or France. Though perhaps not intended, one possible inference—­
the most likely one, I think—­to be drawn from all that is that if our 
allies are devoting less to the common defense than we are, we should 
cut back.
We must press (and we will) for greater efforts on the part of 
our allies. But I urge you not to abandon our position as leader of the 
free world’s military alliance. If we elect to cut the burden we bear to 
no more than that borne by any of our allies, we will have become a
