Human Rights 543 State’s other suggestion seems to me a little off the wall, but perhaps warrants closer examination. The proposal is a call for a worldwide amnesty for prisoners of conscience. If one ever tried to actually implement it, it would be a nightmare. Who would decide who is a prisoner of conscience? Are the Wilmington 10?4 One additional important announcement could be included, dealing with refugees. Vance and Bell are now engaged in discussions on a possible new parole that Newsom would announce in Geneva on December 11. If they reach agreement (and OMB approves) this could mean 15,000 additional spots for Indochinese and 15,000 for Cambodian refugees. This would also be worthy of major press attention. Bell would have completed necessary Congressional consultations beforehand. Finally, we have suggested that the speech conclude with the awarding of the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Roger Baldwin and to A. Philip Randolph. An award to Randolph would return to the theme of the congruence between human rights and civil rights. Baldwin’s credentials are obvious. The appropriate audience for such a speech would include not only representatives of the NGOs and religious groups active in human rights, and the obvious Russian and Eastern European groups, but also black, Hispanic and others. Joe Aragon has strongly suggested, and Pastor has tentatively supported the idea, that released Cuban political prisoners also be invited. We need your views on this. The audience would of course also include appropriate members of the Congress and the press. I have already met with Anne Wexler on setting up the meeting. She will take prime responsibility on the invitation list (we and State will submit suggestions). Her staff is already at work. Public Relations Campaign We suggested in the schedule proposal5 that the event begin with a briefing by Vance and yourself on the Administration’s human rights policy. To the extent it is possible (without infuriating other governments by implying that decisions they took were made under US 4 Reference is to 10 individuals arrested, tried, and convicted on arson and conspiracy charges in Wilmington, North Carolina, in February 1971. At the time, African American students in Wilmington had instituted a boycott against the city’s schools in response to attacks on African American students prompted by desegregation of the school system. The boycott precipitated various acts of violence, culminating in the firing of shots at firefighters attempting to extinguish an arson fire. The “Wilmington 10” were implicated in this action, despite the lack of evidence regarding involvement, and, as a result, were perceived as political prisoners and thus deprived of their human rights. Eventually, the case against the Wilmington 10 was overturned in 1980. 5 Not found and not further identified.
