Chapter 4, February–April 1990 469 Shevardnadze said he wanted to make a few comments on the Secretary’s thoughts and ideas. At Malta the sides had agreed that our experts should throw further light on the relationship between START and the ABM Treaty. From the outset the Soviets had seen this as the problem of problems. At the same time the question was not intractable. In Wyoming he had proposed a pragmatic way out of the deadlock of sterile conceptual debates. The Soviets had stated their readiness to sign and ratify a START treaty even if, by the time of completion, the sides had not reached agreement on ABM issues. The only point was that the sides would continue to observe the ABM Treaty as signed in 1972. Elimination of the Krasnoyarsk radar had removed another impediment to completing START. Yet despite these Soviet moves aimed at opening the way to a START agreement, the last round in Geneva indicated that U.S. policy had not undergone any change for its part; the aim continued to be to discuss ways of ensuring strategic stability through a cooperative transition to increased reliance on defense. Such an approach was the basis of the U.S. draft treaty. The Soviets had studied that draft very carefully and believed it offered no promise. Shevardnadze said the Soviets were consistently following a policy that START would only be possible if the sides continued to observe the ABM Treaty. This was a position of principle for Moscow. He wanted to call the Secretary’s attention to the need to continue moving toward agreement on a common understanding defining the line between permitted and prohibited activities. Achieving such an understanding was not a precondition for signing a START treaty, however. He wanted to emphasize this point, although he did not mean to diminish the importance of reaching an understanding on a clear line between permitted and prohibited activities. Frankly, Shevardnadze continued, the Soviets did not understand the motivation of their negotiating partners in opposing a common understanding that the provisions on withdrawal for reasons of supreme interests would include the right to withdraw if the other side violated the ABM Treaty. He believed the U.S. understood that if a side had the right to withdraw and if it believed there was a threat to its supreme national interests, it should be able to use this right in the event of an ABM violation. The Soviets did not see any contradiction here. Such an understanding would not detract from the Soviet right to determine what was a threat to its national interests. Perhaps the sides would continue their discussions on this, but an agreement would only be possible on this basis. Shevardnadze explained that the Soviets believed they had made major changes in their position in Wyoming. These ideas had received a mixed reaction inside the Soviet Union and he could not preclude the fact that Secretary Baker would personally get a sense of this dissatisfaction
