938 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement The Panama Canal Company directors have authorized an increase of five cents an hour but no action can be taken until the three armed services and the Canal Zone Government authorize a corresponding increase, which must come from appropriated funds, for their workers. In the discussion before the President it is recommended that you suggest an immediate wage increase for local rate employees. 2. Job Reclassification The memorandum suggests that an immediate study be made to see how the pay rates of more Panamanians can be hitched to the United States wage scale. Mr. Brucker and Mr. Roderick will discuss ways and means of doing this and it is recommended that the Department [illegible in the original]. 3. Security Positions The memorandum suggests that an immediate study be made to ascertain which of the more than 2,000 security jobs may safely be opened to qualified Panamanians. A move by the Canal Zone agencies to reduce the number of security positions open only to United States citizens would be beneficial to relations with Panama and is recommended you support any plan submitted by Mr. Brucker or Mr. Roderick to achieve the reduction. 4. Apprenticeship Program The memorandum suggests a sizeable increase in the apprentice program and the reservation exclusively to Panamanians of a portion of the positions in the skilled trades in order that they may separate for these jobs among themselves. The President mentioned improvement of the apprentice progress in his discussion of the Panamanian problem with Ambassador Arias on October 12. The Department has expressed itself in favor of opening more United States-rate jobs to Panamanians on numerous occasions in discussions with Defense officials and it is recommended that this viewpoint again be mentioned. If the Defense representatives present a good plan it is recommended that you support it. 5. Discrimination in Promotion Opportunities The memorandum suggests that a training program should be undertaken for qualified Panamanians leading to appointments to at least minor supervisory positions. Recalling that United States industry follows the policy of replacing its American personnel with nationals as soon as the latter are sufficiently well-trained it is recommended that you support any move which will reverse the present practice of freezing Americans in choice
