852
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
f. Some discussion took place on obtaining better intelligence on
the newly-formed Parliament. I said we were placing attention on this
group as a target. It was suggested that we draw up a list of the
members and include whatever information we might have. I said I
was sure something along these lines was under way.
3. Komer asked that we think about a program which is separate
from a) FI collection; b) covert action and c) hostage rescue infrastruc-
ture which would be directed toward the possibility of U.S. military
intervention in southern Iran in response to Soviet intervention. The
program would entail grouping assets in localities that would be key
to such an operation. I suggested Komer send me his priority list and
we would initiate such a program noting that although developing
human assets would take a considerable period of time we could start
our technical collection immediately. [portion marking not declassified]
4. [13 lines not declassified]
5. The only problem that arose during the discussion on covert
action was Aaron’s continuing belief that we can somehow erect a
structure inside without reference to the exile group. He asked about
doing this with labor unions, the Bazaaris, etc. I pointed out that in
each case there was no identifiable leadership with which we could
work. We were not adverse to working with these groups, indeed we
were trying to target on them, but in many instances the best lines
inside came from those on the outside. I told him I saw no phoenix in
Iran about to arise from the ashes. [portion marking not declassified]
6. State was asked to go out to its posts with a request for stepped-
up reporting on Iran. [7½ lines not declassified]
7. I talked with Newsom about access [less than 1 line not declassified].
I told him we were prepared to send [less than 1 line not declassified]
over. Newsom agreed that we should have access but said the first
priority was to have him meet with his family. He might very well be
on his way back to the U.S. within 48 hours. If so he much preferred
we interview him here. I told him he would unquestionably get requests
from other intelligence components for access [less than 1 line not declassi-
fied], but that he could tell them that CIA would handle their require-
ments. I suggest we convey this to the Pentagon, including General
Vaught. [portion marking not declassified]
Frank C. Carlucci3
3 [name not declassified] signed for Carlucci above this typed signature.
