588
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
240.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
the United Kingdom1
Washington, September 18, 1979, 2327Z
245697. CTB Delegation for Okun. Subject: CTB: Approach to UK
on NSS Question.
1. On behalf of the Secretary PM Director Bartholomew called in
UK Embassy Counselor Weston (in absence of DCM Robinson) Sep-
tember 17 to make de´marche along following lines:
—The US government continues to place great importance on the
progress of the CTB negotiations.
—The negotiations are stalled on the NSS issue because of the So-
viet rejection of the present UK position.2 The Soviets consider the ball
to be in the Western court on this question. They may believe they have
the UK and US on the defensive and that they can make it appear that
the two Western parties are responsible for the stalemate and have lost
interest in the talks.
—We therefore need a combined US/UK strategy which will:
(A) solidify our joint approach on this issue; (B) put some pressure on
the Soviets and test their willingness to negotiate seriously; and
(C) move the negotiations off dead center and ensure that the talks do
not unravel over this issue.
—We recommend, therefore, that your government consider the
following strategy for this round:
—Both the US and UK would work together to counter Soviet
claims that the UK would have the same number of stations as the US
and USSR.
—We would propose instead that the UK make a credible step in
the direction of the Soviet position, a step which would include the ac-
ceptance of NSS in dependent territories. We note that this was dis-
cussed by the President and the Prime Minister at their Tokyo meeting3
and that the Prime Minister said HMG would be taking this matter
under serious consideration.
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D790427–0917. Se-
cret; Exdis; Immediate. Sent for information Priority to the Mission in Geneva and
Moscow. Drafted by Steven Steiner (PM/DCA); Neil Michaud (EUR/NE), Arnold Ra-
phel, Avis Bohlen (EUR/SOV), and Robert Steven (S/S); and approved by Bartholomew
(PM).
2 On September 27, Carrington told Vance that his government had “perhaps em-
barrassed the US with their position on a verification presence.” Vance replied that the
United States did “not believe that one seismic station is an adequate answer.” (Telegram
254134 to the Mission in Geneva, September 27; National Archives, RG 59, Central For-
eign Policy File, D790441–1007)
3 According to the President’s Daily Diary, Carter met with Thatcher in Tokyo on
June 27 from 6:15 to 7:30 p.m. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials) No other record of
this meeting has been found.
