and the primary valuations should be completed as rapidly as possible. The
problem of rate reduction would be much simplified by a process of
railroad consolidations. This principle has already been adopted as Federal
law. Experience has shown that a more effective method must be provided.
Studies have already been made and legislation introduced seeking to
promote this end. It would be of great advantage if it could be taken up at
once and speedily enacted. The railroad systems of the country and the
convenience of all the people are waiting on this important decision.
MERCHANT MARINE
It is axiomatic that no agricultural and industrial country can get the full
benefit of its own advantages without a merchant marine. We have been
proceeding under the act of Congress that contemplates the establishment of
trade routes to be ultimately transferred to private ownership and operation.
Due to temporary conditions abroad and at home we have a large demand
just now for certain types of freight vessels. Some suggestion has been
made for new construction. I do not feel that we are yet warranted in
entering that field. Such ships as we might build could not be sold after they
are launched for anywhere near what they would cost. We have expended
over $250,000,000 out of the public Treasury in recent years to make up the
losses of operation, not counting depreciation or any cost whatever of our
capital investment. The great need of our merchant marine is not for more
ships but for more freight. Our merchants are altogether too indifferent
about using American ships for the transportation of goods which they send
abroad or bring home. Some of our vessels necessarily need repairs, which
should be made. I do not believe that the operation of our fleet is as
economical and efficient as it could be made if placed under a single
responsible head, leaving the Shipping Board free to deal with general
matters of policy and regulation.
RADIO LEGISLATION
The Department of Commerce has for some years urgently presented the
necessity for further legislation in order to protect radio listeners from
interference between broadcasting stations and to carry out other regulatory
functions. Both branches of Congress at the last session passed enactments
