The Engineer Corps of the Army has contracted to close all breaks in the
dike system before the next season of high water. A most thorough and
elaborate survey of the whole situation has been made and embodied in a
report with recommendations for future flood control, which will be
presented to the Congress. The carrying out of their plans will necessarily
extend over a series of years. They will call for a raising and strengthening
of the dike system with provision for emergency spillways and
improvements for the benefit of navigation.
Under the present law the land adjacent to the dikes has paid one-third of
the cost of their construction. This has been a most extraordinary
concession from the plan adopted in relation to irrigation, where the general
rule has been that the land benefited should bear the entire expense. It is
true, of course, that the troublesome waters do not originate on the land to
be reclaimed, but it is also true that such waters have a right of way through
that section of the country and the land there is charged with that easement.
It is the land of this region that is to be benefited. To say that it is unable to
bear any expense of reclamation is the same thing as saying that it is not
worth reclaiming. Because of expenses incurred and charges already held
against this land, it seems probable that some revision will have to be made
concerning the proportion of cost which it should bear. But it is extremely
important that it should pay enough so that those requesting improvements
will be charged with some responsibility for their cost, and the
neighborhood where works are constructed have a pecuniary interest in
preventing waste and extravagance and securing a wise and economical
expenditure of public funds.
It is necessary to look upon this emergency as a national disaster. It has
been so treated from its inception. Our whole people have provided with
great generosity for its relief. Most of the departments of the Federal
Government have been engaged in the same effort. The governments of the
afflicted areas, both State and municipal, can not be given too high praise
for the courageous and helpful way in which they have come to the rescue
of the people. If the sources directly chargeable can not meet the demand,
the National Government should not fail to provide generous relief. This,
however, does not mean restoration. The Government is not an insurer of its
citizens against the hazard of the elements. We shall always have flood and
