National Security Policy  477
capabilities. We think it will not make early major alterations in its 
present force structure, although such factors as the increasing cost and 
complexity of new weapons and equipment, the competing demands 
of highly important nonmilitary programs, and the rapid obsolescence 
of various types of military equipment will probably dictate some alter­
ations in the present balance of Soviet forces over the next five years.
98. Likelihood of Force Reductions. The USSR has publicized two 
reductions in military personnel strength: the first, a 640,000 cut, was 
announced in August 1955 and completion was claimed by the end of 
that year; the second, a 1.2 million cut, was announced in May 1956, 
with completion promised by May 1957. In our last estimate in this 
series, we concluded that total Soviet military manpower had proba­
bly increased during the Korean War period and that the first of the 
two Soviet claims may have related to a post-Korean reduction in force 
levels. Further evidence and analysis supports the belief that substan­
tial changes in numerical strength have in fact occurred. The pattern of 
conscript call-­ups and terms of service over the past decade suggests 
that military manpower may have increased to a peak of around six 
million in the early 1950’s, and has been reduced substantially during 
the past several years. Moreover, recent analysis of Soviet statistics 
reveals increases in civilian employment which point to the possibility 
of a sizable flow from the armed forces since 1953. Thus the USSR, in 
announcing force reductions, may have been taking propaganda credit 
for force reductions from peak Korean War levels which had been made 
in large part prior to the announcements.
99. Some reductions probably continued to take place after the May 
1956 Soviet announcement, but evidence is lacking as to the extent of 
these cuts. The promised token withdrawals from East Germany were 
actually carried out with much publicity in the summer of 1956, and 
there were fragmentary indications of a selective weeding out of offi­
cers and men elsewhere in the Soviet forces. But in the fall of 1956 there 
were reports that demobilization had been halted; since then we have 
had no evidence of further cuts, and Soviet propaganda has failed to 
make the claims that we would have expected had the announced cuts 
been completed. Therefore, we do not believe that cuts of the size the 
USSR announced in May 1956 for completion by May 1957 were car­
ried out during that period. The disturbances in East Europe in autumn 
1956, and further uncertainties created by the Middle East situation, 
may have led to Soviet suspension of such demobilization plans.
100. In any event, with respect to current Soviet military person­
nel strength, there is substantial agreement between our estimates 
made on the basis of unit order of battle and those made by analyzing 
conscription trends and population and labor statistics. On the basis
