428
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II
127.
Memorandum From the Global Issues Cluster of the
National Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant
for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski)1
Washington, March 21, 1978
SUBJECT
Evening Report
Daily Activities
[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]
Mathews attended a lunch sponsored by UNA where State-
Treasury-NSC representatives were to brief representatives of the
human rights NGOs on our efforts to broaden international acceptance
for implementing human rights policy through the IFIs. This group is
usually united in its criticism of the Administration’s human rights
policy. After a long discussion of the issues, Nachmanoff asked those
present to say how they would have voted on a recent loan to Chile
which supported basic human needs. The results were little short of as-
tounding. About half said they would have voted for that loan, and
about half against. Even among those who voted the same way, the
reasons were completely different. We then went around the table
twice more—once on a loan for agricultural aid to Laos, and then on a
non-basic human needs loan for Romania—with the same results. Ev-
eryone was sobered by this experiment. I made the plea that they
would take the message to the Hill—that the Christopher Group faces a
fiendishly difficult task, and that much of the recent criticism of it has
been wildly inflated and irresponsible. This discussion demonstrated
again that whenever outsiders sit down and force themselves to ad-
dress the issues in a detailed, case-by-case fashion, they are immedi-
ately hit by the difficulties. The message certainly got through. For my
part, I have never felt so good about the efforts of the Christopher
Group.2
[Omitted here is information unrelated to human rights.]
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Global Issues—
Oplinger/Bloomfield Subject File, Box 36, Evening Reports: 1–3/78. Top Secret.
2 Brzezinski placed a line in the right-hand margin next to the last two sentences
and wrote “good.”
