Hungary
501
garians to explore areas of cooperation which are in the U.S. national
interest. At the same time, we should clear up a few lingering aspects
of our relations which date from the past: remove personnel ceilings
on our respective Embassies and agree on the issuance of multiple-
entry visas for businessmen. We welcome the Hesburgh Commission’s
mandate to examine the INA and hope that the present section 212 (a)
28 will be rewritten to permit more flexibility, thereby reducing both
a political irritant as well as our Consular work load.
D. Complexion of relations: With the signing of the Trade Agree-
ment in 1978 and implementation of the steps which flowed from this
development (EXIM facilities, for example) the emphasis on economic
relations has shifted to practical hard work directed toward increased
trade and economic cooperation. Implementation rather than striking
new advances is what we should expect. On the other hand, we should
be able to look forward to cooperation in the cultural field to an extent
unprecedented since the end of the war now that we have established
the framework. The new result of these two developments is that the
emphasis in our current work may shift from economic to cultural.
9. Political work will continue to be difficult. A dialogue through
high level visits remains our best tool here. In this connection, the
desire of Kadar to visit the U.S. must be addressed after the elections
of November 1980. This may be the dominant issue in our relations
in 1981.
10. Our highest administrative priority will be a property settle-
ment. For the first time in several years an administrative issue may
well be at the forefront of our relations.
11. Hungary in a regional and global context: Global issues—Iran,
Afghanistan, SALT II—are bound to have an adverse effect on our
relations with Hungary and may eventually dominate them if the
present downward trend in the East-West climate continues. I expect
Hungary to remain in the middle of the Eastern European pack. They
will try hard to preserve the progress they have made with the U.S.
in the economic field, because it is in their long term interest as well
as ours. At the same time they will continue to identify closely with the
Soviet Union, with some nuances which are not really that important
to us, but of some significance to the more “progressive” elements in
the society. The Hungarians would not want to risk a sharp Soviet
reaction which would sweep away completely the relative economic
independence they have worked so hard to achieve.
12. Resources: The nature of our relationship with Hungary has
changed substantially over the past two years, but the resources of the
Embassy have not kept up with this change, especially in personnel.
We have greatly expanded our ICA work and have prospects of an
even greater expansion in cultural exchanges. We need an additional
