48  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
STRATEGIC WARNING
6. As achievable tactical warning time decreases, it becomes 
increasingly important to obtain strategic warning of Soviet Bloc attack 
against the United States. Even if some risks have to be taken, vigorous 
efforts should be made, including the development of new techniques, 
to collect and accurately evaluate indications of hostile intentions that 
would give maximum prior strategic warning of hostile action against 
the United States. Because it cannot be concluded that the United States 
surely will, or surely will not, have strategic warning of attack, U.S. 
planning should take account of both possibilities.
TACTICAL WARNING AGAINST AIRCRAFT AND MISSILES
7. Tactical warning of an impending attack, including very high- 
and very low-­level altitude detection and sea surveillance, should be 
provided to assure adequate time for counter-­offensive forces to ini­
tiate action, for defense forces to achieve alert readiness, and for civil 
defense, internal security and other non-­military measures to be effec­
tively implemented. To this end:
a. Our early warning radar network and its seaward extensions 
should be improved.
b. Weaknesses in identification techniques should be remedied.
c. An effective early warning radar system against ICBM’s should 
be developed and brought into operation as an integral part of the air 
defense system, as a matter of the highest national priority.
ACTIVE DEFENSE AGAINST AIRCRAFT AND MISSILES
8. The United States should continue to improve, and to maintain 
at a high state of readiness, an effective, integrated system of air sur­
veillance, weapons, and control elements, providing defense in depth 
capable of detecting, identifying, engaging, and destroying enemy air­
craft or missiles approaching or operating over the North American 
Continent before they reach vital targets.
a. Defense against Bomber and Non-Ballistic Missile Attack. Such a 
defense in depth should include interceptor and fighter aircraft and air 
defense missiles. In addition to primary air defense forces, all other forces 
with an air defense capability which can be made temporarily available 
should be made immediately available and employed as required within 
this system in the event of attack or the threat of immediate attack.
b. Defense against ICBM Attack. In view of continued USSR advances 
in ballistic missile development, the United States should develop an 
anti-ICBM weapon system as a matter of the highest national priority.
c. Defense against the Threat of Missile Attack Launched from Ocean 
Areas. In order to meet the threat of missiles launched from ocean areas, 
the United States should develop and maintain at a high state of read­
iness integrated sea surveillance systems which will provide for detec­
tion and tracking of surface ships and submarines operating within
