1956 853 528. Letter 34 from McConaughy to Johnson1 Letter No. 34 Washington, March 9, 1956 Dear Alex: We have received your 1614 analyzing the March 8 meeting, and two out of seven sections of your 1615 giving the record of the meeting. We don’t see how we can give you any variant to freshen the atmo­ sphere at the next meeting. It is vexing to have to waltz around the floor to the same old music for the umpteenth time. We understand and share your antipathy for this business but our strategy requires us to stand fast and to do nothing to precipitate a walkout. Your pertinacity will put an extra star in your crown. One of the 37 Chinese named by Wang came in to see us yesterday in a state of great agitation. He is [text not declassified]. A senior mem­ ber of the University faculty accompanied him. The occasion of the visit was his receipt of a letter from Wang, enclosing a copy of the Agreed Announcement. It was posted in Geneva February 28. An informal English translation of the letter is enclosed. We do not know how many of these letters Wang has mailed, but the presumption is that he has sent the letter to all the Chinese whose addresses are known to the PRC. [text not declassified] suspects that his name and address were obtained from one of the students who recently returned to the Mainland. There is a printed list of the members of the Chinese Students Club at the University of Illinois, and this list was probably taken back to China by one of the recent travelers. [text not declassified] thinks that the letter to him signi­ fies that his wife and two children will be pressured in some way if he does not return. Of course he does not want to go back. He is completely adjusted and committed to life in this country, and has already taken out his first citizenship papers. He would like to bring his family over. But he is not willing to intimate in any way either in a letter to the Mainland or in conversation here outside of the Department that he wants to stay here, or that he has not been prevented from returning to the Mainland. He is scared to death, so much so that he insisted that we blank out his name and all other identifying data from the letter sent him before we photostated it. The letter apparently is a circular form, with blanks to be filled in as appropriate. This man will not talk to the Indian Embassy or do anything to disillusion the Chinese Communists or otherwise set the record straight, so long as his close relatives are at the mercy of the 1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official– Informal.
