32
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
9.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, June 24, 1977
SUBJECT
Prospects for Eastern Europe
The Intelligence Community recently published a report entitled
“Prospects for Eastern Europe.”2 The estimates provided in that report
are interesting and I have summarized them below:
—Unrest is likely to grow in Eastern Europe over the next three
years. Destabilizing factors include detente, slower economic growth,
and dissident activity.
—Poland will be the most volatile of the East European states. A
blow-up there, which might bring down Gierek and even conceivably
compel the Soviets to restore order, cannot be ruled out. (I have
included an additional note on the possibility of Soviet intervention at
the end of this memo.)
—The situation will be less volatile in East Germany, but the Hon-
ecker regime is going to have a harder time balancing its economic
need for closer ties to the West with the unsettling effect those ties
have on the East German people.
—In the rest of Eastern Europe, the tension is not likely to get
out of hand. Nowhere will dissident activists by themselves seriously
challenge the regime.
—Under economic pressures, all of the East European countries
will show more interest in expanding their trade with the West. Despite
misgivings, the Soviets will acquiesce or even encourage such expan-
sion because they are increasingly reluctant to subsidize the East Euro-
pean economies.
—East European leaders will continue to give ground, sporadically
and reluctantly, on human rights issues of interest to the West. The
prospects are fair for a slow evolution toward less authoritarian meth-
ods of rule in East Europe. I should note here that the Defense Intelli-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 22, Europe: 1/77–12/78. Top Secret; Codeword. Drafted by Inderfurth on June
23. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 Dated June 10, the memorandum was prepared by representatives of the CIA,
State/INR, and DIA under the auspices of the National Intelligence Officer for Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe. (Ibid.) Brzezinski included copies of the National Intelligence
Daily from June 21, June 22, and June 23, which had published the entire interagency
memorandum in three parts. Carter initialed the June 21 copy, indicating he saw it.
