296
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
Also, adopt a delaying posture regarding China, CTB and MBFR, and
stay away from definitely sensitive areas of international politics (i.e.,
Cuba and Vietnam, which give us nothing and cost a great deal).
—Concentrate on Panama, and on other steps toward peace in the
Middle East, so that ratification of the Panama Treaties and peace
progress in the Middle East would represent tangible accomplishments
before we plunge last into SALT.
—Give a pro-defense speech some time this winter.
[Omitted here is the annex entitled “Record of Goals and Actions.”]
63.
Address by Secretary of State Vance1
Los Angeles, January 13, 1978
Foreign Policy Decisions for 1978
Our country, within sight and memory of some Americans still
living, has been transformed from a largely agrarian society to the
world’s greatest industrial power—one in which economic, political,
and social mobility are the accepted order of the day. The fantastic
stories of Horatio Alger, as well as those of H.G. Wells, have come true.
Of course, there is still poverty in America. There is still lack of suffi-
cient opportunity for many. There is still discrimination.
But, day by day, and despite a few deplorable detours, we have
held remarkably to the journey begun by our Founding Fathers—
toward a new nation in a new world in which each citizen might stand
free and equal beside his neighbor, able to make the most of his or her
human potential.
When I am asked about the American people—as I often am by
leaders of other countries—I say that as a people we have today a re-
newed faith in our old dreams, and this is something President Carter
and I believe in very deeply. Because of who and what we are, both the
basic interests and the ideals of our people must be present in our for-
eign policy, or it will not be long sustained.
• We must maintain a defense establishment modern and strong
enough to protect ourselves and our allies.
1 Source: Department of State Bulletin, February 1978, pp. 23–26. Vance delivered
his address before the Los Angeles World Affairs Council.
