Human Rights I believe that this will be extremely helpful to you and the Secretary of State and Dr. Brzezinski as a meaningful way of reenforcing and institutionalizing within the State Department bureaucracy this fundamental policy of the Administration. I also believe that it will be of assistance to us in our attempts to defuse the efforts by Congressman Harkins and others to attach mandatory provisions to numerous legislative bills which are coming up in the Congress, by demonstrating your determination to further institutionalize your Human Rights Policy in the State Department. If you approve this Presidential Decision Memorandum, I will have it drafted in final form for your signature.2 Attachment Paper Prepared in the Office of the White House Counsel3 Washington, undated SUBJECT Presidential Determination on Human Rights and United States Foreign Policy The fundamental premise for human rights priorities in determining United States foreign policy is the positive influence upon interstate relations resulting from greater individual government sensitivity and respect for the rights of its respective population. The reduction of domestic tension between particular peoples and their governments— a result of enhanced government acknowledgment of the rights of the governed—will bring about a consequent reduction of tensions between governments. U.S. Government foreign policy requirements will therefore include a careful evaluation of human rights obligations accepted by all governments with which this country has normal diplomatic relations or other established ties. The Department of State will have primary responsibility for defining the legal, political and other internationally accepted obligations upon governments to respect human rights. The official U.S. foreign policy community, under the direction of the Department of State, will establish, evaluate and review estimates of the extent the United States Government shall support human rights policies or initiatives of foreign governments. It will also determine the 2 There is no indication as to whether the President approved or disapproved the recommendation. 3 No classification marking.
