Human Rights
335
I believe that this will be extremely helpful to you and the Secre-
tary of State and Dr. Brzezinski as a meaningful way of reenforcing and
institutionalizing within the State Department bureaucracy this funda-
mental policy of the Administration.
I also believe that it will be of assistance to us in our attempts to de-
fuse the efforts by Congressman Harkins and others to attach manda-
tory provisions to numerous legislative bills which are coming up in
the Congress, by demonstrating your determination to further institu-
tionalize your Human Rights Policy in the State Department.
If you approve this Presidential Decision Memorandum, I will
have it drafted in final form for your signature.2
Attachment
Paper Prepared in the Office of the White House Counsel3
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Presidential Determination on Human Rights and United States Foreign Policy
The fundamental premise for human rights priorities in deter-
mining United States foreign policy is the positive influence upon inter-
state relations resulting from greater individual government sensitivity
and respect for the rights of its respective population. The reduction of
domestic tension between particular peoples and their governments—
a result of enhanced government acknowledgment of the rights of the
governed—will bring about a consequent reduction of tensions be-
tween governments.
U.S. Government foreign policy requirements will therefore in-
clude a careful evaluation of human rights obligations accepted by all
governments with which this country has normal diplomatic relations
or other established ties. The Department of State will have primary re-
sponsibility for defining the legal, political and other internationally ac-
cepted obligations upon governments to respect human rights.
The official U.S. foreign policy community, under the direction of
the Department of State, will establish, evaluate and review estimates
of the extent the United States Government shall support human rights
policies or initiatives of foreign governments. It will also determine the
2 There is no indication as to whether the President approved or disapproved the
recommendation.
3 No classification marking.
