484
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
high, wheat, the staff of life, is in short supply and is becoming dearer
in Kabul markets. End summary.
3. As of mid-afternoon Wednesday, January 16, Kabul remains
quiet but somewhat tense. The quietness reflects the absence of noted
incidents; the tension reflects widespread unease and anger at the
continued Soviet occupation of the country. Although the Soviet pres-
ence is not visible on every street corner, the passing of a truckload
of armed Soviet soldiers, the presence of a Soviet soldier (military
policeman?) at the entrance to an Air Force installation near the Kabul
Airport, the increased number of Soviet civilians seen living in Kabul’s
Karteh Seh and Karteh Chahar areas (near the Soviet Embassy) all
serve to remind Afghans and other observers that the Soviets are very
much on the scene. (This is to say nothing of the curfew hours when
Soviet troopers reportedly take over much of the guard responsibilities
at many DRA installations.)
4. The ruling Parchamist faction of the People’s Democratic Party
of Afghanistan has made an attempt to broaden its bases of support
through the cooption of some non-partisan, prominent Afghans, of
some former Khalqi officials, and of officials from the Daoud and King
Zahir eras, in an effort to form a “Fatherland Front,” presumably at
Soviet urging. (The Soviets had reportedly urged unsuccessfully the
Taraki-Amin regime to broaden, rather than narrow, its bases of sup-
port last year.)
5. Despite the recent Parchamist effort to form its Fatherland Front,
there are indications that splits are occurring within Parcham, as well
as within Khalqi, circles over the issue of Soviet domination. If such
indications prove true, it would appear that Afghan nationalism is a
force to be reckoned with, even within President Babrak Karmal’s
Parcham faction. There are also rumors repeat rumors that Babrak
himself is growing unhappy with the degree of Soviet control of his
government.
6. Meanwhile, the DRA-controlled Kabul New Times maintains its
incessant anti-U.S. and anti-Western drumbeats.
7. Babrak has, however, made an overture to Iran’s Khomeini in
a publicized note to the latter, carried in the Times’ January 14 edition.
Babrak charged that “certain Iranian men and circles . . . have been
doing vile propaganda and are engaged in unfriendly and unbrotherly
activities at the instigation of American world imperialism . . . against
the revolutionary change brought about by the Moslem, freedom-lov-
ing and brave people of Afghanistan . . .” Babrak assured Khomeini
that the present DRA leadership wishes to have “most cordial relations
based on Islamic brotherhood with the Islamic Republic of Iran.”
Babrak pledged that the DRA “will never allow anybody to use our
soil as a base against (the) Islamic revolution of Iran and against the
