Chapter 6, June–December 1990 857 This issue matters to the Soviets: both Shevardnadze and Gorbachev have pressed the matter with Baker. It also matters to the British. Mrs. Thatcher will strongly resist anything in START that looks like a limitation on the “existing pattern of cooperation.” At the same time, she also has a strong interest in not letting British nuclear modernization become a final stumbling block to a START treaty. The Soviets said they are prepared to accept continuing U.S. cooperation with the British provided it is limited to SLBMs (i.e., Trident and beyond but no cruise missiles). The British would surely reject such a limitation and we would do damage to our relationship by even sounding them out on their reaction. We have little alternative but to hang tough with the Soviets on this issue, perhaps moving in their direction on some other issue (e.g., heavy ICBMs throw-­weight) in a tacit political trade. We might, however, consider working with the British on a fig-­leaf for the Soviets that could take the form of a unilateral statement by HMG that it has no plans for strategic modernization beyond its SLBM program for the duration of the START treaty and/or a unilateral U.S. statement that we have no plans for strategic cooperation with the British beyond SLBMs for the duration of the START treaty. Mrs. Thatcher will not like even these non-­binding statements, but she also does not want to become the last obstacle to a START agreement. Heavy ICBMs The Soviets insist that they already have agreed to all the limits they are prepared to accept in START, arguing that any further limitations on heavy ICBMs should be the subject of the follow-­on negotiations. In Moscow, we again proposed a limit of seven flight tests every three years as a way of constraining further improvements in SS-18 capabilities. We also invited the Soviets to give us their ideas for achieving this objective. They were unresponsive on both counts. The Soviets are very unlikely to accept anything like our flight test limit. NSD–40 says we can settle for the already agreed limitations on heavies. If we do, we will need at a minimum to insist on a Soviet commitment not to increase the SS–18’s launch weight and throw-­weight. (Otherwise, our “new types” definition would give them a free ride on further SS–18 upgrades.) My Ungroup was distinctly unenthusiastic about your idea to get a more explicit Soviet commitment to deMIRVing in the follow-­on talks in exchange for accepting the currently agreed SS–18 limits in START. They argued that it would reopen the joint statement agreed at the Summit at the same time that we are criticizing the Soviets for trying to reopen agreements on issues like ALCMs. That is a silly argument against a proposal that is worth trying and would give us some
