International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues 1137 growing population density relative to arable land, massive ruralurban migration, and high unemployment/underemployment—particularly among urban youth. These factors add up to an increasing potential for economic and political instability, social unrest and extremism, mass migrations, and possible international conflicts over control of land and resources. U.S. international population policy is predicated on the premise that, while the demographic situation is obviously serious, it is not hopeless. China, Indonesia, Thailand, Colombia, and Mexico are among countries which have brought birth rates down through concerted policies. Yet, further fertility reduction will require considerably more intensive, and expensive, efforts in terms of education, motivation, and expansion of family planning services. By virtue of experience and resources, the U.S. cannot relinquish the leadership role in this area. Notwithstanding current budgetary stringencies, the report renews the 1975 NSC recommendation for a “major expansion” of U.S. funding for both bilateral and multilateral population programs and for biomedical research, and recommends high-level diplomatic support for population programs. 4. Action requested: (A) I urge you to consider ways in which you and your Country Team can support national and international efforts to address the problem of excessive population growth. Those of you in donor or potential donor countries should seek ways to encourage expanded assistance to multilateral agencies such as UN Fund for Population Activities and through bilateral aid programs, as well as a greater priority for biomedical research in human reproduction. Chiefs of Mission in developing countries experiencing excessive population growth should seek appropriate ways of supporting and encouraging effective local efforts, especially in cooperation with other multilateral and bilateral donors. (B) Department would welcome comments on the report, addressed to the Coordinator of Population Affairs. We would also appreciate regular reporting by missions of important local developments, including analysis of policy changes and statements by national leaders, parliamentarians, opposition leaders, religious leaders, etc. Muskie
