International Health, Population Growth, and Women’s Issues
1137
growing population density relative to arable land, massive rural-
urban migration, and high unemployment/underemployment—par-
ticularly among urban youth. These factors add up to an increasing
potential for economic and political instability, social unrest and ex-
tremism, mass migrations, and possible international conflicts over
control of land and resources.
U.S. international population policy is predicated on the premise
that, while the demographic situation is obviously serious, it is not
hopeless. China, Indonesia, Thailand, Colombia, and Mexico are
among countries which have brought birth rates down through con-
certed policies. Yet, further fertility reduction will require considerably
more intensive, and expensive, efforts in terms of education, motiva-
tion, and expansion of family planning services.
By virtue of experience and resources, the U.S. cannot relinquish
the leadership role in this area. Notwithstanding current budgetary
stringencies, the report renews the 1975 NSC recommendation for a
“major expansion” of U.S. funding for both bilateral and multilateral
population programs and for biomedical research, and recommends
high-level diplomatic support for population programs.
4. Action requested: (A) I urge you to consider ways in which you
and your Country Team can support national and international efforts
to address the problem of excessive population growth. Those of you in
donor or potential donor countries should seek ways to encourage ex-
panded assistance to multilateral agencies such as UN Fund for Popu-
lation Activities and through bilateral aid programs, as well as a greater
priority for biomedical research in human reproduction. Chiefs of Mis-
sion in developing countries experiencing excessive population growth
should seek appropriate ways of supporting and encouraging effective
local efforts, especially in cooperation with other multilateral and bilat-
eral donors.
(B) Department would welcome comments on the report, ad-
dressed to the Coordinator of Population Affairs. We would also ap-
preciate regular reporting by missions of important local develop-
ments, including analysis of policy changes and statements by national
leaders, parliamentarians, opposition leaders, religious leaders, etc.
Muskie
