1528  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
spoke with you, that the U.S. Delegation seems to be negotiating toward 
an unattainable goal, and that therefore the U.S. must face the prospect 
of failure to obtain our present objectives at the Conference. This seems 
to me to be especially true in the light of your decision to break the link 
with other disarmament measures, an action which seemed vital by our 
delegation to continued successful negotiation.
The officials who advise you with regard to the Geneva Confer­
ence agree that the United States should not now advance the Gore 
proposal. All agree, however, that the Gore suggestion should be con­
sidered as one of the alternatives if the time comes when developments 
in Geneva necessitate consideration of a change in the existing U.S. 
position summarized in your statement of August 22.
It would be my hope that if you feel it necessary to reply further to 
Senator Gore, the reply could be handled in such a way as to discour­
age discussion by public officials of alternatives to our present position 
at Geneva, at least until the Russian negotiators have made clearer the 
position which they will take on the proposals we have advanced at 
the Conference. Senator Gore is being kept currently informed by State 
Department officials of discussions within the U.S. Government with 
respect to our Geneva position. He could be assured by you that at such 
time as it appears to the responsible officials that the Russians are not 
prepared to agree to a treaty acceptable to us, his suggestion would be 
considered, along with others, in deciding future U.S. policy toward 
nuclear testing.
Gordon Gray
Special Assistant to the President
Attachment
EVALUATION OF TEST SUSPENSION PROPOSAL 
BY SENATOR GORE2
1. The Gore Proposal as a U.S. Position to Take in Geneva Now
a. The U.S. should not advance the Gore proposal at this time 
because:
(1) It would give the USSR an excuse to escape from revealing its 
true position on acceptance of international controls on testing.
2 The views contained in the first two numbered paragraphs of this memorandum 
are those of the Departments of State and Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency and the 
Office of the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology. The views of 
the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission are summarized in the final paragraph. 
[Footnote is in the original.]
