566 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement (3) The general support of the Government of El Salvador for the U.S. position in the U.N. and the particular support for the election of William Sanders as Assistant Secretary General of the OAS; (4) The conciliatory efforts of the Foreign Office to accommodate the Salvadoran constitutional 200-­mile territorial water limit to the United States position regarding conservation of resources and freedom of the sea. As part of that effort, the Salvadoran delegate to the Geneva Conference spoke in favor of the United States position barring the admission of Communist China to the Conference.5 (5) The signing recently of a new Air Mission Agreement,6 in spite of the higher costs imposed on the Salvadoran Government for the maintenance of the Mission here. All of these illustrations testify that relations could not have been more cordial and friendly in spite of the stand the Embassy has had to take opposing the position of El Salvador on certain issues. While the Lemus Government has cooperated with us cheerfully on important issues, our concessions to them have been few and relatively minor in importance. There were accommodations made to El Salvador during the Osorio administration;7 but since the inauguration of President Lemus, the one major favorable concession on our part has been the agreement to sell 28 U.S. used airplanes to El Salvador. It is against this background that we measure the present problem. Each item that follows can be defended cogently and persuasively as the proper course for the United States to follow. Each can be justified in terms of our policies and objectives. Each alone can be managed within its own context. However, when all are taken together the composite is not manageable. In combination they raise the broad question of whether we have given enough attention to the overall aspects. They also raise the further question, Does the Department consider that any changes are in order? (1) The delay in inviting Lemus to Washington. The Lemus visit has been under consideration for more than a year. He first publicly expressed a desire to visit the United States while President-­elect. Neither Lemus nor any of the other high officials of his Government have made any secret of the importance they attach to this visit. It has been the subject of radio and press commentary. In a recent conversation with the U.S. Military Attaché in El Salvador, an official of the 5 Reference is to the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, held at Geneva, February 24–April 27, 1958; for documentation, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. II, United Nations and General International Matters, Chapter 8. 6 For the text of the Air Force Mission Agreement, signed at San Salvador, November 21, 1957, see United States Treaties and other International Agreements (UST), vol. 8 (pt. 2), p. 2356. 7 Lt. Col. Oscar Osorio, President of El Salvador, September 14, 1950-September 14, 1956.
