1594  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
438.	 Memorandum From Beckler to Killian1
Washington, March 11, 1959
SUBJECT
Thoughts on Geneva Follow-­Up
1. The conclusions of the Panel on Seismic Improvement with 
respect to the possibility of concealing underground nuclear tests have 
fundamentally altered the U.S. position in the Geneva conference. For 
it now appears that even if the Soviets were to accept our conditions for 
the monitoring of nuclear testing, there is insufficient technical basis 
for assuming that a reasonable detection network can be devised to 
assure high confidence in the detection of clandestine tests. One pos­
sible exception to this is the fact that automatic detectors in sufficient 
density in seismic areas might give high probability of detecting inten­
tionally concealed nuclear tests. Although this possibility needs further 
investigation and study, it is not clear that we would be prepared to 
seriously advance this system without actual tests of its reliability and 
non-­jammability. Further, such a system may be unacceptable to the 
Soviets because of the number of inspections required of the detector 
sites to assure continuous operation of the stations.
Because the conclusion on concealment fundamentally alters the 
U.S. position at Geneva, it might be well to reinforce the technical con­
clusion with further examination by other experts. There were only 
a few members of the Panel who could professionally participate in 
the conclusion. It would also be well to involve British experts, such 
as Penney, not only because of his technical competence but because 
the conclusion on concealment would undermine the British position 
in Geneva. It may not be possible to improve the technical basis of the 
conclusion because the imperfectness of the medium involved, i.e. the 
earth, will undoubtedly require testing under actual environments to 
check out the theory.
2. This new development seriously weakens the psychological 
advantage of the U.S. that might otherwise accrue if we were to break 
on the basis of the veto issue. It can no longer be maintained that the 
U.S. would be willing to continue the discussions if the Soviets were 
to capitulate on the veto issue. Hence, the Soviets would have a good 
chance of convincing world opinion that U.S. distrust of Soviet motives 
coupled with an insecure technical position prompted the U.S. to break.
1 Source: Mitigating effects of withdrawal from nuclear testing suspension talks. 
Secret. 3 pp. Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Additional Records of the 
Office of the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, Disarmament-­Nuclear Policy.
