384 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement would give thought to statement before our next meeting and hoped at that time I could have his very considered views on statement. 22. He had raised question of press statement. I assured him I did not give any information to press regarding our last meeting. It should be quite apparent from newspaper stories themselves that information they published was not accurate. Newspaper articles which I saw had said I presented and discussed in detail the question of missing military personnel. We both knew that was not correct. I could only assume that in light public statements and discussion this subject, which had taken place in United States even before these talks, that newspaper men assumed that was what we had discussed. I certainly gave them no information whatsoever. 23. Wang said I had stated UK Charge in Peking not able perform his functions and that he had not received replies to questions he had raised. This was not accurate. As he understood situation ­British Charge had not up to that time made formal approach to Chinese Government. If UK Charge formally contacted Chinese Government regarding UK functions assumed under agreed announcement, Wang’s government would certainly be available to him. Chinese Government willing con­ sider any proposal which reasonable and served improve relations between China and the US and thus facilitated progress our talks. 24. I said I had no more to say and hoped at next meeting to have his government’s very considered views on statement I had made this morning. I suggested we meet again Friday, October 14. 25. Wang said he hoped I would be able to give concrete views concerning embargo question introduced by his side. 26. I replied our view on timing discussion of that question was contained in statement I made this morning. 27. Wang said he could not agree to any fixed order of discussion. His side would continue to comment on our subjects and hoped we would do likewise. He agreed date for next meeting. 28. I said point I had made on timing was not made in procedural sense but in substantive sense. 29. We agreed without discussion on press release identical last meeting. Gowen
