Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II Possible Early Actions 1. Military Aid. The Administration will have to submit its Fiscal ’78 budget request for military aid under the Security Assistance Act in March. Section 502(b) of this Act (enacted last summer),4 requires that no security assistance be provided to any government “which engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights” except under extraordinary circumstances. Because of this provision, and the last Administration’s flagrant violation of it, the content of these budget requests will be taken as the single most important signal of this Administration’s policies on human rights. In Fiscal ’77, Congress cut off all military aid to Chile and Uruguay, and attention is now focused on a total prohibition of military aid to Argentina (current level: $49 million) and a cutback for South Korea, as well as on Iran, Indonesia and the Philippines. Although time is extremely short, if decisions can be reached quickly enough, there is some opportunity for quiet diplomacy to show results by March, or at least before Congressional action occurs. For example, a government’s willingness to allow field visits by representatives of international organizations and non-governmental organizations and to provide all data requested by them, might be taken to weigh significantly in favor of continuing security assistance. Another option—going one step further—would be to cut from the requests of the worst violators, anything that might be directly used for maintaining a repressive regime in power. In other words, to distinguish between items necessary to maintaining internal security and those used for external defense. Simultaneous with the budget request, the State Department is also required by Section 502(b) to send up reports on the status of human rights in each country for which a budget request is made. In the past, these reports have become another bone of contention because they have been intentionally incomplete and evasive. If this Administration is serious about human rights, a major effort should be taken to see that these reports are as honest, complete and unclassified as security requirements allow. In sum, Congress—if kept informed—will welcome a gradual implementation of Section 502(b) as long as the Administration shows its clear intent to support the spirit of the language. On a case-by-case basis (no attempt should be made to establish global guidelines) the Administration can request signals from the more extreme violators which would indicate their willingness to improve the human rights
