474 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV desirability of a policy of escalation control based on a range of SIOP and non-SIOP options. We find, however, that there are serious deficiencies in current plans and capabilities to carry out a strategy of escalation control. There has been inadequate political input into the planning of nuclear options, particularly non-SIOP options. There are deficiencies in the integration of limited nuclear options with non-­nuclear plans, and an absence of political, economic and psychological plans to complement non-SIOP options. Further, the plans for limited use of nuclear weapons have not been sufficiently exercised with the participation of high level political and military leaders. The vulnerability of forces and Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (C3I) also limits the effectiveness of an escalation control strategy. As a result, the US Government may not be adequately prepared to deal with a crisis which could involve nuclear weapons, should it occur. Dealing with a nuclear crisis in the multilateral framework of NATO would be even more difficult. 3. General War Plans. Our general war plans are designed to meet the following principal objectives, the last three of which are to be accomplished “to the extent practicable:” (1) impede recovery of the Soviet Union both in the short term and the long term; (2) destroy Soviet national political and military leadership and command and control; (3) destroy Soviet nuclear forces, and (4) destroy Soviet non-­ nuclear forces. Although targeting to impede recovery receives highest priority [less than 1 line not declassified] it is not clear that threatening to impede recovery by destroying large amounts of Soviet population and industry is the most effective deterrent, particularly in situations less than general war. Nor is it clear that our current targeting would, in effect, subsequently impede recovery, in the long-­term (as distinct from reducing Soviet GNP sharply, which it clearly would do). Furthermore, we have no confidence that our present targeting plans would prolong Soviet recovery more than our own if massive attacks were launched by both sides. While planning contemplates the possibility of withholding attacks on recovery targets if substantial US urban/industrial assets survive an initial attack (and this is appropriate in our view), the endurance and survivability of our forces and their supporting command, control, communications and intelligence are not sufficient to support such a strategy. In all large scale attacks on Soviet recovery targets (and indeed on military forces) there would be substantial Soviet population losses (at least tens of millions). But, if Soviet civil defense plans are successfully implemented, these levels could be significantly reduced. If the Soviets or the US could effectively shelter and thereby protect a significant portion of their labor force, this should have an important bearing on
