Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII not declassified] million for a total Afghan program budget of $30 million.5 (S/[handling restriction not declassified]) Stansfield Turner6 5 There is no indication on the original of the SCC Chairman’s approval. Attached but not printed is a summary of projected expenditures for the Afghan covert action program, divided into three items: covert paramilitary [text not declassified], covert action [text not declassified], and intelligence collection [text not declassified] for a total of $30 million. This list is further broken down into an itemized list, also attached but not printed. In addition, two intelligence cables updating the Chief of Station in Islamabad on the status of the covert action program and a list of “propaganda themes” for promulgation on Afghan radio are attached but not printed. 6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature. 215. Analysis Paper Prepared in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research1 Washington, February 21, 1980 1. AFGHANISTAN IN TURMOIL The Afghan nationalist rebels are steadily expanding their area of influence as the government forces disintegrate. Babrak Karmal, the Soviet puppet, is despised and ridiculed, while increased conflict between Khalqis and Parchamists has created political anarchy. Another change at the top is likely, but another leftist in Babrak’s place would not promise to end the drift into chaos. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan may have been intended to establish stability, but it has had the opposite effect. The Soviets vastly overrated the clout of the Parchamist supporters of Babrak Karmal, who rules from an even narrower base than his predecessors. The key problem, however, is the popular revulsion to the Soviet presence. Soviet forces were probably expected to stiffen the Afghan army and free it to fight insurgents as the Soviets secured the cities, roads, and key installations. But the Soviet presence has caused army units to evaporate as Afghan soldiers join the nationalists in ever 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
