National Security Policy 579 weapons technology. Thus, by the end of the period the current lim­ itation on the allocation of nuclear materials to air defense and tacti­ cal operations will have eased, although even then and for a longer period, limitations imposed by the availability of fissionable materials will still be felt.13 121. Prior to its suspension of testing in March 1958, the USSR had probably developed types of nuclear weapons which could meet most of its major requirements for such weapons. However, strong technical motivations have continued to exist for further testing, for example in the categories of lighter-­weight, more efficient war­ heads for air defense and other purposes, higher yield warheads, and antimissile defense techniques. The USSR’s reasons for conducting nuclear tests in the fall of 1958 probably included the desire to ful­ fill technical requirements and, to a lesser extent, the desire to create a situation in which there would be increased world pressure for a ban on further testing. Considering the achievements of the Soviet nuclear test program to date and the broader advantages the USSR may feel it can achieve by negotiating a multilateral test cessation, we believe that technical requirements alone would not prevent the USSR from joining in a test ban. We also believe that if an agreed ban with a suitable control system were negotiated, the Soviets would be unlikely to attempt to carry out a concealed test or abrogate the agree­ ment, at least for some time, but would incorporate into their weap­ ons program such refinements as could be achieved without new test explosions. 122. Although we do not know the Soviet estimate of minimum stockpile requirements for fissionable materials, we doubt that such requirements have been met and we know that production facilities are expanding. Therefore, while the USSR might enter negotiations on cessation of weapons material production, we believe it would neither unilaterally cease such production nor agree to mutual cessation in the near future. Guided Missiles 123. The USSR continues to press ahead with an extensive research and development program embracing all major categories of guided missiles. Soviet achievements in surface-­to-surface ballistic missiles have been especially impressive, and substantial success has also been 13 For estimates of present and future cumulative availability of fissionable material
