124 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX —Provided the Romanians properly implement the current cultural agreement, expand ICA exchanges with Romania using funds reprogrammed from the Soviet Union. POLAND Poland has been modestly helpful on the hostage issue through private demarches to the Iranians and public statements on the primacy of diplomatic immunity and inviolability. On Afghanistan, its apparent efforts to get by with the minimum acceptable to the Soviet Union were overshadowed by its defense of Soviet action in the General Assembly debate. Consistent with Poland’s exhibition of some restraint on Iran and with our general policy objectives in Eastern Europe, we should, over the near term, give consideration to the following steps with Poland: —Proceed with the next round of CSCE discussions tentatively scheduled for Washington in March. —Invite higher-level participation in the U.S.-Polish Roundtable, also planned for Washington in April, perhaps making explicit our desire for a Frelek visit. —Propose a visit to Poland and another Eastern European country by DOD’s National Defense University. —Propose a visit to Poland and another Eastern European country by the White House Fellows, whose trip to the Soviet Union has just been cancelled. —Should further P.L. 480 funds become available, consider including Poland in the program. [N.B. This will require a country-specific Presidential Decision.] —Ensure continuation of U.S.-Polish S&T exchanges by seeking new Congressionally-authorized funding for FY–1982. —Expand modestly ICA exchanges with Poland using funds reprogrammed from the Soviet Union. —Increase Poland’s fishing allocation by using quotas previously reserved for the Soviet Union. —Depending upon the reaction of the Western Europeans we are consulting with, encourage Poland to join the IMF/IBRD. [N.B. This requires further discussion within the government and consultation with allies.] —Encourage private U.S.-Polish cooperation in health, particularly the Project Hope involvement in the Lodz Hospital project. HUNGARY Hungary has coupled expressions of understanding for Iran’s alleged historical grievances against the U.S. with lower-key denunci-
