Paraguay  1019
PA–12.	
Memorandum of Conservation, Department of State1

Washington, September 29, 1960
SUBJECT
U.S.-Paraguayan Relations
PARTICIPANTS
Thomas C. Mann, Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs
Ambassador Harry F. Stimpson, Jr.2
C. A. Boonstra, Director, Office of East Coast Affairs, ARA
Charles C. Carson, O-in-C, Paraguayan Affairs, ARA/EST
William T. Pryos, Staff Aide, ARA
Ambassador Stimpson reviewed his conversations regarding 
Paraguay’s political-­economic situation over the past two weeks with 
officials of the Department and other U.S. agencies and of certain inter-
national agencies. He stated that, out of those talks and out of his expe-
riences in Asunción during the last twelve months, he had come to the 
conclusion that, the troublesome stigma of dictatorship of the Stroessner 
government notwithstanding, the U.S. should pursue a policy of work-
ing with the regime. [text not declassified] Meanwhile, he continued, 
we should encourage Paraguay to move forward with the nationwide 
municipal council elections slated for October 16 and, subsequently, 
with other steps toward more representative government. We should, 
for example, try discreetly to foster an agreement between the GOP and 
the opposition—­including the Liberal Party, the Febrerista Party and 
dissident elements of the ruling Colorrdo Party—­so that the latter, with 
guarantees of a free press and other civil liberties, could be persuaded 
to take part in the next congressional and presidential elections.
The Ambassador noted that, the Paraguayans have amply demon-
strated their friendship for the U.S. Surely it is in our best interests to 
try to preserve that reservoir of good will in the area. One of our pri-
mary political objectives in Paraguay should be to make certain that it 
continues to cooperate with U.S. policies in the OAS and in the UK. By 
diplomatic efforts we should do everything possible to maintain politi-
cal stability in Paraguay—­and in the River Plate region generally—­and 
help to prevent any further communist and leftist infiltrations into the 
country from neighboring states. Our next step, once the threat to inter-
nal security is eliminated, should be to try to convince Paraguay of the 
wisdom of reducing the size of its armed forces and of using its now 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/EST Files, Lot 62 D 354. Confidential. [illegible 
in the original].
2 [text is illegible].
