of the Government of Chile before my Government.
There was a time, Your Excellency, when the traditions of the past united us
fraternally in the shadow of a history forged by common heroes on a soil
whose continuity was marked by the hand of God.
In the course of time peoples unite or separate, according to the voice that
moved them. There was an epoch during which predominated dissolving
forces which provoked the perpetual anarchy of the universe; but today, by
the law of evolution which transforms primitive instincts into intelligence,
forces of cooperation dominate the world; these forces weld men and
peoples and establish the reign of peace and love.
Believing thus, His Excellency the Secretary of State, Mr. Frank B.
Kellogg, proposed the suggestion, which we accepted, that diplomatic
relations between our two peoples be reestablished. These relations were
broken in a moment when human conscience had not revealed its strength
for transforming the past, embittered by wars, into the present, illuminated
by peace.
We live, Your Excellency, in an historic moment. Your presence in the
ancient house made illustrious by the legendary life of Pizarro; your words
which demonstrate the sincerity of your convictions; the generous attitude
of His Excellency, the President of Chile, statesman and patriot,—all seem
to anticipate the coming of an hour which posterity shall bless:—the hour
for liquidating, with justice and abnegation, the errors of the past, as you
have so well said, in a manner which shall reestablish firmly and
definitively the friendship between Peru and Chile, in order, that, in the
future, without fear nor distrust, the ancient brotherhood which our strength
and glory generated, may be achieved anew.
Your Excellency, in acknowledging your high diplomatic rank, it gives me
pleasure to offer you all the assistance of my Government for the greatest
success of your mission and to request that you transmit to your country my
best wishes for the prosperity of Chile and the personal happiness of your
worthy President.
