1116  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
discussion this stage. What I had tried do was simply arrive agreement 
with him this stage that both of us agree we do not go war over it. That 
is all. If his government would adopt same attitude we could very read­
ily reach agreement.
22. Wang challanged my statement US not occupying Taiwan. 
Nobody could be deceived by this remark. If US had not used force 
occupy ­Taiwan then Taiwan would long ago been rejoined to mother­
land. Any such remark could in no way succeed whitewash and defend 
aggression of US. He did not think any arguments or remarks along 
this line could contribute to our discussions.
23. I said it did not contribute to our discussions to characterize 
the relations between the US and government occupying Taiwan as US 
occupation of Taiwan or US aggression. Two of us could very easily get 
selves in long acrimonious discussion all these questions. I had tried my 
best this stage avoid such unprofitable discussion. I hoped we could get 
back to first and fundamental principle of simply saying we not going 
go war about it. That was all I had that subject.
24. Wang said he had merely pointed out real facts situation. They 
would not put up with incorrect and absurd arguments. He had noth­
ing more say this regard this morning.
25. I said he had often spoken here of these talks as well as specific 
subjects we been discussing being benefit both our countries. He had 
spoken of necessity their not being one-­sided. I entirely agreed with 
that. I wanted point out briefly that as far as first subject we came here 
discuss, return civilians, results appear very one-­sided to my country. 
After weeks of discussion, he and I arrived at agreement on issuing 
agreed announcement September 10 with regard civilians. During that 
discussion I had pointed out we had unilaterally and without demand­
ing concessions entirely removed all restrictions which had previously 
been imposed on departure any Chinese from my country. I agreed 
to arrangements which he proposed with regard third power func­
tions. My government had fully complied with both letter and spirit of 
announcement we issued at that time. Chinese continuing depart freely 
my country and arriving his country. In more than ten months now 
past since issuance that announcement, not single case any obstruction 
of Chinese wishing depart from my country has been brought to our 
attention.
26. Although not included in original discussions and I did not 
consider they covered in agreed announcement, we even gone to 
extent making it possible for any Chinese in prison my country to 
leave for his country. This done in response to representations this 
regard he subsequently made to me here. Its full implementation thus 
far been delayed only because inexplicable objections his government
