International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1979
647
If we are to achieve a balance of supply and demand in oil we must
make OPEC understand that oil price increases jeopardize the Western
world. We should look to increased nuclear production for the future.
We produce oil but have the same interest in saving energy as others
because we depend on the world economy. We should be realistic and
not cloak measures in soft phrases. This would give the world greater
confidence than by hiding what we mean.
JENKINS: We had a successful conclusion of the MTN in April and
now we need full implementation. Our concerted growth strategy was
fulfilled, and as a result there has been more rapid growth in countries
other than the U.S. On the monetary side, the stabilization measures of
the United States on November 1 and the EMS have been helpful.
The least progress has been on North/South relations, but in the
EC we have renewed the Lome Agreement7 with 57 LDCs (Schmidt: ½
of all LDCs).
But all this has been overshadowed by what has happened in en-
ergy. Energy should be the Summit theme. In the short term, imme-
diate prospects will be damaged by developments over the past six
months in the oil field. It will increase inflation, which is already going
up in our countries. The balance of payments costs will be $20 billion
per year in the OECD as a whole, and it will lead to a cut in our growth
prospects. One question is how far we add to these unpleasant but sur-
vivable problems. The oil market will balance itself over a period. But if
we do not have effective restraints and substitutes, this will be an ex-
pensive way of doing it.
The long-term trends in oil prices are going up, and we can’t avoid
oil price increases. But we should address the speed with which oil
price increases take place. If they take place suddenly there will be a
rapid transfer of resources away from us without an increase in de-
mand by OPEC. Although we save energy through a high level of re-
cession, the Schultze paper8 indicates that the cost of saving a barrel of
oil through recession is $300 per barrel. The danger is that the market
will stabilize only at very high prices, and there may in fact be an ap-
parent glut on the oil market as a result. We need to change our life-
styles and produce alternative supplies. Effective voluntary restraints
are an investment in our prosperity.
CLARK: It is important that the understandings we reach be se-
rious. They will help only if we are clear on the impact of our commit-
ments to individual countries. We should set goals that can be
achieved. If not, there will be skepticism about the process.
7 See footnote 6, Document 24.
8 Not further identified.
