100 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV Warren Christopher responded by focusing his comments on the political sufficiency question. He said that our goals should be overall equivalence in strategic forces, and that as long as we had overall equivalence, we could tolerate asymmetries in some particular measures. He said that in looking back to the time when we had true superiority in strategic systems, there was really no great change between that and today in terms of our ability to conduct foreign policy. This raised the question of even if we tried to buy superiority, whether it would justify the expense of buying it in terms of what it did for us. He said that the Chinese want us to be stronger, but that by and large as long as we maintain equivalence, we were able to carry out our foreign policy effectively. He noted that it was also important not to boast, but rather to be confident in proclaiming the situation of overall parity, since many countries would become concerned if we became more modest about our capabilities; therefore, we should speak confidently about them. Charles Duncan concurred in this view and emphasized that we should have rough equivalence not only in perceived capability but in real capability—­particularly in terms of our retaliatory capability in a second-­strike situation. Secretary Brown noted that we all probably could agree on this general approach, but that the disagreement came in terms of how much insurance to have in some of these situations, how to count civil defense, etc. Dave McGiffert indicated that he was particularly concerned about the question of hard target capability and the implications of our pursuing any efficient hard target capability in terms of stability. Secretary Brown noted that if the Soviets had a hard target capability, it would be destabilized. McGiffert responded that it would be more destabilizing if both had an efficient hard target capability. He noted that there were complications even if we pursued a limited hard target capability, since, even though it might be seen as limited by the Soviets, third countries may perceive it as a sign of weakness compared to the Soviets. Secretary Brown noted that we could obtain a limited ­number of highly accurate weapons and not have an efficient hard target capability—­which would complicate the plans of an attacker. He noted the problem, however, of how the other side might perceive the capability. [3 lines not declassified] But if the Soviets behave as we do and end up calculating 100% reliability and 100% kill probability, then in their eyes we would have an efficient hard target kill capability against their silos. Randy Jayne noted that, as Dr. Brzezinski had mentioned with respect to general purpose forces, there was nothing wrong with having some ambiguities in terms of force capability. However, there was a question of how this was presented both internally and externally in terms of our saying what capability we do have.
