(3) The President, as Arbitrator, realizing that all of the acts of the
Plebiscitary Commission are subject to review by him on appeal,
has desisted from making any suggestions or giving directions to
General Pershing. I have, however, as you will see, from time to
time made suggestions to him in an advisory capacity. My object
has been to keep the Arbitrator’s record clear, to do everything
possible to hold a plebiscite, and to prevent a break so that if the
time came when a plebiscite could not be held, the responsibility
would not be on the Arbitrator but would be on the party making
the plebiscite impossible. I feel very earnestly that this course
should be pursued. You should, as I know you will, take the
greatest pains, to be strictly impartial between the two countries
in their conflicting views. On the one hand, I have made it
perfectly plain to Peru that the President has no power under the
Treaty of Ancon and the convention by which the question was
submitted to the President to take over the administrative control
of Tacna and Arica. That remains in Chile. On the other hand, I
have advised General Pershing that Chile has no right to use her
administrative control to interfere with or frustrate a fair
plebiscite. While it may eventually be impossible to satisfy both
or either of the countries fully, an impartial and careful adherence
to the terms of the Award is absolutely essential. I think the
greatest caution should be taken to avoid getting into a position
where it can be claimed that the Arbitrator or his representatives
on the Commission is fighting the battles of either party. Very
bitter charges have been made by Chile against the advisers of
General Pershing as to their conduct of investigation and
complaints have been made to us that they have not shown tact
and discretion in such work. I am, of course, unable to judge at
this distance accurately between the conflicting charges of these
countries, but without in any way impairing a reasonably fair and
honest plebiscite, I think every effort should be made to maintain
a frank and friendly attitude towards both parties. You, of course,
will be better able to judge on the ground after you have talked
with General Pershing and with all of the advisers but I should
expect you to inform yourself and exercise your own judgment.
