446
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
144.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, August 3, 1977
SUBJECT
Hungary: Crown of St. Stephen
Cy Vance’s memorandum (Tab A)2 sets out a scenario for returning
the Crown of St. Stephen to Hungary by September 15, before the
opening of the CSCE Conference about September 27. Return of the
Crown would highlight Hungary’s generally good human rights
record. Cy suggests that the crown be returned by a distinguished
government or public figure, such as the Vice President or Governor
Harriman, accompanied by members of Congress.
Cy also recommends that Ambassador Kaiser, while presenting
his credentials in early August, inform the Hungarian President that
we will return the Crown, under conditions to which the Hungarians
apparently are prepared to agree.
Under this scenario, we would consult with members of Congress
but only after Kaiser has made the necessary arrangements with the
Hungarian Government.
However, I believe the arguments for deferring a decision on the return
of the Crown are still compelling.3 (Your last guidance and Ham’s
comments on the issue are attached at Tab B.)4 Domestically, there is
still little to be gained by return and something to be lost in the reaction
from vocal elements of the Hungarian-American community. The Vati-
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Country
File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77. Secret. Sent for action. A stamped notation reads: “The
President has seen.”
2 Dated July 28. Attached but not printed.
3 In a memorandum for Brzezinski dated August 2, Hyland, Treverton, and Hunter
recommended that he oppose Vance’s proposal. Arguing that the return of the Crown
be “a central element—one of few major instruments we have—of a strategy toward
Eastern Europe,” they stressed that since domestic opinion is divided, “there are no
kudos to be had for return and some flak to be taken.” A comprehensive review of
Eastern Europe will be held later in August, they concluded, and a decision should be
joined directly to that review, and “measured directly against a refined sense of the
domestic implications.” (Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Country File, Box 27, Hungary: 1–12/77)
4 Jordan’s written recommendation is not attached and was not found. Rick Inder-
furth transmitted Jordan’s recommendation with an undated note to the President and
informed Carter that Jordan favored option 3 and that “from a domestic political point
of view, it is not worth the trouble it would cause at this point in time.” (Ibid.)
