1232  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Organization, in the event of an important violation by another party, 
or other action by any state which so prejudices the security of the noti­
fying party as to require partial or complete suspension.
B. At its option a party may give advance notice of intention to 
suspend its obligations, in order to afford opportunity for correction of 
the violations or prejudicial action. 
XI. This working paper is offered for negotiation on the understanding 
that its provisions are inseparable. Failure to fulfill any of the provi­
sions of the convention would create a situation calling for examination 
at the request of any party.
288.	 Memorandum of Conversation Between Stassen and John 
Foster Dulles1
Washington, January 2, 1958, 3 p.m.
Governor Stassen said he hoped I would be in a position to support 
his recommendations coming up at the NSC. I said I was very skepti­
cal as to the recommendations. I said I felt that they would involve a 
practical abandonment of our proposals dealing with the substance of 
the matter, i.e., the cut-­off of fissionable material for weapons purposes, 
the supervision against surprise attack, and the use of outer space for 
peaceful purposes only.
Governor Stassen argued that he felt on the contrary that if we 
started with suspension of nuclear testing and supervision of such sus­
pension that would make it more likely rather than less likely that we 
would gain our further objectives.
We discussed the problem of opening up the Four Power Proposals 
as approved by NATO and the danger that by opening up one point 
everything else would become unbuttoned. Governor Stassen felt there 
was no such danger.
Governor Stassen contended broadly speaking that the Four 
Power Proposals were very heavily weighted against Russia and that 
they should be moderated in Russia’s favor. I asked in what respect 
he felt they were so weighted and he said it was largely because of 
the zones for inspection that we had urged. I pointed out that we had 
1 Source: Four-­power disarmament proposal. Secret. 1 p. Eisenhower Library, Dulles 
Papers, General Memoranda of Conversation.
