1164  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
Included in naval forces are Fleet Marine Force ground and air 
units with the capability to employ tactical nuclear and non-­nuclear 
weapons, either surface or air launched. Capabilities for conducting 
helicopter-­borne vertical assault operations continue to improve. Three 
interim amphibious assault ships (LPH) now serve the fleets. One 
more antisubmarine warfare carrier (CVS) converted to an LPH will be 
added during FY 1961 while 2 further LPH, currently under construc­
tion, should be available by FY 1963.
In certain areas the capabilities of U.S. Air Force tactical forces have 
continued to improve during FY 1960. Compatibility tests between 
tactical fighters and KC–135 jet tankers have been successfully com­
pleted making it possible to deploy Composite Air Strike Force (CASF) 
units to overseas locations by use of these jet tankers, if desired. This 
will not only provide greater reliability for refueling operations, it will 
also permit more rapid deployment. Modernization of tactical forces 
with F–­105 all-­weather tactical fighters began in FY 1960. Tactical Air 
Command is now equipped with one wing of F–105 aircraft, to be 
increased to 3 wings by end FY 1964. Equippage of theater based forces 
will begin in early FY 1962 for Europe and early FY 1963 for Far East. 
About one wing equivalent of F–100 and all F–105 aircraft will be capa­
ble of delivering BULLPUP air-­to-­surface missiles, which will be com­
ing into the operational inventory in FY 1961. Improved reaction time 
for MATADOR tactical missile units has resulted in an increased readi­
ness posture for those forces and similar improvement is scheduled for 
MACE units during FY 1961.
[Omitted here are pages 10–23.]
III. PROGRAMS FOR CONTINENTAL DEFENSE.
ESTIMATED SOVIET THREAT AND CAPABILITIES. As of 30 
June 1960, by employing their entire heavy bomber force, many of 
their medium bombers, their small submarine-­launched missile capa­
bility, and available ICBMS, the Soviets could mount large-­scale ini­
tial nuclear attacks against North American targets. Actual weight of 
attack launched against the United States would depend upon Soviet 
judgment as to optimum combination of surprise and weight of attack 
against all areas where U.S. and allied nuclear retaliatory capabilities 
and other essential targets were located. Soviet leaders probably regard 
their current long-­range attack forces as adequate to deliver a devas­
tating attack on concentrations of population and industry, but inca­
pable of preventing, by military action, the nuclear devastation of the 
USSR. How long this latter consideration remains valid depends upon 
the progress made in maintaining an effective U.S. military posture vis-­
a-­vis the Soviets.
