52 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II sified form initially.7 Subsequently, the Department was asked for and provided unclassified versions of these statements. The Congress can be expected to ask for statements on a number of other countries on which reports are submitted under para 2 above. Posts will be notified when reports are requested. 5. Several points should be noted about these statements: A) The countries were selected by the congressional committees, not by the Department. The Department has not been informed of the basis for selecting these particular countries. B) As in the case of the Subsection (B) reports, these Subsection (C)(1) statements make no determination regarding a country’s human rights practices—a point frequently missed in media stories which characterized the statements as State Department condemnation of the 6 countries. C) On the basis of the facts on human rights practices and the justification for security assistance set out in the statements, the Congress may then decide to enact legislation to terminate, reduce or continue assistance to a country. 6. Finally, Section 116(D) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, provides that the annual AID presentation to the Congress include a full and complete report on steps taken to insure that devel- 7 In telegram 307523 to all American Republic diplomatic posts, December 20, 1976, the Department indicated that earlier that fall, Fraser had invoked Section 502 (B) and had requested human rights statements for Argentina, Haiti, and Peru. The statements were designed to provide Congress with information about human rights in the country specified, steps the United States had taken to promote human rights within the country, and a justification for security assistance programs. The Department sent confidential copies to Fraser in October; Fraser then requested that these be declassified. In addition, Humphrey had requested copies of 17 reports, including those for Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay. The Department sent copies of the reports to Humphrey’s subcommittee staff, commenting that the reports “will remain confidential.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D760467–0483) In an October 12, 1976, letter to Jenkins, Fraser explained that his purpose in requesting the reports was not “exclusively for the use of Members and Staff of the Committee on International Relations. It is important for the American public to have access to this information and to have the Department ‘on the public record’ with respect to its own evaluation of the human rights situation in the country concerned.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, P760163–0838) In telegram 5158 to all American Republic diplomatic posts, January 10, 1977, the Department noted that unclassified versions of the Argentina, Haiti, and Peru statements—in addition to ones for Indonesia, Iran, and the Philippines—were given to Fraser on December 29 and were subsequently published by the House Committee on International Relations. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D770009– 0771) Ultimately, Humphrey’s Subcommittee on Foreign Assistance released 82 reports on March 12. (Don Oberdorfer, “State Dept. Lists Rights Conditions In 82 Countries,” The Washington Post, March 13, 1977, p. A–1 and Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. Says Most Lands Receiving Arms Aid Are Abusing Rights,” The New York Times, March 13, 1977, p. A–1)
