Arms Control and Disarmament  1369
17. Experimental operation of these plants has, in the main, been 
very gratifying. Three of the boiling water reactors, EBWR, BORAX– IV, 
and VBWR (a private project) have performed far above their designed 
ratings, indicating a potential for capital cost reductions. In addition, 
successful operation of several of these plants has relieved much of the 
serious concern once felt about certain operating characteristics. Oper­
ation of the Organic Moderated Roaster Experiment, for example, thus 
far, shows no evidence of fouling of heat transfer surfaces and gives 
added confidence that the cost of makeup for the organic material can 
be acceptably low.
18. The civilian power effort has clearly advanced to much firmer 
ground as a result of this encouraging operating experience and the 
direction of development required to achieve economic nuclear power 
can now be charted with more certainty.
19. It has become clear that the achievement of economically com­
petitive nuclear power in the United States will require a continued 
aggressive program including design, construction, and operation of 
successive generations of nuclear power plants of the same basic type. 
Several generations of plants must be built in order to gain the experi­
ence which will lead to cost reductions through engineering improve­
ments. The fact that these plants are expected to be economically 
competitive in other countries (with higher power costs) before this 
goal is achieved in the United States provides an economic incentive 
for a certain amount of integration of our domestic development pro­
gram with our foreign assistance program in the nuclear power field. 
The building of some “middle generation” plants in other countries can 
provide progress towards the goal of economic nuclear power in the 
United States for the lowest government cost. The principal activity in 
U.S. efforts to facilitate the building of reactors based on U.S. technol­
ogy in other countries has been the negotiation of an arrangement with 
Euratom to provide assistance in the building of one million electrical 
kilowatts of nuclear power to be in operation by 1963 in those countries.
20. It is recognized that power reactor technology which is most 
advantageous for the United States may have certain limitations or 
disadvantages when applied to the design of nuclear power plants for 
other countries. The principal example of this problem is the possible 
reluctance of other countries to become heavily committed to power 
reactors which require partially enriched uranium if this fuel is avail­
able only from the U.S. This factor is considered in the planning of the 
U.S. power reactor development program. However, all U.S. studies 
have continued to show that real advantages of flexibility of design, 
compactness, higher performance, and resulting lower power costs can 
be obtained from the use of partially enriched fuel rather than natural 
uranium. Meanwhile, these advantages are becoming better recognized
