Chemical and Biological Weapons
283
At a certain stage in the outbreak, civilian medical personnel were
excluded from the hospital where victims were being treated and the
military assumed exclusive control.
—The United States Government believes that the concerns based
on this information make it necessary for the US and USSR to consult in
accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Biological Weapons
Convention.
—In an effort to clarify the circumstances surrounding the spring
1979 anthrax outbreak, and in accordance with Article V of the Biolog-
ical Weapons Convention, the United States Government proposed on
March 23 that confidential bilateral discussions be held in which Soviet
and American scientific and medical specialists would participate. This
proposal was based on the proven value of discussions among experts
in resolving questions of great complexity and sensitivity in the SALT
Standing Consultative Commission. The United States Government
continues to believe that confidential consultations on this problem,
similar in nature to those conducted in the Standing Consultative Com-
mission, would provide the best approach for resolving this matter in a
mutually satisfactory manner.
—The United States Government envisages that such consulta-
tions would include consideration of the following subjects, together
with appropriate documentation:
The nature of the disease involved;
The cause of the outbreak;
The number of people affected, the geographical extent and the
duration of the outbreak;
Background information, particularly with respect to normal inci-
dence of anthrax in Sverdlovsk.
—The United States Government recognizes that arrangements for
consultations must be worked out in a mutually agreeable fashion. For
this reason, we would be open to your suggestions as to how these se-
rious and meaningful consultations could be carried out.
—The United States Government is mindful of the fact that our
two countries were leaders in negotiating the Biological Weapons Con-
vention and encouraging worldwide adherence. The Convention now
has more than 80 parties who share a stake in the successful realization
of its objectives, including the implementation of its provisions for co-
operation and consultation.
—It is therefore now incumbent upon the United States and the So-
viet Union to demonstrate that our two countries are able cooperatively
to resolve a serious problem, as they have undertaken to do in the Bio-
logical Weapons Convention. In view of the importance the United
States Government attaches to this matter, the Soviet Government
