532  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
reservations or qualifications concerning applicability of that general 
principle to area of Taiwan. My draft thus proposes that we specifically 
and clearly state this as fact.
I. We also are agreed that in whatever we say neither of us wants 
sacrifice or prejudice our position with respect to matters at issue 
between ourselves or others, that is, we do not desire to say something 
that would prevent us from maintaining our views and pursuing our 
policies by means other than use of military force. We want to be free 
pursue our policies by peaceful means. My draft also says this in just as 
clear and simple terms as I can.
J. We also agreed on principle that peaceful means should be used 
for just settlement of disputes between us. It was in accordance with 
this principle United States proposed these talks and it was hoped that 
reason your government accepted this proposal was that it also agrees 
with this principle. United States has done everything possible and 
will continue do all it can make these talks succeed. My government’s 
purpose in suggesting declaration renouncing use of force as a funda­
mental first principle was intended contribute this objective. And it will 
continue be our policy, based on principles of United Nations Charter, 
strive for just settlement of disputes by peaceful means.
K. I have taken this time carefully explain and amplify my draft of 
November 10, since, from your remarks at our last meeting, it appeared 
that your government apparently did not have a full understanding of 
it. I hope that these remarks will serve clarify any misunderstanding 
that may have existed and enable us make progress in agreeing upon 
text.
3. Wang replied first with comments my implementation state­
ment. He said during course of talks 41 American civilians or law-­
offenders had returned to US. Number of Americans who left China 
since talks began far exceeded two-thirds of number in China at time 
talks started. This fact shows PRC has made greatest effort in solution 
problem of returning American civilians.
4. Wang said Americans still remaining being treated accordance 
agreed announcement and PRC legal procedures. His side could not 
accept remarks alleging obstructions in regard to Americans who com­
mitted offenses. Proof of this in fact I had mentioned that one American 
remaining in prison was able communicate with British Charge with­
out factual basis.
5. Wang said he had in past spoken of principle under which 
American law offenders will be dealt with. He could not accept con­
tention that imprisonment itself constitutes evidence of obstruction 
against return. These people not able return simply because they have 
breached Chinese law.
