food to supply the domestic manufacturer than the foreign manufacturer. In
one case our country would have only the farmer; in the other it would have
the farmer and the manufacturer. Assuming that Europe would have more
money if it sold us larger amounts of merchandise, it is not certain it would
consume more food, or, if it did, that its purchases would be made in this
country. Undoubtedly it would resort to the cheapest market, which is by no
means ours. The largest and best and most profitable market for the farmer
in the world is our own domestic market. Any great increase in
manufactured imports means the closing of our own plants. Nothing could
be worse for agriculture.
Probably no one expects a material reduction in the rates on manufactures
while maintaining the rates on agriculture. A material reduction in either
would be disastrous to the farmer. It would mean a general shrinkage of
values, a deflation of prices, a reduction of wages, a general depression
carrying our people down to the low standard of living in our competing
countries. It is obvious that this would not improve but destroy our market
for imports, which is best served by maintaining our present high
purchasing power under which in the past five years imports have increased
63 per cent.
FARM LOAN SYSTEM
It is exceedingly important that the Federal land and joint-stock land banks
should furnish the best possible service for agriculture. Certain joint-stock
banks have fallen into improper and unsound practices, resulting in the
indictment of the officials of three of them. More money has been provided
for examinations, and at the instance of the Treasury rules and regulations
of the Federal Farm Board have been revised. Early last May three of its
members resigned. Their places were filled with men connected with the
War Finance Corporation, Eugene Meyer being designated as Farm Loan
Commissioner. The new members have demonstrated their ability in the
field of agricultural finance in the extensive operations of the War Finance
Corporation. Three joint-stock banks have gone into receivership. It is
necessary to preserve the public confidence in this system in order to find a
market for their bonds. A recent flotation was made at a record low rate of 4
percent. Careful supervision is absolutely necessary to protect the investor
