576 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement well as Panama if the latter were interested. Governor Herter expressed general agreement and suggested that the President might want to mention the subject in his talk with President Eisenhower. At that point President Lemus asked the Minister of Economy, Mr. Rochac, to express his views on the subject of economic integration. Minister Rochac leaned heavily on the report of Dr. Milton Eisenhower,4 especially that section suggesting a pilot project of two countries like “El Salvador and Honduras”.5 President Lemus interceded to say that El Salvador wanted to be not just a borrower of monies from abroad, but wanted to play an active role in economic development; he added that this should not be misunderstood since his country really needs assistance, but wants to do more than it has in the past. Mr. Rubottom suggested that the pilot project, involving just two countries, might require rather delicate negotiation on the part of the countries concerned, since all the other countries of Central America were vitally interested in integration. The United States had moved from a position of more or less passive acceptance of the plan of integration, to one of active and enthusiastic support of it, but it would be in an embarrassing position to favor any two countries over others in the area. President Lemus referred to the recent visit through Central America of Messrs. Frank and Turkel to discuss with the Governments concerned, and anybody else interested, the subject of a regional market. He said that they were anxiously awaiting the report that might be filed following that trip, since the means to achieve integration had not yet been thoroughly defined.6 Minister Rochac said that, by having a pilot project of two countries, it would be possible to speed up the achievement of the objective of a Central American common market. They have already been working seven years and, unless something is done to break the road jam, it may require eight years more. 4 Reference is to the report (submitted) to the President by Milton S. Eisenhower on December 27, 1958. For information concerning the report, see footnote 1, Document ES-2. 5 The statement under reference does not appear in Eisenhower’s report to the President. 6 Harry R. Turkel and Isaiah Frank of the Department of State visited El Salvador, February 18–22, 1959, on a mission to Central America, to discuss ways of speeding up Central American Economic integration. They talked with industrial and banking figures and government officials, including Lemus. He strongly supported the idea of Salvadoran economic integration with one or more Central American countries, perhaps Honduras or Guatemala, before economic integration of the whole area. Their report on the trip was not found in Department of State files, but documents pertaining to their discussions in El Salvador are in files 110.4-REA and 716.00 (W).
