follows text, printed on page 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 271].] The exceptions claimed by the several governments and other observations in the premises are set forth in document C. I. A. P. 23 of February 10, 1928, and document C. I. A. P. 25 of May 7, 1928. Examination of the subject matter of the forthcoming Conference indicates that the points of interest to the Government of the United States call for the following comment and instructions: You will probably find it advisable at the beginning of the Conference to make for the record a formal statement of the general position of this Government. Such a statement might set forth inter alia the sincere regret felt by this Government at the tendency to claim exceptions contrary to the spirit and purpose of the Convention, and could reiterate and if necessary expand upon the considerations set forth in your communication of April 28, 1928, to the Secretary General.22 It is obvious that discussions of the particular exceptions claimed by the various States may easily become unduly complicated and technical unless such exceptions are tested by the application of general criteria. The first criterion which might logically be applied is whether certain exceptions claimed are not already covered under the terms of the convention, and in particular under Articles 4 and 5 thereof. In case there should be agreement that certain exceptions claimed are already so covered, you may suggest that that fact might be recognized merely by its inclusion in the procesverbal of the conference. Such recognition of the exceptions would of course always have force in the interpretation of the convention. In addition to reducing the number of individual exceptions to be discussed by the Conference, and ultimately the number of specific restrictions recognized as admissible under the convention, this procedure would have the advantage of bringing into the open the particular objectives sought by the different countries in presenting their reservations, and obtaining either the withdrawal or the limitation of the application of exceptional restrictions to the purposes or circumstances for which they are recognized. This scrutinizing and winnowing process should tend to strengthen materially the agreement that finally results.
