1168 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement The general feeling among businessmen in Montevideo is that it was a great misfortune that the UBD did not quite obtain a majority within the Nationalist Party. At the same time, there is very general relief that the List 15 people are going to be out of the Government. The List 15 leaders, particularly Luis BATLLE Berres, have been widely disliked and feared by responsible citizens because their motivations had become so exclusively those of wardpoliticians who have decided any and every issue on the basis of how many votes the decision would bring in. This narrow, parochial attitude has now been proven to have been mistaken. It seems, in fact, that the Uruguayan people have had a greater and more responsible concern for their long-­term interests than their governmental leaders have shown. [text not declassified] To my mind, there are a number of very reassuring conclusions to be drawn from the recent elections. First, it has been revealed that the rigidity of party affiliation in Uruguay was not as ossified as had been generally believed, and it has been proved that people will change parties (for the first time in 93 years, for any large majority) when sufficiently dissatisfied; this is reassuring for the future of Uruguayan democracy. Second, it has been revealed that the size of the vote that has been susceptible to the cheap, demagogic, short-­term appeal of the present leaders of List 15—even with the help of thousands of Government employees—has not been as large as we had feared; this is a very wholesome indication of the strength of middle-­class opinion which has some solid stake in the economy and social system of Uruguay. Third, the former Opposition won the elections by a sufficiently large majority so there is literally no chance of any attempt at a coup or “palace revolution” on the part of List 15 to retain power, even if there had been any such chance with a narrower majority; it is good for the permanency, growth and reputation of Uruguayan democracy that this temptation does not exist. Fourth, it is reassuring to note that, despite the powerful attitude of “protest” that motivated the voting during these elections, the Communist Party— which has had complete freedom of operation in this country and tried emphatically to round up every vote it could—was able to obtain only about 24,000 votes, not enough to increase its present Congressional representation of two Deputies out of 99; this, to my mind, is a very significant revelation of the strength of the democratic convictions of the some 940,000 Uruguayan voters who showed no interest in communism. Fifth, the very close division in the Nationalist vote between Herteristas and UBD—­now within about 6,000 of each other—­should promote a cooperative working relationship between these two wings with wholesome effects for the country, particularly when combined with the vivid example of the disastrous political results of Sr. Luis BATLLE Berres’ having harbored and nurtured personal animosity between List 15 and List 14 of the Colorado party; this situation offers real hope of further
