804  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
be unable to reduce significantly the weight of a large-­scale US nuclear 
attack on the USSR.
Air Defense
59. At present the massive Soviet air defense forces, if undegraded, 
would probably perform well against aircraft at medium and high alti-
tude, but they have little capability to intercept targets at low altitudes. 
The graphs in figure 6 reflect our projections that:
—New interceptors, the majority of them equipped with modern 
lookdown/shootdown capabilities, and a new low-­altitude surface-­to-­
air missile system will be deployed in substantial numbers during the 
1980s.
—The percentage of the area of the western USSR covered by air 
defense warning and control systems capable of vectoring lookdown/
shootdown fighters will grow gradually. Significant gaps in coverage 
will remain, however.
—With the deployment of AWACS aircraft in conjunction with 
longer range interceptors, the Soviets in the middle and late 1980s 
would be able, for relatively brief periods (during a crisis, for example), 
to mount forward defenses along the approach routes to the western 
USSR. Such defenses would be designed to intercept US bombers and 
to force ALCM carriers to launch their missiles at considerable dis-
tances from Soviet borders.
60. We are unable to quantify the attrition that Soviet air defenses 
would be able to inflict on US low-­altitude aircraft and cruise missiles, 
in part because of uncertainties about key technical characteristics 
of future Soviet systems, and in part because we cannot quantify the 
effects of important operational factors and interactions that would 
bear heavily on actual air defense performance. Accordingly, there is a 
view in the Intelligence Community which holds that graphs showing 
the gross area of theoretical coverage of air defense systems, particu-
larly when standing alone, can be misleading as measures of Soviet air 
defense potential. Because such graphs cannot incorporate important 
deployment and operational considerations, this view concludes that 
the graphs are not useful.12
61. The estimates that follow represent our best judgments about 
the capabilities of Soviet air defenses against programed US aerody-
namic forces over the next decade:
—In the early 1980s, improved Soviet air defense systems will not 
be available in numbers large enough to markedly improve defense 
against bombers and cruise missiles at low altitudes.
—In the middle and late 1980s, Soviet air defenses will probably 
have reduced the USSR’s vulnerability to US defense avoidance tactics 
12 The holders of this view are the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, and the Senior 
Intelligence Officers of the military services. [Footnote is in the original.]
