1372 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement accrue to millions of people through the diagnostic and therapeutic use of radioisotopes to alleviate human suffering, it is evident that in this modern genei we indeed have one of the most, if not the most, import­ ant peacetime benefits of atomic energy. 30. In spite of these accomplishments, we are far from satisfied. The industrial savings mentioned above can be attributed almost exclu­ sively to use of radioisotopes in thickness gauging, flow and level con­ trol, and industrial radiography. There are in fact hundreds of other ways in which radioisotopes can bring about benefits and savings equal to or greater than those already realized. Even in such areas as thick­ ness gauging and process control, in which radioisotopes have already proven their worth manyfold, the surface has only been scratched. All major industrial effort involving carbon and hydrogen containing materials—­and these cover organic chemicals, petroleum products, plastics, rubber, etc.—can expect to use radioactive carbon and hydro­ gen safely and efficiently in process control techniques that will result in untold savings. To a greater or lesser degree, the same may be said of the use of radioisotopes in almost every other industrial effort. 31. The potential of radioisotopes as a source of power in atomic batteries and luminescent sources has hardly been touched. The life, stability, mobility, and dependability of batteries and light sources using radioisotopes makes their utility almost unlimited. 32. Perhaps the most exciting general industrial application of radioisotopes, and certainly the one which seems to have the greatest potential impact on the entire industrial effort, and on the economy of the nation, is the utilization of massive radiation (million to billions of curies) from these radioisotopes to bring about, on an industrial scale, chemical and physical changes which either cannot be accomplished by other means or which can be accomplished by other means only expen­ sively or inefficiently. Such things as the pasteurization or sterilization of feeds to retard decay, the formation of new linkages in plastics or rubber to bring about desirable changes in properties, the modification of the conditions of petroleum cracking to make that process cheaper and more efficient, the sterilization of drugs and medical supplies, the control of biological and botanical pests, and the development of new and improved strains of plant life, to name but a few, should, within the next few years do much toward making man’s life longer, healthier and more enjoyable. 33. In view of the impressive progress which has already been made in the application of radioisotopes and radiation, in recognition of the tremendous potential good which can result from the use of these materials, and with the knowledge that the other major nations of the world—particularly Britain and the U.S.S.R.—are making great strides in this field, the Commission has established an Isotope Development
