1956 1029 he might write would be based on pure conjecture. Such conjecture would be prejudicial to the interest of the 13 imprisoned Americans. Mr. Robertson thought he would want to think twice before he would write an uncorroborated story which might have the effect of wors­ ening the plight of his fellow countrymen who were already in dire straits. Don Gonzales of UP also got wind of the story yesterday, but so far has been held off by the use of tactics similar to those employed with Hightower. We understand from Hightower that the New York Times ­Washington Bureau and other correspondents are working on the story. They all sense that a news story is present. But they are loathe to move until they can get some official confirmation. Kuh’s poor reputation with many of his colleagues is helping us here, although his account is so circumstantial that the other correspondents are con­ vinced there must be some fire where there is that much smoke. As usual we have no idea where the leak occurred, although we suspect the Indian Embassy may be the source. It is interesting that ­Gonzales said he understood that 36 names were on the list of ­Chinese crim­ inals. This is a figure which was never given the Indian Embassy. It is the figure originally received from I & N. S. Two names were later deleted from this list because they appear to have a claim to ­American citizenship. This would make it seem that Gonzales’ source was someone who saw the list either in Justice or in State at an early stage. Obviously the story is going to come out eventually although we hope to stave off general circulation of acceptance of the story for a while longer. It seems to us that official confirmation of the story at this time would be totally inconsistent with our tactics of giving the Chinese Communists as much room as possible for a graceful change in policy on the imprisoned Americans. We will most certainly get bogged down with an exchange of recriminations with the Chinese ­Communists on the application of the Agreed Announcement, if we let anything out prematurely. The chances of the 13 would likely be lost in the heat of the controversy. Although you have given us some intimation of your general attitude of the publicity question, we would welcome a more explicit recommendation and analysis. We have tried our hands at three drafts of a contingency press release if we are forced into the position of putting out a confirmation. We do not like any of these drafts. It is an extemely difficult subject to press succinctly and cogently with the right shades of emphasis throughout. There is enclosed a copy of the letter which is being sent to each prisoner. It has been cleared in the Department and by I & N. S. and
