1416  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
827.	 Telegram 240 from Geneva1
Geneva, September 12, 1957, 5 p.m.
240. From Johnson.
1. Wang opened 70th today with statement that at last meeting 
I willfully tried present course two year talks in false light. My repe­
tition old worn-out arguments was vain attempt shirk responsibility 
my side for dragging out talks. Facts before us are clear; namely with 
respect to agreement reached under first agenda item, my authorities 
during past two years have employed 101 means of obstruction to pre­
vent those who can return from doing so and even those who have 
returned home met all kinds of obstruction.
2. Wang continued that on second agenda item he still protests our 
seizure of Taiwan and continued inadmissible interference in internal 
affairs. He added my side refuses to discuss Foreign Ministers confer­
ence, removal of embargo, cultural exchanges and peoples contacts. At 
same time threat peace by my side increases, tensions are continued by 
my side following hostile policy towards China. This is display complete 
lack of good faith toward his country. His side consistently worked for 
improvement Sino-America relations. With view to promoting tradition 
friendship, they have put forth proposals for cultural exchanges and 
human contacts at our 58th meeting.
3. Wang continued I will recall both sides agreed adopt measures 
promoting contacts between two nations. In an earlier move to demon­
strate good faith, his government on own initiative permitted entry 
number US press representatives. They had believed that there was no 
reason why such a proposal of equality and mutual benefit should not be 
accepted. My side, however, refused discuss proposal and also refused 
permission enter. It thus clearly tells on which side Iron Curtain hangs 
after all. In spite of the obstacles, Stevens, Harrington and Worthy came 
to our country and completed press coverage. Recently the American 
Youth delegation visited China despite instructions and were warmly 
welcomed and with an abundance of good will. Does not this show that 
no official ban can prevent Chinese and American people from show­
ing their demand for better contacts. Again does not this explain why 
US Government policy of preventing exchanges is bound to lead to an 
uproar and pressure on the part of the American people.
4. Wang continued. Nearly a year has passed since the pro­
posal of the 22nd of September last year. On August 22 this year US 
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.93/9–1257. Confidential; Priority; 
Limit Distribution.
