586 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX smokescreen of fighting for the rights of the small countries in the face of the overbearing nature of the great powers. 25. At the same time, the Romanian leadership is always conscious of the great power factor in any situation which somehow touches Romania. The regime is quick to point to the problems of others and even quicker to blame its own failures on external or uncontrollable events such as the 1975 flood or the 1977 earthquake. This leads to occasional overinterpretation of real or imagined signals, to blaming the Ottoman Empire for countless current Romanian problems, to imagining that visiting American scholars and the few Romanian dissidents are spies, and to seeing the Soviet hand in the current Hungarian minority problem. Admittedly, there are historical precedents for the last example. MILITARY: 26. In keeping with Romania’s wish to be as independent as her politico-geographical situation permits vis-a-vis the Soviet Union, it participates as little as possible in Warsaw Pact activities. There are no Soviet troops on Romanian soil; neither do Warsaw Pact troop maneuvers take place in Romania. In the same way that the Soviet Union would like Romania to be more fully integrated into CEMA, so has it been trying to move Romania closer to its military alliance. That the Soviet Union is not trying harder is probably a reflection of the Soviet view of the current and foreseeable threat on its southern flank. Should the Soviet perception of this threat change, there is no question that Romania would have little choice but to play the game according to Soviet rules. Although there would be initial armed resistance to a Soviet invasion of the type seen in Hungary in 1956 or Prague in 1968, the regime would be forced to give Soviet troops transit rights if the Soviet Union believed it needed to send troops to Yugoslavia or Bulgaria. Depending, on the circumstances, however, it seems probable that the USSR would transit Romania only as a last choice, preferring instead to overfly Romania, to take the Black Sea route, or to go through Hungary. At the same time, Romania would probably be more agreeable to a transit request if the final destination were Bulgaria rather than Yugoslavia, with whom it has more in common and whose own relative independence from Moscow is an important prop to Bucharest’s go-it-alone attitude in foreign affairs. If the Soviet Union wanted to station troops on Romanian soil against a foreign (non-Romanian) threat, however, Romania would probably accede. Such an occupation would not be popular, but, as it has done before through countless occupations (and in a way as it is doing now under Ceausescu), the people would concentrate on surviving rather than on fighting back. That Romania has been able to become and remain a national entity
