1977 177 President for National Security Affairs, 31 March 1977.23 A more detailed discussion of each issue is contained in the Appendix.24 The questions in the aforementioned memorandum are repeated below for clarity. a. “A succinct statement of our present nuclear war doctrine. In so doing, you should comment on the advisability of retaining or cancelling NSDM 242 and limited nuclear options.” The fundamental objective of current US doctrine for the employment of nuclear weapons is deterrence of conventional or nuclear attacks and attempts at coercion by nuclear powers against the United States and its allies. If deterrence fails, the objective seeks to limit damage to the United States and its allies through control of escalation by employing first conventional and then, if necessary, limited nuclear options designed to limit the conflict and reestablish deterrence. If escalation cannot be controlled, the objective seeks to maximize US power relative to an enemy in the postwar era. This doctrine is responsive to the realities of current technology and the relative military power balance between the United States and the Soviet Union. Its adoption has placed greater emphasis on planning for limited options, thereby improving the capability for deterrence across the entire spectrum of conflict and providing the NCA with a realistic, flexible response capability. It also complements and supports NATO’s strategy of flexible response. For these reasons, NSDM 242 and limited nuclear options should be retained. b. “A brief statement of the procedures for actually conducting a nuclear war, limited or total, beyond the initial phase. This should include an indication of the command procedures for the conduct of such a war, including such operational aspects as the location and procedures for effective exercise of control. In addition, please provide your assessment of the survivability of our command and control systems. The Blue Ribbon Defense Panel of 1970 reached some disturbing conclusions regarding this matter.” The key element in US nuclear war procedures is the direct involvement of the NCA in not only the initial stages but the execution of a nuclear war. The effectiveness of this participation is almost totally dependent on the survivability of command centers and reliable communications. The primary command center for conduct of a limited nuclear conflict would be the [5 lines not declassified]. In a major nuclear attack on the United States, the SIOP could be successfully executed. [2 lines not declassified]. Under the conditions of limited nuclear exchange, the effectiveness of communications with executing forces would be dependent on the intensity of the nuclear exchange and whether or not attacks were aimed at command and control components. Continuing efforts are being made to enhance the survivability and effectiveness of these systems. c. “A short statement of the basic objectives to be achieved through our various LNO options and some indication of the assumptions, both political and military, regarding the specific LNOs.” Limited nuclear options have been developed to support generalized military campaigns within a theater of operations, complementing 23 See Document 9. 24 Not found attached.
