721.2315/176: Telegram [Document 293] The Ambassador in Peru (Poindexter) to the Secretary of State LIMA, March 1, 1925—10 p.m. [Received 11:45 p.m.] 10. Your 8, February 28, 11 a.m. [p.m.] Immediately upon its receipt I requested and was granted an interview with the President and had a long conversation with him in which I urged all points suggested by you and presented fully advantages to Peru to lend aid in composing the differences between the three countries. In respect to the third modification of the procès-verbal contained in the instructions of the Peruvian Government to Doctor Velarde the President agreed to substitute the following: “Doctor Velarde then stated that he also was authorized by his Government to express its acceptance of the friendly suggestion which the Secretary of State had just made and that as a consequence of the assurances just given his Government would immediately advise the Peruvian Congress thereof— repeating at the same time its recommendation that it approve the boundary treaty with Colombia.” The President was immovable in his insistence upon the first and second modifications of the procès-verbal and I was unable to persuade him to make any other change in his instructions the [to] Ambassador Velarde except that in the third modification of the procès-verbal just stated. In the course of his conversation the President stated several times that if the procèsverbal should be signed by the representatives of the three countries in the modified form proposed in his instructions to the Peruvian Ambassador it was his intention to repeat his recommendation for the approval of the treaty and urge it upon the Peruvian Congress.

The President urges that if the language “immediately after the ratification of the above treaty” should be retained in the third suggestion of the Secretary of State as set forth in the proposed process-verbal it would immediately make Peru the object of pressure both by Brazil and Colombia and deeply involve her in the conflicting interests of those two countries. …
