1956  999
619.	 Letter 34 from Johnson to McConaughy1
Letter No. 34
Geneva, May 25, 1956
Dear Walter:
As I told you, I am staying down over this weekend until the next 
meeting to get some dental work done, so that I also have an opportu­
nity to write you at a little leisure today.
I have received your Letter No. 43 and entirely agree that the first 
two paragraphs of the May 11 draft are very clever and adroit. How­
ever, I think that they are much more vulnerable in the last paragraph 
both from the negotiating and public position, particularly as we had 
previously accepted their December 1 version of that paragraph. As 
I indicated in my 1902, it seems to me we are faced with two broad 
courses of action. We can continue to take our previous broad position 
that the Communists have in effect agreed to renounce force and that 
the problem revolves around the self-­defense clause, or we can take the 
position they refuse unconditionally and unambiguously to renounce 
force with respect to the Taiwan area. The latter is, of course, the actual 
fact and you will note that in the last two meetings I have been concen­
trating heavily upon that aspect. The former course has some obvious 
advantages but it is open to a great deal of public confusion over the 
actual issue and does not give us as clean and clear a public position 
as the latter course. A good example of this is the lead editorial in the 
­London Times of May 24 which states that the Chinese Communists are 
willing to make a general declaration of renunciation of force, but that 
the issue revolves around its application to Formosa with the added 
American proviso that Taiwan and its government must have a right to 
collective self-­defense. I think that we should regard the whole matter 
from the standpoint of the public position we will desire to take when 
the matter next becomes public. There is, of course, much to be said 
for maintaining the public position that the Chinese Communists have 
in effect renounced force and leaving up to them the onus of denying 
it. While it leaves us in the disadvantageous position of not being able 
to present a clean-­cut and simple issue, it does serve the purpose of 
reducing public impression of “tension” in the Taiwan area. These are 
just some random thoughts on which I would appreciate the trend of 
the Department’s thinking.
While it would be very useful to get back to our April 19 draft as a 
basis of discussion, it is easier said than done and I fear I have not thus 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal. Johnson signed the original “Alex.”
