1234  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
744.	 Letter 58 from McConaughy to Johnson1
Letter No. 58
Washington, November 9, 1956
Dear Alex:
The world shaking events in Hungary and Egypt hare indeed 
crowded out our Geneva operation. It is just as well that we were able 
to take a back seat at this time.
You handled the postponement of last week’s meeting precisely 
right. We agree that a two week postponement was all that could 
justifiably be requested in the circumstances. The confluence of the 
crises in Eastern Europe and Suez with the preoccupations of the pre-­
election week undoubtedly made the reasons for postponement quite 
understandable.
EUR is no doubt less uneasy about your leaving your post for the 
next meeting. They were quite apprehensive last week, but your assess­
ment that no early eruption in Czechoslovakia should be anticipated, 
should remove any strong objection to your absence from Prague next 
week. However, EUR from a longer range standpoint is not happy with 
the double duty arrangement.
There has been no meeting yet on your instructions for the next 
session. With the Secretary in the hospital and with Herman Phleger 
deeply engrossed in the two major crises, the meeting will be largely 
a FE proposition. I do not anticipate anything new. We will consider 
the pros and cons of taking up the missing military personnel issue at 
Geneva again at the next meeting, but I would not be surprised if we 
postponed it for at least one more meeting.
The British still have no reply from the Chinese Communists, 
either to the Father McCarthy representation or to the general request 
of last August for permission to visit all American prisoners. Relations 
between the British Mission in Peiping and the Chinese Communist 
Foreign Office are more strained than they have been since the Korean 
Armistice, with the Egyptian crises added to the Hong Kong border 
violation incident and the nasty attitude the Chinese Communists have 
taken on the Hong Kong riots.
In reading over your letter of September 22, requesting a change 
in the method of payment for Helenka Osborn, we find your request 
somewhat ambiguous [text not declassified]. We would appreciate your 
1 Source: Department of State, Geneva Talks Files, Lot 72D415. Secret; Official–­
Informal.
