996 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement The United States and Paraguay on October 29, 1958, signed a loan agreement making $2.5 million in development loan funds available for completion of an all-­weather, rock-­surface road in Paraguay known as the Route to Brazil, the funds to be used primarily for financing crushed-­rock surfacing of the section between Coronel Oviedo and Puerto Presidente Stroessner. The agreement was signed by Ambassador Juan Plate for the Government of Paraguay and Robert B. Menapace, Acting Managing Director of the Development Loan Fund, for the United States. Pertinent documentation is located in ARA/EST Files: Lot 62 D 354, “DLF.” PA–5. Telegram from the Acting Secretary of State to the Embassy in Paraguay1  Washington, September 18, 1958, 6:26 p.m. 59. Reference Embassy’s despatch No. 111,2 Department desires no effort be spared toward arresting further propagation views expressed by Foreign Minister. Implication that aid on FM’s terms should be granted as reward for willingness stabilize currency and other measures in Paraguay’s own self-­interest, or to ease FM’s political difficulties, represents fundamental misunderstanding entire economic development program. Playing east against west, and threat of policy change, are singularly inappropriate as basis for productive and progressive Paraguayan foreign policy. U.S. efforts help Paraguay already generous and FM’s present tactics more likely handicap than encourage further help. Dept will make clear to FM, if opportunity occurs during 1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 834.00/9–1858. Confidential. Drafted by Clarence A. Boonstra, Deputy Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs, and Charles C. [illegible in the original], Officer in Charge of Paraguayan Affairs; initialed by Maurice M. Bernbaum, Director of the Office of East Coast Affairs. Repeated for information as telegram [illegible in the original] to New York for Assistant Secretary Rubottom, who was attending the thirteenth regular session of the U.N. General Assembly. 2 The referenced despatch from Asuncion, September 9, 1958, transmitted a memorandum of conversation between Ambassador Ploeser and Paraguayan Foreign Minister [illegible in the original]. In the memorandum of conversation, Ambassador Ploeser stated that [illegible in the original] indicated that Paraguay was dissatisfied with the amount of aid it had thus far received from the United States, and expressed a desire for prompt additional aid amounting to $25 or $30 million. The Ambassador also stated that [illegible in the original] exhibited impatience with the notion that aid should be based on the soundness of the country’s fiscal position, and implied that if the United States was not favorably disposed [illegible in the original] aid, Soviet bloc countries were [illegible in the original] in helping Paraguay. ([illegible in the original])
