182 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I outside of government—be coordinated and used in a way that is supportive of these objectives. I have attempted in this memorandum to outline the first step in this process—consultation—as relates to foreign policy generally and the Middle East specifically. Steps II and III—public education and political planning and coordination—are the subject of a separate memorandum. [Omitted here are Section A: “Consultation with Congress on Foreign Policy Initiatives,” Section B: “The Role of the American Jewish Community in the Middle East,” and the Summary of Recommendations.] 43. Editorial Note On June 6, 1977, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance addressed the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe in order to discuss the administration’s approach to the forthcoming CSCE Review Conference, scheduled to take place in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, in October 1977. Vance asserted that he wanted to underline the “continuing importance” the Carter administration placed on the implementation of the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference (see footnote 7, Document 4): “You are fully aware of this Administration’s interest in promoting more stable and mutually beneficial relations between the peoples of East and West. The Helsinki Final Act provides one framework for such cooperation. “You are also aware of our commitment to honor and promote the rights of individuals, the human rights of all peoples, no matter what their political or social origins and affiliations. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe has provided a multilateral mechanism through which to pursue these aims.” After praising the continued cooperation between the executive and legislative branches concerning the multiple issues related to the Helsinki Accords, Vance then stated the administration’s objectives for the upcoming meeting: “—We seek full implementation of all the commitments contained in the Helsinki Final Act. None can be called more binding, more vital, than others. All three of the so-called baskets are important. “—We seek incremental improvements in relations between East and West on all the fronts surveyed at Helsinki: political, economic, scientific, cultural, security, and humanitarian.
