1977 27 Example: Maintain conventional forces capability to halt a major Soviet/Warsaw Pact attack in Central Europe without major loss of territory. Maintain nuclear forces sufficient to deter Soviet use of nuclear weapons and, failing deterrence, guarantee an amount of economic and military damage to the Soviet Union at least equivalent to that inflicted on the U.S. and its allies. FORCE POSTURE—The composition, basing, and readiness for combat of our military forces. Example: Seventeen Army divisions, of which five are deployed in Western Europe, plus 26 tactical air wings, of which six are deployed in NATO, plus designated naval task force. 6. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1 Washington, undated SUBJECT JCS Briefings: NSC Action Implications This memorandum is a summary of my reaction to the JCS briefing.2 It is not urgent but, depending on your comments, it could lead to some important reviews. I have tried to reduce my concern to nine basic points which now follow: 1. Rigidity of SIOP. I was struck by the relative rigidity of the SIOP options and by the limited choice that they leave you in the event of a major conflict. You are, in effect, left with the option of initiating a response which, irrespective of the version, amounts to at least the first phase of a massive central war. I am also struck that there seems to be limited integration between the SIOP and the proposed LNO’s (limited nuclear options) and RNO’s (regional nuclear options). Moreover, unless I misunderstood, retargeting for effective LNO or RNO 1 Source: Reagan Library, National Security Council, Intelligence Directorate Files, Box WI–22, Mahley Box, FRG Nuclear Control. Secret. Sent for information. Carter initialed the memorandum in the upper right-­hand corner. An unknown hand wrote “2/22/77” next to the heading. 2 On February 11, Carter and Brzezinski flew from Andrews Air Force Base to ­Warner-Robins Air Force Base aboard the National Emergency Airborne Command Post (NEACP); onboard, they participated in a briefing with Brigadier General A.W. ­Atkinson of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (Carter Library, Presidential Materials, President’s Daily Diary). No minutes of the briefing were found.
