596
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XXVI
could perhaps be dealt with by precise data on quite limited areas,
building on the hypothetical sample profile of a testing area already ex-
changed in connection with the TTBT. The panel could also develop
procedures for participation of US and Soviet experts in an exchange of
calibration data from past explosions at these sites. And there are un-
doubtedly other measures that the panel could consider as well to elim-
inate unnecessary uncertainties.
End text.
Christopher
244.
Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the
Department of State1
London, January 11, 1980, 2047Z
803. Subject: (S) US/UK CTB Consultations.
Secret—Entire text
1. Following the meeting on issues related to high yield testing, the
UK asked for a meeting at FCO to cover broader CTB issues. UK side,
led by Assistant Under Secretary Patrick Moberly and Ambassador Ed-
monds, included Dennis Fakley (MOD), Tony Reeve (FCO), Michael
Warner (MOD) and Ivor Callen (FCO). US side led by John Marcum
(OSTP), included Larry Finch (ACDA), Steve Steiner (PM/DCA), Jack
Griffin (DOE), Col. Dick Thornton (JCS) and Embassy Pol-Mil officer.
2. Moberly stated that UK wished to cover four areas: The status of
CTB in the light of Afghanistan,2 the UK–NSS issue, other CTB issues in
1980, and plans for future US/UK bilaterals.
3. Marcum said that in the course of deciding on actions US would
take in response to Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, USG had looked at
whether CTB negotiations should continue. Decision was taken that ne-
gotiations should continue at a slow pace. Talks should continue be-
cause they are in the US and Western interest, and because they have
an important international dimension, particularly with the NPT
REVCON approaching in August. The US would, therefore, continue
with its previous positions and current initiatives in CTB, and will not
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800019–0932. Se-
cret; Priority. Sent for information to the Mission in Geneva and Moscow.
2 The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan on December 25, 1979.
