National Security Policy 715 2. That three other satellite programs be added, notably, SENTRY (Satellite-­borne visual and Ferret reconnaissance system); DISCOVERER (Satellite guidance and recovery); and MERCURY (Manned satellite). In addition, the Secretary of Defense recommended a change in the system whereby he determined satellite priorities, so that in the future changes in priorities for space programs will be made by the President on the advice of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. The proposed changes were approved by the President on the advice of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at its meeting on April 27, 1959. The purpose of bringing this matter before you this morning is to ask the National Security Council to note these changes and make nec­ essary revisions in the existing NSC statement of policy on the subject (NSC Action No. 1846). The Joint Chiefs of Staff concur in this proposal. 159. Memorandum of Conversation1 Geneva, May 23, 1959 SUBJECT Strategic Concept and Military Paragraphs of NSC 5810/1 PARTICIPANTS: 1 Source: Strategic concept of basic national security policy. Top Secret. 4 pp. NARA, RG 59, S/P Files: Lot 67 D 548, Military and Naval Policy. State Secretary Herter Gerard C. Smith Defense Secretary McElroy John N. Irwin II Mr. McElroy opened the discussion by saying that he foresaw a time when we would have to change our counterforce strategy. He suggested that this might be some years in the future when the USSR has invulnerable missile sites. They do not have such an invulnerable striking force now and Mr. McElroy is accordingly opposed to a change away from our present counter-­force strategy. On our limited war capability, the Secretary of Defense pointed out that last year’s State-­Defense limited war study had shown that the US had the capability to handle two limited war situations at the same time. Mr. Smith pointed out that this study had been based on the assumption, insisted upon by the JCS, that only the US would use nuclear weapons in limited war situations.
