290 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I [Omitted here is Section III. Policy Performance and Evaluation.] IV. AN OVERVIEW It is probably fair and not only self-serving to conclude that the first year in foreign policy was a relative success. Progress has been made toward deeper and more structural improvements in regard to a number of key regional, bilateral or global problems. The Administration has not gone for quick successes or band-aids; on the contrary, it has undertaken responses which are potentially of a more structural and enduring kind. The real payoffs will come later but they are likely to last longer. Our accomplishments and our shortcomings can perhaps be best summarized in a brief table: Our pluses: —U.S. again identified at home and abroad with moral values, generating some genuine progress regarding human rights; —Shaped a new agenda for international action on neglected areas of human rights, non-proliferation, arms restraint; —More emphasis on the centrality of Alliance relations in U.S. foreign policy and on the priority of North-South accommodation; —Explicit U.S. support for European unity and progress on NATO military renovation; —Novel emphasis on importance of bilateral relations with France, India and new regional influentials; underscoring our respect for diversity; —Generation of genuine momentum for comprehensive peace in the Middle East; —Identification with African states and liberation leaders in the search for a solution to the Southern African conflict—preemption of Soviet influence in that area. —Panama Canal treaties and new maturity in our relations with Latin America; —Arms sales for the first time under control and substantive talks underway with Allies and Soviets; —An active policy to inhibit nuclear proliferation, including the initiation of INFCE;18 —The initiation of a wide spectrum of U.S.-Soviet negotiations, even while deemphasizing the primacy of U.S.-Soviet relations in U.S. foreign policy; 18 See footnote 3, Document 56.
