Arms Control and Disarmament  1421
and said he just would say all types of atomic and nuclear weapons and 
say nothing more about the subject at all. H said they are heading that 
way. The Sec said it may be possible the way it is worded they intend to 
do it themselves—the Sec indicated I think we would.
H said he got the telegram re the Sec’s talk with de Murville. They 
agreed it is good. H said they have not heard from Geneva. Macmillan 
has not sent word to the President.
The Sec said Couve wants to come to Washington and obviously to 
see the Pres though he did not say so. H will find out the Pres’ weekend 
plans. The Sec told Couve Friday p.m. would probably be better than 
Saturday a.m.
The Sec said the Pres may get a question re the offshore islands. 
H read a suggested reply from WSR. The Sec would have thought he 
could have gone further. H said it has been quieter the last few days. The 
Sec thought the Pres could say our position remains the same, namely 
under the Treaty and authority under Public Law 4, the US would act 
if it seemed that the attack involved Formosa and the Penghus and that 
during the 4 years since that time there has been increasing integration 
between Formosa and the offshore islands and that would have to be 
taken into account. H told of today’s Alsop story. If the Pres is asked re 
the ME he will say it is being actively discussed at the UN and it would 
be inappropriate to get into it in Washington. The Sec said speeches are 
supposed to end today and get down to real business tomorrow.
The Sec asked if the plan is to make a statement tomorrow. H said 
yes—they are signing at 11 in Geneva and he hopes the Pres will get it 
out about 10. Hagerty may want the Pres to step out of NSC to give to 
the Press. The Sec complained about all the jargon in the preliminary. H 
said it is to build up the idea it is only a small part of working towards 
disarmament. The Sec would suggest cutting down. It is essentially a 
propaganda exercise and the time it takes hemming and hawing peo­
ple will wonder what we are up to and what it is. The Sec would think 
it could be put in more pungent terms though he realizes it is late. H 
said they can take a try and it would have to go through Defense, AEC 
etc. and H would hope we won’t end up tonight with an indecisive 
statement. The Sec said if he has time he might make a suggestion later 
in the day but realizes it is late to do it. H said it can always be looked 
over again.
H said the French came in and talked to Farley last night. They 
talked it over and said it sounds as if an ultimatum went to Geneva but 
we pointed out we have acted as a group. This was about signature—
not statement. The position here is mild compared with Geneva.
