460  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
probably compete with defense and industrial investment for both 
materials and labor.
49. The difficulty of pursuing all these goals simultaneously proba­
bly lay behind the decision to abandon the Sixth Five-Year Plan (1956–60) 
in favor of a seven-­year plan for 1959–65. Apparently the regime wished 
to erase from public record 1960 targets which it doubted its ability fully 
to meet. Probably it judged that, in the light of industrial lags in 1956–57 
(see paras. 58–59), the original targets for this sector, particularly those 
for some key industrial materials, could not be reached without cutting 
too deeply into other programs. If this interpretation is correct, aban­
donment of the original plan appears to reaffirm and to extend into the 
future the decision, embodied in the 1957 plan, not to put all-­out stress 
on heavy industry irrespective of the cost to other economic goals. The 
issue of competing priorities, however, has not been finally settled by 
this action and is certain to arise again.
Prospects for Economic Growth
50. Soviet economic growth during the coming five years will con­
tinue to be faster than that of the US, though somewhat slower than the 
pace achieved during the Fifth Five-Year Plan (1951–55). The princi­
pal factors behind the past rapid rate of growth have been a high level 
of investment concentrated in sectors providing most rapid growth, 
increases in the industrial labor force, and gains in economic efficiency. 
We believe that a high level of investment will be maintained, amount­
ing to more than one-­quarter of GNP (in the US, investment’s share is 
about one-­fifth). However, in the future a greater share of total invest­
ment will have to be directed to programs in which the returns, in terms 
of additional production, are relatively low. These programs include 
expansion of the fuel and raw material base, where a chronic lag in 
new construction finally produced severe supply stringencies in 1956; 
development of the eastern regions, where initial investment require­
ments are high; and the large effort in housing. Total output will grow 
less rapidly under such a distribution of investment than it did when 
a greater share of funds were directed into such sectors as machine-­
building and chemicals.
51. Another major limitation upon rapid growth is the fact that 
the labor force will not grow as rapidly as before, especially toward 
the end of the 1957–62 period, as war-­reduced age groups move into 
employment. Whereas during the period 1950–57 the labor force grew 
by an average of 1.6 million new workers each year (apparently with 
the aid of some reduction of military personnel after the Korean War—­
see para. 98), population growth will provide an average of only about 
1.1 million during 1957–62. The planned reduction from 48 to 41 hours 
in the industrial work week, which will probably be carried out, will
