Human Rights 621 6. Central America. The interagency working group on El Salvador was expanded into a Central America working group because of political developments in Nicaragua and the need to devise a strategy to deal with growing violence in Guatemala. Nongovernmental organizations strenuously opposed and are not reconciled to our decision to provide security assistance to El Salvador. We justify our assistance as intended to advance human rights. In view of this public commitment, and the difficult decisions to be taken HA should participate in the proposed PRC on Central America. 7. Security Assistance. We need a better mechanism to ensure that human rights concerns are factored into the allocation of security assistance and that security assistance is coordinated with economic assistance. Our first preference is for the Christopher Committee to assume this responsibility. Alternatives are the creation of a new committee analogous to the Interagency Committee or an AECB with a broadened mandate. 8. Korea. General Chun Doo Hwan’s recent press conference, and his assumption of the KCIA directorship, make me profoundly uneasy.4 We must continue to press the ROK to lift martial law and continue political liberalization. We must disabuse General Chun of incipient notions he may harbor of perpetuating the Yushin system or becoming a new Park. 9. Taiwan. We anticipate heightened interest and concern from Congress and other groups about the Taiwan authorities’ handling of the Kaohsiung incident last December.5 Eight participants received sentences from 12 years to life imprisonment. Thirty-three others are currently on trial facing lesser charges. Ten more (including the leader of the United Presbyterian Church in Taiwan) were indicted on April 29 and will be tried in a military court. The trials, while open, were a sham. Signed confessions were extracted through intimidation and torture. These trials have serious implications for Taiwan’s internal stability. The authorities have effectively removed the most potent oppositionists from the political scene and delayed progress toward the 4 During an April 29 news conference, Lieutenant General Chun Doo Hwan, Commander of the South Korean Security Command and Acting Director of KCIA, indicated that he did not have the authority to suspend martial law in South Korea, which had been imposed following Park Chung Hee’s October 1979 assassination, and noted that it should not be lifted until the right conditions developed. Chun and several other military officers had seized power in a December 1979 coup d’etat. See William Chapman, “Key Korean General Says It’s Too Early To Lift Martial Law,” The Washington Post, April 30, 1980, p. A–25. 5 On December 10, 1979, police attempted to block a World Human Rights Day rally in Kaohsiung, Taiwan, prompting 10,000 protesters to attack unarmed security troops. See “10,000 in Taiwan City Clash With Police on Rights Issue,” The New York Times, December 11, 1979, p. A–5.
