March 27–December 31, 1979
979
might think this would get him by (and it could be technically stated),
but this is not a technical issue, and the facts would appear to be dif-
ferent. It would get him in trouble. These are political considerations.
He (Ambassador Strauss) has no answers. If the President had no polit-
ical considerations, then few changes to the plan would be needed. But
if he wants something politically—like in Florida—he can’t do both, or
explain it away. If the PLO is in the equation, it is difficult. Therefore
there is a basic decision, like the Sadat fiasco on the UN resolution in
August.4 At the UN, we got into a position that wouldn’t fly. We need a
fail-safe idea, though even that might doom us. He (Ambassador
Strauss) could say to the Israelis: you are portrayed, fairly or not, in a
negative light, which is getting worse and worse. This impacts on the
peace process. He has shown polls to Begin which bear out what is hap-
pening here to Israel’s popularity. He can try to convince the Israelis to
find positive things which it can do (and Begin is crippled politically).
A cease-fire? A six-month moratorium on settlements? He (Begin) an-
swers in the negative. He can’t do these things. There is less of a gov-
ernment in Israel than one thinks. It hasn’t got one. Therefore it can’t
take positive steps. Therefore can we get a fail-safe mechanism? He
(Ambassador Strauss) may go to see Begin in London about 17 No-
vember. He could also go to Sadat. There is a problem in raising expec-
tations. He could try to convince Begin to take the lead. He could lay
the approach out to him, and give him assurances to get him involved
as a leader with us. This will help Begin in Europe and here. He (Begin)
could do this without political loss in Israel, or to Israel’s security.
Secretary Vance asked whether Ambassador Strauss could see
Begin before November 17. If not, would it be possible to split off the
PLO piece of the plan, and work on others, in order to get something
more solid?
Ambassador Strauss said he is looking for alternatives to progress
on the autonomy talks. Is Jordan it? No. The autonomy talks are a
fraud. It can be kept up until June, through the primaries. We might get
to then. But if we want something positive, then it is difficult. Begin has
shown he won’t let this happen; Begin is through. Therefore he might
grasp at something on Lebanon.
Secretary Vance asked whether Ambassador Strauss could see
Begin sooner, without raising expectations.
Ambassador Strauss said that this is the problem, of doing it without
having another U.S. initiative fail. Eppy Evron will say it can’t be done.
Secretary Vance said that Eppy will say the approach is ok only if all
terrorism stops.
4 See Documents 285 and 287.
