500.A 4 e/226: Telegram [Document 687] The Ambassador in Japan (Bancroft) to the Secretary of State TOKYO, July 1, 1925—4 p.m. [Received July 1—1:45 p.m.] 118. In an informal conversation with Shidehara46 yesterday, Neville46a and I being present, MacMurray47 stated his general views on the following points: 1. The policy should be a middle course between China’s national aspirations and rights of foreign governments under the treaty. The present situation in China makes it necessary for the special economic conference to assume a position a little beyond the scope of the conference in order to reestablish Chinese confidence. It is necessary to find a course between sternly rebuffing the Chinese claims on the one hand and weakening the foreigners’ position by allowing the disorders to control the action of the conference. 2. The powers might find themselves in a position where they will have to grant the two and a half percent48 for political reasons even though this might not otherwise be advisable. 3. The purpose of the customs treaty obligates the powers to make the conference a means of abolishing the likin. It may be possible to induce the Chinese to bring into unity the central and local governments. This is worth considering for the good that might be produced and it might impress the Chinese with the need of coming to such an agreement though the conference may be unable to go very far in this direction. 4. The conference will have to decide as to the disposition of the additional two and a half percent if allowed. Hypothetically it is desirable to devote the additional income to internal constructive work but with the large unsecured debts the conference may have to devote the funded increased income to China’s unsecured and inadequately secured debts. We think this two and a half percent should be distinguished from customs revenues heretofore allocated as security for the Boxer loans. The British claim the contrary. 5. It is unknown and impossible at present to know whether the two and a half percent will provide revenue for funding the total of these debts and leave some amount for administrative purposes. No plans have yet been
