National Security Policy  977
threats or inducements could cause Iran to withdraw from CENTO. All 
in all, the Middle East will remain very unstable.
74. South Asia. In India, moderate political elements will probably 
be able to maintain control for at least the next few years. However, 
the departure of Nehru would probably intensify political divisions 
and might contribute to a decline in the effectiveness of government. 
Particularly if economic progress diminishes, there is a possibility that 
Nehru’s departure would be followed by such political dislocations as 
to produce a temporary abandonment of democratic methods, perhaps 
associated with army participation in the government.
75. Elsewhere in the area, Afghanistan has become deeply involved 
with the USSR in trade and economic and military aid programs. So long 
as Western support continues it can probably retain its independence, 
but even granted such support there is a possibility that it will come 
under effective Soviet domination within five years or so. Pakistan’s 
military regime can probably keep control and a reasonable degree of 
stability for some time. Ceylon may emerge under conservative control 
from its present precarious state, but in any event the outlook is for 
unstable conditions.
76. Africa. Former French North Africa is a special case, with the 
possibilities ranging from chaos to fairly constructive relationships 
with France; the economic outlook is generally dim. Those areas of East, 
Central, and southern Africa which have an acute white settler problem 
face a grave and increasingly urgent problem of terminating or modify­
ing white control and of forming workable governments. Even if these 
are solved, the long-­term outlook for stability and orderly develop­
ment is unpromising. Both in these areas and in West Africa, most new 
nations will turn for aid first to the West and, if unsatisfied, to the Bloc, 
often with highly unrealistic aspirations and expectations. While trade 
and other economic relations with the Bloc will increase in Africa and 
there will be many opportunities for the spread of Communist influ­
ence, we do not believe that local Communist-­controlled groups will 
become entrenched in power in any country at least over the next few 
years, given a reasonable degree of effective attention from the west.11
77. Latin America. Latin America’s importance in world affairs will 
grow substantially in coming years. However, even the economic growth 
of the more advanced countries, much less that of the more backward, 
will have difficulty in keeping pace with rising popular expectations, 
11 The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, the Assistant 
Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, Department of the Navy, and the Director for 
Intelligence, The Joint Staff, believe that the prospects for Communist groups should be 
limited further by substituting after “Communist-­controlled groups” in the last sentence 
the words: “will become a major political force in any country. . . .” [Footnote is in the 
original.]
