1322  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
they felt should be studied further. From this discussion a preliminary 
report should be prepared for transmission to the President’s Special 
Cabinet Committee.
General Fox said that he thought an aspect of our policy which 
should be considered very seriously is the question of how it is pre­
sented. He said he felt the August 29 proposals were substantively 
quite sound but had been presented very badly. He thought the work­
ing group should pay particular attention to how, in the future our pol­
icy may be presented as to be clear and immediately understandable 
throughout the world.
Mr. Farley agreed, noting that our negotiators had great difficulty 
presenting our case, and that it is very difficult to separate policy from 
public impact. However, he noted that this is secondary to the work the 
group must do. The group must first focus on policy; once that is decided 
we can consider how it is to be presented. He stressed that the report to 
the Special Cabinet Committee on next Tuesday should give a consensus 
of the working group as to whether the August 29 policy should stand, 
whether it should be changed, studied further, whether detailed techni­
cal studies are needed or whether the working group would need imme­
diate Presidential decisions before it could proceed further.
General Fox said that as far as the possible separation of test cessa­
tion from the cutoff was concerned, the answer from the military would 
most certainly be no. However, he said that this might be different if the 
question were asked relative to the state of our knowledge after HARD­
TACK has been completed.
Mr. Farley agreed that any decision would clearly be easier given 
successful completion of the HARDTACK testing program. But he 
noted that an immediate response to the Soviet demarche might be 
necessary.
General Fox said that the Defense Department could not recom­
mend such a decision. Mr. Farley noted that this was not just a military 
consideration but that there were extremely important political prob­
lems involved.
Admiral Foster said that he was not very sanguine about the possi­
bility that HARDTACK would give the AEC laboratories all the infor­
mation they want. He said that we would certainly have to predicate 
our assumptions on what the USSR is doing at the time the U.S. might 
stop testing. Would they continue their present cessation or would they 
resume? Mr. Farley noted that the Soviet Union by its unilateral cessation 
of testing has given up considerable freedom of action. What we do with 
regard to nuclear testing will certainly affect the future Russian position.
Mr. Farley reviewed the extent of separability of the various items 
in the State Department paper, noting that we propose not only changes
