298 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV 68. Memorandum From the President’s Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Aaron) to President Carter1 Washington, July 28, 1978 SUBJECT NSC Weekly Report #68 1. Opinion SALT Support Strategy After meeting with Hamilton, Jody and Frank Moore, I met with Harold Brown and Charles Duncan to see how our defense decisions could be coordinated to build a more positive Congressional climate for SALT. Harold welcomed this initiative and, together, we have identified the following issues which will shape public and Congressional perceptions of our defense posture and the acceptability of a SALT Agreement. —What should we do about the vulnerability of our land-­based missile force; deploy new systems (such as MAP or some other mobile missile) or switch our doctrine away from the Triad? —What do we do about increasing Soviet lead in counterforce capability; deploy a hard-­target MX, Trident II, or a hybrid? Would improving our ICBM survivability suffice? —What do we do about a future manned, penetrating bomber? (I understand Zbig has talked to you about Air Force ideas on this.) —Harold also feels that the overall size of the budget is important—­in particular, the size of the component devoted to strategic forces. As you can see, these involve some of the most difficult strategic decisions this country has ever faced. Ideally, we would want more time to decide them, but SALT is forcing our hand. Some policies, such as whether to try to maintain a survivable ICBM force, we might only decide in principle leaving our hardware options (e.g., MAP, Mobiles) open. At the minimum, we will have to identify those issues which might be decided early-­on to shape public opinion and those which should be reserved for later to have more direct impact on SALT acceptability in Congress. The following are the key decision events. 1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Brzezinski Office File, Subject Chron File, Box 126, Weekly National Security Report: 7–9/78. Secret; Sensitive. Carter initialed the memorandum in the upper right corner.
