VI Preface 3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy; 4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the pol­ icy options brought before these bodies or their individual members; 5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement ­Presidential decisions or policies; 6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspond­ ence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy imple­ mentation on major issues; 7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State; 8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State; 9. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions; 10. Economic aspects of foreign policy; 11. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance; 12. The political-­military recommendations, decisions, and activ­ ities of the military establishment and major regional military com­ mands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies; 13. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies; 14. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes. Scope and Focus of Documents Researched and Selected for the Microfiche Supplement to Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III Most of the research for the print volume and this supplement was completed in 1988, prior to a protracted declassification review. The principles of selection followed by the editors for the print volume are described in the preface of the volume. The print volume may be used without this supplement, but the supplement should be used in con­ junction with the print volume. The documents selected for this microfiche publication by the editors of volume III provide additional details on the major issues
