770 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII line not declassified] and/or by sea are also under investigation. We can deliver arms as fast as Pakistan can distribute them. 3. There are several indications of the effectiveness of the arms program: —Sensitive [less than 1 line not declassified] and Afghan messages in mid-March 1980 began noting a significant upsurge in rebel landmine and anti-tank rocket attacks against Soviet armor. The [less than 1 line not declassified] description of the equipment was in part identical to that being delivered in our support program. [1 line not declassified] “A quantitative and qualitative increase in Afghan rebel activity started in late March and early April 1980.” This phenomenon coincides with predicted battlefield arrival dates for CIA-provided weaponry. —A [less than 1 line not declassified] CIA source [less than 1 line not declassified] with an exile group actually saw weapons being funneled to the Afghans by the Pakistani military. The number and type of weapons distributed coincided with the report given to CIA by Pakistani liaison. —The US Consul in Peshawar recently reported from his Afghan sources on the availability to the Afghans of many Soviet-originated weapons.3 —A separate CIA source also saw Egyptian-originated weapons being distributed from Peshawar to the Afghan exile groups. In sum, independent evidence, plus developments on the battlefield, support Pakistani guarantees that the equipment is being delivered to Afghanistan. There is no evidence of Pakistani siphoning. 4. Our partners in the covert action program, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, are extremely sensitive to this program. The Saudis have commented favorably on the efficiency and security of the program; Saudi Arabia has never been mentioned in any press leak. The Pakistanis are less pleased because they have been mentioned. We have committed to them to protect the security of the program. We have generally briefed [less than 1 line not declassified] on the program and they have provided propaganda support. [less than 1 line not declassified] is aware that there is a general support program. There has been no discussion with [less than 1 line not declassified]. We believe the program can be generally reviewed with [1 line not declassified] as an indication of US commitment. We would discourage any discussion of mechanism amounts or partners. 3 The United States Consul in Peshawar was Douglas A. Archard.
