Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
147
36.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, April 29, 1977
SUBJECT
Four-Year Goals: Preliminary Statement
Purpose and Scope
The memorandum which follows is an attempt to define your
four-year foreign policy goals. It is not meant to be a public statement—
and its publication or revelation would be counterproductive. It would
provide your critics with ammunition (both now and four years hence)
and public disclosure would also make it more difficult to attain many
of your goals. Moreover, in some ways any such statement is bound to
be arbitrary and even simplistic—but otherwise it would have to be a
book, with all the explanations, elaborations, and nuances included.
The document is not an interagency consensus statement. It was
prepared, on the basis of the conceptual framework which you and I
have often discussed, by Sam Huntington and myself, with NSC staff
inputs. (Sam is also coordinating the PRM 102 effort.)
As of now, you are the first consumer of this statement. It has not been
cleared with the Secretary of State nor with any other members of the
Cabinet. At this stage, the document is meant only for your personal
consumption. Once revised on the basis of your instructions and fol-
lowing a discussion with your principal advisers, it should become a
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office File, Out-
side the System File, Box 63, Goals: Four Year: 4–7/77. Secret. Brzezinski sent the memo-
randum and the attached “Four-Year Foreign Policy Objectives” paper to the President
under an April 29 covering memorandum, suggesting that Carter review the “objectives”
paper prior to the upcoming London summit meeting. Although there is no indication
that Carter saw the memorandum, in his diary entry for April 29, the President wrote:
“The National Security Council staff has prepared for me what we call our international
goals. This is a good framework around which to build our day-to-day decisions. I think a
growing consciousness of these tangible goals will be good to bind us all together in a
common effort.” (White House Diary, p. 45) For additional information about the prepara-
tion of the “objectives” paper, see footnote 4, Document 19. Earlier versions of the April
29 memorandum are in the Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material,
Subject File, Box 27, Goals/Initiatives: 4–5/77. Mondale’s May 12 response to the memo-
randum is printed in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. II, Human Rights and Humani-
tarian Affairs, Document 43.
2 In PRM/NSC–10, issued on February 18, the President called for a comprehensive
review of overall U.S. national strategy and capabilities. Documentation on the PRM–10
process is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. IV, National Se-
curity Policy.
