National Security Policy 899 The big question to him was that we have got to find a defense program now and in the future within a reasonable budget, i.e., within feasible tax levels such that our people will not start evading the taxes and will be able and willing to support on the basis of the present kind of prosperity and present tax rates. He thought the B–70 is a duplication of something we will have otherwise. He said he would take another look at the B–70 proposition. However, in ten years he saw missiles car­ rying the burden of warfare. He thought that each Chief must look for every possible saving, even driblets. We must make every effort to stay within a reasonable level defense program. General White said he thought that perhaps Air Force management has been discredited. Many of the programs approved last year have now been cancelled and are no longer being continued. The President said the question is simply one of success in rocketry. This success has made possible and necessary reductions in aircraft programs. It is a change in our thinking. General White said there is the question of what is the future of the Air Force and of flying. This shift has a great impingement on morale. There is no follow on to the fighter, and no new opportunity for Air Force personnel. A natural extension of Air Force activity would be into space as flying drops off. He wanted the predominant role in space for the Air Force. The President said he did not know what our needs were going to be in space. He thought that would be going ahead of current plans and problems. At the time these questions arose, we probably will not have air, navy and ground forces. He commented that he is going to make a change in NASA, cutting back military operations in space to strictly defense activities. General White said he thought the Department of Defense should establish force objectives extending some three years or so into the future as was done in the Joint Strategic Objectives Plan. The President said that each Service Chief had come down to the meeting with a firm service program. He would like to see the Chiefs come to some basis of principles, give those to the Joint Staff with no other instructions and see what the Joint Staff would develop as to needs. General White thought if this were sent to the Secretary of Defense he should then have the task of making a three-­year program and budget. The President commented that he believes we should have one National War College. He thought that service staff colleges are all right but at war college level we should be talking about the needs of the U.S. and not orienting our thoughts toward services.
