582  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
the exception of our program in Brazil resulting from the strategic loca-
tion of the country and our missile tracking facilities there.
He also told the Ambassador that the present trend of public and 
Congressional opinion in the U.S. was away from defense expendi-
tures and in the direction of economic assistance. The Ambassador’s 
frank discussion was appreciated, Mr. Rubottom said, and the ques-
tion would be given full consideration. However, Mr. Rubottom said 
he could not be optimistic.3
Ambassador Castro appreciated the frank reply and said he 
believed his President also doubted that this program was being empha-
sized by the U.S. at this time. He said he would advise President Lemus 
of the conversation and await further informal reply by Mr. Rubottom.
It was agreed that no formal steps, such as a note to the Secretary, 
would be taken at this time.
3 On April 21, 1959, Rubottom told Ambassador Castro that the United States could 
not conclude a mutual assistance agreement with El Salvador. (716.5–MSP/4–2159)
ES–8.	
Memorandum for the Record by the Ambassador in 
El Salvador (Kalijarvi)1

San Salvador, May 5, 1959.
1. As a follow-­up of the request of the Foreign Minister [text not 
declassified]. I requested and was granted a session with the President in 
the company of the Foreign Minister this morning.
2. [text not declassified]
3. The President said that the problem of Communism had two 
aspects in El Salvador. The first was the possibility of infiltration into 
the campesino area. He commented that he could not understand how 
people who had suffered as long as the people in the country areas 
could still maintain their stability and loyalty. He recognized that this 
condition constituted a potential danger; however, he proposed con-
structive programs to raise the standard of living of the campesino. 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA Special Assistant’s Files, Lot 62 D 24, [text not 
declassified] Papers, 1959.” Secret; Eyes Only. Hill sent the source text to Rubottom and 
Snow, June 11, 1959, under cover of a memorandum stating that Kalijarvi wanted Herter 
and Dillon to have the report, [text not declassified].
