September 18–December 16, 1978 373 encouraged. Under GOI auspices, considerable pioneering work has taken place during the occupation. A shutting down of the fields would imply an economic loss to the GOE. On the question of transfer of the fields, there would be no problem if the present operator (Neptune) continues. Under these circumstances it would be a simple matter to arrange for a redirection of revenue flow and that portion of production accruing to the sovereign. Hence, the GOI believes it would be most advantageous to come to an agreement whereby Neptune3 would continue to operate the fields but would do so henceforth under Egyptian aegis. The GOI also would like to arrange for the continuation of Israeli commercial operators (sub-contractors) to work with any Egyptian concessionaire. Vardi elaborated on Bar-On’s presentation. He noted that petroleum exploration and exploitation is perhaps unique as an area wherein international involvement is a norm. The proposed Israeli arrangement would result not in a petroleum deal between the two governments, but between the GOE and a commercial group. In this regard, Vardi said Israel hopes that Egypt would agree to grant a concession to Neptune and the Israeli National Oil Company (INOC). Neptune and INOC would join together for this purpose, Vardi said. Vardi acknowledged Egyptian sensitivity on sovereignty aspects, noting that, apparently, any restriction on concession granting authority (e.g. through a negotiated agreement specifying a role for Neptune and/or INOC) would be interpreted by the GOE to be an infringement on that sovereignty. While the Israeli team recognizes the GOE argument re responsibilities to AMOCO as a “very valid argument,” they believe that the 1974 AMOCO concession4 was primarily a political instrument. AMOCO “did not come with clean hands” into the present negotiating matrix, since the company accepted with “eyes open” a concession wherein access was not possible. Vardi went on to state that the GOI has moral commitment to Neptune. He opined that Neptune was entitled to USG help. He alluded to extensive geological data developed for broader areas in the Sinai which could be made available to the GOE in the context of an agree- 3 Israeli petroleum company. 4 In October 1974, Gulf Petroleum, a joint company formed by Amoco and the Egyptian General Petroleum Company, in line with Egypt’s policy of selling petroleum concessions in territory unoccupied by Israeli forces, made a large strike in the Damadan off-shore oil field in the Gulf of Suez. (“Promising Oil Strike Reported in Egypt,” The Washington Post, November 1, 1974, p. A19) On October 25, Egyptian petroleum negotiators “underlined” to Korn Egypt’s commitment to Amoco, adding that “as sovereign, the GOE should have unfettered right to determine concessions in the area.” The memorandum of conversation for this meeting is in the National Archives, RG 59, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Files of Alfred L. Atherton, Lot 80D166, Box 6, Memcons 1 of 2.
