September 18–December 16, 1978
455
133.
Transcript of a Telephone Conversation Between President
Carter and Israeli Prime Minister Begin1
Washington, November 12, 1978
SUBJECT
Telephone Conversation between President Carter and Prime Minister Begin,
November 12, 1978
President Carter: I have sent you a personal letter today by Secre-
tary Vance.2
Prime Minister Begin: He will give it to me at the airport?
President Carter: Yes, as soon as he sees you.3 The essence of it is, in
my own opinion in spite of all of the efforts that Vance and the negoti-
ators have made, the prospects at this point of approving an agreement
are quite remote. My own belief is that the deep feeling and demands
on Israel on one side and Egypt on the other, without substantial
courage and flexibility, are incompatible. We have tried to explore, as
best we could, language that would be a reasonable compromise, and
that would be fair to both nations and would carry out the commit-
ments made at Camp David. We also realize very clearly that to trans-
late the general language at Camp David into specific agreements is a
major step forward and also very difficult. Secretary Vance met last
night until about one-thirty this morning with your negotiators4 and I
suggested yesterday that he bring them up with him to save your own
time and to let you know what the tentative agreements are.
Prime Minister Begin: I don’t know yet what they discussed.
President Carter: I realize that you don’t. He’ll bring along the Is-
raeli negotiators with him. We have just about reached the end of our
ability, because on several occasions, as you know, including about
three weeks ago when I personally met with both negotiators,5 once we
reach an agreement here and it goes back to either you, the Israeli Cab-
inet, or President Sadat, the negotiated agreement is thrown aside and
additional demands are made. I don’t criticize anyone for it, but it has
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East, Sub-
ject File, Box 15, Egypt-Israel Negotiations, 11/6–13/78. Secret. According to the Presi-
dent’s Daily Diary, Carter spoke with Begin from 2:43 p.m. to 2:53 p.m. (Carter Library,
Presidential Materials) Carter’s handwritten notes related to this conversation are in the
Carter Library, Plains File, President’s Personal Foreign Affairs File, Box 2, Israel,
11/77–2/79.
2 See Document 130.
3 See Document 134.
4 See Document 131.
5 See Documents 96 and 98.
