386
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
groupings that are being considered for such a future government and
wishes to be assured that the Secretary of State and the Secretary of
Defense, as well as those with long experience in the political affairs
of Iran, have been consulted. Also, that you and your principal advisors
have carefully reviewed the nature of contacts, any obligations entered
into, and the long-term consequences of such relationships.
The covert action Finding regarding Afghanistan was developed
before the Soviet invasion and overthrow of the Amin government,
although final action on the Finding was not completed until after those
events. Members of the Committee noted that the level of assistance
envisaged in December was not likely to suffice in the face of Soviet
arms. If the Afghan rebels are to hold out successfully then it would
seem necessary to provide more arms appropriate for use against Soviet
helicopter gunships, if not against jet fighters. On the other hand, if it
is in the interest of resistance groups over the long run, they may be
better served by refraining from premature offensives against Soviet
troops rather than giving more arms to disorganized and independent
groups which may only invite their tragic slaughter.
Some members of the Committee suggested that the United States
pursue a policy of overt support for the Afghan resistance groups
emphasizing regional cooperation and involvement. The extremely
delicate relations between India and Pakistan were discussed. Some
members emphasized the need for the United States to show in a public
manner its ability to take useful action in the interests of Moslem states.
On the other hand, the Committee understands the problem posed by
the reluctance of Pakistan and other Moslem states to be publicly
identified with the United States or to provide the Soviet Union with
explicit confirmation of their role in support of the Afghan rebels.
In conclusion, the Committee is of the firm view that covert action
may be an adjunct but is not a substitute for coherent U.S. policy and
strategy toward the Middle East, South Asia or the Soviet Union. There
is a deep concern that covert action should not be relied upon to salvage
almost impossible situations, for this often results in operations which
are themselves unlikely either to succeed or to remain covert. It is for
these reasons that the Committee believes it should closely follow the
development of these programs.
The Committee valued the opportunity to discuss with the CIA
the details and consequences of these two crucial programs. The Com-
mittee is mindful that the Congress has undertaken to share responsibil-
ity for such programs. This responsibility is most effectively met when
the full facts and circumstances are considered in a season when consul-
tation and advice can be exchanged. The Committee recognizes that
we have entered into a very dangerous time and we want to assure you
