National Security Policy 493 Soviets will retain their capability for submarine production however, and we believe that after an interim period for changeover and devel­ opment of prototypes, series construction of new long-­range types will be resumed. This procedure would be parallel to that followed in the period 1949–51 in the changeover to the “W,” “Z,” and “Q” classes. 144a. We estimate that the USSR could now have a prototype nuclear-­powered submarine, and that they may develop other improve­ ments in propulsion design during the period. The Soviets also could produce a new type of submarine specifically designed for guided mis­ sile firing. Although they have adequate fissionable material and the over-­all technological potential to produce larger numbers of the new types, we believe that their program will be of the magnitude indicated unless they adopt less sophisticated designs for reasons of urgency. Subject to successful development of prototypes, we believe the Soviets could build, within the period, about 70 submarines with advanced weapon systems and improved propulsion, about 20 of which probably would be nuclear powered. Considering such factors as the decommis­ sioning of obsolete boats and the development of new propulsion and weapon systems, we estimate that the total force will approximate 560 submarines by mid-1962. 145. Naval Aviation. Soviet Naval Aviation, comprising nearly 20 percent of total Soviet air strength, is now the second largest naval air force in the world. It is engaged in a concentrated training program which stresses coordinated action between its land-­based aircraft and naval vessels (both surface and submarines), offensive action against enemy naval forces, and air defense. During this period, its strength will probably be increased and its modernization will continue. There is no evidence of intention to build aircraft carriers. Improved light bomb­ ers and all-­weather fighters will probably be introduced. Long-­range maritime reconnaissance and attack capabilities should be improved materially by increases in the number of jet and piston medium bomb­ ers allocated to Naval Aviation, and by the probable availability of airto-­surface guided missiles for attack against ships. TRENDS IN SOVIET STRATEGY AND CAPABILITIES 146. For reasons which have been set forth elsewhere in this esti­ mate we believe that the Soviet leaders wish to avoid an all-­out nuclear exchange with the US. We have also pointed out that they almost cer­ tainly consider that any general war with the US would involve such an exchange. Consequently, we think that a key element of Soviet strat­ egy in any war, whether with the US or with another nation, would be to attempt to keep the conflict limited in geographic scope. The Soviets would probably also prefer that nuclear weapons not be used, at least
