70 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement any commitment or indication of U.S. financial assistance in the paper we submit to them, the Embassy should say that we contemplate that the DLF will work closely with the Community Fund and would give priority consideration to requests for financing sound development projects including joint projects. Both ARA and I feel that this line is inadequate to deal with the expectations our policy statements have aroused. In order to effectively carry out policy of supporting Central American Integration, we will need to finance projects accounting to about $15 million per country with the possibility that this might be execeeded if sound projects totaling more than this sum were submitted. It is not proposed that any new regional Fund be established; however, it is felt that the time has come for us to make concrete commitments to finance sound development projects related to the integration effort from existing appropriations as through existing agencies. Within the Governments of the Central American countries enthusiasm for economic integration is high. Its need has been felt for a long time. ARA has been active in the area and has taken some steps toward furthering the integration effort although in a manner which we regard as unsatisfactory. Even if we do not take this opportunity to lead and guide this movement, it is very likely that it may find other means of proceeding, but in a way which would be instrumental to United States interests as well as in the long-­term interests of the countries themselves. Recommendations: That you discuss this matter with the Treasury Department with a view to obtaining, in line of a Central American Development Fund, (1) agreement that the U.S. will sympathetically consider the financing of sound development projects relating the integration effort, in the amount of approximately $15 million per country, and (2) Treasury’s concurrence in making this position known in a note of transmittal to the governments concerned when the proposed recommends is sent.
