1060  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement
Mr. Haider explained they had come to fill the Department in 
on IPC’s problem in Peru. The company has been in contact with the 
American Embassy in Lima and Mr. Haider presumed the Department 
was generally familiar with the situation. At Mr. Haider’s request, 
Mr. Brisco explained that according to the terms under which it oper-
ates in Peru, IPC is obliged to supply 80% of the domestic market’s 
needs. The Lobitos Company, in which IPC recently purchased a 50% 
interest, must supply 15% of the domestic requirements and a few 
small companies make up the balance. Back in the early ’40s when this 
requirement was established, it was not an onerous one as only about 
40% of IPC’s production had to be devoted to the internal market. Since 
then, as domestic consumption has risen, while production has been 
relatively stabilized, it has reached the point where some 80% of IPC’s 
production must be devoted to the Peruvian market. Mr. Brisco went 
on to explain why this obligation to supply the domestic market places 
such a burden on the company. At the beginning of World War II, the 
Peruvian Government placed price controls on many necessities. These 
controls were lifted after the war on everything except bread and petro-
leum products. With the exception of some minor adjustments allowed 
in 1953–54, the Government has hesitated to permit further price 
adjustments because of its fear of the political and social repercussions 
which might ensue. In the meanwhile, the sol has depreciated in value 
and production costs have risen. Today the controlled prices net IPC 
a return of only 70c⁄ a barrel at the well-­head. He emphasized that this 
calculation is reached by subtracting only the costs of the refining and 
distribution operations and without including a profit return on those 
operations. The comparative price in the United States for the equiv-
alent grade of crude would be about $3.25 a barrel. Today it costs IPC 
about a dollar a barrel to produce the crude which is netting only the 
70c⁄/barrel return. Mr. Brisco pointed out that the Government-­owned 
petroleum company which produces some 2600 barrels a day by itself 
and receives another 500–600 barrels in royalty crude is not obliged to 
supply the domestic market and in fact, has resisted efforts to make it 
supply that market on the grounds that it cannot do so profitably at the 
prices presently allowed. Most of the Government company’s crude is 
exported. It supplies small quantities for the refinery at Iquitos area 
where the controlled price is well above the price permitted in the rest 
of the country.
In response to a question, it was brought out that IPC expects to 
just about break even this year on its Peruvian operations, since the 
profit on the foreign marketing of about 20% of its production will be 
just enough to cover the losses on its domestic processing and sales 
of the other 80%. This contrasts to an overall profit last year of about 
­$2-­l/2 million and of some $12 million as late as 1954. IPC’s investment 
in Peru, however, is upwards of $200 million.
