that it will prevent any unfortunate repercussion from the departure of our
delegation from Shanghai and in order to demonstrate to the Chinese
Government and people our earnest desire to settle the Shanghai incident
itself at the earliest moment possible and to cooperate with the Chinese
Government [in] the broader questions of a reorganization of the
International Settlement if authorized to do so by our Governments.
3. The Heads of Legation decided to constitute the Italian Minister, the
French Minister and myself a committee to negotiate with the Chinese
Government in the above regard.
4. I believe this morning’s démarche is a very wise step along the line of
proper conciliation whenever possible. It likewise divides into two sections,
for negotiation with the Chinese Government, the question of the actual
shooting affrays themselves at Shanghai and the broader matter of a
reorganization of the International Settlement. Not to make this
differentiation and maintain it, would be to cause endless confusion and in
effect in my opinion jeopardize the success in either direction. I construe the
present state of affairs extremely critical; that the prescribed [sic] movement
and agitation is essentially nationalist in character rather than antiforeign;
that we foreigners must make some concession to the Chinese before the
agitation will subside and that if we do not do so speedily there are grave
fears for the future. In my opinion the widespread agitation centers
psychologically in the Shanghai incident; that therefore we should settle this
as satisfactorily as possible at once when it is hoped the agitation throughout
the country will subside temporarily at least.
5. The readjustment now going on between China and the foreign powers is
greatly accelerated and exacerbated by the Shanghai incident and its
widespread repercussion and is likewise being exploited in every manner
possible by the Soviets. Just how much they had to do with the actual
initiation of the Shanghai incident is at present impossible to say. While the
situation in China is not yet out of [hand] I am alarmed at the potentialities
unless something is done speedily and satisfactorily as regards a solution
thereof.
MAYER
