592  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
(S) There is the additional economic threat posed by even the cur-
rent oil situation. Our and our allies’ economies are vulnerable to major 
oil price increases—­say of a factor of two or more in real dollars. In 
the long run such a price rise would create alternative energy sources; 
in the short run it would be disastrous. We now pay $45 billion to for-
eign nations to import oil—­roughly one third our Defense budget. That 
number will surely increase this year with adverse effects on our bal-
ance of payments and further stimulation of inflation. So long as these 
trends continue, our own economic health lies in the hands of others. 
The Soviet Union’s energy problems are not of this magnitude, nor so 
susceptible of manipulation by others.
2. (S) Oil is not our only strategic import. We must likewise import 
cobalt, chrome, and a variety of other materials which may be subject to 
cut-­off or arbitrarily increased prices. We will be increasingly dependent 
on world trade in the coming years. Again, though the Soviet empire is 
not at times self-­sufficient in agricultural commodities, it remains so in 
raw materials. And it can accommodate, albeit painfully, to agricultural 
deficit by shifting its ratio of consumption of meat to cereal.
3. (C) I am convinced that, as your assessment notes, we will con-
tinue to maintain and expand our world trade and political leadership 
in international affairs. The appeal of western concern for the individ-
ual citizen and his economic welfare remains in stark contrast to Soviet 
oppression. Yet it is this very contrast that, in my view, continues to 
pose problems for the Soviets—­problems they may choose to solve 
internationally by subversion or force, their own or surrogates’. Thus, 
it is in part because of our political and economic appeal, and their lack 
of it, that we may face increased risk of the use of military force from 
the Soviets.
4. (C) In a different way, our international economic competition 
with the USSR is affected strongly by the Soviet concentration on mil-
itary research and development. The opportunity cost of this concen-
tration is a deprived non-­defense industry which cannot compete in 
the worldwide commercial market. Soviet technology might instead be 
used to improve production of commercial aircraft, autos, trucks and 
oil, and to develop a petro-­chemical industry—­but it is not. We and 
our Allies, in contrast, exploit our technology in non-­defense indus-
tries to develop and sustain a clear competitive advantage vis-­a-­vis the 
Soviets in world markets. In the past two years, we have maintained 
this advantage, with concomitant international, economic and political 
benefits. For example, China’s interest in normalized relations with us 
has been driven in part by US technical superiority. This coupling of 
our commercial leadership with a free, political tradition is, in my view, 
our strongest international asset. Thus, I would be loath to trade to the 
Soviets our technical lead in any area for short-­term or unsure political
