Colombia  359
CO–26.	
Telegram from the Ambassador in Colombia (McIntosh) 
to the Department of State1

Bogotá, March 25, 1960, 6 p.m.
439.
DEPTEL 4422
Following arrival Valeriano,3 I contacted Alberto Gonzalez Secretary 
General presidency requested permission bring Valeriano with me in my 
farewell call upon President today. President sent word due lack time 
unable receive Valeriano but would be glad have me present preliminary 
report4 which I did today during half hour private talk. President lis-
tened attentively to my exposition but made no significant comments on 
substance of report or on question GOC ability and willingness to finance 
recommended programs; nor did he comment on offer of helio-­courier 
plane. He stated he would read report soonest and possibly would be 
in position to give me some comments upon arrival in Miami April 4. 
I stressed our desire for his early reaction indicating that both Colonel 
Valeriano and Chargé Wells would be available at anytime before his 
departure for further discussions. (Obviously, Lleras preoccupied with 
post-­election problems and preparations for U.S. visit). In circumstances 
Embassy will not attempt to press him further for reaction before his 
departure.
As for Embassy reaction I consider preliminary report good staff 
study violence problem for internal U.S. consideration of basic ques-
tion whether we willing take political decision provide GOC with 
MAP assistance on grant basis for internal security. Embassy has 
always understood primary mission survey team was facilitate our 
determination this policy issue. Therefore, we less than enthusiastic 
at presentation this preliminary document President Lleras before we 
had reached this policy decision, especially in hurried circumstances 
unlikely permit adequate discussions with Lleras re significance and 
scope recommendation.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 721.5-MSP/3–2560. Secret; Priority; 
Limit Distribution. This telegram was transmitted in two sections.
2 Reference uncertain; Department telegram 442 is dated April 24, 1959, and does 
not relate to the subject under discussion. (102.6/4–2459)
3 Colonel Napoleon Valeriano.
4 Apparent reference to an earlier version of the “Report of the Colombia Survey 
Team,” dated April 1960, concerning violence in Colombia and possible methods for 
dealing with the problem. The report covers the period October–December 1959; a copy 
is filed under Department of State decimal file 721.00/4–3060.
