Dominican Republic  493
DR–15.	
Memorandum from the Assistant Secretary of State for 
Inter-American Affairs’ Special Assistant (Hill) to the 
Representative at the Council of the Organization of 
American States (Dreier)1
 
Washington, March 15, 1960.
SUBJECT
Policy Towards the Dominican Republic
While all concerned, including Ambassador Farland, would 
whole-heartedly agree with the point in your memorandum2—­that it 
would be desirable to encourage a satisfactory transition from the pres-
ent regime to one which will work towards the development of “dem-
ocratic procedures”—­this has already been considered in very great 
detail, and the situation practically does not exist that this can be done 
within a period of, say, one year. The ideal is not in-­harmony with the 
facts as they exist and there is, therefore, imposed on us the in escap-
able necessity over the next year of assigning priorities between our 
“negative” objective of keeping Castro out and our “positive” objec-
tive of working towards a more democratic regime. Unpleasant as it 
is, we must recognize that we must precariously ride both these horses 
as long as we can but that, if they come to a parting of the ways when 
a real possibility of a Castro or Castro-­type takeover of the Dominican 
Republic exists, we must be prepared to jump solidly on the “stop-­Castro” 
animal.
With an eye to the longer term—­and to death, assassination or rev-
olution this year—­we must of course work with all possible assets to 
assure that a successor government comes in which is friendly to us, 
stable, and as “democratic” as Dominican realities will permit it to be. 
This is being done insofar as possible, although we must recognize that 
our overt activities—­including those in the OAS—­must necessarily be 
limited by the consideration that we should avoid giving the present 
government a too rough a shove down until we reach an estimate that 
this would help achieve a U.S.-oriented rather than Castro-­oriented 
successor regime.
1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 739.00/3–2560. Secret.
2 Apparent reference to Dreier’s memorandum of March 14, printed as DR–14.
