454 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI Shevardnadze: Yes, we do have something. It’s a counterproposal, not a counteroffensive. Baker: On CW, I sent you a letter3 which outlined some of our ideas and also draft agreement. I’ve got a joint draft statement that I’d like to give you, and I hope that we can agree on it and issue it while I’m here. Both substantively and politically such a statement would send a very important signal to the rest of the world. (Baker turns over paper4) On START, I’d like to go through the proposal I brought. I would like you to understand that it represents some very hard work at the highest levels of the Administration particularly on the President’s part and on my part to move the bureaucracy forward. I don’t want to spend too much time going through the details tonight since I know we can do that tomorrow, but I would like to go through the three issues we said we would resolve and outline our general approach. On ALCMs, we will propose a package that moves toward your position in nearly every element, e.g., on counting rules, on range thresholds, and on distinguishability. Shevardnadze: That is very important. Baker: You will be able to tell your bureaucracy that the United States has come in our direction on range, on distinguishability, and on counting. I am not saying that we have adopted your position on each, but we have certainly moved toward your positions. I hope that when you see the detail you will appreciate our movements because, let me tell you, I have got the scars on my back to show you this took some real effort. Shevardnadze: You know, I’ve got quite a few of those scars myself. Baker: On non-­deployed missiles, we are ready to endorse your approach and drop all numerical limits on non-­deployed missiles with the sole exception of mobiles. And I think that the proposal I am bringing on this is one that you will find acceptable. On telemetry encryption, on data denial, Burt and Nazarkin have closed the gap on this. I hope that they will resolve it here—I assume they will. It is extraordinarily technical. Shevardnadze: And, also very sensitive. Baker: I’d like to keep Burt and Nazarkin together and let them resolve it. We won’t have to debate the technical details but if necessary we can produce the political will to resolve the negotiations if need be. 3 In telegram 34575 to Moscow, February 3, 1990, the Department transmitted the text of Baker’s letter to Shevardnadze along with a draft bilateral destruction MOU and instructions to submit both to Karpov or more senior Soviet official in preparation of Baker’s visit. (Department of State, Central Foreign Policy File, N900001–0300) 4 Not found. See footnote 3, Document 71.
