Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IX The complete treaty package now before the Governments of Egypt and Israel contains the following documents: —a Protocol concerning Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai and accompanying security arrangements; —maps delineating the line for an interim Israeli withdrawal and the security zones to be established in the Sinai and the Negev after Israel’s final withdrawal; —a Protocol concerning the normalization of relations between the Parties under conditions of peace; —a set of letters and interpretive notes. In those documents, the two Parties have reached agreement on: the basic text of a peace treaty, the Annex on withdrawal and security arrangements, the maps, virtually all of the Annex on the normalization of relations, the beginning of the next round of negotiations on the West Bank and Gaza one month after ratification of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty. There are three principle outstanding issues: —How to express the relationship between the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty and the political process in the West Bank/Gaza which both sides agreed at Camp David should be negotiated and set in motion. Egypt wants assurances that the sequence of steps leading to Palestinian autonomy will take place within a specific timeframe. Israel agrees to start negotiations promptly, but takes the position that it is impossible to determine when those negotiations can be concluded. Israel does not want implementation of the Egyptian-Israeli Treaty conditioned on other negotiations. Egypt has insisted since President Sadat’s visit to Israel in November, 1977, that Egypt can make peace with Israel only in the context of progress toward peace between Israel and its other Arab neighbors.8 This issue is touched on in two proposed letters—one specifying the time period within which these negotiations would be concluded and another in which Egypt relates the exchange of ambassadors to inauguration of a Palestinian self-governing authority. —How to define the relationship between the obligations under this Treaty and those under other international obligations. Israel wants the obligations under this Treaty to have priority over Egypt’s commitments to other Arab nations. Egypt has insisted on the right, under the UN Charter, to honor the several mutual defense pacts it has with other Arab States in the event of armed attack against them. These issues are dealt with in Article VI of the Treaty. —Both sides agree to the principle of a review in Article IV of the Treaty and that any changes must be by mutual agreement. Egypt wants it made explicit that review is mandatory upon the request of either side and has suggested a fixed date for review. Israel agrees that review should be mandatory if either side requets a review but does not accept the mention of a review in 5 years. 8 Carter underlined “other Arab neighbors” and wrote “Palestinians, W Bk/Gaza” in the right-hand margin next to it.
