548
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
There is also a ripple effect. The Germans, for example, are already
nervous that the Soviet response to our playing “the China card” will
result in the Russians playing “the German card.” By this they are evi-
dently concerned that pressure could be brought on Berlin or that some
other aspect of Soviet-West German relations could be adversely
affected.
Thus, it is extremely important for allied solidarity as well as
global stability for this three-cornered relationship to be handled with
the utmost care. From a political standpoint it is important to maintain
momentum with both Peking and Moscow. I believe this means that
you should plan on emerging from both the Deng visit and the
Brezhnev visit5 with concrete plans to visit both China and the Soviet
Union before the 1980 election. (You should make some tentative
scheduling decisions on this even before you meet with Deng.)
Such summits in Peking and Moscow will not only enhance your
own prestige but serve as a focus for structuring our relations with both
China and the Soviet Union over the next 18 months. They will provide
both reassurance of a continuing relationship with both countries and
positive incentives for both to maintain a measure of restraint in their
mutual relations.
My second recommendation is that you take more direct com-
mand of our relationship with the Soviet Union. You should insist on
tight personal control of all actions affecting our relationship with the
Soviet Union. You have taken this approach in regard to the Middle
East and China with significant success. There is a potential for great
disarray, given the different ideological views in your Administration.
We cannot afford this disarray any longer, but it is likely to intensify in
the absence of better discipline.
The Process
This leads me to my final concern. Substantively, we are doing ex-
tremely well. You have dispelled the popular impression that you are
not skilled in foreign policy. You have made real progress on a number
of key issues, and today the U.S. has better relations with the more im-
portant countries in the world than at any point since 1945.
But as an Administration, we have not dispelled the notion that we
are amateurish and disorganized and that our policies are uncertain
5 During a December 7, 1978, question-and-answer session at a breakfast with
members of the White House Correspondents Association, the President indicated that
he would like to host Brezhnev in Washington for 4–5 days to discuss “a broad range of
agenda items.” (Public Papers: Carter, 1978, Book I, p. 2180) Responding to reporters’ ques-
tions in Plains, Georgia, on December 25, the President suggested that it was unlikely that
the meeting would take place in January, but adding: “We would be ready in January if
the Soviets are.” (Ibid., p. 2287)
