Nicaragua 841 NI–4. Letter from the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs (Rubottom) to the Ambassador in Nicaragua (Whelan)1 Washington, April 7, 1958. Dear Tom: The always thorny question of a visit by President Luis Somoza to the United States arose last Thursday at lunch with Guillermo who took the initiative, both in the invitation and in the subject matter we discussed. I sat on him rather hard at first, saying that the visit was simply out of the question in the foreseeable future for a variety of reasons, several of which he knew. He looked quite unhappy and, having given him the medicine, I proceeded to sugar-coat it as much as possible for the next half hour. Actually, we discussed the kind of letter that I would write to you on this subject, so I suppose that this goes back to earlier conservations which the two of you have had in Managua. Luis has won commendation from all of us who are interested in Latin American affairs in Washington, and he has done surprisingly well in obtaining the respect and good will of most of his neighbors. However, most of the publicity media in the United States still tend to lump him with the other “dictators” of Latin America and the same treatment is accorded him throughout most of South America. In that continent, especially in Colombia, Venezuela, Uruguay, Argentina and Chile, the current against anything smacking of state control is very strong indeed, and Luis’ family name hurts him no matter what he does. I do not cite the above as reason for not inviting him to the United States, but it is an aspect of the problem which has to be considered. It seems to us in the Department that the following points should be given weight in any consideration of this problem, since they indicate both that Nicaragua and President Somoza are well regarded by the United States and also that there are reasons other than the one listed above for going slow on an invitation to him; (1) The treatment accorded President Tacho Somoza following his shooting and at the time of his death clearly revealed the extent of United States friendship toward Nicaragua (and has been used to our detriment by some elements);2 (2) The President’s brother, General Tachito Somoza, was invited to the United States last year and accorded full honors during
