1464 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement of doing no more than matching the action that had been taken by my government with respect to the Chinese in the United States—that is, withdrawing all measures preventing their departure and permitting them to return. This would have permitted us promptly to proceed to the discussion of other questions in an atmosphere that would give greater hope of constructive results. However, your authorities refused to take this straightforward and reciprocal step and you insisted that I enter into public agreement with you on the subject. Although I saw no necessity for such an agreement, I concurred in your proposal, even including your proposal on third party representation in the U.S. I did this on the clear understanding, which was embodied in the specific words of the agreement, that this would promptly resolve the prob­ lem of Americans detained in your country. The agreement into which we entered on September 10, 1955 in fact specifically said that your authorities agreed to take measures to permit Americans (not just some Americans, but all Americans) expeditiously to exercise their right to return. Yet eight hundred and twenty four days after we entered into that agreement, Mr. Ambassador, six Americans still remain in your prisons. I have, in the past, and must again today express to you as solemnly as I can, the dissatisfaction of myself, my government and the American people with this absurdly long delay of your authorities in resolving this problem and in carrying out their pledged word in the first agreement ever reached between us. (b) At our twenty-third meeting on October 27, 1955, I raised with you the question of the failure of your side to account for many U.S. military personnel still missing from the Korean hostilities. I pointed out to you that each of these men were last seen or heard from under circumstances indicating that he was either captured or killed by forces of your side and that your authorities should have information concern­ ing them. I also pointed out many specific cases in which your official radio, as well as press, had specifically identified persons on the list as being prisoners of your side. Yet they were never returned nor was any report even received of their death. In the time that has elapsed during the fifty meetings that have taken place since that period, no satisfac­ tory accounting of these men has been made in the Military Armistice Commission in Korea or here. Surely at one of these meetings it would have been very simple and straightforward for you to have offered to request your authorities to investigate the matter and furnish us infor­ mation to which we are entitled not only on humanitarian grounds but also by the specific terms of the Korean armistice agreement. Yet you have not done so. (c) Mr. Ambassador, at our 20th meeting on October 8, 1955 I made to you a proposal suggesting that we renounce in reciprocal terms the use of force in the settlement of issues between us, that is, either we were going to permit our disputes to lead to hostilities between us, or
