32 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement justification to producing two similar missiles with the same perfor­ mance. Thor has had more advanced testing and is closer to production than Jupiter. We recommend that it alone should be chosen for contin­ ued development and use, while Jupiter should be terminated as soon as practicable. This decision will result in considerable dollar savings, will reduce the burden on the Air Force of making two weapon systems with different GSE, training procedures and spare parts operational at the same time and will make ABMA available for other projects. In the case of Atlas and Titan the situation is different because Atlas is much nearer being operational but Titan promises to have better ini­ tial performance and has greater improvement potential. The need for an early operational ICBM makes the termination of Atlas impractical, but this project should not be encouraged to engage in development work beyond that needed for IOC, because Titan can become opera­ tional some 18 months later if adequate funding is provided. III. The Fleet Ballistic Missile, Polaris, with a solid propellant engine, is in an early stage of development. The introduction of solid propellant engines into long-­range ballistic missiles has many import­ ant advantages: the engines are comparatively simple and are instantly ready to fire; the reliability, judging by the performance of smaller rock­ ets, is very high. The performance characteristics required of solid pro­ pellant engines for use in ballistic missiles are, however, far higher than achieved in the past. Furthermore, solid propellant engines add greatly to the difficulties of all-­inertial guidance. It is believed that in time these problems will be solved and since the solid propellant ballistic missiles are very advantageous from the operational point of view, their vigor­ ous development is strongly recommended. The first version of Polaris, A–1, a missile of about 1000 miles range, is scheduled to be operational in 1960. This schedule appears to be realistic, but there may be navigational and guidance difficulties in conjunction with its use as a FBM which will not be entirely solved in the early stages of operational availability of Polaris. Polaris B, a missile of 1500 mile range, is planned to become opera­ tional in 1963. The advance from Polaris A–1 to B involves some rather dramatic improvements in the solid propellant engines and we are not at all sure that the actual progress will be as rapid as planned. It should also be emphasized that the reliability of the early operational Polaris may not be all that is being anticipated for it by its enthusiasts because of several novel features never before used in solid propellant engines. At about the same time that Polaris will become a fleet ballistic missile it should be possible to have a land based version of this missile, provided the Air Force is satisfied with its performance. If the Air Force desires to change the specifications then there might be an additional delay of one or two years in obtaining a solid propellant land-­based IRBM.
