3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
552
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume VI
193.
Oral Note From the Soviet Leadership1
undated
Moscow has carefully examined the points made by the Secretary
of State concerning questions of trade and economic relations between
our countries.2
Naturally, one can only welcome the fact that the US Government
recognizes the highly abnormal situation that has arisen in this sphere
through the fault of the American side, and is demonstrating a desire to
correct it. This question is long overdue. It is, of course, up to the Presi-
dent to decide what specific steps he considers it possible to adopt
toward these ends. And we do not intend to give advice here. What is
important is that artificially created discriminatory restrictions be
eliminated.
Our position of principle is well known to the American side. It has
been frequently set forth and it remains unchanged. We proceed from
the premise that trade between our countries—like that between any
other countries—can and must be carried out only on an equal and mu-
tually advantageous basis without being linked with other, unrelated
questions. So it is, of course, completely unacceptable in this that there
should be any efforts to interfere in the internal affairs of one another.
And yet this is precisely the aim of existing American legislation cov-
ering the conduct of trade and economic matters with the USSR. Only
by rejecting such an approach can one anticipate that Soviet-American
trade and economic ties will achieve the necessary scale for the mutual
benefit of both countries and will contribute to the positive develop-
ment of our relations as a whole.
If one examines the procedure that is now being proposed on the
basis of this principled viewpoint, the question legitimately arises of
what actually would change in substance. For what is referred to is not
fundamental change, nor is it change in the existing legislation. To be
sure, we are told that in the present instance it is not formally de-
manded of the Soviet side, as it were, to offer any assurances con-
cerning its policy on the exit of Soviet citizens for permanent residence
abroad. However, there is here the qualification that the President
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Office, Outside
the System File, Box 53, Chron: 5/19–31/79. Secret. Sent under a May 19 covering memo-
randum from Aaron to Carter, in which Aaron stated that the Soviet response was “quite
negative, stopping short only of outright rejection of our ‘proposal.’” (Ibid.) Carter wrote
in the upper right-hand corner of the covering memorandum, “Zbig—To hell with
them. J.”
2 See Document 190.
