National Security Policy  247
industrial targets; (2) that there will be one nuclear exchange only; (3) that 
fallout shelter will be available for the population of the United States, 
and that 90% of the people not killed by blast and thermal effects will 
enter and stay in shelter for the necessary periods of time (which will 
vary from a few hours to as many as 13 weeks); (4) that no assistance 
(food, medicine, etc.) will be available from outside the United States.
d. Because the assumed attack (a) takes place in 1965 (when more 
weapons, including ICBMs, will be available), and (b) uses more than 
one weapon per target, the severity of the attack—­and the resulting 
fallout and casualties from fallout—­is greater than we have seen in 
other hypothetical attacks (98 million fatal American casualties).
e. The details of the attack assumed are covered in Chapter II of the 
Study and form a framework for the later chapters, which deal with the 
problems faced by survivors in a post-­attack environment.
MR. CANNELL, of the Stanford Research Institute, will speak on 
the problems of survival and recovery.
Questions.
9. The last of the four items is the report to be given by Governor 
Hoegh on the status of the six approved measures to carry out the con­
cept of shelter. Those measures are: (a) research on shelter design, shelter 
habitation, shelter equipment, weapons effects on animals, etc.; (b) a lim­
ited progress of construction of shelter prototypes; (c) a sampling survey 
of existing structures; (d) a program of public education; (e) a “shelf” of 
emergency plans; and (f) incorporation of fallout shelter in appropriate 
new Federal civilian construction. At the time the President approved 
these measures in March, it was estimated that the cost to FCDA in FY 
1959 of the first five items would approximate $28.5 million. I now under­
stand that the FCDA program for these five measures, as agreed upon 
with the Budget Bureau in late June, comes to only about $11 million.
10. Action on five other measures proposed by the Interdepartmental 
Committee in March was deferred pending consideration by the Council 
of the reports you are hearing this morning (NSC Action No. 1882-­d). 
Those five measures are further shelter prototype construction, pilot 
studies in selected communities, shelters in existing civilian Federal 
buildings, and shelters in existing and new military construction. I 
understand that OCDM is not seeking Council approval now for those 
additional measures, but will come back to the Council later in this calen­
dar year after further evaluation of the studies presented today.
GOVERNOR HOEGH
cc:  Mr. Harr
Mr. Lay
Dr. Gleason
Mr. Haskins
