3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1980
819
quest of anyone. As for the domestic affairs of Afghanistan, one thing
had to be said firmly: questions of the internal leadership of Afghani-
stan were internal affairs of that country and could only be resolved by
the Afghans themselves. No one had the right to interfere in these
matters. The President of Pakistan had said that he did not wish to ne-
gotiate with the President of Afghanistan, Babrak Karmal. Gromyko
wondered whether Zia had asked himself the question of how many
people liked the present leadership of Pakistan. Many people recalled
that Zia himself had come to power at the point of a rifle or bayonet; but
now Zia did not want to talk to these people, although people did talk
to him. Gromyko wanted to emphasize that the core of this problem
was that any settlement had to be arrived at in negotiations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, that there must be peace between these two
countries. The Afghan leadership agreed with this premise and was
prepared to enter into negotiations. Naturally, Iran must be involved as
well, but first and foremost this was a matter of relations between Af-
ghanistan and Pakistan. Just two days ago the Afghan leadership had
once again made its proposal, but Zia says that he does not want to sit
down at a table with them. Gromyko would urge the Secretary to try
and persuade Zia to enter into negotiations. If he genuinely wished to
settle this matter peacefully, Zia must be persuaded to enter into nego-
tiations. The Soviet Union was certainly in favor of a political settle-
ment, and believed that such a settlement was necessary and possible.
Thus, it was necessary to persuade Zia. As soon as the invasion of Af-
ghanistan was halted and a settlement reached, and relations between
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran returned to a peaceful basis, Soviet
forces would be withdrawn and Afghanistan’s neutrality would be
guaranteed. Of course, guarantees would be required and, as Brezhnev
had said, one such guarantor power could be the U.S., perhaps also the
Soviet Union and some other countries. That question, too, should be
discussed between Pakistan, Afghanistan and Iran. Gromyko could not
understand why this was not acceptable to the U.S. He had explained
his position to the Secretary. He had explained that the Soviet Union fa-
vored a peaceful solution, but no one should demand that Afghanistan
conduct its affairs to suit some other capital, whether it be London or
any other. In conclusion, he would point out that this was an internal
matter for Afghanistan. He would urge the Secretary to reflect on this
matter. In the Soviet view it was something well worth reflecting on. If
such a course is followed and a settlement reached, the question of Af-
ghanistan will simply disappear and disappear completely. It was cur-
rently being used in an artificial manner to stop progress on other
issues. While the Secretary might not agree, Gromyko was certain that
it can and must be resolved in a political manner.
There were two more issues Gromyko wanted to address briefly—
China and Iran.
