Afghanistan
173
A. Option 1: Provide International Radio Capability and Expand Insur-
gent Propaganda
—Initially, the possibility was explored of using [less than 1 line
not declassified] radio facilities for a “Voice of Afghanistan” program.
This was rejected for political considerations. CIA is considering use
of [less than 1 line not declassified] radio for such broadcasts.
—A special team of propaganda and linguistic experts has been
assembled and is producing both broadcast and printed material for
distribution inside Afghanistan. Six leaflets have been produced and
two of these have been circulated in Afghanistan, including Kabul.
Four tape cassettes have been recorded with two of these distributed
in Afghanistan. Radio material is being produced regularly for a low-
power insurgent radio now operating near the Afghan-Pakistan border.
B. Option 2: Provide Cash and Nonlethal Support to the Insurgents
The amount of [amount not declassified] was established for this
purpose. The following actions have been taken:
—[amount not declassified] has been handed to a Nuristani asset in
support of that tribe’s unique insurgency effort.3
—A principal Afghan asset with excellent ties to the Peshawar
insurgent leadership is enroute to Pakistan to provide [amount not
declassified] to aid a coalition of dissident Afghan leaders.
—Pakistan liaison has agreed in principle to serve as a channel for
CIA aid to the insurgents. We have not as yet pressed them to convey
money. We believe the next week or two will provide a clearer idea
as to whom the balance of the funds [amount not declassified] would
best be given, unilaterally or through liaison.
—Action is being taken to assemble up to 50 medical kits for the
insurgents, one kit serving 50 men.
C. Option 3: Establish a Psychological Operations Program in Pakistan
We have discussed with Pakistan liaison their interest in providing
to the insurgents a dependable broadcast capability. In judging this
local capability by the insurgents to be even more important than the
projected international broadcasts of Option 1 above, CIA has taken
the following action:
—Located and ordered for immediate delivery a shortwave broad-
cast transmitter with backup equipment which will permit the insur-
gents to cover nearly one-half of Afghanistan. This transmitter package,
sturdy and lightweight, will be ready for shipment 10 September. Paki-
stan liaison has agreed to position the transmitter for the insurgents.
3. The General Finding: This Finding tasked the worldwide covert
action infrastructure to expose the Kabul regime as despotic and subser-
vient to the Soviets, and to publicize insurgent activities. A Perspectives
3 The Nuristani are an ethnic group indigenous to northeastern Afghanistan.
