288
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume I
with the Muscovites. In this lies Carter’s opportunity.” (Joseph Harsh
in the Christian Science Monitor, December, 1976)
—“The USSR . . . has silently forged a formidable war machine.
Will the West be so irresponsible as to let it do this? This is the great
question on the eve of the inauguration of the new U.S. President . . .”
(Paris’ Aurore, January, 1977)
—Kissinger, because of his step-by-step approach, “was able to set
aside the most difficult issues between Egypt and Israel and select the
manageable ones for negotiation. His successor will not be able to do
so. There now is a consensus in the area that there is no room for further
small steps.” (Henry Tanner in the New York Times, December, 1976)
—“There can be no greater tonic to the Third World countries than
the knowledge that we have, at last, come to the end of the Kissinger
era. We hope that Mr. Carter . . . will display a refreshing readiness to
see African problems in far more clear-cut terms of principle than those
at any time reflected in the posture of the State Department during
Kissinger’s tenure.” (The New Nigerian, January, 1977)
—“We think the realities of world politics give Latin America a po-
sition not very high in President Carter’s priorities.” However, “fol-
lowing a policy of indifference . . . anything concrete or substantive that
Carter would do would at least be something . . .” (El Universal, Ca-
racas, January, 1977)
—“Jimmy Carter has promised to make life much more difficult
for would-be buyers of arms from the U.S. . . . But a man with Mr.
Carter’s commitments on cutting unemployment is going to find it very
hard to cut foreign (arms) sales, too.” (Financial Times of London, Jan-
uary 1977)
—“. . . the seeming indifferences of the last Administration to such
value (human rights) contribute to the declined confidence in the for-
eign policy and, eventually to its loss at the polls.” (The Washington
Post, January, 1977)
II. YOUR RESPONSE
U.S. foreign policy was clearly in need of broad renovation. Your
Administration recognized the need to move on a wide front, to deal
with a variety of complex issues—thus making a break with the pre-
dominant pattern of U.S. foreign policy in previous years. That pattern
had largely involved a heavy concentration on the U.S.-Soviet relation-
ship, with most other aspects of foreign policy being derivative of that
relationship.
Instead, the new Administration accepted the reality of complexity
and of change, and it placed emphasis not so much on maneuver, but
on building new relationships with friends, with adversaries, with the
developing world, even with the whole world—in the hope thereby of
