384 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI allowing us to commit to D–5 and peacekeeper inspections and deciding what Soviet missiles we want to inspect would help considerably. — A decision on range capability is absolutely critical to our efforts in throw-­weight. If the U.S. can explain how it intends to determine range capability, I think we can break the logjam in throw-­weight and get the Soviets to engage on our protocol. — We will need authority to begin to merge the mobiles joint working paper with the treaty text as soon as possible after Congress acts on Peacekeeper and Midgetman. This will give us the most latitude to implement the merger and follow through on the secretary’s initiative. Even after we merge text, it is important that we continue to work the verification problem, fill in the gaps in our positions, and reconcile our own mobile deployment plans and the work we are doing in Geneva. — The next step we should take in PPCMs is to lay down procedures for conducting monitoring. By definition, the longer we wait, the less the value of this initiative. 8. In the rush to finish short-­deadline work, I realize it is easy to let longer term issues slide. But we need to maintain our momentum on other issues, so that during the rounds before the summit our position is fleshed out. — I am glad to hear that work is progressing well on RV counting for future types of ballistic missiles. This is one of the most important issues to resolve in START. — However, I am disappointed that phasing of reductions and establishing intermediate limits apparently have been reduced in priority in the START work program. This fundamental issue has been discussed off and on for a long time; we need to crystallize what the problems are and try to solve them. — The Soviet interest in engaging on NDMs highlights the need for the U.S. to form a position on this key issue, which is central to much of our thinking on other issues, such as PPM and SSI. — We also need to maintain our efforts on the MOU review. The list of unresolved issues is pretty long, and we need a steady-­paced effort to work through them. The delegation is working on some ideas to help focus the review efforts. 9. These are my thoughts, and those of many on the delegation. Making decisions on the issues mentioned in this message will, I think, prove invaluable as we head into the upcoming period of ministerials and negotiating rounds before the spring summit. Keeping up the pace now will help us get to the summit in good shape. Cheers. Rick. Burt
