Uruguay  1165
It is more likely, by its nature, to be anti-Communist than the List 15 
Government, although several Nationalists, while in the opposition, 
have been notably friendly with the Soviet Legation. However, it is not 
likely that the Communists will be dealt with sufficiently drastically to 
give them a phoney “aura of persecution” which would actually help 
to strengthen them. In general, the broad middle-­class element that has 
been revealed in this election will be a very important bulwark against 
drastic change in policies in Uruguay—­and the unusual governmental 
system which gives the opposition unique opportunity to influence 
policies will help this.
Leaders of the Nationalist Party have shown, individually, a cour-
teous and friendly personal attitude in conversations with officers of 
the U.S. Embassy and U.S. citizens. The 85-­year old leader, Herrera, 
has been very cordial. He made a distinct effort to be friendly in greet-
ing Vice President Nixon during the Vice President’s visit to Uruguay 
from April 28–30, 1958, and he came to the Embassy residence to a 
reception for the Vice President. I made it a point to invite him to sit 
down on the sofa in the National Palace beside Vice President Nixon, 
as the Vice President was saying goodbye to the National Council, so 
that he and the Vice President could have their picture taken together, 
and this obviously greatly pleased the old gentleman. When I made a 
courtesy call on Herrera a few weeks later, he went out of his way to 
be exceptionally cordial even though it was obvious that he is almost 
totally deaf. He gave considerable publicity to this visit in his newspa-
per. (Amusingly, when I called on another Nationalist Councillor, Viña, 
the next day, he told me that the Herreristas didn’t have a “ghost of a 
chance“ in the coming elections under “the old man“.)
The man who will be President of the Council during the first 
year is Dr. Martin R. ECHEGOYEN. He is quite widely respected in 
Montevideo as a decent, intelligent and honest lawyer. He is consid-
ered to be so loyal to Herrera as probably to be almost subservient to 
him. While he opposed ratification of the ICA Industrial Productivity 
Agreement during the discussion on this subject in the Senate, I expect 
this was more symptomatic of opposition to List 15 than any real indi-
cation of feeling with respect to the United States or with respect to the 
substance of the matter. If he had any motivation other than “politics“, 
it may have been more a manifestation of nationalistic resistance against 
taking advice rather than any feeling with respect to the United States.
The man who would be President of the Council during the second 
year is Señor Benito NARDONE. [text not declassified] it was his dema-
gogic appeal through radio programs over several years which appar-
ently helped greatly to glean a large number of votes from small farmers 
whom he promised to help. It seems probable that he has no convic-
tions on international matters and will continue to be an opportunist;
