Chile 277 endeavor to enhance its prestige by having President EISENHOWER visit Chile and inviting President Alessandri to visit the United States. We should make it clear that we approve of the constructive steps which the government has taken to cope with Chile’s problems. At the same time, we must recognize that the political pendulum has swung as far to the right in Chile as it is likely to go, and that the return swing is likely to be evidenced in the Congressional elections in 1961 and in the Presidential election of 1964. We must therefore also maintain good working relations with the non-Communist parties of the Chilean center and left and make-­every effort to clear up the misapprehensions which cloud their understanding of the policy and which cause them to fail to see that the interests of Chile and the United States are basically in harmony, not in conflict. In the economic field, our course is not difficult to state though it may be difficult to carry out in practice. We must encourage by every legitimate means constructive action by the Alessandri Administration to check inflation and provide a sound foundation for the country’s economic growth. At the same time, it would be an error to forget the political requirements of the Administration, and it would be self-­ defeating to insist on perfection overnight. Alessandri was elected with less than one-­third of the popular vote: his support in the Congress is based upon a delicately-­balanced coalition which may disintegrate if the political sensitivities of the various parties are not continuously considered by the Administration in designing its program. These factors cannot be overlooked by the United States when we measure the effectiveness of Alessandri’s programs and accomplishments. To stint in our support because of Alessandri’s failure to achieve the ideal in his first year in office might lead to even, less satisfactory progress in achieving stability politically; the alternatives would certainly be less attractive from our point of view and less in line with United States interests. We should therefore lend such aid as we properly can to stabilize the economy, and we should adopt a sympathetic attitude toward requests for financial assistance designed to further the sound economic growth of the country. Our technical cooperation program should be carefully examined to eliminate what is less productive and emphasize its most useful features. For the present, major emphasis should be placed on the expansion of agricultural production and on the stimulation of foreign and local investment in Chilean private enterprise, including the private housing industry. At the same time, it may be desirable to provide limited amounts of special assistance, probably in the form of equipment, where it appears that a small investment will
