In these circumstances it is not perceived that Peru has any just complaint on account
of any commercial and customs arrangements which Chile may have made for the
regulation of the territory subject to her authority. If such arrangements benefited the
territory and thereby promoted immigration this was merely a legitimate incident of the
administration of the territory contemplated by the treaty.
The Arbitrator therefore holds that, with respect to the specific acts adduced by Peru as
tending to show the subsidized introduction of Chilean citizens, either as a matter of
law these acts were within Chile’s right under the treaty during the period in which the
territory is “subject to Chilean laws and authority” or there is no sufficient evidence to
show that they were in fact committed.
B. The acts of which Peru has complained as constituting the dispersion of the Peruvian
population after 1900 are: (1) The closing of the Peruvian schools; (2) the expulsion of
the Peruvian priests; (3) the suppression of Peruvian newspapers; (4) depriving
Peruvians of the right to assemble and display the Peruvian flag; (5) the boycotting of
Peruvian labor; (6) the conscription of Peruvian youth into the Chilean army; (7) the
expulsion of Peruvian citizens; and (8) general persecution of the Peruvian people
through mob violence either tolerated or encouraged by the authorities and
miscellaneous official persecution of all kinds.
Peruvian Schools. On May 14, 1900, the Governor of Tacna issued a decree closing the
Peruvian schools. The Peruvian Government made vigorous protest. It was stated by
the Peruvian Minister of Foreign Affairs that this action was “contrary to the laws of
Chile and, consequently, contrary to the Treaty of Ancon, which dictates their force and
effect in these territories.” The Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs in answer denied
that there had been exceptional procedure and asserted justification under Chilean law.
It was said that permits had been refused for the schools in question because of the
violation of the law by the Peruvian teachers; that neither the history nor the geography
of Chile was taught as required by the general law, and that on the other hand
sentiments of hostility toward Chile were inculcated in the pupils and a campaign of
propaganda carried on, in view of which the action was taken pursuant to law. It was
replied on behalf of Peru that schools maintained by private individuals or by tuition
fees paid by pupils were subject to the inspection established by law in respect of the
morality and order of the establishment but not in respect of the teaching that may be
imparted in them or of the methods that may be employed. The Chilean Minister
rejoined by reasserting his position saying that “if in those schools propaganda, has
been made against Chile, if sentiments of hatred toward this country have been
inculcated in their pupils, if in this way the authority and rights that Chile exercises
have been denied,” these considerations were sufficient to justify the measure as one of
public order. The Peruvian Minister insisted that there was no teacher of honorable and
lofty views who does not endeavor to inculcate into his pupils sentiments of love and
self-denial in favor of their fatherland; that this was one of the most elementary and
