Eastern Europe Region You will recall I told you I planned to work closely with Luers to encourage him. I spent an hour with him yesterday (17 November) reviewing what he has managed to do so far. He is less gung-ho than he was when he took on this responsibility in early October, because he has found roadblocks in his path at every turn—but he intends to persist, and I believe we should continue to help him. One of the principal roadblocks is INR, which is making an enormous production of the simple things Luers wants to do, as exemplified by the attached paper (TAB A)5 addressed to the SCC/SAWG which INR sent to me this week. It asks for SCC Working Group review and authorization for what Luers is trying to do—simple exploratory actions. It is also filled with a whole series of negative statements about existing CIA programs and appears, at several points, to be, in effect, a protest against the fact that the SCC has already authorized expansion of publishing and distribution activity. State’s profound lack of enthusiasm for all activity in this field comes through almost every line of this paper. (I have marked certain striking passages in red.) As a foretaste of future State negatism, we are told that State has doubts about any use of emigre organizations and is doing a review of what policy toward nationalities should be. (I hear that State—perhaps even Luers—feels that nothing should be done in respect to non-Russian nationalities at all. But it remains to be seen whether they will take this negative a position formally.) I told Luers yesterday that I saw no need to have an SCC/SAWG review of the actions he wishes to take—these are not covert activities. I said your request last winter that these “overt options” be explored constituted all the clearance needed at the NSC level. I added that the kinds of things he wants to look into have been open to exploration for nearly 30 years. The fact that no one outside of CIA has ever taken much initiative does not prove that it cannot be done—but it naturally leaves one doubtful that much will be accomplished. Nevertheless, I reiterated, you were very eager to see this effort made and I was ready to support it. Luers will try and may even succeed in getting something going—but I doubt very much that he will be able to develop anything that could be regarded as a substitute for much that CIA is doing covertly. Some specific thoughts on his proposed initiatives (pp. 3–4 of TAB A): a. USIA: I see no legal barriers to some increased USIA activity, though it obviously can go no farther than “gray” areas and cannot engage in covert funding or covert distribution. 5 Not attached.
