The Government has now been established and I, the Chief Executive, have entered upon the performance of my weighty duty to the full extent of my ability. All the multifarious functions of the Government await attention and all civil and military officials in Peking and the provinces shall continue to administer their posts as in the past, lending their united assistance in meeting the difficulties of the times.” Mandate November 24th appoints following Cabinet: Foreign Affairs, Tang Shao-yi; Interior, Kung Hsin-chan; Finance, Li Shihhao; War, Wu Kuanghsin; Navy, Lin Chien-chang; Justice, Chang Shih-chao; Education, Wang Chiu-lihg; Agriculture and Commerce, Yang Shu-chan; Communications, Yeh Kung-cho. 3. Referring to third paragraph my 452, at meeting of heads of Legations this afternoon senior minister stated Tuan Chi-jui had approached him to ask if foreign representatives would be willing to call upon him in day or two to pay personal respects individually and without ceremony. 4. It was unanimous opinion of chiefs of mission that Tuan Chijui is the de facto government and for this reason the senior minister was authorized to reply to Tuan Chi-jui that the heads of Legations would call individually on him in day or two to pay him personal respects as head of the provisional de facto government, and that the senior minister should make it entirely clear that such action would in no way imply formal de jure recognition. 5. I made reservation that, while I personally agreed with proposed procedure, I could not associate myself therewith until I had received instructions to that effect from my Government. 6. It was the sense of the meeting that question of de jure recognition was not pending at this time owing to the fact that the present de facto authorities in their mandates and in conversation with senior minister stressed the provisional character of the present regime and since the question of de jure recognition if and when it arose was a matter for the respective Governments to decide.
