868
Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, Iran, 1951–1954
confinement. He thought that if the sentence had been for a longer term
there might have been considerable public sympathy for Mosadeq. On
the other hand if the sentence had not called for “solitary” confinement
he would not have been in a position to commute the sentence to ban-
ishment to a remote place in Iran or to some foreign country which
would consent to receive him and prevent him from engaging in polit-
ical activities against Iran. In Iran a sentence to simple imprisonment—
not solitary confinement—is considered to be just as mild as banish-
ment, and therefore not subject to commutation to banishment. If Mo-
sadeq should subsequently show the right attitude it was the intention
of the Shah to commute the sentence to banishment.
The Shah said he was also pleased with the sentence of General
Riahi. He thought that General Riahi had behaved in a dignified,
manly, and constructive way during the trial and therefore should not
be punished too severely. The General was now being expelled from
the Army and in the opinion of the Shah should never be reinstated.
The Shah asked me if I had read the statement which he had sent to
the trial judge on the eve of the termination of the trial. In this statement
he had indicated that in his opinion Mosadeq had served the interests
of Iran by nationalizing oil and in fact during the first year of his Prime
Ministership had had the support of the Shah himself and that there-
fore the Shah held no personal grievance against Mosadeq for what the
latter had done during the last part of his Prime Ministership. The Shah
said that he had sent this message to the President of the Court for two
reasons:
a. He wanted to make it clear that he favored and still favored the
nationalization of oil. He thought this was wise in order that the nation-
alists in Iran would not think that their Sovereign had deserted them.
He considered that a certain amount of nationalism was necessary for
Iran and that it should develop under his leadership.
b. When it became apparent that the arrival of the British would al-
most coincide with the sentencing of Mosadeq it seemed important that
he should make it clear to all Iranians that he was still supporting Mo-
sadeq’s attitude towards the British during the first year that Mosadeq
was Prime Minister. He thought this was necessary in order to weaken
propaganda which the enemies of himself and of the Government
would be sure to disseminate to the effect that the sentencing of Mo-
sadeq to prison at the time of the arrival of the British in Iran showed
how completely the present regime of Iran was under the British
thumb. The Shah said he was well pleased with the results of his inter-
vention in the trial. He had caught Mosadeq off balance and had for the
time being disarmed Mosadeq’s adherents.
The Dissolution of the Senate and the Majlis and the Call for New Elections
I told the Shah that I was glad that finally the firman had been is-
sued dissolving the Majlis and calling for new elections. I was particu-
