158
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
—Supporting Romania in the IMF/IBRD, particularly the power
station loan coming up this month.4
GDR
—The East Germans have clearly been urging intervention on Mos-
cow. While they may not be given much of a military role because of
the incendiary effect this would have in Poland, they will certainly join
in Soviet action in some fashion.
—The East Germans are the prime candidates for retaliatory mea-
sures. Yet we have very little going with them in the first place. And
the West Germans, who do, will not want to do anything for fear of
giving Moscow an excuse to squeeze Berlin and the inner-German
relationship.
—Aside from the general extension of a COCOM no-exceptions
policy to cover Eastern Europe, we believe that the most appropriate
response in dealing with the GDR would be:
—A marked cooling of political relations across-the-board.
—Refusal to discuss MFN or conclusion of a cultural agreement
for the foreseeable future.
—Encouragement of restriction of private credits to the GDR and
an active policy of discouraging US business from involvement in major
projects involving the GDR.5
Czechoslovakia
—Czechoslovakia will presumably be required to support actively
a Soviet intervention and may even play a military role larger than the
GDR. The Western Europeans will be less sensitive about steps taken
against Czechoslovakia than about those taken against the GDR. Our
own relations with Czechoslovakia are not good and there are few
areas where we could take meaningful action aside from our general
technology transfer policy.
—One area of importance is the claims/gold negotiation. We have
asked for a $105 million settlement and the Czechoslovaks have offered
less than half of that. In the wake of Soviet intervention the prospects
for a negotiated settlement would be very poor. Our response could
be to insist on a settlement at or near the US proposal and, if this is
not forthcoming, report to the Congress that no negotiated settlement
is in sight. This would lead to passage of legislation vesting the gold
4 Bucharest was not among the addressees, and no response from the Embassy in
Romania was found.
5 No response from the Embassy in East Berlin was found.
