“In private international law this same situation has in a certain
manner presented itself to the International Commission of
Jurists. The two doctrines of the laws of nationality and domicile
for governing personal relations are embodied in the legislation of
different American Republics. Each one of the groups considers
its system as a fact of transcendent public order affecting its
social, economic, and political constitution. There is no way for
the present of settling upon one uniform law.
“In this matter, therefore, the same as in public law, a compromise
with reality has been unavoidable. The Republics will continue to
apply as the personal law, what their domestic system prescribes.
Happily, that does not imply an impossibility of regulating private
international law in a vast field of legal relations which are not
affected by the applications of personal law. Neither does it imply
the necessity nor the convenience of renewing partial or sub-
regional concerts on the continent founded upon the system of the
two laws adopted for personal relations. Quite the contrary: the
common interest consists in keeping the work within the Pan
American concert until reaching, by a continuous effort of
reciprocal penetration, the solution of the divergence in a system
of legislative uniformity.
“All America should be viewed legally as a single field in which
the relations of individuals and of States are in play. The rivalry
of national laws should be settled by the selection of the most
adequate, in justice, for the relations to be dealt with. Relations
between States are also contests of laws and sovereignties which
should be regulated by laws superior to the individual
sovereignties which are the most adequate, because the most just,
to insure peaceful coexistence and the welfare of all the members
of the American international system. Here we have the integral
concept of American law. Its analytical formulas will be a
‘continuous creation.’ ”
The Delegates of the United States have avoided the mention of
personalities in the text of the report, in so far as this was possible,
