Romania make immediate progress on release of hostages, implementation of sanctions could be reviewed. 10. China: Ceausescu welcomed US-China relations but cautioned that they not be to detriment of relations with USSR, stressing need for collaboration if not friendship and avoidance of confrontation. He also stressed that US-China relationship should not be at expense of interest of other peoples, implying Kampuchea. In reply, Newsom took note of his concern but pointed out that US public and Congress want stronger US relations with China and do not believe we can delay this development simply because our relations with Soviet Union are deteriorating. Consequently, our policy to China may seem more positive under present conditions than is the case, given US-Soviet relations. 11. Mideast: Ceausescu spent considerable proportion of discussion on Middle East negotiations and criticism of Camp David and U.S. role. While supporting Egyptian-Israeli steps in Camp David, he said that “present Camp David course has no chance for success, at least concerning the Palestinian problem.” He said that U.S. “could do a lot more on this issue” and that a representative movement towards comprehensive peace is necessary not only for stability in Middle East but also for securing normal supply of oil. He decried fact that Jordan, Syria and PLO have been left out of process. With respect to possibility of amending 242 to add concept of “Palestine rights”, which Andrei raised with Under Secretary yesterday,8 Newsom used talking points in reftel with Ceausescu. Romanian President listened intently but adhered to position that some parallel action to on-going Camp David negotiations is necessary. He indicated some way must be developed to assure Palestinian participation and suggested that this a sphere where an initiatve could be developed with Soviet participation despite problems of Afghanistan. He also suggested idea of Geneva type international conference resumption. (Andrei later told Newsom Romanian idea was for post-Camp David conference to resolve issues not yet resolved.) 12. In reply, Newsom spoke about U.S. approach and our desire for achieving sufficient results in autonomy negotiations to attract Palestinian participation. Ceausescu listened patiently but evinced skeptism over results with a Romanian expression roughly equivalent to
