March 27–December 31, 1979
915
stitute a modification of SC 242, which was explicitly accepted at Camp
David as the “agreed basis” for CDA. Inevitable result would be to
make “null and void those CDA passages which refer to 242. Though
Begin would not be drawn out further as to consequences, clear impli-
cation was that GOI might withdraw from or suspend its participation
in autonomy negotiations.3 Begin said USG should carry out its 1975
written commitment,4 and that required veto of any and all new SC res-
olutions which treat the Palestinian or Arab-Israeli issues.
6. After having done everything possible to spread salve on the
various latest abrasions in the U.S.-Israeli relationship, I elicited Begin’s
judgment that key step now needed to dispel ugly rumors and distor-
tions would be for U.S. and Israel to agree that CDA and joint letter
must be carried out in their entirety, to the letter, and to act in the nego-
tiations accordingly.
7. At end of meeting, I told Begin that we had an honest disagree-
ment about the question of a new resolution. We had tentatively de-
cided to put forward a positive resolution of our own, not to amend 242
but to build on it. Gave him our rationale for going this route to avoid
having to consider veto of resolutions put forward by others. Stressed
any U.S. resolution would reaffirm 242 and 338 and contain essential el-
ements from CDA concerning Palestinian problem. I did not repeat not
show him any text.
8. Begin was rocked by this unpleasant news. He said he deeply re-
gretted what I had told him, asked me to inform you that it would pro-
duce the most negative developments for all of us, and asked that you
reconsider the tentative decision. He said again that any new UNSC
resolution would, in the unanimous5 view of the Cabinet, cause “the
agreed basis” of the Camp David Agreement (i.e. 242) to collapse.
Later, Lewis and I agreed he was genuinely shocked and disturbed.
9. Over all, meeting was difficult but not mean or petty. Begin’s
parting words to me were: Quote: Bob, I can only appeal to you and
President Carter. Please reconsider your initiative to change the agreed
basis for the Camp David Agreement.6 After all the effort we and you
invested at Camp David, and after all our sacrifices to carry out the
Agreement, to change the “agreed basis” now would be destructive of
all we have done. We were never forewarned at Camp David that a
3 Carter underlined “clear implication was that GOI might withdraw” and “in au-
tonomy” in this sentence.
4 See footnote 5, Document 97.
5 In the right-hand margin next to the portion of the paragraph ending with this
word, Carter drew a heavy vertical line with an arrow pointing to it.
6 In the right-hand margin next to this sentence, Carter drew a vertical line with an
arrow pointing to it.
