3 8 3 6/
8 S/800 8
January–May 1977
3
I look forward to meeting you and to discussing with you both our
differences as well as our common interests. Meanwhile I propose that
we both do all that we can to further the progress of improving
US-Soviet relations. I have asked Secretary Vance to prepare to meet
with you, if you wish, in the spring to review the progress being made,
to discuss key issues which are outstanding. At that time we will want
to exchange views on a subsequent meeting between you and me.
Any specific suggestions you may wish to communicate to me on
these or any other issues will be welcomed and carefully studied.
With best personal regards.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Carter
2.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Brzezinski) to President Carter1
Washington, undated
SUBJECT
Letter to You from Andrey Sakharov
I transmit herewith Secretary Vance’s memorandum regarding the
handling of Sakharov’s letter to you.2 The Secretary recommends:
(1) that a response on your behalf be conveyed by him through the US
Embassy in Moscow; (2) that Sakharov be told that in the future he can
communicate his views to us through the Embassy, thereby providing
him with the channel he requested.3
I have discussed the enclosed with Cy, and I feel this matter ought
to be weighed very carefully. It could establish a dangerous precedent.
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Brzezinski Material, Name File,
Box 3, Sakharov, Andrei, 2–3/77. Confidential. Sent for action. Carter wrote in the upper
right-hand corner, “Zbig—Where is Cy’s proposed message—(att. 1)? J.” Carter wrote in
his memoirs, “While improving diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union was an im-
portant goal of mine, I had made it clear in the campaign that I was not going to ignore
Soviet abuse of human rights, as I believed some previous administrations had done.”
(Keeping Faith, p. 146)
2 Vance’s memorandum, January 30, is attached at tab A but not printed.
3 Carter wrote “ok” in the margin adjacent to this paragraph then struck through it.
