Ecuador  537
government could not pass regulations that its own materials must 
be brought in its own vessels. He referred to the shipping provisions 
under the United States PL–480 program and the Eximbank loan pro-
gram and said that Ecuador accepts those regulations as being normal 
and natural, implying that the United States should therefore not object 
to the new Ecuadoran law.
The Minister also said that one of the principal reasons for the 
Flota’s great increase in percentage of Ecuadoran-bound traffic is 
the fact that the Flota ships go all the way to Guayaquil, whereas the 
Grace ships offload at Puna with consequent added expense and expo-
sure of cargo to theft and damage. He said that Grace was complaining 
so bitterly about the Ecuadoran law simply because it is a powerful 
company and is accustomed to brooking no competition.
The Minister of Economy ended up by saying that if he had had 
the slightest idea that the new law might be considered discriminatory, 
he would have advised President Ponce not to sign it. He said that 
Ecuador must keep the friendship of the United States which has been 
so helpful to Ecuador in all its problems.
There was then a discussion of the percentage of cargo carried by 
the Grace Line and the percentage carried by the Flota Grancolombiana, 
with the Ecuadoran officials insisting that the new decree would have 
little if any effect on the traffic of the Grace Line.
Assistant Secretary Rubottom said that the principle is the important 
thing, rather than statistics, although these are interesting and import-
ant. He said that since there is no political problem outstanding between 
the United States and Ecuador, the group was free to concentrate freely 
on this shipping question and that he appreciated the frank manner in 
which the Ecuadorans had brought up the subject. He pointed out that 
the United States has tried for years to wipe off the slate the consular 
free question and that it seemed to be on the way to termination when 
this new decree was passed. He pointed out that the new decree was a 
heavy blow to United States expectations of seeing an end to the ship-
ping problem and stated that in our point of view there is no doubt that 
the new decree is discriminatory.
Mr. Rubottom said that the United States has always taken the 
same firm position on questions of discrimination and that we must 
continue to face such questions. He said that the attitude of the United 
States Government is not dependent in any way on the Grace Line and 
pointed out that the United States has been following the same principle 
of protesting against discrimination in the case of Argentina and Brazil. 
Mr. Rubbottom referred to the subsidies received by American ship-
ping lines and said the Ecuadorans are the first to recognize that if the 
United States did not maintain a strong merchant fleet the resultant 
weakness would prevent it from being able to face Russia. He pointed
