444  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
truck-­mobile scheme mentioned by Harold Brown) should receive 
more emphasis.
—A careful study should be made to determine whether DOD’s 
concerns about the security problems associated with moving strategic 
systems onto private land are reasonable—­particularly if such move-
ments occur only in deep crisis situations.
—As part of the assessment of the feasibility of ICBM systems that 
are normally visible and countable but disperse in times of crisis, the 
intelligence community should be asked to assess the level of confi-
dence we can have that we would detect Soviet moves to the levels of 
military readiness at which they would be willing to execute a coun-
terforce attack. This assessment should identify the numbers and types 
of strategic forces and other important Soviet assets that might have to 
remain vulnerable to a US retaliatory strike in order to achieve strategic 
surprise.
—DOD should be asked to bring its now overdue targeting study 
to a rapid close so that we can more fully appreciate how the issues it 
raises bear on the question of whether to modernize the ICBM force.
—DOD should be asked for descriptions of the various classes of 
time-­sensitive targets, the numbers of targets in each class, the time 
required to reduce them to their minimum values, and a comparison of 
their relative day-­to-­day and minimum values.
—The intelligence community should be asked to assess the likeli-
hood that we could prevent the launch of significant numbers of Soviet 
ICBMs.
—Improvements in C3 systems that support the SLBM force (more 
TACAMO and improvements in the systems that can talk to it, such 
as E4B aircraft) should be supported in the upcoming FY 80 budget 
review.
—On a very close-­hold basis, a set of talking points making the 
case for a Dyad should be worked out to see if such a move can be 
explained in convincing terms to the public.
Even if our continuing investigations show that moving to a Dyad 
is the right thing to do, such a move would have to be made relatively 
slowly, given the upcoming SALT ratification debates and the enor-
mous amount of change implied by the strategic forces decisions that 
have already been made during this Administration.
Fritz Ermarth has discussed this memo with me and has no signif-
icant difficulties with what it says.3
3 Ermarth initialed above his name and wrote at the bottom of the page: “I’ll try for 
some contribution of my own shortly. F.E.”
