Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1977
81
REPRESENTATIVE HAMILTON said that along with granting
emergency aid the Egyptians be committed to capital projects in the
Suez Canal area.
PRESIDENT CARTER then discussed the need to cut back on
spending on weapons. He said he hoped, with the aid of Congress, to
achieve an overall world-wide reduction in arms transfers. “We are the
only nation that can take the lead on arms transfers,” the President said.
SECRETARY VANCE said we are in the process of reviewing our
own policies on how to proceed on arms transfers. The principle he
wants to see carried out, said Secretary Vance, is for arms transfers to
be designed to carry out our foreign policy, not to be used as an eco-
nomic tool. We are putting our thoughts together to get a handle on
arms sales problems in the world.
SECRETARY VANCE said he discussed this problem with Soviet
Ambassador Dobrynin in reference to the Middle East. Dobrynin did
not express opposition but coupled reduction of arms sales with a polit-
ical solution in the Middle East.
REPRESENTATIVE LONG said, “We have a tremendous respon-
sibility to make a start on this. If we say, “Let’s have a treaty to limit
arms transfers, a rough translation would be, ‘let’s not do anything’”.
He then raised the question of Egypt’s purchase of $1.6 billion worth of
jets from France. “They make no contribution to peace in the Middle
East. Why do we give day-to-day aid to Egypt while they buy expen-
sive jets,” asked Long.
SECRETARY VANCE. “I have not talked to the heads of state
about arms purchases but I will on my trip.”5
There was a general discussion of developing a pause in arms sales
and SECRETARY VANCE pointed out that President Ford had ap-
proved the sale of weapons to Israel which include the CBU (cluster
bombs) and the FLIR (forward looking infrared), along with tanks and
artillery, and a decision will have to be made on whether to go forward
with this commitment.6
5 Reference is to Vance’s scheduled trip to Israel (February 15–17), Egypt (February
17–18), Lebanon (February 18), Jordan (February 18–19), Saudi Arabia (February 19–20),
and Syria (February 20–21). Documentation on Vance’s trip is printed in Foreign Relations,
1977–1980, vol. VIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, January 1977–August 1978.
6 During Allon’s October 11, 1976, visit to Washington, Ford indicated that he
would lift the ban on the sale of CBU and FLIR to Israel. (Bernard Gwertzman, “U.S. De-
cides to Sell Some Arms to Israel That it Blocked in Past,” The New York Times, October 12,
1976, pp. 1, 12)
