International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977 147 Tab A5 Paper Prepared in the National Security Council Washington, undated PRC DISCUSSION ON APPROACH TO SCHMIDT ON INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION Background A deep sense of apprehension today characterizes European economic and political life. On the economic side, this results not so much from a single dramatic crisis, although conditions have worsened in some cases, but from a prolonged period of serious difficulties and the likelihood that they will continue. The EC expects growth in 1977 to be 3% as compared to an earlier anticipated 4%, and compared to 4.5% in 1976; unemployment is 5.4 million (5.1% of working age population, roughly 6.6% in US terms); inflation remains at between 9% and 10%; investment rates are low, and savings are high. This unsatisfactory economic climate has both contributed to, and resulted from, major political problems. Continuing economic troubles are seriously eroding popular confidence in the ability of Europe’s leaders and its economic and political systems to bring about solutions. If unabated, they risk profound changes in, and perhaps radicalization of, many of Europe’s fundamental social, political, and economic institutions. The prospects of governments with Communist participation coming to power in France and Italy are enhanced by these countries’ serious economic problems (e. g. industrial production in April down 1.6% and 3.1%, respectively). The possibility of Communist participation (which at the extreme implies a dramatic transformation of both countries from market-oriented to state-run economies) in turn contributes to a loss of economic confidence in the rest of Europe. The Germans are particularly concerned about the economic, as well as the enormous political and security, implications of Communists gaining or sharing power in either country, but particularly in France. The Mediterranean countries face special problems. Portugal, Spain, Italy, Greece and Turkey have large current account deficits which are difficult to finance. Spain and Turkey, in particular, could, in the near future, suffer acute financial problems (inability to repay debts, the need for massive borrowings) which would disrupt their societies, further shake confidence in Northern Europe, and raise new concerns about the stability of international financial banking systems. 5 Secret.
