the course of the discussions whether such is in fact the understanding of those who have drafted the convention. ARTICLE 3 In order that the provisions of Article 3 should in no way conflict with the provisions of treaties drawn up at the Washington Conference of 1921–1922 (Treaty on the Limitation of Naval Armament and Treaty Relating to The Use of Submarines and Noxious Gases in Warfare), the Commission might find it desirable to insert after the words “International Law” in the first sentence of paragraph one of Article 3 the following words “or treaties, or of which the disposal by gift, sale or any mode of transfer has not been restricted by treaty, licenses for the export,” etc., etc. This paragraph of Article 3 would then read in full as follows: “Nevertheless, notwithstanding this prohibition, the H. C. P. reserve the right to grant in respect of arms and munitions of war whose use is not prohibited by international law or treaties or of which the disposal by gift, sale or any mode of transfer has not been restricted by treaty, licenses for the export of arms and munitions of war in Category I, but such licenses are only to be granted on the following conditions:” In the following paragraph of Article 3 the Department considers it would be most desirable to add after “Government” the words “or belligerents” (see Department’s telegram of March 7th). It appears from page 8 of your predecessor’s report from Paris of March 2934 that the insertion of this word was considered at the Paris meeting but not accepted by the Commission. Mr. Grew indicated, however, that if there had been further opportunity for the consideration of the point the change might have been made. It is therefore possible that this question may again be raised at Geneva and in this case, if an opportunity is presented, you should not fail to indicate this Government’s view. The Department has noted in the minutes of the discussion of the T. M. C. on Article 3 (see despatch No. 1458, April 4, enclosure pages 5 and 6, from the Legation at Berne34 ) that consideration was given to the effect upon
