648 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement secure entry permits Taiwan was matter of mental torture towards these Chinese students. 66. Wang said he had list of three persons in US and he was request­ ing me make investigation about them. (He then handed me list, tele­ graphed separately, containing names Tan Yu-­min, Teng ­Hsien-­jung, Yuan Jui-­hsiang). In this list they had detailed information known to PRC side including place residence, profession, as well as time since they last heard of. 67. I said, of course I had no way of forcing Chinese in US to write to people in China. They free do so if they wanted to. However, in speaking of obstruction, I wanted be clear, was allegation that Chinese in US not free communicate with Indian Embassy? 68. Wang said his statement included cases in which freedom of communication with Indian Embassy been obstructed. 69. I asked whether that applied these three on list. 70. Wang said that was different matter. These three were missing, no information from them. Their families have lost contact with them. 71. I said, to get back to my question, is the allegation that people being prevented from communicating with Indian Embassy? 72. Wang said there had been cases in which freedom of communi­ cation been obstructed. 73. I asked if Wang could give me any details on these cases. 74. Wang said they would give me such details whenever he found it necessary. 75. I said it is all very simple. If Chinese want to return, they free do so. I knew of no such case in which any person has been in any way prevented from communicating with Indian Embassy. 76. I said then our next meeting would be next Thursday. 77. Wang said he had suggested that as from today our meetings be made open and he had given his reasons. He didn’t know how I felt on this. 78. I said I had told him I did not agree. 79. Wang said if I unable agree, then should we leave question open for time being. However I would recall that at last meeting during discussion second item of agenda, he had told me his side going to make public statement on that matter which was discussed between us. 80. I asked him if he was going to do that. 81. Wang said they were going to make public statement. 82. I said that was entirely matter their choice, but US would have to consider making reply. 83. Wang said that was matter of our freedom. 84. I asked if I could get copy of text.
