96  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
tactic use as bait obtain release some Americans and avoid anticipated 
CHICOM tactic of asserting agenda item one completed with agree­
ment on representation. Believe it would be mistake now to extend this 
tactic to point of making release all Americans price of representation 
agreement.
If Dept agrees with foregoing position it will be very important 
that at Tuesday’s meeting I have the maximum discretion Dept is will­
ing to give me and instructions on our minimum positions on points at 
issue.
I would plan at Tuesday’s meeting to present Wang with a draft 
of simultaneous unilateral statements to be issued by joint agreement 
accordance our agreement on private nature these talks. (See following 
tel for text.)
For best bargaining position I would require considerable discre­
tion exact language we would be willing accept so that I can press him 
for agreement and reach firm as possible understandings. Possibility 
should not be excluded he willing reach immediate agreement and 
make statement public.
I do not believe I should be in position of asking him how many 
they are releasing before entering into agreement on representation, or 
being required to haggle over numbers or in any way ever to imply that 
we are satisfied with anything other than release of all. Do not believe 
I should go any further toward bald position of bargaining representa­
tion agreement against Americans.
I will also require instructions on our minimum position on enlarg­
ing scope of representation proposal to include governmental inqui­
ries or inquiries from families. There were some indications at today’s 
meeting Wang may be prepared recede on this point and I will of course 
press hard on it. However if we are willing to concede in any way (and 
I believe we should for reasons set forth my tel 364) it would be of max­
imum bargaining use to me at Tuesday’s meeting.
If Dept does not accept foregoing general approach situation is 
such I do not at moment see any alternative for Tuesday’s meeting 
other than asking him for numbers of Americans they prepared now 
to release (which I think undesirable for reasons stated above), indicate 
number is unsatisfactory, and recess talks, at least on item one, until they 
have “completed review” of more or all cases (I would have to indicate 
which) and we would then have to be prepared on that position.
Will remain Hotel Du Rhone tomorrow from 2 p.m. in event Dept 
believes any phone discussion possible or desirable.
Gowen
