National Security Policy 861 a small advance in this direction was made in Basic National Security policy this year. I believe that any move which will increase our depen­ dence on the strategic bombing deterrent would be contrary to the new emphasis on maintaining balanced forces which the President approved only a few months ago. I am struck by the likely effect of the force cuts on our limited war capability. Irwin touched on a very sore point indeed in stating “by moving air strength out of Europe, we would limit US capability for responses to problems in the Middle East, and in the Far East would reduce flexibility to meet local situations there.” Such limitation is com­ pletely at odds with the policy which you have urged many times of beefing up our capability to meet limited situations. I think there is a good deal of sense in Irwin’s point that there is a degree of “schizophrenia in at one and the same time moving in the direction of nuclear test suspension and pursuing a trend toward increased development and dependence on nuclear weapons as a result of budgetary and balance of payment pressures.” The statement on page 7 of the report referring to “our growing dependence on nuclear weapons in limited war situations” seems to fly in the face of the recent Presidential decision calling for greater “bal­ ance” in our military establishment. There is no comfort in Secretary McElroy’s stated belief that in a limited war situation the “use of tactical nuclear weapons would not necessarily start a general nuclear war.” If there is even a 50–50 chance that their use would start a general nuclear war, I would think that they would be completely ruled out as limited war weapons by the dictates of common sense. I share Tom Gates’ expressed feeling that perhaps the courageous thing to do would be to raise taxes rather than permit budget consider­ ations to reduce our military power. There seems to me to be no greater problem facing this Government than whether or not to warp our military doctrine and stunt our mili­ tary establishment to meet temporary economic pressures. We face the alternative of whether to run an uncertain risk of some loss of confi­ dence in the dollar or the certain risk of loss of confidence in America’s determination to make common cause with its allies and maintain a rational and credible deterrent to communist aggression. If this hap­ pens, the standing of the American dollar and a great deal more besides will inevitably be prejudiced. I hope that you will urge this line vigorously upon the President. It seems especially important that American military influence abroad not be reduced at this time of pre-­Berlin negotiation and post-­Khrushchev visit.
