International Monetary and Trade Policy, 1977
257
83.
Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic
Affairs (Cooper) to Vice President Mondale1
Washington, December 14, 1977
SUBJECT
Recent Movements of the Dollar in Foreign Markets
In recent weeks the dollar has fallen noticeably against major for-
eign currencies, as the probable outcome of the U.S. energy policy de-
bate has been deteriorating daily. The major factor affecting the dollar
is the present and prospective deficit in the current account of the bal-
ance of payments, running at a rate of $17.5 billion in the first half of
1977 and expected to worsen in 1978. The current deficit is as large as it
is because of a more vigorous economic recovery here than abroad and
because of the rapid growth in our dependence on imported oil.
Between November 30 and December 13, the dollar fell an average
of 1.1 percent against the currencies of our trading partners. The down-
ward movement has been erratic rather than continuous, with brief pe-
riods of recovery. These movements carry the Japanese yen and the
German mark further along the paths of appreciation they have been
following since September.
A longer view of exchange rate movements shows that since
March 1973 (when currencies began to float against one another on a
general basis) the dollar has appreciated on all the various measures
that we use, by amounts varying from 1 percent (against the SDR) to 10
percent (against a bundle of 46 currencies weighted by their impor-
tance in U.S. trade). Since the beginning of 1977, the dollar has appreci-
ated by 0.9 percent on the measure most relevant to the U.S. but it has
depreciated by about 3 percent against the SDR—the main difference
being the greater importance of depreciating currencies of less devel-
oped countries in the trade-weighted index than in the SDR. These
changes are negligible.
The recent appreciations of the German mark and of the Japanese
yen are rightly alarming to Germany and to Japan. But they can avoid
such currency appreciations by expanding their domestic economies
more rapidly, and in the case of Japan by taking steps to encourage
more imports (the real pressure on Japan in their current discussions
1 Source: Carter Library, Papers of Walter F. Mondale, National Security Issues,
Box 82, National Security Issues—Economic (2/5/1977–8/14/1977). No classification
marking. Forwarded to Mondale under cover of a December 16 memorandum from Clift;
a note on Clift’s memorandum reads: “The V.P. has seen.” (Ibid.)
