Comprehensive Test Ban
529
a certain period of time national seismic stations would in fact be in-
stalled. Thus, he felt that we ought to continue discussing the question
of how many such stations would be installed, where and when. How-
ever, he believed that if there was a difference in principle on the entire
question, he would say quite frankly that his optimism would be seri-
ously set back. Concerning the technology involved, he did not think
we needed to fear that the equipment in question would operate like
the lawn mower to which Gromyko had referred. He believed that in-
stalling the equipment would be a substantial step forward in terms of
verification and rather than raise questions, would settle them and pro-
mote confidence.
Gromyko noted that Warnke had avoided the question Gromyko
had asked. He would therefore repeat it: will that equipment be ca-
pable of distinguishing between nuclear explosions and ordinary non-
nuclear explosions carried out for economic purposes?
Warnke said the answer to that question was no.
Gromyko said that in his country, with its vast territory, hundreds
and perhaps thousands of economic explosions were carried out annu-
ally, especially in the eastern part of the country. He would ask, then,
will there be fire brigades constantly travelling throughout his country
pursuant to signals received from that machine? He thought this would
hardly promote confidence on either side. Such were his views con-
cerning the equipment in question. As for national means, on its own
territory each country could install as many machines as it felt were
needed.
Warnke thought that Gromyko’s comments were not relevant to
the issue. Obviously there will be chemical explosions, whether or not
one had seismic stations. Chemical explosions could be appropriately
dealt with through pre-notification procedures. But, he would point
out, this was not a problem that would be created by the stations; the
problem existed in any case. Otherwise one might also say that national
technical means should not be very good, because if they were, they
will raise questions. For purposes of verification we had proposed the
use of national technical means, voluntary on-site inspection and these
additional seismic stations. Without all three elements there would not
be adequate confidence in compliance with a complete test ban. A lim-
ited threshold treaty would be futile in terms of furthering our non-
proliferation objectives.
Gromyko said he could see that Warnke was quite hypnotized by
his machine, a machine that could not distinguish between nuclear and
chemical explosions. Well, that was his business. In a country as large
as the Soviet Union there would be many chemical explosions for many
different economic purposes. Could that machine distinguish chemical
explosions from nuclear explosions? No, it could not. In the case of nu-
