Afghanistan
493
It was also pointed out that the Pakistanis want foreign assistance for
building a communications infrastructure on their western front.
Dr. Brzezinski asked if we need a big consortium figure for public
and political effect such as $1 billion. Secretary Brown observed that
one to one and a half billion dollars for equipment spread over three
years could be absorbed effectively by the Pakistanis; therefore, Dr.
Brzezinski’s figure is about right. Dr. Brzezinski added that we must
avoid a figure which is so high that we are open to criticism that we
are “saturating” Pakistan with arms the same way we did Iran.
Dr. Brzezinski added that we need a military equipment package
and a concept for a division of labor which we can propose to the
allies. Secretary Vance suggested that this be done at the upcoming
Political Directors Meeting on January 24. Dr. Brzezinski agreed; we
must supplement our delegation with technical teams sufficiently com-
petent to make concrete decisions on both funds and equipment.
Agreed action:
—State will press France on the Mirage aircraft.
—The Political Directors Meeting will be reinforced with sufficient
staff to discuss military assistance and funding.
—The U.S. will give an exemplary package to the Political Directors
as a proposal for a division of labor.
—To fund the consortium, we will press the Japanese for $400
million and the Saudis for $800 million which, combined with our $400
million, should be above $1 billion.
—Britain and France will be encouraged to supply specific military
equipment.
U.S. Assurances to Pakistan
Secretary Vance reported that we are still working out contingency
scenarios to define circumstances under which we would come to
Pakistan’s military assistance against foreign attack. Secretary Vance
promised to have a paper by Friday or Saturday which spells these
out in considerable detail for the President.
It was agreed, at Secretary Vance’s suggestion, that this is the next
big decision issue which should be discussed with the President.
Contingency of a Soviet Invasion of Iran
Dr. Brzezinski proposed that the President mention in his speech
that the United States has been committed to the independence of Iran
for the past 30 years and remains so committed today.4 Secretaries
4 Reference is to the President’s upcoming State of the Union speech; see footnote
2, Document 175.
