Human Rights
189
and protests by Saul Bellow and Arthur Miller concerning the harsh
treatment of writers in many countries for their human rights stand.
The Voice of America will produce a series honoring human rights
statesmen and stateswomen in American history. Included will be Jus-
tice Oliver Wendell Holmes; Charles Houston, the late black lawyer
and leader in the civil rights struggle; Eleanor Roosevelt, Ralph Bunche
and others. Such programs will illustrate the historical basis of human
rights in the U.S. The Voice will produce a “VOA Forum Series” of
twenty half-hour programs treating human rights. Examples of pro-
gram themes will be important Supreme Court decisions dealing with
human rights and the concept of due process in the 14th amendment.
Prominent jurists and civil rights activists will be featured speakers for
the Forum series. The Voice will also schedule prominent American
and foreign speakers for interviews and panel programs.
The Press and Publications Service (IPS) will commission articles
and acquire byliners by American and non-American scholars on the
origins and record of human rights in the United States. IPS will pro-
duce an illustrated pamphlet on the origins and development of human
rights in the U.S.
Special articles on human rights will be placed in Agency publica-
tions such as Problems of Communism, Horizons, Dialogue, Economic Im-
pact, and Economic Portfolio. The March–April 1977 issue of Problems of
Communism featured a review-essay of six books entitled “De´tente and
Soviet Dissidents” by Sovietologist Harvey Fireside.
Problems of Communism has developed a distinguished world-wide
reputation. We will consider initiating a new publication, perhaps to be
entitled Problems of Democracy, which could afford distinguished Amer-
ican—and foreign—political philosophers, politicians, humanitarians a
forum in which to explore the ideas, values and processes which lie be-
neath both liberty and democracy.
For selected audiences, the Agency’s Film and Television Service
(IMV) will continue videotape coverage of official statements. It will ac-
quire commercial films and videotapes, feature films, network specials
and documentaries. Examples of acquired commercial productions are
the two recent NBC programs on human rights—the recent Soviet-
American debate at Georgetown University6 and the documentary on
the Belgrade CSCE meeting. For more general television audiences, the
6 The NBC News Soviet debate special, moderated by Edwin Newman, was telecast
live from Georgetown University and featured three Soviet citizens debating Robert G.
Kaiser of The Washington Post, Professor Alan M. Dershowitz of the Harvard University
Law School, and Reverend Theodore Hesburgh. (John Carmody, “The TV Column,” The
Washington Post, May 27, 1977, p. D–8 and “Late TV Information,” The Washington Post,
June 12, 1977, p. 102)
