22  Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume IV
alternative national strategies and their implications for military strat-
egy and force posture planning.2
B. The examination will be conducted in two parts, to be done con-
currently and cooperatively. Data and analysis should be made avail-
able to and between both parts of the study.
II. MILITARY STRATEGY AND FORCE POSTURE REVIEW
A. Purpose. The purpose of this part of the analysis is to define a 
wide range of alternative military strategies, to construct force postures 
to support these strategies, to analyze the ability of these strategies to 
achieve U.S. objectives in certain key military contingencies, and to 
identify the key decisions required for the selection and implementa-
tion of the alternative military strategies and force postures.
B. Substance
1. An examination will be conducted of a broad range of alterna-
tives to the current overall U.S. military strategy. This examination will 
consider the foreign policy, arms control, and force structure implica-
tions of a range of such strategies. The alternative strategies will high-
light key strategy issues (such as criteria for deterrence, NATO warning 
time, etc.) and will include such general variations as a shift toward 
a “one war” strategy, a “short war” strategy in Europe, less reliance 
on forward-­based ground forces, changes in the current objective of 
essential equivalence in strategic forces, and alternatives to the present 
“triad” posture.
2. The study should specify a limited number of key military con-
tingencies involving U.S. strategic and/or general purpose forces and 
should assess for each the current relative capabilities of the U.S. and 
its allies to counter potential adversaries. The contingencies should 
include, but not be limited to:
—A major U.S./Soviet strategic nuclear exchange;
—A limited U.S./Soviet strategic nuclear exchange;
—A NATO/Pact war limited to Central Europe;
—A war in Central Europe plus a limited conflict on the flanks of 
Europe involving Soviet forces;
—A war in Europe plus a conflict with the USSR in other areas, 
including the Pacific, as part of an overall NATO/Pact war;
—A conflict in the Middle East involving limited Soviet 
participation;
—Intervention by the Soviet Union in relatively remote areas (such 
as Southern Africa); and
2 For purposes of this study, national objectives, national strategy, military strategy, 
and force posture will be defined as indicated at Appendix A. [Footnote is in the original.]
