912 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI the B–2, both because its vulnerabilities to defenses may be revealed by close visual inspection and because the bomb bay is clearly capable of carrying ALCMs. So far, the Soviets have been equally adamant in their insistence that B–2s be subject to inspection. Although the substantive reason for their position is weak (since ALCM-­carrying capability cannot in any event be verified by inspection), the Soviets emphasize a political point: they cannot accept a treaty in which all heavy bombers except the B–2 are subject to regular inspections. A related issue is Soviet insistence that the B–2 not be permitted to carry long-­range non-­nuclear ALCMs unless we are prepared to count it as an ALCM carrier. If we wish to retain the option of deploying B–2s in significant numbers as conventional standoff bombers armed with yet-­to-­be-­developed long-­range conventional cruise missiles, we cannot accept this Soviet position. One possible solution would be to offer B–2 inspections starting whenever flight-­tests of long-­range non-­nuclear ALCMs begin from the B–2. The Soviets could possibly agree to the proposal, but the JCS will hate it because the practical effect would be to force some future tradeoff between placing a de facto range cap of 600 km on future standoff weapons, or subjecting the B–2 at some future date to Soviet inspection. ALCM Inspections. The JCS may be willing to move in this area in return for Soviet agreement to U.S. positions on the B–1 and B–2 issues. The U.S. has resisted mandatory inspections to monitor the ban on long-­range nuclear ALCMs at bomber bases other than where nuclear ALCM heavy bombers are deployed, and instead would rely on right-­ of-­refusal inspections. On the other hand, the Soviets have proposed intrusive inspections of entire bomber bases to monitor this ban. Arnie’s Ungroup has developed the proposal on ALCM inspections attached at Tab 1. You should confirm that this proposal is an acceptable bottom line U.S. position. PPCM U.S. and Soviet proposals on PPCM have narrowed considerably over the last year (largely as result of U.S. offers and compromises). The primary issue now is whether, for MIRVed mobile missiles, to PPCM the production plant for the first stage rocket motor, as the U.S. proposes, or the assembly facility, as the Soviets propose. Specifically, should we continue to insist that we be allowed to PPCM the SS–24 solid rocket motor plant at Pavlograd, or can we accept the Soviet proposal to PPCM the SS–24 assembly facility at Pavlograd. If we insist on PPCM at SS–24 rocket motor production, a secondary issue is to what extent we can relax other elements of the U.S. proposal to address Soviet concerns. On substance, PPCM would be intended to ensure that the Soviets did not cheat by building and storing illegal mobile ICBMs over and
