North-South Issues; Commodities Policy, 1977
843
2) how active we should be in attempting to influence the selection
of a specific UN mechanism to serve the overview function of the
North/South dialogue in the post-CIEC period.
ESSENTIAL FACTORS
The Administration has clearly demonstrated its concern for the
real problems of developing countries. In CIEC, the US, along with the
other industrialized countries, agreed to increase substantially its
development assistance to developing countries and to negotiate a
financially-viable common fund to stabilize commodity prices; along
with the EC, the US proposed a comprehensive procedure for dealing
with LDC debt problems, on which agreement was not reached in
CIEC. At this summer’s ECOSOC conference, Ambassador Young an-
nounced that, in contrast to earlier positions, the US now accepts the
New International Economic Order as an evolving concept, while
maintaining our reservations on certain specific measures proposed by
the developing countries.4
We believe the focus of the North/South dialogue in the post-
CIEC period should be in the existing functional fora where negotia-
tions on the complex individual issues are conducted among countries
with an economic stake in the outcome and by persons who are experts
on the issue. Trade issues should be negotiated in the GATT; com-
modity issues in UNCTAD; and financial and monetary issues in the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and their joint Develop-
ment Committee. Negotiations in general fora, such as CIEC and the
UN General Assembly, have the major disadvantage of linking all
issues so that political success requires concessions on most or all of
them. They thus encourage a bloc-to-bloc approach to the issues and
tend to increase political pressure on the industrialized countries.
On the other hand, it is inevitable that UNGA will have some sub-
stantive discussions on the specific issues addressed in CIEC. The G–77
members as a group will continue to demand a major restructuring of
the international economic system through large, automatic, and often
economically inefficient resource transfers (e.g., commodity price in-
dexation, generalized debt relief). We want to begin the process of
turning UN General Assembly discussions toward 1) the broader eco-
nomic issues of global economic interdependence and the responsi-
bility of all countries for the future world economy and 2) moral and
political issues, in particular, human rights, basic human needs, and eq-
uitable distribution of income within countries.
4 The 63rd session of the Economic and Social Council took place in Geneva July
6–August 4. For the text of Young’s address delivered on July 8, see the Department of
State Bulletin, September 19, 1977, pp. 383–389.
