436
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XII
to one American friend there are one million Soviet troops in the east
which we don’t think are directed solely against China. But, if they
were solely directed against China and if we could pin down two
million Soviet troops, what harm would that do? You must be aware
of my thoughts.
DR. BROWN: Yes. The question you have raised is in the midst of
being implemented. The United States and Europe are each improving
their strengths and increasing their cooperation. Japan is increasing its
defense expenditure and closely cooperating with the United States.
US/Chinese cooperation is also increasing.
DENG: We, on our part, are satisfied with what Japan, Europe,
and the United States have done—that this is the correct line of action.
If I may say, it would have been better if this could have been done
even earlier. If so, some events could have been avoided. Please don’t
regard this as a critical comment; it is just my analysis.
DR. BROWN: We just should learn from the past to coordinate our
actions now and take visible parallel actions. Regarding Afghanistan,
we have agreed to follow-on talks and parallel actions. For example,
we’ve agreed to aid the Afghanistan rebels whom the Soviets hope to
crush because of their religion and we are also going to help Pakistan.
DENG: As far as Afghanistan is concerned, the only correct
approach to Afghanistan is to give aid to the resistance forces, and we
should work together on this. But, I’d emphasize that this kind of aid
must be more than symbolic. I must note the fact that Soviet aggression
involves the fate of the whole nation. Facts in Afghanistan prove that
most of the Afghan troops have leaned toward the resistance forces,
although some have been disarmed. The Afghan people have been
fighting fiercely against Soviet aggression. We must turn Afghanistan
into a quagmire in which the Soviet Union is bogged down for a long
time in a guerrilla warfare.
Vice Premier Geng earlier assured me that provided aid to Pakistan
was more than symbolic, there would be no difficulty in using Chinese
overflight as one way of delivering supplies.3 It is also important that
the PRC supply the Afghanistan freedom fighters with arms. We would
like to know your plans in that regard.
DENG: Since the southward drive strategy of the Soviet Union is
to seize warm water ports along the Indian Ocean, Pakistan inevitably
becomes the next target on the Soviet list. Personally, I must have said
on no less than ten occasions to my American friends that the United
3 See Document 149.
