846 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement or for recovery. He suggested a subparagraph on survival and a sepa­ rate subparagraph on recovery. Mr. Gates suggested the word “plans” might be used instead of “measures.” Mr. Gray said this wording would enable OCDM to move ahead. The Attorney General confessed that all the drafting proposals so far advanced seemed to him to have exactly the same meaning. Secretary Herter said the words “develop and maintain” were of key importance; these words meant that whatever plan is developed goes immediately into force. At Mr. Gray’s suggestion, Mr. Scribner restated his proposal as fol­ lows: “(4) Development and maintenance in a high state of readiness of measures essential to survival as a nation, including minimum civilian needs and continuity of government (5) Development of plans essential to national recovery in the event of general war.” Mr. Patterson asked what was meant by “minimum civilian needs.” Mr. Gray said OCDM had been operating under this phrase for several years. Mr. Patterson said that under the formula “mini­ mum civilian needs” there was nothing to prevent the minimum being reduced. Mr. Gray wondered whether OCDM wanted to do anything it could not do under the Treasury proposal. He suggested that the Treasury language might be adopted while sympathy might be extended to OCDM. The National Security Council: a. Noted and discussed the draft revision of paragraphs con­ tained in NSC 5906/1, transmitted by the reference memorandum of September 21, 1959; in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff thereon, transmitted by the reference memorandum of September 29, 1959: (1) Paragraph 59 (Mobilization Base), prepared by the NSC Planning Board on the basis of a draft submitted by the Department of Defense and the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization after review of current mobilization base policy pursuant to NSC Action No. 2114–­c. (2) Paragraph 64–­f (Manpower), prepared by the NSC Planning Board in the light of its review of the Mobilization Base paragraph. b. Adopted as a recommendation to the President the revisions of paragraphs 59 and 64–­f of NSC 5906/1 enclosed with the reference mem­ orandum of September 21, 1959, subject to the following amendments: (1) Page 2, subparagraph 59–­a–­(2): In the last sentence of this sub­ paragraph, insert the words “cold war and” between “Planning for” and “opposition”. (2) Page 4, subparagraph 59–­b–­(4): Include the Budget-­Treasury ver­ sion in the right column, delete the State-­OCDM-­Commerce version in the left column, and add the following subparagraph (5): “(5) Development of plans essential to national recovery in the event of general war.”
