846ÔÇâ Foreign Relations, 1958ÔÇô1960, Volume III, Supplement
or for recovery. He suggested a subparagraph on survival and a sepa┬ş
rate subparagraph on recovery.
Mr. Gates suggested the word ÔÇťplansÔÇŁ might be used instead of 
ÔÇťmeasures.ÔÇŁ Mr. Gray said this wording would enable OCDM to move 
ahead. The Attorney General confessed that all the drafting proposals 
so far advanced seemed to him to have exactly the same meaning.
Secretary Herter said the words ÔÇťdevelop and maintainÔÇŁ were of 
key importance; these words meant that whatever plan is developed 
goes immediately into force.
At Mr. GrayÔÇÖs suggestion, Mr. Scribner restated his proposal as fol┬ş
lows: ÔÇť(4) Development and maintenance in a high state of readiness of 
measures essential to survival as a nation, including minimum civilian 
needs and continuity of government (5) Development of plans essential 
to national recovery in the event of general war.ÔÇŁ
Mr. Patterson asked what was meant by ÔÇťminimum civilian 
needs.ÔÇŁ Mr. Gray said OCDM had been operating under this phrase 
for several years. Mr. Patterson said that under the formula ÔÇťmini┬ş
mum civilian needsÔÇŁ there was nothing to prevent the minimum 
being reduced. Mr.┬á Gray wondered whether OCDM wanted to do 
anything it could not do under the Treasury proposal. He suggested 
that the Treasury language might be adopted while sympathy might 
be extended to OCDM.
The National Security Council:
a. Noted and discussed the draft revision of paragraphs con┬ş
tained in NSC 5906/1, transmitted by the reference memorandum of 
September 21, 1959; in the light of the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 
thereon, transmitted by the reference memorandum of September 29, 
1959:
(1) Paragraph 59 (Mobilization Base), prepared by the NSC 
Planning Board on the basis of a draft submitted by the Department of 
Defense and the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization after review 
of current mobilization base policy pursuant to NSC Action No. 2114ÔÇô┬şc.
(2) Paragraph 64ÔÇô┬şf (Manpower), prepared by the NSC Planning 
Board in the light of its review of the Mobilization Base paragraph.
b. Adopted as a recommendation to the President the revisions of 
paragraphs 59 and 64ÔÇô┬şf of NSC 5906/1 enclosed with the reference mem┬ş
orandum of September 21, 1959, subject to the following amendments:
(1) Page 2, subparagraph 59ÔÇô┬şaÔÇô┬ş(2): In the last sentence of this sub┬ş
paragraph, insert the words ÔÇťcold war andÔÇŁ between ÔÇťPlanning forÔÇŁ 
and ÔÇťoppositionÔÇŁ.
(2) Page 4, subparagraph 59ÔÇô┬şbÔÇô┬ş(4): Include the Budget-┬şTreasury ver┬ş
sion in the right column, delete the State-┬şOCDM-┬şCommerce version in 
the left column, and add the following subparagraph (5):
ÔÇť(5) Development of plans essential to national recovery in the 
event of general war.ÔÇŁ
