Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1979 661 Third, I’m establishing a permanent, full-time Caribbean joint task force headquarters at Key West, Florida. I will assign to this headquarters, forces from all the military services responsible for expanded planning and for conducting exercises. This headquarters unit will employ designated forces for action if required. This will substantially improve our capability to monitor and to respond rapidly to any attempted military encroachment in this region. Fourth, we will expand military maneuvers in the region. We will conduct these exercises regularly from now on. In accordance with existing treaty rights, the United States will, of course, keep our forces in Guantanamo. Fifth, we will increase our economic assistance to alleviate the unmet economic and human needs in the Caribbean region and further to ensure the ability of troubled peoples to resist social turmoil and possible Communist domination. The United States has a worldwide interest in peace and stability. Accordingly, I have directed the Secretary of Defense to further enhance the capacity of our rapid deployment forces to protect our own interests and to act in response to requests for help from our allies and friends. We must be able to move our ground, sea, and air units to distant areas, rapidly and with adequate supplies. We have reinforced our naval presence in the Indian Ocean. We are enhancing our intelligence capability in order to monitor Soviet and Cuban military activities—both in Cuba and throughout the world. We will increase our efforts to guard against damage to our crucial intelligence sources and our methods of collection, without impairing civil and constitutional rights.8 These steps reflect my determination to preserve peace, to strengthen our alliances, and to defend the interests of the United States. In developing them, I’ve consulted not only with my own advisers but with congressional leaders and with a bipartisan group of distinguished American citizens as well.9 The decisions are my own, Castro. In many ways we have attempted to isolate Cuba and to indicate our determination to continue that policy until Cuba is free.” (Public Papers: Kennedy, 1963, p. 329) 8 See Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, vol. VI, Soviet Union, Document 225. 9 Clifford had organized a group of seven former high-ranking officials, constituted as the Citizens Advisory Committee on Cuba, in order to provide the administration with advice concerning the U.S. response to the Soviet brigade and suggestions for the President’s speech. In addition to Clifford, the group included McCloy, Bundy, Linowitz, Packard, McCone, and Scowcroft. Clifford then expanded the group to 16 members, adding Rusk, Rogers, Kissinger, Ball, Gilpatric, Harriman, Schlesinger, Katzenbach, and Scranton. On September 29, the President hosted a White House luncheon and received recommendations from the group, with the exception of Scranton, who did not attend. (Bernard Gwertzman, “President Gets Wide-Ranging Advice on Soviet Troops From 15 Experts,” The New York Times, September 30, 1979, p. A–3)
