1294 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement rate, even though new oil investments have been sharply contracted, outward earnings remittances have reached very high levels, and exports have receded. Concurrently, the previous capital inflow has apparently turned into a net outflow, principally for two reasons: payments on the shortand medium-­term foreign debt incurred under Perez Jimenez, and capital flight. Finally, and perhaps most important, imports have been maintained and capital flight has been stimulated by expansionary fiscal and credit policies. Along with the cumulative drain on the central bank’s foreign exchange reserves, a series of grossly imbalanced federal budgets, largely attributable to efforts to carry on extensive public works and development programs, have depleted treasury holdings and created a serious fiscal problem. Treasury holdings are currently less than $100 million. Although purportedly determined to balance the federal budget next year, the Government of Venezuela requires some $300 million over and above anticipated revenues to meet the current, FY 60 budget with its politically essential works programs. The Venezuelan constitution prohibits treasury borrowing from the central bank and the tight domestic credit situation precludes heavy borrowing from domestic commercial banks, so that recourse must be had to foreign sources for the needed funds. Current Status The balance of payments problem is being dealt with in part by various measures to curtail imports of less essential goods through quantitative restrictions and prohibitive duties, and discourage the outflow of nervous, flight capital, while at the same time seeking to encourage new capital inflow for investment purposes. It is as yet too early to appraise the adequacy of these measures, but they are already ameliorating the drain of reserves to some extent. It was necessary, however, for the central bank to sell some $65 million worth of gold in the fall of 1959. Remaining gold reserves are probably an adequate bulwark against any immediate payment crisis but large scale gold sales are considered undesirable by Venezuela because of the anticipated psychological reaction. Rather than accentuate her unemployment problems by further curtailment of public works programs to permit a balanced budget, the Government of Venezuela hopes to obtain foreign credits of about $300 million. The first $100 million of this was obtained in November, 1959 by sale of tax anticipation certificates to the foreign oil companies operating in Venezuela. An informal IMF consultation in December served to advise the Government of Venezuela on certain measures recommended to remedy the financial problems. On February 1 an IMF Mission arrived in Caracas to begin two weeks of talks looking to a stand-­by agreement. Without awaiting the outcome of these
