1150 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement to meet with me at any time I designate. In such an event I would of course refuse to accept any such condition, point up its ultimatum aspects, and making a definite proposal for the date of the next meeting strive to obtain a definite acceptance or rejection from him. However, it is possible that the situation might become somewhat confused. August 21 Well, things livened up a bit at today’s meeting and his perform­ ance confirmed my feeling they are continuing to build up their case along the lines of Chou’s People’s Congress speech. He placed me in a dilemma which I was able to avoid today and was able to counter­ attack. However, the situation is going to be much more difficult next meeting and harder for me to maintain the objectives of assuring con­ tinuation of the talks and also carrying out my other instructions with regard discussion of renunciation of force and trade. I know you will consider all this in my guidance for the next meeting. Whereas I would not expect any clean break at the next meeting it is possible that he might try a gambit along the lines of the first paragraph at the top of this page, or set the stage to pull it later on. Of course, once I have taken a flat stand against discussion of trade until renunciation of force is resolved it would be very difficult for me to recede from it and this can well start us on the road to an actual or de facto break. On the other hand I recognize the almost insuperable difficulties of giving me any basis on which I could discuss trade in a positive sense even contingent on a satisfactory renunciation of force. You will note I have carefully avoided thus far even stating the converse of my present instructions, that is trade discussions might be “fruitful” if renunciation of force was agreed upon. They could, of course, well exploit just the fact of dis­ cussion of trade even on a contingent basis. I do not know what the answers can be but hope you will give me the maximum of straws with which to build my bricks. (I have written this before writing my “com­ ment telegram” just in the way of doing some “thinking out loud” with you.) [text not declassified] All the best to all. Sincerely, U. Alexis Johnson American Ambassador P.S. I was tremendously surprised and naturally most pleased at the President’s letter which I received at Prague through EE last Friday. I have transmitted an acknowledgment through EE which I asked they show FE before sending on.
