El Salvador  633
ES–35.	
Letter from the Chargé in El Salvador (Downs) to the 
Ambassador in El Salvador, Temporarily in Washington 
(Kalijarvi)1
 
San Salvador, November 10, 1960.
Dear Mr. Ambassador:
I received your two letters2 and wish to thank you very much for 
them and for the advice and counsel which I can read between the lines. 
We have been exceedingly busy. What with the many discussions we 
have been having with almost everyone around the place these days, 
the telegrams that have had to be drafted and cleared and the other 
myriad of activities which always seem to come upon one, I must admit 
that I have had very little time for either eating or sleeping. It has, how-
ever, as you can probably gather from that end, been a very interesting 
period. I believe that the pieces of the puzzle are beginning to fall into 
place fairly rapidly these days and I must say that the picture which 
is outlined is much as we had thought it would be in the early stages. 
One thing seems clear: we are in for a very difficult period over the next 
couple of months. From all we have been able to learn to date I am now 
more convinced than ever that we will be making a very grave error 
to put our money on Mr. Osorio. The latest we have heard is that he is 
drinking very heavily and is now letting it be known among his very 
close friends that he has indeed been double-­crossed. It seems to me, 
therefore, that our best course of action for the present is to give every 
bit of under the table assistance we can to the moderate forces in the 
country—­both outside the government and where we can find them 
inside—­and attempt to awaken them to the danger which is clearly 
apparent and give all the help we can in organizing the fight against it. 
This I think can be done without recognition on our part and I continue 
to believe that we would be making a very grave error in recognizing 
this Junta as it is currently composed.
I think you too would be amazed at the number of people who 
have been seeking us out in the last week to tell us of their fears and 
concerns. People who up to a week ago were insisting that we recog-
nize and give this government our full assistance. Among them, I am 
sure, are a large number who contributed both financially and morally 
1 Source: Department of State, ARA/OAP Files, Lot 64 D 16, “Junta Memoranda: 
El  Salvador, 1960.” Confidential. Kalijarvi enclosed this letter with a memorandum to 
Herter, November 16, 1960, opposing immediate recognition of the Junta and recommend-
ing his prompt return to El Salvador. (ARA/OAP Files, Lot 63D 127, “El Salvador, 1960”)
2 The letters under reference were not further identified.
