1098 Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume V, Supplement He stated Peru had been negotiating off and on since January 1956 for two British cruisers to replace two old ones recently scrapped, that purchase of both had been consummated in October subject to inspection of second one when it returned to UK in December, that Peru had recently proposed cancellation of second purchase but had reaffirmed it when told by British that Ecuador wished to buy it and would if Peru did not. (Last point probably reported by Peruvian Embassy London but I doubt its truth). He continued that effect of second purchase on his arms limitation proposal would indeed be bad. (He did show strong personal interest in possibilities of limitation). However, he was sure we well knew necessity to any LA government of military support. He had obtained their agreement to his proposal only with difficulty. Peru was more fortunate than most in having sound and responsible military leaders but he could not push them too far. EL COMERCIO was having considerable effect with its allegations that he was undermining country’s safety with his proposal. Full facts surrounding cruiser deal, including possibility of Ecuadoran purchase, were well known to considerable number in military circles, Foreign Office and Parliament. If he cancelled it now his position would be untenable. I recognized his problem with military but said he was still in dilemma, other horn of which was effect on his international reputation and loss of popularity among thinking people in Peru and elsewhere who realized futility of armament race. Could he not escape dilemma if he cancelled second purchase provided British undertook not sell it to Ecuador or Chile? He doubted it, stressing Chilean naval strength and effect in Peru when two Chilean cruisers, newly rehabilitated in U.S., steamed down coast. U.S. was primarily to blame for whole arms race in not, with other guarantors, forcing Ecuador to comply with Rio protocol. After discussing Ecuador at length (next telegram)5 I urged him in leaving to give further thought to escaping from his dilemma. While there is bare chance that, if British-Ecuadoran dealings were found non-­existent and British would agree not sell cruiser to Ecuador or Chile, he might still cancel second purchase, I believe his preoccupation with military and nationalistic public opinion is too great to offer any real hope and that we must now re-­evaluate situation accordingly. I continue to hope that eventual good can be obtained from arms limitation initiative and that U.S. sanctions will be limited to armaments rather than extended to economic development field. Achilles 5 Telegram 495 from Lima, December 4; 362/12–459.
