Romania 703 and Suddarth.4 Ceausescu was joined by Foreign Minister Andrei, interpreter, and note taker. Major points of discussion are summarized below. 4. Newsom opened discussion by presenting President Carter’s letter which interpreter read to Ceausescu, who expressed regards and best wishes to President Carter and indicated Ceausescu has been working on reply to President’s letter regarding Afghanistan5 which he will send soon.6 5. General discussions: Ceausescu while being specific on several points, continued his well-known approach of articulating Romania’s application of non-aligned principles to general world situation. He indicated that international situation has worsened as a result of a process begun long ago and that great powers, including China, should make efforts to retrieve the situation by pursuing detente, and taking into account independence and sovereignty of all states. Ceausescu enumerated following factors resulting in deterioration: (1) slow progress of SALT II; (2) Camp David has created impression on Soviets they are being ignored in Mid-East peace process; (3) situation in Afghanistan, partly result of fact that U.S. in the past only paid attention to military rather than social and economic matters in Iran. 4 Roscow Seldon “Rocky” Suddarth, Newsom’s Executive Assistant. 5 On December 29, 1979, Carter approved a letter to several world leaders, including Ceausescu, concerning the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. On December 31, in another letter concerning the NATO dual-track decision, Carter added a handwritten postscript again expressing concern about Afghanistan and inviting Ceausescu to inform him of his views. See Document 219. The December 31 letter was transmitted in telegram 420 to Bucharest, January 1. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800005–0442) 6 No response specific to Carter’s December 29 letter on Afghanistan was found. In telegram 1033 from Bucharest, February 7, Aggrey reported his conversation with Andrei earlier that day regarding Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko’s visit to Bucharest. Andrei informed the Ambassador that Ceausescu told Gromyko that Romania saw Afghanistan as the greatest cause of international tension, that an urgent solution was necessary, and that such a solution would be cessation of all outside support for anti-government forces and withdrawal of Soviet troops. Andrei also reported that Gromyko said Soviet troops would be withdrawn once outside support ceases. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800066–0451) On March 12, the Embassy in Islamabad reported in telegram 2311 that it received information of a possible mediation offer from Romania between Pakistan and the Soviet Union in order to reach an accommodation on Afghanistan. The offer had been made by Pungan while visiting Pakistan in February. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800132– 0761) In telegram 2123 from Bucharest March 14, the Embassy responded that Romania would like to broker the Afghan problem. The Embassy wrote: “While it is clearly not in a position to settle the dispute, Ceausescu is in his own inimitable way trying to act as a middleman in order to serve Romania’s national interests, world peace, and his own ego—all of which are in this instance compatible.” (National Archives, RG 59, Central Foreign Policy File, D800130–0957)
