436 Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume II siderations to bear on economic assistance decisions, especially as to votes in the IFIs.2 We are committed to the proposition that it is preferable to use positive actions (“rewards”) and normal diplomatic channels rather than “sanctions” in pursuing our human rights objectives. However, in addition to the general thrust of our human rights policy, we are explicitly required by a wide array of federal statutes to oppose grants or loans to human rights violators. We have acted with moderation in these matters. Of the over 400 loans that have been voted on in the IFIs since January 1977, we have voted against only nine and abstained on only 14 on human rights grounds. In addition, we have sought to defer consideration of about 20 loans pending human rights developments in the countries in question; in several of these cases the deferrals were only temporary. The countries that applied for the loans as to which we cast negative votes, abstained, or obtained postponements number only 13, as follows: No Votes Abstentions Postponed Argentina Argentina Chile Chile Benin El Salvador Paraguay Central African Empire Korea South Yemen Ethiopia Nicaragua Uruguay Guinea Paraguay Korea Uruguay Philippines We have also been moderate in withholding or delaying our bilateral economic aid on human rights grounds. Of hundreds of AID projects that have been considered since January 1977, we deferred only 22, five of which were subsequently approved. The very low ratio of deferral results from the fact that virtually all of these projects meet basic human needs. Only six countries were involved, as follows: 2 During January 1978, Representatives Moorhead, Minish, LaFalce, Wilson, Stanton, Brown, and Hyde traveled to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Colombia to investigate IADB projects within those nations. In a March 16 letter to the President, the Representatives asserted, “in practice the Presidential and Congressional directives have been too rigidly applied. We concluded that overly rigid application of human rights position by economic sanctions through multilateral agencies are not effective and are probably counterproductive.” After offering their support for the President’s statements on human rights, the co-authors expressed their belief that the Department of State “has overreacted to expressions from the President and the Congress in a way that is not only detrimental to the United States but also to the people about whose human rights we are concerned.” The President’s handwritten notations on the letter instructed that both Vance and Christopher receive copies of it. (Ibid.)
