850  Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume III, Supplement
propaganda cooked up by USIA but simply the reporting of an event. 
However, Premier Khrushchev would probably take offense at it. The 
President observed that he could see some of the difficulties but won­
dered whether the Voice of America could not simply forego broadcast­
ing this particular item to the Soviet Union but proceed with broadcasts 
to the Far East and Asia, for example.
6. I reported to the President that I detected mounting unrest not 
only in Government but out of Government, about our organization 
for space activities. I said that there was not only an inherent friction 
between the military establishment and the space agency which would 
always derive from jurisdictional problems but there was beginning 
to be thoughtful concern from outside of Government. As an exam­
ple, I described the visit of Mr. Ralph Davies from the Management 
Consultant firm of Klein and Saks, who offered the services of his 
firm in developing a most effective organization within government. I 
acknowledged to the President that this matter was not precisely within 
my charter. However, I said it seemed to me that this was becoming a 
very important problem and one which would get increasing visibility.
The President said that he had always felt that the emphasis on space 
should be on peaceful uses and that the Defense interest should develop 
only when a specific military application was clearly discernible. I said 
that there was a question of whether the Army Ballistics Missile Agency 
should stay under the Army or be transferred to the Space Agency. The 
President indicated that his personal view was that it should be so trans­
ferred and that Mr. McElroy had demonstrated an interest in this matter 
by memorandum just before he left on his current trip.
I asked the President if he had anything specifically before him on 
the general problem and he indicated that he did not. I then agreed to 
discuss it with General Goodpaster.
7. I then said to the President that I would like to talk to him for a 
few minutes about the posture, character and activities of the National 
Security Council in the next 15 months. I said that perhaps the problem 
might be stated in an over-­simplified way: as to whether the Council 
should be an active or a passive body. I said to the President that I 
wished to take the liberty of observing that for my own part I was eager 
to serve him in any way he found my services useful; that I was not 
interested in being a custodian or a caretaker. I said that with respect to 
what is now being called “The Thaw” might require many revisions of 
many papers if the thaw was really meaningful or if it was not, in the 
nature of the things we may have very little paper work to do in the 
next 15 months. In the last months of the Administration there would 
probably be little in the way of development of new policies and we 
would probably find ourselves running out of backlog. At this point the 
President interrupted to say that he did not think that the thaw really
