864
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
323.
Intelligence Information Cable Prepared in the Central
Intelligence Agency1
[cable number not declassified]
Washington, July 25, 1980
COUNTRY
Iran
SUBJECT
Recent Developments in Oveisi Movement [date not declassified]
SOURCE
[2 lines not declassified]
1. During mid-July, Buick Saber, a trusted aide of Iranian exile
leader Gholam Ali Oveisi, made two trips to Cairo to meet with the
Shah and members of the royal family at the behest of Ardeshir Zahedi,
the Shah’s former Ambassador to the United States. Zahedi advised
Oveisi that the Shah was attempting to fund other Iranian exile leaders
and was informing these leaders that Oveisi was a tool of the United
States and was not to be trusted. Zahedi felt that such activity was
divisive to the exiles and suggested Oveisi send a representative at
once to clear up the matter. When Saber saw the Shah, he proceeded
to refute the Shah’s claims that Oveisi was being used by the United
States to denigrate him and prevent the royal family from returning
to Iran. The Shah told Saber that if Oveisi would announce publicly
that he wished to restore the 1906 Constitution to Iran, that would be
sufficient to appease him. The Shah said he knew he could not return
to Iran but still hoped that his son could. If Oveisi agreed, he would
provide his movement with U.S. dollars 20 million, the assistance of
the royal family, and would attempt to gain Jordanian support for him.
Saber then returned to Paris and delivered the message to Oveisi.
Oveisi refused to accept the offer and told Saber to go back to Cairo
and make clear to the Shah that Oveisi harbored no personal animosity
toward him or his family. However, he felt the Shah and the royal
family were no longer really an issue, and his only real concern was
getting Iran away from Khomeini and the mullahs and preventing it
from falling into the hands of the Communists. Once this had been
accomplished, the people could determine if they wanted a return of
the monarchy. Also, he felt that the Shah’s involvement with the exiles
1 Source: Carter Library, National Security Affairs, Staff Material, Middle East File,
Box 36, Subject File, Iran Cables and Press 7/80. Secret; [handling restriction not declassified].
Sent to INR, DIA, the National Military Command Center, NSA, the NSC Staff, the
White House Situation Room, and the NFAC.
