793.00/83: Telegram [Document 652] The Minister in China (MacMurray) to the Secretary of State [Paraphrase] PEKING, July 16, 1925—9 p.m. [Received 10:50 p.m.] 277. 1. Legation’s 263, July 5, 1 p.m. In the course of a conversation on July 10 regarding the situation at Shanghai, the Japanese Minister inquired whether I was informed of the tenor of his conversation with Mayer. Yoshizawa urged that the American, British, and Japanese Governments cooperate in seeking a solution of the present crisis. It seemed to me that he somewhat conspicuously avoided referring to more general cooperation.

2. Yoshizawa inquired regarding the willingness of the United States to cooperate in the particular matter under consideration. I told him that personally I believed that my Government would welcome heartily cooperation on the basis contemplated as I understood it, i. e., not an agreement restricting the freedom of action which might be considered by some power to be necessary, not a set of obligations, but rather a state of mind based upon the realization that the powers concerned have common interests and purposes, confidence in each other, and a spirit of accommodation. Yoshizawa said that he was pleased with this tentative expression of my opinion. He suggested that after I had had an opportunity to consider it we should discuss the matter further. 3. As there have been exacting and incessant discussions among the Ministers with respect to the situation at Shanghai, I have not been able to find an opportunity to resume my discussion with my Japanese colleague without giving an impression of emphasis which I am afraid would be misunderstood. I am waiting for a chance for a more apparently spontaneous resumption of my conversation with Yoshizawa. In the meantime I submit to you my own suggestion on behalf of the Japanese Government. 4. In telegram 118 of July 1 from our Embassy in Japan92 I reported my conversation with Baron Shidehara on June 30. From our discussion it seems to me that we may assume that there is such a substantial agreement in points of view between the Japanese and us that we can work in harmony with respect to the general situation in China with special reference to the necessity for envisaging the growth of Chinese national feeling and adapting ourselves to it. I believe the Japanese desire to work
