22
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XI, Part 1
believed that seizure of the three islands provided interesting possibili-
ties. At this point there was a lengthy break in the meeting while the
President met with Ramsey Clark and William Miller, the two emissar-
ies who were due to leave for Tehran that evening.8 When the meeting
resumed The President suggested that if the Iranians say yes to our
emissaries we should do nothing to upset that process. Ramsey Clark
believes that movement to the UN would be a good thing but that we
should avoid going to the UN for the moment unless they turn us
down on the emissaries.
Ramsey Clark also recommended calling in the Iranian Chargé as
an interpreter and placing a call from the President to Khomeini appeal-
ing to him on religious grounds if the Iranians will not let our emissaries
come in. With regard to the United Nations, we should focus on the
violation of international law.
Secretary Brown noted that by holding up all actions we would lose
time in the event we should need to retaliate.
The President noted that in the meantime we should simply explore
the possibilities.
Secretary Brown noted that we would be meeting tomorrow morn-
ing to consider whether to move the helicopters, carriers and other
items. He took it from what the President had said that we will do
nothing if the Iranians agree to accept our emissaries.
The President said that was correct. Since these men had put their
lives on the line we should do nothing to endanger their mission. The
President wondered, however, whether there was no way we could
move the carrier without that fact appearing on the front page of the
New York Times.
Secretary Brown said that the carrier was due to arrive in Mombasa
on November 9th; if it did not show up that would attract attention.
He thought that if we did it verbally we could probably turn the carrier
around without it appearing in the news for perhaps two to three days.
Jody Powell said he thought this was one case where it was justified
for the press secretary to tell a lie.
Dr. Brzezinski said we should defer a decision until tomorrow. If
they do not accept our emissaries then it would be appropriate to turn
the carrier around.
Secretary Brown said that we could make up a story why the carrier
was late in arriving in Mombasa. He then suggested considering what
we would do in the event of a break up of Iran. He noted that any
8 Carter and Vance met with Clark and Miller in the Oval Office from 5:40 to 6
p.m., then returned to the Cabinet Room. (Carter Library, President’s Daily Diary)
