1350  Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, Volume III, Supplement
such students had been withdrawn. Thus in that matter I had entirely 
met his point view. That I had done so and that any Chinese in U.S. 
desiring return his country could do so, was proven by official state­
ments of very agency he himself had suggested for establishing facts.
14. I continued no amount of distorted efforts to attempt misrep­
resent various aspects U.S. immigration legislation could change fact, 
established by evidence of third power agency established for purpose, 
that no Chinese in U.S. desiring return to Wang’s country had been or 
was being obstructed from doing so. Chinese steadily returning to his 
country whenever they desired do so. My latest information was that 
277 had returned by direct route to Hong Kong since beginning our 
talks here. I had no way knowing how many returned other routes. He 
continued speak of 53 and 22 and demanded what he termed account­
ing for them. U.S. was under no obligation provide accounting for 
Chinese in U.S. What it was under obligation to do and would do was 
not obstruct departure of any Chinese in U.S. who desired depart. As 
far as 53 and 22 concerned I had told him in past and reiterated categor­
ically that their return not being obstructed and if they had not returned 
it was because they did not desire do so. If they felt being obstructed, 
they, along with any other Chinese in U.S., entirely free communicate 
with Indian Embassy. They had not done so as far as I knew. Certainly 
no case alleged obstruction brought to attention my government by 
Indian Embassy. I certainly did not propose have them cross-examined 
as to reasons for whatever decisions they may have made.
15. I continued there was another example of continued freedom 
of Chinese in U.S. to proceed to Wang’s country if they desired do so. 
I referred to case Lee Li-chuen, whom he mentioned 64th meeting here. 
This man at no time prevented from returning Wang’s country if he 
desired do so. This true even though he was seaman on ship registered 
by Government Republic China and had overstayed period temporary 
admission to U.S. and was therefore subject to deportation. According 
my information he had departed from U.S. on February 23 en route to 
Hong Kong. It my understanding he expressed intention proceeding 
Wang’s country at time he left. However, whether he did so was of 
course matter his own choice.
16. I continued again as matter meeting Wang’s point of view and 
advantageous his side, after he had raised with me question impris­
onment Chinese common criminals U.S. we took measures assure any 
Chinese desiring proceed Wang’s country able do so. The one who 
desired do so was enabled do so—even though he far from having 
served term sentence or even eligible for parole.
17. I continued, thus situation regard Chinese in U.S. contrasted 
sharply with that of Americans imprisoned in Wang’s country. Thus 
there appeared to have been what he would term no advantage to 
American side in this agreement. However what is even more serious
