936 Foreign Relations, 1989–1992, Volume XXXI – If a side elects to withhold information, it will notify the other side and provide a rationale for the deletions. – To prevent abuses, such withholding will be subject to a small annual quota. – If a side elects to withhold information, information on all other telemetry channels other than those specifically exempted for security reasons will be exchanged. – In no case may information be withheld that is necessary to monitor missile acceleration, boost stage separation, re-­entry vehicle separation commands, or re-­entry vehicle releases. For 3 years following entry into force, each side will maintain its current practices with respect to the effective radiated power, broadcast frequency, bandwidth, and modulation methods used for transmitting telemetry from ICBMs or SLBMs. Current practices means those in effect on December 1, 1990. – During this 3-­year transition period, transmission practices will be negotiated in the JCIC to ensure that each side can receive the telemetry transmissions of the other side. – These negotiated transmission practices will ensure equal reciprocal rights and obligations. – If, after 3 years, the sides have not reached agreement on a regime for telemetry transmission, each side will be free to adopt the current practices of the other side in effect on December 1, 1990. Throw Weight Package All elements of the ad-­referendum agreement worked out in Geneva on throw weight are confirmed, with the following observations: – Aggregate throw weight will be limited to 54 percent of the Soviet aggregate throw weight at the time of signature, and shrouds will be excluded from accountable throw weight. This will be implemented in Geneva. – One of the technical characteristics used to distinguish a new type of ICBM or SLBM from an existing type will be a difference of 10 percent or more in the length of the missile or the largest stage. – The number of warheads attributed to a future type of ICBM will be based on the largest number of re-­entry vehicles tested, but will be no less than 40 percent of the accountable throw weight divided by the weight of the lightest re-­entry vehicle tested. In the case of new and unconventional front-­end designs, the question of whether the 40 percent rule would be waived would be subject to consultation and agreement in the JCIC.
