324
Foreign Relations, 1977–1980, Volume XX
on this end of the spectrum are Josef Kempny and Lubomir Strougal.
[classification not declassified]
Several factors give Kempny, 59, an edge over other contenders.
He enjoys the confidence and support of Husak, who has secured his
appointment to a succession of key party positions. Aside from Husak,
Kempny and Bilak are the only full Presidium members who are also
party secretaries. Kempny bears no stigma from 1968; as mayor of
Ostrava, he managed to win Soviet confidence without antagonizing
his own countrymen. He also boasts a wide range of experience. A
construction engineer by training, he assumed responsibility for ideo-
logical affairs in 1969 as a KSC secretary and chairman of the party’s
ideological commission. He was intensively involved in cadre work as
chairman of the Bureau for Party Work in the Czech Lands in 1970–71.
Since then, he has been chairman of the Central Committee’s economic
commission, and oversight of the economy has also been his primary
responsibility on the Presidium. Kempny’s Presidium responsibilities
may have increased after the December 1977 plenum. While losing
some of his more specialized economic duties, which are now per-
formed within the Secretariat, he retained general oversight of the
economy and reportedly received in addition the key areas of defense
and security. [classification not declassified]
Against these assets, certain liabilities must be counted. If the politi-
cal tide were to turn, Kempny’s close association with Husak could
work to his disadvantage. Moreover, his longstanding responsibility
for economic policy renders him vulnerable because of continuing
problems in that sphere. Kempny reportedly was attacked along with
Husak at the December 1977 plenum, and rumors of his imminent
departure circulated in late 1978. There has been no subsequent evi-
dence, however, that he is in trouble. [classification not declassified]
The other leading moderate contender for the succession, Lubomir
Strougal, suffered a reverse similar to Indra’s when he was appointed
Premier in January 1970; the appointment cost him his position as KSC
secretary and chairman of the Bureau for Party Work in the Czech
Lands—a role to which Kempny succeeded. Strougal is still young (55),
however, and politically adroit; like Indra, he has managed to retain
considerable influence while having little day-to-day involvement in
party affairs. As a contender to succeed Husak, he has two principal
liabilities. Having been Premier for nearly a decade, he must, like
Kempny, bear a large share of the blame for the poor state of the
economy. He may also be less acceptable to Moscow than other candi-
dates. As acting premier in August 1968, Strougal condemned the
occupation, an act of defiance he later recanted. As noted above, he
was host during Kosygin’s visit to Prague in May when disagreements
arose over economic issues, and he stated Czechoslovakia’s grievances
